## Presidential Address

## Preadaptation and European Colonization in Rural North America

Terry G. Jordan

Department of Geography,  University of Texas,  Austin,  TX  78712

Abstract. The European colonization o f   rural North America and its resultant mosaic o f   cultures and ethnicity provided a rich subject material  for  historical  geographers.  Seven  descriptive  themes  and  concepts-region, diffusion, landscape, first effective  settlement,  simplification,  environmental perception, and humans as modifiers o f   the earthhave traditionally  been  employed  by  geographers in their study o f   rural Euroamericans, providing  an  impressive  empirical  body  o f knowledge  upon  which  to  base  our  causal analyses.  Seeking explanation,  we began assertively as environmental determinists,  subsequently moving to economic and cultural determinism.  Few  sought  holistic  explanations.  It  is  here suggested that cultural ecology, and in  particular  the concept o f preadaptation,  offers  an  additional,  potent,  but largely unused explanatory device for the interpretation o f   overseas European farm settlement.  If  used  in conjunction with  economic and cultural determinism, preadaptation can contribute to our explanatory ability.

Key  Words: adaptation, cultural ecology,  diffusion,  environmental perception,  Europeans overseas,  historical geography, human modification o f the  earth,  landscape,  North America,  preadaptation, region.

<!-- image -->

ORTH American historical and cultural geographers have long demonstrated a profound interest in the overseas migrations  of  Europeans,  the  largest  mass movement of people in  world history, spanning four centuries and several continents  (Schlichtmann  1977;  Raitz  1979).  Perhaps because the colonial areas remained dominantly rural during most of that period, attention has focused upon farm settlement.  The "Berkeley  school" of cultural-historical  geographers has been particularly  active in this intellectual venture,  and Carl 0.  Sauer  pursued the subject  repeatedly (1941,  1966). Numerous students of  Sauer followed his example, perhaps most notably  Andrew H. Clark  (1949,  1968),  whose  memorial volume was fittingly titled European Settlement andDevelopment in North America (Gibson 1978). The interest passed  abundantly, in  turn, to  third and fourth generation Berkeley students. Many other geographers on both sides of the Atlantic,  unaffiliated  with Berkeley, made substantial contributions  to  the  study  of  European  implantment  in North America,  including  such luminaries as D. W. Meinig  (1986), E. Estyn  Evans (1969), and Walter  M. Kollmorgen (1941). As a result of this multi-generational pursuit by diverse schools,  geographers  have built a  major body of scholarly  literature on traditional  Euroamerican culture, gaining access to the best university  presses  and  on  occasion  winning honors from outside the discipline.

## Descriptive Themes and Concepts

From this compiled literature, we can glean seven essentially descriptive and by no means

mutually  exclusive  geographical  themes  and concepts relevant to the European occupancy of rural  North America. The seven include region, diffusion, landscape, first effective settlement,  simplification,  environmental  percep- tion, and humans as modifiers of t h e  earth.

At  the simplest  level,  we  have  applied  the concept o f cultural  region t o  the mapping o f European  groups  in  North  America, a  useful first step in  geographical analysis (Smith 193031;  Meigs  1941;  Johnson 1951;  Jordan 1970; Nostrand 1970, 1980; Vogeler 1976; Raitz 1978; Hopple 1979; Millward  1981; Louder and Waddell  1983; Estaville 1986; Gerlach 1986; Wacker 1986; West 1986; Allen and Turner 1987; Harris and Matthews 1987, pl. 44,46,68). In addition, some devotees of the regional  method  produced valuable monographs dealing with major ethnic enclaves (Gerlach 1976; Wilhelm  1980) or  with  colonial  seaboard  areas  o f European implantment (Clark 1959,1968; Merrens 1964; Harris 1966; Lemon 1972; Earle 1975; Head 1976). Many among us interpreted the neo-European cultural  regions  o f t h e   colonial  seaboard  as nurseries  or  staging  grounds  for  the  subsequent evolution o f   American sectional cultures covering  much  larger  areas (Meinig  1957-58; Mitchell 1978, 66-90;  Pillsbury  1987,50). Some geographers, by contrast, documented a desire on  the part  o f certain  transplanted  European groups  for rural isolation,  segregation,  and community, often in  a marginal  or refuge site, with  resultant  optimization  o f t h e   shape and function  o f the  ethnic  region (Davis  1935; Bjorklund  1964;  Rice  1973, 3-5, 92;  Rechlin 1976, v,  vi,  1; Wilhelm  1980, 219;  Lehr  1985). Others measured the acculturative impact and decay o f   regionalism when such isolation broke down (Estaville 1988a,  b).  Still  others,  downplaying ethnicity, suggested that a weakness o f region,  place,  and  community  prevailed  from the first among overseas Europeans, indicating a new cultural order (Lemon 1978).

Geographical studies o f t h e  diffusion o f   European ways o f   life  t o  overseas areas have been numerous,  involving  both  material  and  nonmaterial  culture (Clark  1960; Kaups 1966), and some of us littered our maps with the notorious 'Berkeley  arrows.'  Most  diff usionists  believe that  American  agrarian cultures,  in  the main, were imported from Europe. People were not very inventive, in this view, and even the more adventurous,  who emigrated,  remained  suffi- ciently conservative as t o   transfer methods  and artifacts t o  t h e  overseas settlement areas. Particularly  abundant have been studies o f   immigrant farming practices in North America which demonstrated some measure o f   ethnic or  regional  distinctiveness  based upon  diffusion (Raup 1935; Kollmorgen  1941; Cozzens  1943; Hewes 1953; Warkentin 1959; Jordan 1966; Raitz and  Mather  1971;  Glick  1972;  Gerlach  1976; McQuillan  1978;  Baltensperger  1983;  Butzer 1988). These  studies  have,  however,  also  attracted  debunkers (Lemon  1966). Some especially  revealing  diff usionary  studies  utilized  a comparative approach, in  which  the sending districts  o f migrants  were analyzed  alongside t h e   receiving areas  (Starczewska  1967;  Mannion 1974;  Ostergren  1988).  Other  geographers profitably  investigated the migration process itself, as relocation  diffusion, learning how migrants selected themselves for overseas settlement and demonstrating the potency o f   chain migration in  transferring regional or  local  European cultural  heritages to North  America, where they often ultimately acquired an archaic, fossilized character  (Rice  1977, 155,  175;  Rice  and  Ostergren  1978;  Lehr  1985). Another  influential group o f scholars downplayed  diffusion from Europe, stressing instead frontier innovation and borrowing from indigenous groups as the keys t o  peculiarly  American  cultures.  Robin  Wells (1973, 6,  8-10)  listed  contact by  overseas  Europeans with aboriginal cultures as one o f   four defining traits of frontier sociocultural systems, assigning  major  importance to reciprocal  diffusion  between  Indians  and  Euroamericans. Spanish colonization in North America requires major attention t o   this model, as does the Germano-Celtic  settlement  o f t h e   mesothermal forests on  the  eastern  seaboard  (Jordan and Kaups 1989, 87-90).

Closely related to the concept o f   diffusion  is t h e   principle  o f first  effective  settlement,  proposed separately by Wilbur Zelinsky (1973, 13) and Fred Kniffen (1965,551). In Zelinsky's words, 'the first group able to establish a viable, selfperpetuating society  in  an  empty land  are o f crucial significance for the later social and cultural  geography  o f t h e  area,'  regardless  how small the initial  group may  be.  The initial  imprint tends  to  be durable, 'surviving even where a new ethnic stock. .  . succeeded the original settlers.' Successful diffusion, then, rested disproportionately  upon sequence o f   arrival  and

early  success.  Ineffectual  occupancy  paid  no l o ng-term  diff  usionary benefits (Centilcore

1957).

Contradicting the diff  usionists  were a host of other historical geographers who stressed the modification  of European  culture  overseas, recognizing that 'our  ancestors strove to make America something other than Europe'  (Lemon 1980, 116), and that 'the  persistence of an exotic people. .  .  in  a new home led inevitably to a  new combination . . . and,  thus,  to  the appearance of a new geographical entity' (Clark 1968,3).  In  this manner, for example, the French feudal seigneurial system  underwent a fundamental transformation in Quebec  (Harris 1966, 3,   7,   194-95).  The major  path of  modification entailed  a simplification of  the  imported cultures,  for  'Europeans established  overseas drastically  simplified versions  of  European society'(Harris  1977,469;  see also Glick 1972,53). Most of  the early  proponents  of  this  model believed simplification occurred at the point of departure,  that only areal and temporal fragments of  European culture diffused  overseas, reflecting particular sources and periods  of emigration.  Harris (1977),  by  contrast,  suggested that simplification occurred mainly at the point of  arrival,  in the overseas  colonization  areas. More cultural  and  institutional diversity  was implanted than survived,  regional differences of  background  faded, and  multiple  cultures collapsed  into a  few  in the American  setting. Much of the resultant distinctiveness of colonial culture derived from the juxtaposition and fusing of groups that had experienced little or no contact with each other in Europe. A Pennsylvanian culture,  for example,  reputedly took shape in  the American Middle  Colonies through 'a  fusion of more pluralistic complexes of primarily  English,  German,  and  Scotch-Irish origins'  (Mitchell 1978, 67,  69).  From the English  came  common  law  and  language;  Germans  supposedly  contributed  the  long  rifle, Conestoga wagon,  and 'Dutch'  barn;  and the Scotch-Irish are said to have brought whiskey, the Ulster cabin plan,  the potato, and subsistence hill farming with infield-outfield  system (Evans 1969). Once crystallized,  the fused, simplified American  cultures  quickly  achieved  a conservatism and rigidity which permitted persistence (Clark  1968, 380).

Environmental  perception  offered  another fruitful  theme for  the  historical  geographical study  of  Europeans  in  rural  North  America. Practitioners  of  this  behavioralistic  approach investigated the differing images held by various European and Euroamerican groups of New World  flora, climates, soils,  and  topography (McManis 1972;  Blouet and Lawson 1975). The woodland/prairie  ecotone received particular attention (McManis 1964; Jordan 1964; Peters 1970; Birch 1971).  Nor has the venerable geographical concern with humans as modifiers of the earth been absent from studies of overseas Europeans  (Clark 1949, 1956; Prunty 1965; Doughty 1983). It is fair  to say,  though,  that we historical geographers have neglected this vital theme,  in effect handing it over  to historians and others (Cronon 1983;  Crosby 1986).

Last among the seven approaches traditionally employed in the study of Europe overseas, and quite representative of the Cerman-influenced  Berkeley  school,  is  cultural  landscape. Practitioners of this methodology felt that the greater material  artifacts  of  ordinary landscapes,  such as houses, barns, settlement form and field patterns,  possess diagnostic power to reveal  diffusion, reflect  socioeconomic systems, document past interactions between European culture and the American  natural environment, measure  acculturation, chart historical-cultural  regions  and  suggest  settlement processes (Sauer 1925; Bartz 1955; Wright 1958;  Mather and Kaups  1963;  Kniffen  1965; Wilson 1971; Mannion 1974; Wacker 1973,1974; Winberry 1974; Tracie 1975;  Cerlach 1976; Ensminger 1980-81;  Lehr 1980; Class 1986; Harris and Matthews 1987, pl. 41,52,55,56). Devotees of the landscape approach relied very  heavily upon field research to detect the American relict forms they felt constituted a highly valuable and revealing database for  studying past  cultures.  Having spent most of my own career in this sort of activity, I can tell you it has offered an idyllic research  life,  ideally suited to a dyspeptic romantic who habitually disparages the modern world as  frivolous,  artificial,  and ultimately self-destructive (Jordan  1982,1985). The German romantic lurks in all of us landscapists, as surely as  it did in our founder,  August Meitzen (1895),  whose benevolent gaze adorns my office wall.

Collectively, the  previously described themes, concepts,and approaches taught us a great deal about  what  happened  to  Europeans  in  rural North America.  None,  however,  allow  us  to

explain  why  events  transpired  and  cultures evolved as  they  did, for  each  o f t h e  seven  is inherently  descriptive  and  nonexplanatory. Region offers little more than correlations bet ween geographical space and specific culture traits, while diffusion's 'role in  explaining cult u r e  has been greatly overestimated' (Steward 1955,42; see also Denevan 1983,399 and Bennett 1969, 63). Observing the landscape presence o f relict  artifacts  may  prove  a  particular cultural transfer but fails t o  explain it. Diffusion describes a  procession  but  does not  reveal  a process.  Simplification,  first  effective  settlement, and environmental modification may accurately  summarize  what  happened  in t h e overseas zones o f European colonization, but none deal with cause. Why should the first effective settlers have been so influential? What governed the survival or death o f   traits during t h e   simplification  process  in  America?  How were the colonists' environmental perceptions formed?  Clearly, to achieve explanatory power, t h e   models  and  concepts  must  b e   linked  t o causal  mechanisms.

## Seeking Explanations

While some historical geographers and other scholars  studying  overseas  European  settlement attempted to  seek a balanced, multicausal answer, grappling with  'intertwined  processes'  (Clark  1968,  370-71), most  gravitated to one or another o f   three mainsprings which w e can  label  environmental,  economic,  and  cultural determinism. Most venerable is environmental  determinism,  whose  proponents  asserted that  new and different  natural  settings overseas  shaped  Euroamerican  cultures. F. J. Turner's  frontier thesis belongs in this category, since  he  explained  the  differences  between American  and  European  civilization  by  referring  t o  t h e   unique  environment o f t h e   New World (Mikesell 1960,63;  Turner 1962, vii; Clark 1968, 383). Turner viewed  the frontier  as the place  where  Europeans  met  the physical  environment, encountering a savage, remote, raw, untamed, wooded, and largely empty land  in which the relics o f   t h e  old civilization  were of little value. Due t o  t h e  reputedly corrosive influence o f   a forested environment on imported European cultures, ancestral institutions o f   law, religion, group discipline,  agriculture,  and  fi- nance suffered partial  disintegration. The environmentally conditioned frontier way-of-life permanently  stamped American civilization with  democracy,  individualism,  anti-intellectualism, nationalism,  optimism, innovative energetic ambition, and an idealistic view o f   progress  and  improvement.  'Forest  philosophy,' Turner wrote, 'is  t h e  philosophy o f   American democracy'  (1962, 207).  Europe  became culturally irrelevant.

The environmental determinist position was even more explicitly stated by  Ellen  Churchill Semple, who addressed,  among other issues, t h e   question  o f cultural  simplification  in  colonial  America. Acknowledging  that  coastal cultural  enclaves  had  been  'born  o f distinct old-world sources,' Semple  proposed that when pioneers from these several  ethnic enclaves  probed  westward  through  gaps in  the Blue Ridge and entered the Great Valley o f   the Appalachians, they became caught together in a  terrain-directed north-to-south migration flow that mixed and 'obliterated the distinctive types o f t h e  coast'  in  a valley  environment o f 'prevailing similarity.' Mountain-imposed  isolation hindered markets and barred landed estates, fostering classlessness (Semple 1903, 6162).  Historian  Walter  Prescott  Webb,  whose connections  with  t h e  geographical discipline were diverse, provided a classic environmental deterministic study o f   t h e  Euroamerican settlement o f t h e  Great Plains (Webb 1931).

## Economic Determinism

For  a third o f   a century, t h e  fate o f   European civilization  in  t h e  North  American  wilderness was interpreted by many, particularly those with normative  inclinations,  in  almost  purely  economic terms. A keynote for this era was sounded at mid-century, also by historian Webb  (1951), who  proposed  an  economic  core/periphery model  for  explaining  the  American  frontier. Europe, in  Webb's view,  was the center from which a 400-year economic boom, lasting from about 1500 t o  1900, emanated.  At  the beginning o f that  era,  Europe  retained  much o f its medieval character, with a rigidly stratified class society, a  subsistence economy,  little  money, not much food, minimal  personal freedom or individualism, and considerable  rural  communalism.  In t h e   Age  o f Discovery,  Europeans

found vast  resources  in  the rest  o f t h e  world. Seizing and exploiting them, they precipitated the economic boom, and in the process, western  civilization  experienced  fundamental changes, including the advent o f   capitalism, free enterprise,  democracy,  and  individualism. So vast  were the newfound  resources, especially land, that a great many Europeans could take a share,  causing  wealth  t o  become  widely  distributed, the class system to weaken, and communalism to vanish.  To acquire a piece o f   the wealth, many Europeans emigrated, providing human raw material for the  colonies. In Webb's thesis, then, the  overseas colonists represented a completely new type o f European, living on t h e  outer  margins o f a  massive,  moving wave of resource annexation and exploitation. When all  t h e   resources  had  been  seized,  pioneers vanished,  wealth  once again  began  to be assembled in  the hands o f   the few, and western civilization  began  an  irreversible descent into neofeudalism.

Some historical  geographers adhered to this doctrine o f   Economic Man  in  the wilderness. The simplification o f European  culture overseas, an overwhelming of cultural heritage, was attributed to the abundance o f   cheap land and t h e  difficulty o f   access t o  market, an economic aberration that yielded a populist restructuring o f   societyantipathetic to  ethnicity(Harris 1977). In  this view, tobacco prices became the greatest determinant o f   Chesapeake plantation culture, while in French Canada, fursachieved that honor (Mikesell 1960, 69;  Clark  1968, 380-81; Earle 1975). Migrating belts o f   agricultural types, explained in Thunenian/Webbian  terms, were endowed with great cultural significance (Peet 1969). Commercialism  constituted the  causal mainspring, the shaper  o f colonial  American cultures,  even  in  remote  places  such  as  the Shenandoah  Valley  (Mitchell  1977).  Private property and the market  ruled.  Certain other geographers  employed economic determinism t o  explain  class  struggle.  They  presented  Euroamerican society not as populist, but instead, as  dominated  by  capitalistic accumulative  inequalities from the very first (Lemon 1980). Presumably the base pursuit o f   status, rather than egalitarianism,  overwhelmed  and simplified the imported ethnic cultures.  Still others, recognizing the intellectual limitations o f   economic determinism,  challenged  the paradigm,  even during its heyday (Clark 1968, 380-81;  Hudson 1984, 22).

## Cultural Determinism

A  much  less  cohesive  group  o f historical geographers,  humanists  in  the main,  pursued t h e  notion that, in the study o f   Euroamericans, t h e   causal forces in culture are themselves cultural  in  nature,  that all  aspects  o f culture are functionally  interdependent  and  collectively self-explanatory. The  proximate  causes  o f American  simplification, diffusion,  first  effective settlement, perceptions,  regionalism,  environmental  modification,  landscape,  and  innovation  lay  in  t h e  character  o f   t h e  imported cultures and societies. Some arrived at this position by ascribing a life-force t o  culture, a superorganicism  that  permitted  entire  culturecomplexes to  be diffused across the sea without essential change (Duncan 1980). Many o f   those who stressed continuity, diffusion, and transfer implicitly supported this sort o f   determinism.

Others  pointed  t o  attributes of European culture which, when placed in the colonial environment,  spontaneously yielded  societal forms difficult or impossible  t o   obtain in Europe proper. These cultural mainsprings were largely  ideological. For  example, settlers arriving in the  Middle  Colonies  reputedly  already  possessed a  classic  European  liberalism,  in  which individual  freedom,  commercial-mindedness, and  a  desire  for private  control  o f wealth superseded  public interest. Their ideology rested  on a desire for  material success at the level o f   t h e  nuclear family. The essential ideological  structure had  arisen  prior  to the mass emigrations due  t o   t h e   demise  o f   feudalism and t h e   rise  o f Protestantism.  Overseas  colonial areas, through their offer o f   land and their  denial  o f easy  market  access, provided  the ideal setting  for  the  new,  family-based,  egalitarian system  to  blossom.  The  common  ideology helped to integrate the frontier and to simplify imported European culture (Lemon 1972; Harris 1977).  Another key t o   simplification was supposedly syncretism. That is, the traits most likely t o  survive were shared, in  proximate form, by several or all  o f   t h e  constituent ethnic groups prior to immigration and fusion (Newton 1974, 145-48). Colonial European culture, then, came about when  a  postfeudal,  capitalistic, familybased ideology diffused t o   empty overseas lands and there spontaneously and syncretically overwhelmed Old World diversity.

Others  viewed  ideology  not  as  a  leveling

mechanism but, to the contrary, as supportive o f local  or  regional emigrant  community  and ethnicity.  An ideological  underpinning  was proposed  to explain  the character  and  longterm  persistence o f   nineteenth-century  European  ethnic  islands  in  t h e   North  American heartland (Tracie 1975; Rechlin 1976; SimpsonHousley  1978). Ideology  also  directed  acculturation,  yielding  innovations,  simplifications, and  modifications that  acted  t o  support and propagate the ideology and its related ethnicity, while still allowing participation in t h e  larger society (Bjorklund 1964). Imported  kinship networks,  achieved  by  chain  migration,  reinforced  ideology  and  community,  challenging t h e   leveling economic forces (Ostergren 1988).

We historical geographers learned much from t h e   preceding  explanatory  paradigms,  even from environmentalism, though all  have been criticized (Steward 1955, 36-38;  Duncan 1980). But t o   get t o   my main point, I  recommend utilizing  also another  explanatory  methodology, one previously ignored by most o f   us who  study overseas  European  rural  settlement.  This  neglected paradigm is cultural ecology and, more particularly, adaptation.

## Adaptation and Preadaptation

Cultural  ecologists view culture as an adaptive system, as the uniquely human  method o f meeting  physical environmental  challenges. Culture serves t o  facilitate long-term, successful, nongenetic human adaptation to nature and t o   environmental change  (Steward 1955,30-42; Bennett  1969, 10-11;  Mikesell  1978, 7-8). Viewed  from  this  perspective,  the  European cultures  transplanted  t o  colonial  settings become adaptive strategies being  tested  in  new lands. The very founding o f   daughter colonies overseas could itself  have been an adaptive device t o  relieve overpopulation.

Taking one  step  further, w e   c o m e   t o   t h e   c o n cept o f   preadaptation, involving trait complexes possessed by human societies in advance o f   migration that give them competitive advantage in  occupying  the new  environment (Newton 1974).  In  other words, some European regional cultures  were  better  preadapted  for  colonization in particular overseas  environments than others.  I propose that  historical  geographers applying these cultural ecological concepts, in particular  preadaptation, can achieve addition- al  explanatory power in the study o f   European colonization  overseas (Hardesty 1986, 11; Jordan and Kaups  1987). The rate and degree to which  imported  European traits and practices survived  in  rural  North  America often  hinged

upon the level o f   preadaptation.

Perhaps the reason for the slow acceptance o f   cultural-ecological methodology by  historical geographers has been the highly local scale on which it has generally been applied, a legacy o f   its anthropological beginnings (Steward 1955, 38). I  s e e  n o  reason  why t h e  hard-won  principles derived from  local  studies cannot b e  applied  o n  a  broader  scale.  F o r   example, o n e  o f t h e   most valuable insights o f   contemporary cultural  ecology, won at the local level, is t h e  importance placed upon decision-making at the level o f   t h e  individual  person, a  phenomenon often observed by  geographers but never adequately explained (Clark 1968,385; Click 1972, 54; Wolpert 1964, 538; Denevan  1983).

If  we apply preadaptation  to the seven  descriptive  concepts  mentioned  earlier, an  explanatory potential is at once evident.  Simplification  and  diffusion  become the process o f weeding out maladaptive European traits in the colonial areas and  the survival  o f preadapted ones  which  offered some  advantage.  Look closely at what took root in America and what withered, and you will often find adaptation at work.  Simplification,  by  such  reckoning,  occurred largely  in  t h e  colonial setting, and  the necessity  t o  adapt  is  t h e   primary  cause.  First effective settlement achieved importance and durability  precisely  because  it  involved  successful  adaptation  t o   t h e   new  environment. Later arrivals emulated  it  for  that very reason. The  borrowings  from  American  indigenous peoples, including maize and herbal medicine, were,  similarly, those which  offered  adaptive advantage. The cultural landscape will,  by  this reasoning,  consist  o f European  artifacts  possessing preadaptive qualities, such as log construction or the "Dutch"  barn o f   Pennsylvania (Jordan  1985, 1987-88,75).  Cultural regions, by their very existence, proclaim the adaptive virtues  o f their  inhabitants. The human  modification of t h e  earth  is  best  understood  as  t h e consequence o f imposing adaptive  strategies upon the land, and surely environmental perceptions were colored by previous adaptations.

It  is  high  time for  historical  geographers t o end  our  half-century  or  more  o f neglecting physical environmental  factors.  By ignoring

them, we have  not  negated  such  influences, but only succeeded in rendering our own works superficial and, in  a fundamental way,  merely descriptive.  Should historical geographers choose  not t o  pursue this  ecological  path  to explanation, others can  and will, as  is  already becoming evident in recent anthropological  and archaeological  literature  (O'Brien  1984;  Klo- berdanz 1980; Green 1979).

## Case Studies o f   Preadaptation

Very often, successful preadaptation resulted from the deliberate selection o f   settlement sites environmentally similar to  the European homeland,  a  tendency  well-documented  and  expressed in terms such as 'latitude  pull.'  Great Plains Russian Germans and North Woods Finns come immediately to mind. These groups were able t o   import their cultures and artifacts largely  intact,  with  only  minor  modifications (van Cleef  1918, 194-98;  Bennett 1969, 265;  Petersen 1976; Kloberdanz 1980; Carlson 1981; Baltensperger 1983,76-79). The close tie between Acadian  French  settlement and  tidal  marshes in the Bay  o f   Fundy area may owe its origin to a  few  immigrants from  the  Norman  marshes (Clark 1968,109,158-59,385,388-89,399).  On a  broader  scale,  we  need  t o  remember  Carl Sauer's suggestion (1941,159,165)  that 'it would be impossible .  .  . t o  cross an ocean anywhere else' and find environments  as similar as those in  northwestern Europe and northeastern Anglo-America.  All o f   the accustomed crops and livestock o f   Germanic-core  Europe thrived  in t h e  new setting, with  profound results for the ultimate agricultural character o f   the American heartland.

In my  own  research,  I have  recently  employed preadaptation as an explanatory device in  two  different  studies.  In  the  first  project, done in  co-authorship  with  Matti  Kaups,  we attempted to discover the origin o f   the highly successful  woodland  pioneering  culture  that took root in  the Middle Colonies and subsequently  spread through  most  o f t h e  forested areas o f t h e  eastern  United  States (Jordan and Kaups 1989). This backwoods colonization system was arguably the most successful in world history, achieving the very rapid settlement o f an agricultural frontier. Our conclusion was that back-country Finns who came to the Delaware

Valley colony o f   New Sweden beginning in the 1640s introduced a preadapted forest colonization  strategy which,  when  mixed  with  contributions  from  the  indigenous  Delaware  Indians,  produced  the  prototype  backwoods pioneer  culture, the first effective settlement, along the lower  Delaware River  by  1660. The Scotch-Irish, who arrived on the frontier later and  in  much  greater  numbers,  adopted  the Fenno-Indian  adaptive system  and  prompted an  explosive expansion.  Thus,  in  our  view,  a preadapted group from the European periph- ery held the key.

The second project grew out o f   a suggestion made by William Doolittle (1987) and relates to my  ongoing  interest  in  the diffusion o f cattle ranching, a frontier culture as successful in initial  occupancy  o f t h e   North  American  grasslands as the Pennsylvanian backwoods colonization  system  was  in t h e   forests.  Doolittle proposed that some  Andalusian Spaniards  from a  highly  localized  area-the great  marshes of t h e  lower Guadalquivir-practiced a commercial  range-cattle  system ideally  preadapted for transferral t o   t h e  marshes o f   Gulf-coastal Mexico and for subsequent dispersal through lowland savannas. I  pursued this idea through field reconnaissances  in  Mexico and  Spain, elaborated upon it t o  develop a dual lowland/highland model o f   Iberian cattle herding, and came t o  t h e  conclusion  that  two  independent  and preadapted  Hispanic  cattle-raising traditions had  spread  from  their  respective  ecological niches in Iberia to similar settings in the Americas (Jordan 1989).

## Case Studies o f   Maladaptation

We  should  also apply  cultural-ecological principles to groups who possessed few, if  any, preadapted  traits,  rendering  their  imported culture maladaptive. The Anaheim Germans o f southern  California and Utah Scandinavian Mormons stand  as  examples  (Raup  1932; Wahlquist  1978, 128-29).  Often, perhaps even typically,  such  groups quickly  lost  their  traditional  culture,  accepting  the  better-adapted ecological strategies o f   their neighbors. In  certain  other  cases,  the  maladaptation  was  only partial,  as  with  the  Hill  Country  Germans  o f Texas and Spaniards in  highland Mexico (Wilhelm 1980,6,11,218;  Murphy 1986). Partly be-

cause  the Spaniards insisted  upon producing their  traditional winter  wheat  in a  land characterized by a summer precipitation maximum and,  thus,  better  suited  to  Indian  corn,  they had to create extensive, fragile, and areally restricted  irrigation  systems.  Perhaps partly as  a consequence,  the Indian imprint on highland farming remains vivid.

Occasionally, maladaptive characteristics became evident only some time after settlement. Ukrainians in  western Canada, who came mainly  f r o m  forested  Calicia  and Bukovina,  chose marginal  aspen  bush  parkland  to  settle-a marshy, stony, sandy land that,  in the long run, offered little opportunity for commercial farming. They selected the parkland because it offered  abundant  wood,  a  commodity  denied t h e m  b y  t h e  landed gentry in their old homelands,  as  well  as  marsh  for  winter  feed,  roof thatching, livestock water,  and game fowl. Their seemingly inept behavior initially had a sound ecological  basis,  becoming  maladaptive  only when they desired to make the transition from subsistence to commercial farming (Lehr 1975; Schlichtmann 1977,  12-13).  Again,  an adaptive perspective helps explain the Ukrainian settlement experience.

I have, in sum, found the ecological concept o f preadaptation useful in helping explain the historical geography of Europeans in rural North America.  I  carefully  avoid postulating "an  omniscient  and  single-directed,  rational being,"  an Ecological Man if you will, recognizing instead that  overseas  European  colonists  had  "finite abilities  to  perceive  and  store  information" (Wolpert 1964,537).  W e   must  acknowledge, too, that  some facets of  culture seem  immune to ecological  causal forces,  that not all learned behavior is or need be adaptive. Further, my own bias is that w e  should employ cultural-ecological  concepts  in  a  possibilistic,  particularistic manner, rather than in a universalizing  way. W e need to avoid the normative  tendencies evident in some recent anthropological works in cultural ecology,  for  there,  I believe,  lies the way  to  neo-environmental  determinism  and placelessness  (Rhoades  and  Thompson  1975; Green 1979). Proceeding  with such caution and humility, w e  can join the explanatory power of cultural ecology  to the causal  insights gained earlier  from economic and cultural determinism, approaching a more holistic methodology and explanation.

## Acknowledgments

I appreciate  the  useful  suggestions  provided by William  Doolittle and  Gregory  Knapp,  who read a preliminary version of the paper.  I  am also grateful to Karl W. Butzer for sharing his insights on cultural ecology.

## References

- Allen, J. P.,  and Turner, E . J. 1987.  We the people: An atlas of America's  ethnic diversity. New York: Macmillan.
- Baltensperger, B. H. 1983. Agricultural  change among Great Plains Russian Germans. Annals of the Association o f American Geographers 73:7588.
- Bartz, F . 1955.  Franzosische Einflusse im Bilde der Kulturlandschaft  Nordamerikas:  Hufensiedlungen und Marschpolder in Kanada. Erdkunde 9: 286-305.
- Bennett, J. W. 1969.  Northern plainsmen: Adaptive strategy and agrarian life. Chicago: Aldine.
- Birch, B. 1971.  The environment  and settlement of the prairie-woodland transition  belt-a case study o f Edwards  County,  Illinois.  Southampton  Research Series in  Geography 6:3-31.
- Bjorklund, E .   M. 1964. Ideology and culture exemplified in southwestern  Michigan. Annals of the Association  of American Geographers 54:22741.
- Blouet, B.  W.,  and Lawson, M.  P . , eds. 1975.  Images  of  the  plains:  The  role  of human nature in settlement.  Lincoln,  NE:  University  of  Nebraska Press.
- Butzer,  K.  W. 1988.  Cattle and sheep from old to New Spain: Historical antecedents. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 78:29-56.
- Carlson,  A.  W. 1981. German-Russian houses in western North Dakota. Pioneer  America 31(2):4960.
- Clark,  A.  H. 1949.  The invasion of New Zealand by people,  plants and animals:  The South Island. New Brunswick,  NJ: Rutgers University Press. - .
1956.  The impact of exotic invasion on the remaining New World mid-latitude grasslands. In  Man's  role in  changing the face of the earth,  ed. W. L. Thomas,  Jr., pp. 737-62.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- . 1959.  Three centuries and the island. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. - .
1960. Old world nrigins and religious adherence in Nova Scotia. Geographical Review 50: 317-44.
- . 1968.  Acadia:  The geography of early Nova Scotia to 7760. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

- Cozzens, A.  B. 1943. Conservation in German settlements of  the  Missouri Ozarks.  Geographical Review 33:286-98.
- Cronon, W. 1983. Changes in the land: Indians, colonists,  and  the ecology of  New  England. New  York: Hill &amp; Wang.
- Crosby, A.  W. 1986. Ecological  imperialism: The biological expansion  of  Europe, 900-1900. New York: Cambridge University Press.
- Davis, D. H. 1935. The Finland community,  Minnesota. Geographical Review 25:382-94.
- Denevan, W. M. 1983. Adaptation, variation,  and cultural geography.  The Professional Geographer 35~399-407.
- Doolittle, W. E. 1987. Las Marismas to Panuco to Texas: The transfer of open range cattle ranching from Iberia through northeastern Mexico. Yearbook of  the Conference  of  Latin  Americanist Geographers 13:3-11.
- Doughty,  R.  W. 1983. Wildlife and man in Texas: Environmental change and conservation.  College Station, TX:  Texas A&amp;M University Press.
- Duncan, J. S. 1980. The superorganic in American cultural geography.  Annals of the Association of American Geographers 70:181-98.
- Earle,  C. V. 1975. The evolution of a Tidewater settlement system: All  Hallow's'Parish,  Maryland, 7 6507783. Research Paper No. 170. Chicago: University o f Chicago, Department of Geography.
- Ensminger,  R. F. 1980-81. A search for the origin o f the  Pennsylvania barn.  Pennsylvania Folklife 30(2):50-69.
- Estaville, 1. E., Jr. 1986. Mapping the  Louisiana French. Southeastern Geographer 26:90-113.
- - - . 1988a. Were the nineteenth-century  Cajuns geographically isolated?  Geoscience and Man 25:85-95.
- . 1988b. The Louisiana French in 1900. journal of Historical Geography 14:342-59.
- Evans,  E. E. 1969. The Scotch-Irish:  Their  cultural adaptation  and  heritage  in the  American  Old West. In Essays in Scotch-Irish  history,  ed. E. R.  R. Green,  pp. 69-86. London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul.
- Centilcore, R. 1 . 1957. Vincennes and French settlement in the Old Northwest. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 47:285-97.
- Cerlach,  R. 1. 1976. Immigrants in the Ozarks:  A study in ethnic geography. Columbia,  MO: University of Missouri Press.
- . 1986. Settlement patterns  in  Missouri:  A study of population origins,  with a wall map. Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press.
- Gibson, J. R. 1978. European settlement and development in North  America. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
- Class,  J. W. 1986. The Pennsylvania culture region:
- A  view from the barn. Ann Arbor,  MI: UMI Research Press.
- Click, T.  F. 1972. The old world background of the irrigation system of San  Antonio,  Texas. El Paso, TX:  Texas Western Press.
- Green, S. 1979. The  agricultural  colonization  of temperate forest habitats: An ecological model. In The Frontier,  Vol.  Two,  ed. W. W.  Savage,  lr. and S. I . Thompson, pp. 69-103. Norman,  OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
- Hardesty,  D. 1. 1986. Rethinking cultural adaptation. The Professional Geographer 38:ll-18.
- Harris,  R.  C. 1966. The seigneurial system in early Canada:  A geographical study.  Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
- . 1977. The simplification of Europe  overseas. Annals of  the Association  of  American Geographers 67:469-83.
- , and Matthews,  C. J. 1987. Historical atlas of Canada,  Vol. 1. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
- Head,  C.  C. 1976. Eighteenth-century Newfoundland:  A  geographer's  perspective. Toronto:  University  of Toronto Press.
- Hewes, 1. 1953. Tontitown: Ozark vineyard center. Economic Geography 29:125-43.
- Hopple, 1. C. 1979. Spatial organization  of  the southeastern  Pennsylvania  plain  Dutch  group culture  region  to 1975. Pennsylvania  Folklife 29(1):13-26.
- Hudson, J.  C. 1984. Cultural geography of the upper  Great  Lakes region.  journal of Cultural Geography 5(  l):  19-32.
- Johnson, H. B. 1951. The location of  German immigrants in the Middle West. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 41:l-41.
- Jordan, T.  C. 1964. Between the forest and the prairie. Agricultural History 38:205-16.
- . 1966. German seed in Texas soil:  Immigrant farmers  in nineteenth-century  Texas.  Austin,  TX: University of Texas Press.

- .

- .

- .

- .

- . 1989. An Iberian lowland/highland  model for Latin  American cattle ranching.  Journal  of  Historical Geography 15:lll-25.
1970. Population origin groups in rural Texas.  Annals of the Association of American Geographers (map supplement 13) 60:404-5.
1982. Texas  graveyards:  A  cultural  legacy. Austin,  TX:  University of Texas Press.
1985. American log buildings: An old  world heritage.  Chapel  Hill,  NC:  University  of  North Carolina Press.
- 1987-88. Some neglected Swiss literature on the forebay bank barn.  Pennsylvania Folklife 37:75-80.
- , and Kaups, M. 1987. Folk architecture  in cultural and ecological context. Geographical  Review 77:52-75.

- , and -. 1989.  The American backwoods frontier:  An ethnic  and ecological  interpretation. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Kaups, M. 1966.  Finnish  place names in  Minnesota: A study in cultural transfer. Geographical Review 56:377-97.
- Kloberdanz, T. J. 1980.  Plainsmen of three continents: Volga German adaptation to steppe, prairie,  and  pampa.  In Ethnicity on the Great  Plains, ed.  F.  C.  Luebke,  pp.  54-72.  Lincoln,  NE:  University  of Nebraska Press.
- Kniffen, F.  B. 1965.  Folk housing: Key to diffusion. Annals of  the Association of  American Geographers 55:549-77.
- Kollmorgen, W.  M. 1941. The German settlement in  Cullman County, Alabama: An  agricultural island in  the Cotton Belt. Washington:  U.S.  Department of Agriculture.
- Lehr, J. C. 1975.  The rural settlement behaviour of Ukrainian  pioneers  in  western  Canada,  18911914. In Western Canadian research in  geography: The Lethbridge papers,  ed. B. M. Barr, pp. 51-66. British  Columbia  Geographical Series,  21,  Occasional  Papers in Geography.  Vancouver:  Tantalus  Research.

- .

- .

1980.  The log buildingsof Ukrainian settlers in western Canada. Prairie forum 2:183-96.
1985.  Kinship and society in the Ukrainian pioneer  settlement  of  the  Canadian  west.  Canadian Geographer 29:207-19.
3. Lemon, J. T . 1966. The  agricultural  practices  of national groups in eighteenth-century Pennsylvania.  Geographical Review 56:467-96. - .
- . 1978.  The weakness of place and community in early Pennsylvania.  In  European  settlement and development in North America,  ed. 1. R.  Gibson, pp. 190-207. Toronto: University o f Toronto Press.
1972.  The best poor man's  country:  A  geographical study of early southeastern Pennsylvania. Baltimore: johns Hopkins University Press.
- . 1980. Early  Americans and their social environment. journalof HistoricalGeography6:11531.
7. Louder, D.  R . , and  Waddell, E . , eds. 1983.  Du continent perdu  a I'archipel  retrouve: le  Quebec  et I'Amerique  francaise.  Quebec: Travaux  du Dbpartement  de  GCographie de  I'Universite Laval,  6.
8. Mannion, J.  J. 1974.  lrish  settlements in  eastern Canada:  A  study  of cultural  transfer  and adaptation. Toronto:  University of Toronto Press.
9. Mather, E . C.,  and Kaups,  M. 1963. The Finnish sauna: A  cultural index t o  settlement.  Annals of the Association of American Geographers 53:494504.
10. McManis, D.  R . 1964.  The initial evaluation and utilization of the Illinois  prairies.  Research Paper  no.
94. Chicago:  University of Chicago,  Department of Geography.
12. . 1972.  European impressions of the New England coast, 1497-7620. Research Paper no. 139. Chicago:  University of  Chicago,  Department of Geography.
13. McQuillan,  D. A. 1978.  Farm size and work ethic: Measuring the success of immigrant farmers on the American grasslands,  1875-1925.  journal of Historical Geography 4:57-76.
14. Meigs, P . ,   111. 1941.  An ethno-telephonic survey of French Louisiana. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 31:243-50.
15. Meinig, D. W. 1957-58. The  American  colonial era:  A  geographic  commentary. Proceedings  of the Royal Geographical Society,  South Australian Branch,  1-22.
16. . 1986.  The shaping 0fAmerica:A  geographical perspective on 500 years of history,  Vol.  1 .   New Haven,  CT: Yale  University  Press.
17. Meitzen,  A. 1895. Siedelung und Agrarwesen  der Westgermanen und Ostgermanen, der Kelten,  ROmer,  Finnen und Slawen,  4 vols.  Berlin: Wilhelm Hertz.
18. Merrens, H. R. 1964.  Colonial North  Carolina in  the eighteenth century. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
19. Mikesell,  M.  W. 1960. Comparative  studies  in frontier history.  Annals  of  the  Association  of American Geographers 50:62-74. - .
1978. Tradition  and innovation in cultural geography. Annals of the Association of  American Geographers 68: 1-  16.
21. Millward, H. 1981.  Regional patterns of ethnicity in Nova Scotia: A geographical study.  Halifax: International Education  Centre, St.  Mary's university.
22. Mitchell, R. D. 1977.  Commercialism and frontier: Perspectives  on  the early Shenandoah Valley. Charlottesville,  VA:  University Press of Virginia.
- . 1978.  The formation of early American cultural regions: An interpretation.  In  European settlement a n d  development in  North  America,  ed. J. R. Gibson, pp. 66-90.  Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
24. Murphy,  M. E . 1986. Irrigation in the Bajio region ofcolonial  Mexico. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
25. Newton,  M. B . , Jr. 1974. Cultural  preadaptation and the  upland South.  Geoscience  and Man 5: 143-154.
26. Nostrand, R.  L. 1970.  The Hispanic-American borderland: Delimitation of an American culture region. Annals o f the Association of  American Geographers 60:638-61. - .
1980.  The Hispano homeland in 1900. Annals of the Association  of American Geographers 70~382-96.
28. O'Brien,  M. J . , ed. 1984.  Grassland,  forest,  a n d  his-

- torical  settlement. Lincoln, N E :   University of  Nebraska Press.
- Ostergren, R.  C. 1988. A community transplanted: The  trans-Atlantic experience of a Swedish irnmigrant settlement in the upper Middle West, 78357975. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
- Peet, R. 1969. The spatial expansion  of commercial agriculture  in the  nineteenth  century:  A  von Thunen  explanation.  Economic  Geography 45: 283-301.
- Peters, B. C. 1970. Pioneer evaluation of the Kalamazoo County landscape. Michigan  Academician 3~15-25.
- Petersen,  A.  J. 1976. The German-Russian house in  Kansas: A study in persistence o f form. Pioneer America 8(1):19-27.
- Pillsbury,  R. 1987. The Pennsylvania culture area: A reappraisal. North  American Culture 3(2):37-54.
- Prunty, M. C. 1965. Some geographic  views of the role of fire in settlement processes in the South. Proceedings, Fourth  Annual  Tall  Timbers  Fire Ecology Conference, 161-68.
- Raitz, K.  B. 1978. Ethnic maps of  North America. Geographical Review 68:335-50. - .
1979. Themes in the cultural geography of European ethnic  groups in the  United  States. Geographical Review 69:77-94.

- ,

- and Mather,  E.  C. 1971. Norwegians and tobacco in western Wisconsin. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 61:684-96.
- Raup, H. F. 1932. The German colonization of Anaheim,  California. University of California Publications in Geography 6(3):123-46.
- . 1935. The Italian-Swiss  dairymen of San Luis Obispo County, California. Yearbook  of the Association of Pacific Coast Geographers 1:3-8.
- Rechlin, A.  T.  M. 1976. Spatial behavior of the old order  Amish  of  Nappanee, Indiana. Michigan Geographical Publication 18. Ann  Arbor,  MI: University of Michigan, Department of Geography.
- Rhoades, R.  E.,  and Thompson, S.  1. 1975. Adaptive  strategies  in alpine environments: Beyond ecological particularism.  American Ethnologist 2: 535-51.
- Rice, J. C. 1973. Patterns of ethnicity in  a Minnesota County, 7880-7905. Geographical Reports no. 4. Umei, Sweden: University  of Umei, Department of Geography.
- . 1977. The role of culture and community in frontier  prairie  farming. journal  of Historical Geography 3:  1  55-75.
- , and Ostergren, R.  C. 1978. The decision to emigrate:  A study in  diffusion. Geografiska  Annaler 60B:1-15.
- Sauer,  C.  0. 1925. The morphology of landscape. University of California  Publications in Geography 2(2):19-53.
- . 1941. The settlement of the humid east. In
- Climate and man:  Yearbook of agriculture 7941, pp. 157-66. Washington: US. Department o f Agriculture.
- . 1966. The early Spanish Main. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
- Schlichtmann,  H. 1977. Ethnic  themes  in  geographical research  on western Canada. Canadian Ethnic Studies 9:9-41.
- Semple, E. C. 1903. American history and its geographic  conditions.  Boston  and  New  York: Houghton Mifflin.
- Simpson-Housley, P. 1978. Hutterian religious  ideology, environmental perception, and attitudes toward agriculture.  journal of Geography 77:14548.
- Smith,  C.-H. 1930-31. Notes on the distribution of the foreign-born  Scandinavian in Wisconsin in 1905. Wisconsin Magazine of History 14:41936.
- Starczewska, M. 1967. The historical geography of the oldest Polish  settlement in the United States. Polish Review 12:ll-40.
- Steward,  J. H. 1955. Theory of culture change:  The methodology of multilinear evolution. Urbana, IL: University of  Illinois Press.
- Tracie, C. J. 1975. Ethnicity  and settlement in  western  Canada:  Doukhobor  village  settlements in Saskatchewan. In Western  Canadian Research in Geography: The Lethbridge  papers,  ed. B.  M.  Barr, pp. 67-76. British  Columbia Geographical Series, 21, Occasional  Papers in Geography. Vancouver: Tantalus Research.
- Turner, F.  J. 1962. The frontier in American history. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
- van Cleef, E. 1918. The Finn in  America. Geographical  Review 6:185-214.
- Vogeler,  1. 1976. The Roman Catholic culture region of central Minnesota.  Pioneer  America 8:7183.
- Wacker, P. 0. 1973. Folk architecture as  an  indicator of culture areas and culture diffusion:  Dutch barns and barracks in New Jersey.  Pioneer America 5(2):37-47. - .
1974. Traditional house and barn types in New jersey:  Keys to acculturation, past culturogeographic regions,  and settlement history.  Geoscience and Man 5:163-76.
- . 1986. The Dutch culture area in the Northeast, 1609-1800. New Jersey History 104:l-21.
- Wahlquist,  W.  1 . 1978. Population growth  in the Mormon core area, 1847-90. In  The Mormon role in the settlement of the West, ed.  R.  H. Jackson, pp. 107-34. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press.
- Warkentin, J. 1959. Mennonite agricultural settlements of  southern Manitoba. Geographical Review 49:342-68.
- Webb, W.  P. 1931. The Great Plains. Boston: Ginn.

- . 1951. The  great  frontier.  Austin,  TX:  University of Texas Press.
- Wells,  R. 1973.  Frontier systems as a sociocultural type. Papers in  Anthropology (University of Oklahoma) 14(1):6-15.
- West,  R.  C. 1986.  An atlas of Louisiana surnames of French and  Spanish origin. Baton Rouge, LA: Ceoscience Publications,  Louisiana  State University.
- Wilhelm, H. C. H. 1980.  Organized  German settlement and its effects on the frontier of  south-central Texas.  New York:  Arno Press.
- Wilson,  E.  M. 1971. Some  similarities  between American  and  European  folk  houses.  Pioneer America 3(2):8-14.
- Winberry,  j.  j. 1974. The  log  house  in  Mexico. Annals of the  Association of American Geographers 64~54-69.
- Wolpert, J. 1964. The  decision process in spatial context.  Annals  of the  Association  of American Geographers 54:  5  37- 58.
- Wright,  M. 1958.  The antecedents of the doublepen  house  type.  Annals  of  the  Association  of American Geographers 48:109-17.
- Zelinsky,  W. 1973. The  cultural  geography of the United  States. Englewood Cliffs, Nj:  Prentice-Hall.