<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

[ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21](https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21)

## Motivations and Methods for Replication in Geography: Working with Data Streams

## Nigel Waters

To cite this article: Nigel Waters (2020): Motivations and Methods for Replication in Geography: Working with Data Streams, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2020.1806027

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2020.1806027

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 13 Oct 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 34

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

曲

- [x] C

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Motivations and Methods for Replication in Geography: Working with Data Streams

Nigel Waters

Department of Geography, University of Calgary, and College of Science, George Mason University

The article begins with a historical account of Hudson ' s rural settlement theory and the various attempts to replicate Hudson ' s research. Harvey ' s exhortation ' by our theories you shall know us ' is discussed as a motivation for replication. Motivations not considered are the detection of fraud, mendacity, and incompetence, because these are the domain of reproducible research. Replication research in medicine, psychology, economics, and criminology is reviewed. The varying distinctions between replication and reproducible (R&amp;R) research in each discipline are described. In each discipline the essential papers that have defined the ' replication crisis ' and the strategies that researchers have presented are discussed. These strategies include recommendations for systematic reviews and the standardization of research protocols, including the PRISMA and STROBE protocols that are now the accepted format for research in medicine. All four disciplines recommend the use of a formal meta-analysis following the systematic reviews of previous research contributions. There follows a brief discussion of a case study of a meta-analysis in geography that represents a model for others to follow and, second, the suggestion that geographically weighted regression analyses can be seen as a method for replicating the validity of a model across space. The article concludes with a review of the recently developed technology of computer and Jupyter Notebook as a way of facilitating research replication. Key Words: geographically weighted models, Jupyter notebook, meta-analysis, replication.

[T]he river paid no attention, caring only for itself, those changing, roving waters into which -as I later learned -you can never step twice.

-Tokarczuk (2018, 3)

## Motivations: Testing Rural Settlement Theory

T he year 1969 was a watershed with respect to exploration; two men were the first to land on the moon. It was also a defining moment for some in geography. Harvey (1969) published Explanation in Geography , his paean to a scientific approach. Harvey was honored in 2012 by the University of Bristol with an honorary degree. The university orator, Larner (2012), described the immense impact made by Harvey ' s book, noting that it began by stating ' by our theories you shall know us. ' That is actually how Harvey ended the book, not how he began it (Harvey 1969, 486). In 1969 I started studying for a degree in geography at Cambridge University. Harvey ' s book was required reading. The same year, Hudson (1969) published his Theory of Rural Settlement and that, too, was required reading in a department that had five historical geographers, one of whom was Henry Clifford Darby, the head of the department. Hudson ' s theory adopted a scientific approach to the early colonial settlement of Iowa and used point pattern analysis to study how the spacing of settlements changed from a clustered to a more regular pattern as population density increased. Now cited 214 times, it quickly produced numerous articles that sought to test the theory in other locations, to replicate his research.

Although quantitative historical geography was not the orthodoxy at Cambridge, quantitative, statistical geography was increasingly popular owing to the influence of Chorley, Haggett, and Harvey and his book. A test of Hudson ' s theory seemed to me to be a good topic for an undergraduate dissertation. Could the theory be replicated in a slightly different time and space? It worked in Iowa, but would it apply to a landscape that had also been colonized by Europeans -for example, Saskatchewan -just a few decades later under an almost identical land survey system? Hudson ' s time periods were the 1870s, mid1910s, and 1960, whereas mine were 1882, 1915,

and 1971 (Waters 1972). We both used the same point pattern analysis (a spatial analysis technique of choice at the time) and, indeed, both found a somewhat satisfying decline in variance -mean ratios when the settlement pattern changed from clustered to regular as the settlement biotope filled up. In a discipline such as rural geography, the clinical testing and replication of a topic as broad and nuanced as settlement theory is one possibility, but when that is completed it is the individual stories of the colonists and previous inhabitants that also beckon to be told. Grossman (1971) considered Hudson ' s theory in Iboland and, not unsurprising, found it to be less than universal. Birch (1970) critiqued Hudson ' s original article and Hudson (1970) responded. Thus ended an early attempt in settlement geography to replicate the analysis of settlements that sought to prove or disprove an explicitly spatial theory.

## Replication in Geography  s Cognate Disciplines

In the leitmotif earlier, Tokarczuk (2018) was indeed channeling (irresistible pun intended) Heraclitus ' s warning, ' You cannot step twice into the same river. ' If the Greek philosopher is correct, is there ever any possibility of reproducing or replicating research in the discipline of academic geography, or is it a chimera, a wild goose chase, as Gould (1970) once famously argued with respect to statistical analysis in geography? With respect to the use of statistics in geography, technological advances to recognize and remove spatial autocorrelation prior to the application of statistical models and to apply, for example, geographically weighted models to highlight local variation have all helped to inspire a renaissance in the statistical analysis of geographical variation (see following discussion). Similarly, N € ust and Pebesma (2020) and Sui and Kedron (2020) both suggest, in part, technological solutions, including the use of computer notebook technology (see comments later relating to Jupyter Notebook), to assist reproducibility and replication (R&amp;R) in current geographical research.

Before we leave this analogy of the river stream for the problems of replication, it should be admitted that Heraclitus might have been misunderstood. This common interpretation might be a rephrasing by Cratylus, a disciple of Heraclitus. Indeed, Huxley (1981) suggested that the Ephesian philosopher might have been arguing that the river actually retains its identity as a river. The analogy could be salvaged by following Hedges and Schauer ' s (2019) argument and noting that there is exact replication and approximate replication. Take ten samples from, for example, the Mississippi at the same time and from the same place and you have exact replication. Return to the river at a later date to replicate previous work and it will not be exactly the same river. Replication might allow the researcher to develop ' covering laws ' (Harvey 1969) or support middlerange theory, ' defined as contextual generalizations presenting causal explanations of delimited aspects of reality -events or phenomena ' (Meyfroidt et al. 2018, 53). The appropriateness of middle-range theory will depend on how much ' science ' is used in any particular branch of geography; for example, physics in scree slope modeling, chemistry in fluvial analysis, or traffic assignment in transportation geography.

Kedron et al. (2019) provided definitions of reproducibility and replicability. Their succinct rephrasings were stated thus: Reproducible research is possible when a researcher has the same data and same methods, because this should produce the same results. Researchers can replicate existing research if, when they collect new data, they use the same (or very similar) methods, because it seems logical that this should produce the same (or very similar) results. These definitions are most pertinent to that portion of geographical research that hews to the scientific paradigm, and that is what this article discusses (although it is fully recognized here that even in disciplines that are closely allied to geography, such as geology, claims have been made for a scientific model that is both hermeneutic [interpretive] and historical, as opposed to an approach purely based on physics; Frodeman 1995). Kedron et al. (2019) stated that disciplines other than geography might have slightly varying definitions of R&amp;R research, and some of these are noted here. Indeed, a most widely cited paper on this topic by the Open Science Collaboration (2015) completely conflates the two terms multiple times in the same sentence and uses ' direct replication ' as a third synonym.

This article briefly considers five disciplines that have struggled with reproducing and replicating research -medicine, psychology, economics, criminology, and geography (MPECG) -and their cognate disciplines. The intersection of medicine and

geography, medical geography, will be used to consider how replication might be achieved. The other MPECG disciplines also have their intersections with geography; for example, behavioral geography, economic geography, and the criminology of place, which uses geographic information systems and hotspot analysis as a primary methodology and has a similar ' First Law ' (Weisburd 2015; Waters 2018). Motivations not considered are the detection of fraud, mendacity, and incompetence; these are more the purview of reproducible science. Two methods that support replication are selected here for special consideration. The first, meta-analysis, is an approach used in all five of our MPECG disciplines. The second, geographically weighted analyses, is becoming an increasingly common method of investigation in geography. This approach was first conceptualized by Fotheringham, Charlton, and Brunsdon (1996) and, in its first application, named geographically weighted regression (GWR) by Brunsdon, Fotheringham, and Charlton (2010).

## Replication in Medicine: Galvanizing Complacency

Medicine realized that it had a problem in reproducing and replicating results when Ioannidis (2005) published his iconoclastic paper declaring that the results of most medical research were false. To help mitigate the likelihood of publishing false results, Ioannidis and his colleagues implicitly endorsed a meta-analysis (Uitterlinden et al. 2006) and then subsequently published guidelines for systematic reviews and analyses in medical research. Three years later they published two widely cited articles on the PRISMA approach: Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analysis (Liberati et al. 2009; Moher et al. 2009). This, together with the STROBE (Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology) protocol (Von Elm et al. 2007), has since become the de facto standard for meta-analysis in medical and epidemiological research.

## Replication in Psychology: A Crisis of Confidence?

Pashler and Wagenmakers (2012) provided an editorial introduction to a special section of the journal

Perspectives on Psychological Science , which considered the question of whether the lack of replication meant that there was ' a crisis of confidence ' in psychology. This produced many responses, but not all agreed that there was a crisis. Maxwell, Lau, and Howard (2015), for example, doubted whether there was a replication crisis in psychology and concluded perhaps not. They argued that just one failure to replicate might not be conclusive evidence that the first study was faulty. Rather, they suggested, ' The replication study may have failed to produce a statistically significant result because it may have been underpowered ' (Maxwell, Lau, and Howard 2015, 488). They concluded that meta-analyses are one method of bringing together all replication studies to determine the extent of variation in similar studies. More recently, Siddaway, Wood, and Hedges (2019) argued for both meta analyses and meta-syntheses to aggregate the results of quantitative and qualitative replications, respectively.

Regardless of Maxwell, Lau, and Howard ' s (2015) conclusion and Siddaway, Wood, and Hedges ' s (2019) recommendation to solve replication questions within meta-analytic frameworks, this solution is not as easy or as straightforward as first might be thought. Hedges and Schauer (2019) outlined the complexity of framing the issue statistically. These complexities include whether the burden of proof is placed on replication or nonreplication and how the resulting hypotheses, alternative and null, should be specified; whether the replication is exact or whether a small amount of what is assumed to be ' negligible heterogeneity ' is allowed; and whether the studies are treated as fixed or random effects; the former approach assumes that the studies included comprise the entire body of evidence and the latter, more realistic assumption, that they are a sample. Hedges and Schauer ' s (2019) article offers a rigorous treatment of the statistical aspects of these issues. Put simply, meta-analyses are complex and demanding, but they do yield insights into the universality of the results of individual studies.

## Replication in Economics: Politics and Other Problems

Hamermesh (2007) presented an exhaustive and well-cited review of replication in economics. He described the period up until the 1990s when there was little motivation to replicate research in economics, which was partly due to data sets from research papers not being archived. Even when this

became more common, journals such as the Journal of Political Economy , Labor Economics , and Empirical Economics , which had started initiatives to promote replication (including a ' Confirmation and Contradictions ' section, a supportive editorial, and a section devoted to replications, respectively), all reported an almost complete lack of interest. This changed with the publication of Hamermesh ' s (1997) lengthy tutorial on how to replicate research. Hamermesh ' s terminology differs from current usage. He distinguished between pure replication and scientific replication. About two thirds of his 2007 paper concentrates on pure replication: ' same question and model … [and] original data set ' (Hamermesh 2007, 716). According to Kedron et al. ' s (2019) definition, this is not replication but reproducibility. Hamermesh ' s definition of ' scientific replication ' is that it should reexamine a published result or conclusion using a different data set from a different population. For example, he noted that owing to the dominance of U.S. economists and U.S. economic journals, many economic theories are tested on U.S. student populations, a criticism that also affects the empirical research in many disciplines besides economics, including psychology and education. This was certainly the opinion of Henrich, Heine, and Norenzayan (2010), who castigated psychology researchers not only in the United States but also in Canada and Western Europe for relying on samples of students who were WEIRD -Western, educated, industrialized, rich, and democratic -which the authors stated represented no more than 12 percent of the world ' s population. Hamermesh (2007, 727) recommended that to improve what he referred to as the ' sad state of scientific replication in economics, ' there must be a moral imperative to increase scientific replication. This will increase the credibility of economic research with both policymakers and the public. One of his suggestions is to increase the number of survey articles and meta-analyses.

## Replication in Criminology

Recently, six leading criminology researchers summarized the state of the art of replication research in criminology (Farrington et al. 2019). They cited a systematic review by Pridemore, Makel, and Plucker (2018) of more than 38,000 articles in criminology journals that revealed that only 0.45 percent were replications but, of these, 75 percent were successful.

Similarly encouraging results were found in a special issue of the Journal of Contemporary Justice edited by Savolainen and VanEseltine (2018). Despite this progress, Farrington et al. (2019) concluded that ' more research is needed, based on systematic reviews and meta-analyses … a how-to-do-it manual should be developed ' (390). The final section of this article discusses a case study of a meta-analysis in geography that provided many of these directions.

## Methods for Replication in Geography

The preceding discussion has shown that a common response to replication in several of human geography ' s cognate disciplines has been to engage in systematic reviews accompanied by a meta-analysis of the similar studies. This is true of geography as well. Google Scholar searches of the terms metaanalysis , geography , and geographical do reveal numerous papers, but they tend to be primarily in the medical literature, looking at geographical aspects of diseases and medical conditions including, for example, obesity and cancers (see Clifford et al. 2005; Wang and Beydoun 2007). Khatami, Mountrakis, and Stehman (2016) and Grekousis (2019) both adopted the PRISMA protocol discussed earlier in their systematic reviews of the literature prior to their meta-analyses. It is disappointing that geography as a discipline does not have its own protocol for a systematic review. It is hoped that this will change.

Also prevalent are meta-analyses in the environmental and ecological literature. An early example of the latter is Bender, Contreras, and Fahrig ' s (1998) meticulously documented and well-cited meta-analysis of the patch size effect on habitat loss and population decline. Since that paper was published, there have been many developments in terms of methodologies and software for conducting meta-analyses.

Nicholas, Jacobsen, and Waters (2014) provided a meta-analysis of the risk factors associated with human infection by the Rift Valley fever virus. The study began with a systematic review of six databases that reported on Rift Valley fever virus risk factors. Originally 128 articles were identified, but these were eventually reduced to 17 that reported on primary studies of human risk factors (details are provided by Nicholas, Jacobsen, and Waters 2014). The odds ratio (OR) was used as the measure of association for the meta-analysis. The StatsDirect software

package was used to calculate pooled effects estimates for the risk factor when the ORs for four or more studies were available. Based on the literature, fixed effects models were used when there were only four studies for a variable and a random effects model in all other instances. StatsDirect was used to calculate I 2 statistics to test for the problem of heterogeneity and the degree of consistency in the chosen studies. Following Borenstein et al. (2009), a series of statistics was calculated to estimate publication bias. Forest plots were used to portray the OR results for each variable from each study along with their 95 percent confidence intervals. In addition, the summary result for each variable from all studies testing that variable (i.e., the pooled OR and its confidence interval) was plotted. This was the metaanalysis result. The conclusion of the study was that the primary risk factors for Rift Valley fever relate to variables that capture contact with animals and consumption of animal products, including raw milk consumption. So meta-analysis is one methodological solution to the replication crisis and can resolve different results from primary research. It must also produce a way of easily updating the findings when new research is produced, however. After this research was completed, Archer et al. (2013) published a study showing that raw milk consumption was not a significant factor. It could be concluded that all aspects of a meta-analysis should be archived in a manner that allows additional results to be quickly added and integrated. For those in geography wishing to pursue meta-analysis research, the most recent, authoritative coverage of the topic is provided by Cooper, Hedges, and Valentine (2019). Nevertheless, it should be noted that geography has its own challenges in conducting meta-analyses, not least of which are the complexity and diversity of the systems that geography studies.

## Geographically Weighted Models: Testing Theories across Space

Geographically weighted models, regressions, and discriminant analysis are a particularly attractive and potentially highly visual way in which to test theories about relationships across space. GWR has been used widely since its introduction by Brunsdon and others in 1996. Geographically weighted models are ' replication machines ' : The same model with slightly varying data is replicated across a landscape of data points. It is therefore of great interest when the data change and the replication fails. Essentially, it shows how the estimates of the model ' s variable coefficients will change over space and that replication is not necessarily a problem but an opportunity for insights (similar to spatial autocorrelation; Goodchild 1986). There might indeed be a reason why the details of a model that works in one location will not be applicable in another area. For example, from 2004 to 2007 I was the technical director on a project known as Mapping the Media in the Americas. The goal was to determine how the media (newspapers, radio, and TV) influenced elections in Latin American countries (Waters et al. 2006; Hansen, Sun, and Waters 2011). The first country studied was Peru. The results of the most recent presidential election (dependent variable) were modeled using media and social -economic census variables as the explanatory factors. The GWR used an adaptive spatial filter that reduced the number of observations from 1,781 to 99, thus reducing the degrees of freedom (making the model easier to fit), but the average adjusted R 2 rose from 0.35 to 0.67. Thus, the GWR vastly outperformed the aspatial regression model and showed that the interior voted differently than the coast and Quechua speakers voted differently from those whose first language was Spanish. It might be said that the replication failed in a most informative way for those wishing to strengthen democracy, the goal of the Carter Institute, which sponsored the research. It is important, therefore, to emphasize that the goal of replication in such geographical research is not simply to reproduce past studies, but it is either to strengthen and extend existing spatial theories or, indeed, to evolve new theories, as Harvey once suggested.

New forms of geographically weighted models that will aid in replication research are being developed. For example, multiscale geographically weighted regression allows researchers to investigate whether spatial processes exist (can be replicated) at different scales (Fotheringham, Yang, and Kang 2017). Python-based implementations and software manuals are now available (Oshan et al. 2019).

## Conclusion and a Way Forward

It is important to be aware of the vast literature in human geography ' s closely allied disciplines that addresses the ' replication crisis ' with data and model

depositories along with methods and protocols. Equally important are published systematic reviews and meta-analysis guidelines. A uniquely geographic contribution to the discussion is the family of geographically weighted models that automate one form of replication across space. There is a concern that not fixing the replication crisis quickly will reduce the public ' s confidence in academic research and be used to politicize the discussion around, for example, environmental protections (Saltelli 2018).

Finally, let us return to the metaphor of streams that began this discussion. Brunsdon (2016) produced a comprehensive survey of the issues of R&amp;R research and noted the difficulty of working with the same data stream: ' One possibility might be to acknowledge that data used in a given publication is a static entity consisting of data obtained from a stream at a given point in time -and to time stamp and archive the data obtained and used in analysis at the moment it was carried out ' (694). Now, there are new technological solutions in the form of what has come to be known as computer notebooks. In a recent, popular, but academically well-cited article (Somers 2018), it has been argued that this is a new way of writing a scientific paper that combines text and code and allows its archival using Microsoft GitHub. It is being promoted by ESRI with downloadable samples (ESRI 2019) and used by my former colleagues at the Canada Energy Regulator (Skwara and Rodioukova 2019). The technology was partly pioneered by Stephen Wolfram through the use of his Mathematica software to write ' computational essays ' or ' notebooks ' that included text, data, and code to make the entire research process both reproducible by others and replicable for those who wanted to use the methods to compute additional results on new data sets. Somers (2018) described the work of Theodore Gray, a cofounder of Wolfram Research, in designing the original interface for the Mathematica Notebook and the research that led up to it in the 1990s. The history of Jupyter Notebook began with the development of the Interactive Python (IPython) language by Fernando P  erez in 2001 (Mascarelli 2014). P  erez and his colleagues added a Web-enabled interface in 2011 and Jupyter Notebook was developed in 2014. The link to GitHub, to store the native file formats, was launched in 2015. In contrast to the Wolfram technology, which is proprietary, Jupyter Notebook is open source and supports a great many programming languages. Somers (2018) reported the results of a Google Trends search on ' Mathematica ' (the Wolfram software environment) and ' Jupyter. ' The resulting graph portrays the results for the previous five years (2013 -2018) as two percentages that must sum to 100 percent. Mathematica is always ahead until the very last months, when searches for Jupyter are more frequent. Doing the same analysis in late February 2020 (Waters 2020), Mathematica regained its dominance during the fall months of 2018 and held a slight edge during the first four months of 2019 but was completely dominated by Jupyter searches in the summer of 2019. Mathematica was also second best (by a small margin) in the fall of 2019 and by a larger margin in the first six weeks of 2020. The message would appear to be that Mathematica, which is licensed to most universities, was historically a clear favorite when school was in but was eclipsed in the summer months when presumably research was more dominant than teaching. Jupyter is now also dominant in the teaching months, however (Waters 2020). Somers noted in April 2018 that there were 1.3 million Jupyter notebooks hosted on GitHub but by the end of 2019 GitHub had over 6 million Jupyter notebooks, and one modeling exercise predicted that this number would rise by more than 2 million by the end of 2020 (Nbviewer 2020). Among the papers citing Somers ' s article, there are technical descriptions of the flexibility of the Notebook paradigm and its usefulness in promoting reproducible research; for example, Oakes et al. (2019). Sopinka et al. (2020) also referred to Somers ' s paper. Their main recommendations for a research ' paper of the future ' include attributes supported by the Notebook paradigm: trustworthy (reproducibility, replicability, and repeatability), communicable to all users in various ways, open access, and having a measurable impact that is meaningful. These attributes are considered from the perspectives of publishers, authors, and institutions but not ' society ' (Sopinka et al. 2020, table 1). For a diametrically opposing view as to whether Notebook platforms will change, see Mirowski (2018), who stated, ' Open science is to conventional science as ' online education ' is to university education: Neither has as its primary goal serious enlightenment of the citizenry ' (193). Mirowski ' s table 3, ' The Landscape of Science Platforms ' (Mirowski 2018, 194) demonstrates how quickly new technologies that are supposedly more democratic

quickly become commercialized and are not the panacea that researchers and the public might have desired.

Whether these new technologies are widely adopted or not depends on there being an easily perceived motivation for university researchers to use them. Quite simply, university researchers must be rewarded in terms of reputation and career advancement, and university administrators must recognize these achievements. Otherwise, no researchers will make their data and their methods and their code and their results available for all to use.

## Acknowledgments

I thank Michael Goodchild, Peter Kedron, and Stewart Fotheringham for their insightful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of the article and Margaret Skwara for introducing me to Jupyter notebooks. I also thank two reviewers for their meticulous and thoughtful reading of the article that was originally submitted to the Annals Forum and for their comments and suggestions.

## References

- Archer, B. N., J. Thomas, J. Weyer, A. Cengimbo, D. E. Landoh, C. Jacobs, S. Ntuli, M. Modise, M. Mathonsi, M. S. Mashishi, et al. 2013. Epidemiologic investigations into outbreaks of Rift Valley fever in humans, South Africa, 2008 -2011. Emerging Infectious Diseases 19 (12):1918 -25. doi: 10.3201/eid1912. 121527.
- Bender, D. J., T. A. Contreras, and L. Fahrig. 1998. Habitat loss and population decline: A meta-analysis of the patch size effect. Ecology 79 (2):517 -33. doi: 10.1890/0012-9658(1998)079[0517:HLAPDA]2.0.CO;2.
- Birch, B. P. 1970. On a theory for rural settlement. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 60 (3):610 -13. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8306.1970.tb00748.x.
- Borenstein, M., L. V. Hedges, J. P. Higgins, and H. R. Rothstein. 2009. Introduction to meta-analysis . New York: Wiley.
- Brunsdon, C. 2016. Quantitative methods I: Reproducible research and quantitative geography. Progress in Human Geography 40 (5):687 -96. doi: 10.1177/ 0309132515599625.
- Brunsdon, C., A. S. Fotheringham, and M. E. Charlton. 2010. Geographically weighted regression: A method for exploring spatial nonstationarity. Geographical Analysis 28 (4):281 -98. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-4632. 1996.tb00936.x.
- Clifford, G. M., R. K. Rana, S. Franceschi, J. S. Smith, G. Gough, and J. M. Pimenta. 2005. Human papillomavirus genotype distribution in low-grade cervical
- lesions: Comparison by geographic region and with cervical cancer. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers &amp; Prevention 14 (5):1157 -64. doi: 10.1158/1055-9965. EPI-04-0812.
- Cooper, H., L. V. Hedges and J. C. Valentine, eds. 2019. The handbook of research synthesis and meta-analysis . New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
- ESRI. 2019. ArcGIS API for Python. Accessed February 29, 2020. https://developers.arcgis.com/python/samplenotebooks/.
- Farrington, D. P., F. L € osel, R. F. Boruch, D. C. Gottfredson, L. Mazerolle, L. W. Sherman, and D. Weisburd. 2019. Advancing knowledge about replication in criminology. Journal of Experimental Criminology 15 (3):373 -96. doi: 10.1007/s11292-0189337-3.
- Fotheringham, A. S., M. E. Charlton, and C. Brunsdon. 1996. The geography of parameter space: An investigation into spatial non-stationarity. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 10 (5):605 -27. doi: 10.1080/02693799608902100.
- Fotheringham, A. S., W. Yang, and W. Kang. 2017. Multiscale geographically weighted regression (MGWR). Annals of the American Association of Geographers 107 (6):1247 -65. doi: 10.1080/24694452. 2017.1352480.
- Frodeman, R. 1995. Geological reasoning: Geology as an interpretive and historical science. Geological Society of America Bulletin 107 (8):960 -68. doi: 10.1130/ 0016-7606(1995)107 &lt; 0960:GRGAAI &gt; 2.3.CO;2.
- Goodchild, M. F. 1986. Spatial autocorrelation. Norwich, UK: Geo Books.
- Gould, P. 1970. Is Statistix Inferens the geographical name for a wild goose? Economic Geography 46 (Suppl. 1):439 -48. doi: 10.2307/143157.
- Grekousis, G. 2019. Artificial neural networks and deep learning in urban geography: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 74:244 -56. doi: 10.1016/j.compenvurbsys. 2018.10.008.
- Grossman, D. 1971. Do we have a theory for settlement geography? The case of Iboland. The Professional Geographer 23 (3):197 -203. doi: 10.1111/j.0033-0124. 1971.00197.x.
- Hamermesh, D. S. 1997. Some thoughts on replications and reviews. Labour Economics 4 (2):107 -9. doi: 10. 1016/S0927-5371(97)00015-8.
- Hamermesh, D. S. 2007. Replication in economics. Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue Canadienne D'  economique 40 (3):715 -33. doi: 10.1111/j.13652966.2007.00428.x.
- Hansen, C. V., H. E. Sun, and N. M. Waters. 2011. The media communications environment through a spatial lens: The Mapping the Media in the Americas Project. Canadian Journal of Communication 36 (1):141 -45. doi: 10.22230/cjc.2011v36n1a2327.
- Harvey, D. 1969. Explanation in geography . London: Arnold.
- Hedges, L. V., and J. M. Schauer. 2019. Statistical analyses for studying replication: Meta-analytic perspectives. Psychological Methods 24 (5):557 -70. doi: 10. 1037/met0000189.

- Henrich, J., S. J. Heine, and A. Norenzayan. 2010. Most people are not WEIRD. Nature 466 (7302):29. doi: 10.1038/466029a.
- Hudson, J. C. 1969. A location theory for rural settlement. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 59 (2):365 -81. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8306. 1969.tb00676.x.
- Hudson, J. C. 1970. Comments in reply. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 60 (3):613 -14. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8306.1970.tb00749.x.
- Huxley, G. 1981. The art and thought of Heraclitus. Philosophical Studies 28:332 -35.
- Ioannidis, J. P. A. 2005. Why most published research findings are false. PLoS Medicine 2 (8):e124. doi: 10. 1371/journal.pmed.0020124.
- Kedron, P., A. E. Frazier, A. B. Trgovac, T. Nelson, and A. S. Fotheringham. 2019. Reproducibility and replicability in geographical analysis. Geographical Analysis. doi: 10.1111/gean.12221
- Khatami, R., G. Mountrakis, and S. V. Stehman. 2016. A meta-analysis of remote sensing research on supervised pixel-based land-cover image classification processes: General guidelines for practitioners and future research. Remote Sensing of Environment 177:89 -100. doi: 10.1016/j.rse.2016.02.028.
- Larner, W. 2012. Professor David Harvey: Doctor of science. Accessed October 20, 2019. http://www.bristol.ac.uk/ graduation/honorary-degrees/hondeg12/harvey.html.
- Liberati, A., D. G. Altman, J. Tetzlaff, C. Mulrow, P. C. Gøtzsche, J. P. A. Ioannidis, M. Clarke, P. J. Devereaux, J. Kleijnen, and D. Moher. 2009. The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: Explanation and elaboration. PLoS Medicine 6 (7):e1000100. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed. 1000100.
- Mascarelli, A. 2014. Research tools: Jump off the page. Nature 507 (7493):523 -25. doi: 10.1038/nj7493-523a.
- Maxwell, S. E., M. Y. Lau, and G. S. Howard. 2015. Is psychology suffering from a replication crisis? What does ' failure to replicate ' really mean? The American Psychologist 70 (6):487 -98. doi: 10.1037/a0039400.
- Meyfroidt, P., R. R. Chowdhury, A. de Bremond, E. C. Ellis, K.-H. Erb, T. Filatova, R. D. Garrett, J. M. Grove, A. Heinimann, T. Kuemmerle, et al. 2018. Middle-range theories of land system change. Global Environmental Change 53:52 -67. doi: 10.1016/j. gloenvcha.2018.08.006.
- Mirowski, P. 2018. The future(s) of open science. Social Studies of Science 48 (2):171 -203. doi: 10.1177/ 0306312718772086.
- Moher, D., A. Liberati, J. Tetzlaff, D. G. Altman, and the PRISMA Group. 2009. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA statement. PLoS Medicine 6 (7):e100097. doi: 10. 1371/journal.pmed.1000097.
- Nbviewer. 2020. Estimate of public Jupyter notebooks on GitHub. Accessed February 28, 2020. https://nbviewer. jupyter.org/github/parente/nbestimate/blob/master/estimate.ipynb#Estimate-of-Public-Jupyter-Notebooks-onGitHub.
- Nicholas, D. E., K. H. Jacobsen, and N. M. Waters. 2014. Risk factors associated with human Rift Valley Fever infection: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Tropical Medicine &amp; International Health 19 (12):1420 -29. doi: 10.1111/tmi.12385.
- N € ust, D., and E. Pebesma. 2020. Practical reproducibility in geosciences and geography. Annals of the Association of American Geographers. doi: 10.1080/ 24694452.2020.1806028.
- Oakes, B. J., R. Franceschini, S. Van Mierlo, and H. Vangheluwe. 2019. The computational notebook paradigm for multi-paradigm modeling. In ACM/IEEE 22nd International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems Companion (MODELS-C) , ed. L. Burgue ~ no, A. Pretschner, S. Voss, M. Chaudron, J. Kienzle, M. V € olter, S. G  erard, M. Zahedi, E. Bousse, A. Rensink, et al. 449 -54. Munich: IEEE. Accessed February 29, 2020. https:// ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8904600.
- Open Science Collaboration. 2015. Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science. Science 349 (6251):aac4716-1-4716-8.
- Oshan, T. M., Z. Li, W. Kang, L. J. Wolf, and A. S. Fotheringham. 2019. mgwr: A Python implementation of multiscale geographically weighted regression for investigating process spatial heterogeneity and scale. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 8 (6):269. doi: 10.3390/ijgi8060269.
- Pashler, H., and E. J. Wagenmakers. 2012. Editors ' introduction to the special section on replicability in psychological science: A crisis of confidence? Perspectives on Psychological Science: A Journal of the Association for Psychological Science 7 (6):528 -30. doi: 10.1177/ 1745691612465253.
- Pridemore, W. A., M. C. Makel, and J. A. Plucker. 2018. Replication in criminology and the social sciences. Annual Review of Criminology 1 (1):19 -38. doi: 10. 1146/annurev-criminol-032317-091849.
- Saltelli, A. 2018. Why science ' s crisis should not become a political battling ground. Futures 104:85 -90. 10. 1016/j.futures.2018.07.006.
- Savolainen, J., and M. VanEseltine. 2018. Replication and research integrity in criminology: Introduction to the special issue. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice 34 (3):236 -44. doi: 10.1177/1043986218777288.
- Siddaway, A. P., A. M. Wood, and L. V. Hedges. 2019. How to do a systematic review: A best practice guide for conducting and reporting narrative reviews, metaanalyses, and meta-syntheses. Annual Review of Psychology 70:747 -70. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych010418-102803.
- Skwara, M., and J. Rodioukova. 2019. Electricity energy indicators -Data sets and methodologies. Paper presented at PyCon Canada Conference, Toronto, November 17. https://github.com/NEBenergydata/EnergyCommodity-Indicators/blob/master/Energy%20Com modity%20Indicators%20-%20Electricity%20-%20PyCon %20Canada%20-%20November%202019.ipynb.
- Somers, J. 2018. The scientific paper is obsolete. The Atlantic , April 5. Accessed February 29, 2020. https:// www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2018/04/the-scientific-paper-is-obsolete/556676/.

- Sopinka, N. M., L. E. Coristine, M. C. DeRosa, C. M. Rochman, B. L. Owens, and S. J. Cooke. 2020. Envisioning the scientific paper of the future. FACETS 5 (1):1 -16. doi: 10.1139/facets-2019-0012.
- Sui, D., and P. Kedron. 2020. Reproducibility and replicability in the context of the contested identities of geography. Annals of the Association of American Geographers. doi: 10.1080/24694452.2020.1806024.

Tokarczuk, O. 2018. Flights . New York: Riverhead Books.

- Uitterlinden, A. G., S. H. Ralston, M. L. Brandi, A. H. Carey, D. Grinberg, B. L. Langdahl, P. Lips, R. Lorenc, B. Obermayer-Pietsch, J. Reeve, et al. 2006. The association between common vitamin D receptor gene variations and osteoporosis: A participant-level meta-analysis. Annals of Internal Medicine 145 (4):255 -64. doi: 10.7326/ 0003-4819-145-4-200608150-00005.
- Von Elm, E., D. G. Altman, M. Egger, S. J. Pocock, P. C. Gøtzsche, and J. P. Vandenbroucke. 2007. The Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) statement: Guidelines for reporting observational studies. Annals of Internal Medicine 147 (8):573 -77. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819147-8-200710160-00010.
- Wang, Y., and M. A. Beydoun. 2007. The obesity epidemic in the United States -Gender, age, socioeconomic, racial/ethnic, and geographic characteristics: A systematic review and meta-regression analysis. Epidemiologic Reviews 29 (1):6 -28. doi: 10.1093/epirev/mxm007.
- Waters, N. M. 1972. Rural settlement theory. BA thesis, Cambridge University.
- Waters, N. M. 2018. Tobler ' s first law of geography. In International encyclopedia of geography: People, the
- Earth, environment, and technology , ed. D. Richardson, N. Castree, M. F. Goodchild, A. Kobayashi, W. Liu, and R. Marston. New York: Wiley.
- Waters, N. M. 2020. Google Trends comparison of the search terms ' Mathematica ' and ' Jupyter. ' Accessed February 29, 2020. https://trends.google.com/trends/ explore?date=today%205-y&amp;geo=US&amp;q=mathematica, Jupyter%20Notebook.
- Waters, N. M., K. Archer, S. McConnell, J. Gao, C. Hansen, H. Sun, M. Palacios, and B. Wiens. 2006. Tracking media influence using geographic information systems: A case study of Peru. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Latin American Studies Association, San Juan, Puerto Rico, March 16.
- Weisburd, D. 2015. The law of crime concentration and the criminology of place. Criminology 53 (2):133 -57. doi: 10.1111/1745-9125.12070.

NIGEL WATERS is a Professor Emeritus of Geography and an Adjunct Professor of Civil Engineering at the University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada. E-mail: nwaters@ucalgary.ca. His research includes social media and electoral geography and transportation, environmental, and medical applications of GIS. This work has been supported by the Carter Center, Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (Canada), the U.S. Department of Transportation, and the National Institutes of Health.