<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Tigers and 'Good Indian Wives': Feminist Political Ecology Exposing the Gender-Based Violence of Human-Wildlife Conflict in Rajasthan, India

Kalli F. Doubleday

To cite this article: Kalli F. Doubleday (2020): Tigers and 'Good Indian Wives': Feminist Political Ecology Exposing the Gender-Based Violence of Human-Wildlife Conflict in Rajasthan, India, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2020.1723396

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2020.1723396

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 16 Mar 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 12

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Tigers and ' Good Indian Wives ' : Feminist Political Ecology Exposing the Gender-Based Violence of Human -Wildlife Conflict in Rajasthan, India

Kalli F. Doubleday

Department of Geography and the Environment, University of Texas

This qualitative study, based on fifty-two focus groups, interviews, and participant observation within a 10-km buffer around Sariska Tiger Reserve in Rajasthan, India, builds on Monica Ogra ' s foundational work bringing together feminist political ecology and human -wildlife conflict studies. Specifically, it exposes gender-based violence as a hidden cost of the socioenvironmental network of the tiger reserve landscape. This study asks these questions: How do gendered geographies in and around a protected area influence tiger reintroduction, and how do tiger reintroductions influence gendered geographies? What is the nature of the relationships between women ' s economic and gender roles and attitudes toward tigers (original and reintroduced), and what are the main factors influencing this relationship? This research finds that (1) gender-based violence is a hidden cost of women working in and around Sariska and the reintroduced tigers, a hidden cost of human -wildlife conflict otherwise unnoted in the literature, (2) this hidden cost is not solely the product of human -wildlife encounters but in large part a consequence of the highly patriarchal society that dictates gendered human -environmental relations. The results and presented framework seek to inform developing debates and theory around just conservation, gender-based violence in relation to environmental change, human dimensions of apex predator conservation, and sustainable rural livelihoods in and adjacent to protected areas. Key Words: conservation, feminist political ecology, gender-based violence, well-being.

这 项 定 性 研 究 以 莫 妮 卡  奥 格 拉 (Monica Ogra) 所 进 行 的 一 项 基 础 性 研 究 为 研 究 核 心 , 将 女 权 主义 政 治 生 态 学 以 及 人 类 与 野 生 动 物 之 间 的 冲 突 结 合 在 一 起 。 该 研 究 在 印 度 拉 贾 斯 坦 邦 进 行 , 对 萨 里 斯 卡 (Sariska) 老 虎 保 护 区 周 边 10 公 里 缓 冲 区 内 的 52 个 重 点 小 组 进 行 采 访 和 参 与 者 观 察 。 具 体 而 言 , 该 研 究 揭 示 了 老 虎 保 护 区 景 观 社 会 环 境 网 络 中 存 在 一个 隐 性 成 本 ： 性 别 暴 力 。 本 研 究 提 出 了以下 几 个 问 题 ： 保 护 区 内 和周 边 带 有 性 别 偏 见 的 地 理 环 境 如 何 影 响 老 虎 重 新 引 入 ？ 以 及 老 虎 的 重 新 引 入 如 何 影 响 带 有 性 别 特 点 的 地 理 环 境 ？ 女 性 的 经 济 和 性 别 角 色 与 对 待 老 虎 的 态 度 （ 原 生 和 重 新 引 入 ） 之 间 存 在 怎 样 的 关 系 本 质 ？ 影 响 这 种 关 系 的 主 要 因 素 是 什么 ？ 这 项 研 究 发 现 ： (1) 对 于 在 萨 里 斯 卡 保 护 区 内 和周 边 工 作 的 女 性 而 言 , 重 新 引 入 老 虎 所 带 来 的 隐 形 成 本 就 是 性 别 暴 力 , 性 别 暴 力 也 是 人 类 与 野 生 动 物 冲 突 的 隐 性 成 本 , 这 一 点 很 少 有 文 献 予以 关 注 ； (2) 这 种 隐 性 成 本 的 原 因 不仅 来 自 人 类 与 野 生 动 物 之 间 的 关 系 , 在 很 大 程 度 上 , 也 是 高 度 父 权 制 社 会 导 致 人与 环 境 之 间 的 关 系 存 在 性 别 偏 见 , 进 而 产 生 了 这 样 的 结 果 。 根 据 这 些 结 果 以 及 文 中 所 提 出 的 框 架 , 作 者 希 望 在 以下 几 个 领 域 开 展 辩 论 和 构 建 理 论 ： 与 环 境 变化 相 关 的 公 平 保 护 和 性 别 暴 力 , 保 护 食 物 链 顶 端 猎 食 者 过 程 中 的 人 类 因 素 以 及 保 护 区 内 和周 边 地 区 的 可 持 续 农 村 生 活 。 关 键 词 : 保 护 , 女 权 政 治 生 态 , 性 别 暴 力 , 福祉 。

Este estudio cualitativo, basado en cincuenta y dos grupos focales, entrevistas y observaci  on participativa dentro de una franja b  ufer de 10km que circunda de la Reserva Sariska del Tigre en Rajast  an, India, construye a partir del trabajo fundacional de M  onica Ogra, juntando la ecolog  ı a pol  ı tica feminista y los estudios sobre conflictos hombre -vida silvestre. Espec  ı ficamente, se expone la violencia basada en g  enero como costo oculto de la red socioambiental del paisaje de la reserva del tigre. Este estudio formula los siguientes interrogantes: &gt; De qu  e modo influyen las geograf  ı as de g  enero situadas dentro y en los alrededores de un  area protegida la reintroducci  on del tigre, y c  omo influye la reintroducci  on del tigre en las geograf  ı as de g  enero? &gt; Cu  al es la naturaleza de las relaciones entre los roles econ  omicos y de g  enero y las actitudes de las mujeres hacia los tigres (los originales y los reintroducidos), y cu  ales son los principales factores que influyen esta relaci  on? Esta investigaci  on encuentra que (1) la violencia basada en g  enero es un costo oculto

## Doubleday

para las mujeres que trabajan en Sariska y sus alrededores, y los tigres reintroducidos, un costo oculto del conflicto hombre -vida silvestre que de otro modo queda desapercibido en la literatura, (2) este costo oculto no es solamente el producto de encuentros hombre -vida silvestre sino en gran medida la consecuencia de una sociedad muy patriarcal que prescribe relaciones humano -ambientales basadas en g  enero. Los resultados y el marco presentado buscan informar los debates en desarrollo y la teor  ı a justo sobre la conservaci  on, la violencia basada en g  enero en relaci  on con el cambio ambiental, las dimensiones humanas de conservaci  on del predador m  aximo, y del sustento rural sustentable dentro de  areas protegidas y zonas adyacentes. Palabras clave: bienestar, conservaci  on, ecolog  ı a pol  ı tica feminista, violencia basada en g  enero.

I n 2005, Sariska Tiger Reserve (Sariska) in Rajasthan represented the lowest point in India ' s history of tiger conservation. Despite the Indian government spending millions of dollars to protect the endangered species ( Panthera tigris tigris ), Sariska ' s entire resident Bengal tiger population was extirpated by 2005. As recently as 2001, Project Tiger, the national tiger conservation program reported twentytwo and deemed Sariska well protected. The official tiger census of 2001 -2002 indicated at least twentysix tigers in Sariska, but the last sighting was in November 2004, after which no signs of tigers were noted. This lack of tiger activity prompted the Ministry of Environment and Forests to mandate an ' intensive search. ' In addition, the Indian prime minister and the chief minister of Rajasthan both called on nongovernmental organizations like the Wildlife Institute of India and the World Wildlife Fund to conduct their own field studies. They concluded that Sariska was undisputedly tigerless as a result of poaching, local retaliatory killings, and poor park management (Wildlife Institute of India 2013).

Sariska ' s tiger extirpation led then-Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to create the Tiger Task Force. What had been Project Tiger was reinvigorated, given more authority, and renamed the National Tiger Conservation Authority and the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau in 2006. On the ground, the Indian government went into immediate action in 2008 and 2009 by reintroducing tigers to Sariska 1 ; this was the first tiger reintroduction in the world. Thus, Sariska ' s temporary tigerless status activated major changes to Indian and international tiger conservation. First, the loss motivated changes to Indian policy toward rapid assessment, resource allocation, and strengthened tiger conservation. Second, reintroduction become a ready tool for tiger conservation in India. In 2017, the National Tiger Conservation Authority released a statement of their intent for reintroductions in four other national parks -Buxa in West Bengal, Mukundra Hills and Rajaji National Park in Rajasthan, and Satkosia in

Odisha (Pandey 2017). Third, the reintroduction set a new global precedent because there are proposals for reintroductions in several tiger range areas (e.g., Cambodia [Gray et al. 2017], Central Asia [Chestin et al. 2017], south China [Qin et al. 2015], and Southeast Asia [Lynam 2010]).

As reintroduction becomes integral to tiger conservation, it is critical to note that more than 70 percent of India ' s tiger habitat is in multiple-use forests, where human settlement and activity is a conspicuous landscape element (Ahearn et al. 2001). In this context, the social consequences of tiger reintroduction are as important as the ecological considerations for long-term reintroduction success. Apprehensions about the social consequences of conservation are rooted in historic injustice and ongoing negative social impacts to communities living in and adjacent to protected areas (e.g., Goldman 2009; Greiner 2012; Shahabuddin and Bhamidipati 2014; Chhatre, Lakhanpal, and Prasanna 2017). Conservation of biodiversity and protected areas can also provide benefits to human communities, such as livelihood provision through tourism, financial gains, sustainable management, participatory governance, and the safeguarding of heritage sites and cultural resources (e.g., Timko and Satterfield 2008; Andam et al. 2010). Within the scientific literature on the varied social impacts of conservation (e.g., Rastogi et al. 2012; Ahmadia et al. 2015; Bennett et al. 2017) and, more specifically, scholarship on well-being and conservation (Dhakal, Nelson, and Smith 2011; Leisher et al. 2013; Lovell et al. 2015), this article provides an analysis of what Ogra (2008) termed the hidden costs of conservation in the case of human -tiger entanglements in Sariska. Attention to these hidden costs reveals the fraught links among gender, labor, patriarchy, and large carnivores in a conservation landscape. Specifically, this study argues that women might suffer domestic abuse as a result of complex relationships between patriarchal society (Dutt 2019), gendered labor roles, and tiger reintroduction. These complex links necessitate a feminist political ecology (FPE) analysis of the

larger socioenvironmental network within which human -wildlife conflict takes place.

Ogra (2008) defined hidden costs as ' those characterized by one or more of the following traits: (a) uncompensated, (b) temporally delayed, or (c) psychological or social in nature ' (1410); these illuminate the indirect costs of human -wildlife conflict outside of purely economic loss. Although geographers are increasingly highlighting hidden costs of human -wildlife conflict (e.g., Holmes and Brockington 2012; Jadhav and Barua 2012; Barua, Bhagwat, and Jadhav 2013), by definition, ' they remain largely overlooked ' (Bond and Mkutu 2017, 2). The question of well-being and, especially, the well-being of women living under restrictive patriarchal societies within flagship endangered species conservation priority areas (e.g., tiger reserves) has been drastically understudied, with a few exceptions (see, e.g., Chowdhury et al. 2008). To this end, I ask these questions: How do gendered geographies in and around a protected area influence tiger reintroduction, and how do tiger reintroductions influence gendered geographies? What is the nature of the relationship between women ' s economic and gender roles and attitudes toward tigers (original and reintroduced), and what are the main factors influencing this relationship?

To answer these questions, I employ an FPE framework conceived on the lines described in Rocheleau, Thomas-Slayter, and Wangari (1996) and demonstrated by Nightingale ' s (2011) study of the ecological materiality of space in producing gendered subjectivities. I argue that hidden costs of tiger reintroduction in Sariska are unevenly distributed along the lines of gender, as a result of a broader context of patriarchal hierarchies and expectations of women and of a gendered division of labor. The FPE framework facilitates the focus on gendered everyday practices and micropolitics of well-being, security, and people -park relations with consequences for tiger conservation that are key to uncovering these hidden costs. Looking within the household, this research finds gender-based violence (GBV) against women 2 derived from gendered divisions of labor as a yet-identified psychological or social hidden cost of conservation (Ogra 2008). These costs materialize in many ways, with the most prominent being a higher risk of domestic abuse 3 highlighted by twenty women-only focus groups (WOFGs). Specifically, this study examines women ' s embodied consequences of living in households controlled by patriarchal power relations where female family members are socialized ' to accept hierarchical relations expressed in an unequal division of labor between the sexes ' (Mathur 2004, 97) and within a conservation landscape dedicated to protecting endangered tigers.

## Literature Review

Geographers have made significant contributions to the study of human -wildlife conflict through (1) developing frameworks and methods to measure conflict frequency and temporality; (2) detailing social, political, and cultural challenges to mitigating conflict; and (3) emphasizing direct causes, impacts, and economic costs of conflict (e.g., Brandon et al. 1998; Terborgh et al. 2002; Woodroffe et al. 2005; Ogra 2008). Yet, qualitative assessment of the multifaceted perceptions, sensitivity to multiple factors of influence, and costs of often hidden consequences of living alongside wildlife, especially for women, is still an emerging area of research. Research of this kind within the context of large carnivore reintroduction is even sparser. This study contributes to initial efforts to identify these hidden costs of conservation to women in developing countries living within highprofile landscapes of apex predator reintroductions.

Feminist researchers have made clear the linkages between household dynamics and differential control over resources (e.g., Boserup 1970; Sen 1981; Agarwal 1987; Folbre 1988; Nightingale 2006; Elmhirst 2011), as well as the struggles over gendered divisions of labor and livelihood security (Sultana 2011; Truelove 2011; Radel 2012; Mollett and Faria 2013). FPE scholars have furthered this work by reconceptualizing the physical environment in women ' s lives as part of the household (e.g., Leach 1992; Carney 1996; Rocheleau, ThomasSlayter, and Wangari 1996; Pearson and Jackson 1998), ' casting the ' environment ' as at once a source of physical asset as well as cultural, economic, and even domestic spaces ' (Ogra 2008, 1409). Gender is a critical variable in shaping resource control and access that interacts with age, family structure, economic exchange, and other differences that affect processes of ecological change (Rocheleau, ThomasSlayter, and Wangari 1996). Gender -nature -society relationships are not only suspended between material needs and access to natural resources but these relations are formed by ' particular regimes of cultural meaning that in turn shape social relations ' (Mollett and Faria 2013, 117) and substantially affect the

landscape. This research combines these feminist endeavors to address the lack of ' deeper more meaningful analysis of how power relations operate to stimulate women and men in different forested landscapes; why certain individuals and groups are or remain, marginalized; and what role research can play in promoting gender and social justice ' through an FPE lens of women ' s socioenvironmental experience (Colfer, Sijapati Basnett, and Ihalainen 2018, 42). In doing so, this research furthers our knowledge on how women ' s socioenvironmental experience can ' contribute to unique experiences of oppression and privilege ' (Association for Women ' s Rights in Development 2004, 3) in conservation landscapes.

Further, patriarchy ' shape[s] and inform[s] women ' s subordination and oppression ' (Chua, Bhavnani, and Foran 2000, 823), and more comprehensive analyses are needed that take seriously the impacts of patriarchal power relations in both the methods and the findings of FPE research and in contexts relevant for conservation. My approach in this article contributes to remedying this shortcoming in its focus on women ' s complex role in a patriarchal society and their existence within conservation networks. By attending to embodied experiences, I consider how women experience risk, labor, and cohabitation with tigers within the unique context of tiger reintroduction to address the need for political ecological analyses that are attentive to these patriarchal entanglements.

## Methods and Study Area

As part of India ' s second expansion of Project Tiger in the late 1970s, Sariska Wildlife Reserve was upgraded to the status of Sariska Tiger Reserve. In 1982, 274 km 2 of the reserve also became a national park. Based on the National Tiger Conservation Authority ' s (2010) specifications that viable tiger populations require at least an area of 800 to 1,000 km 2 with limited to no human activity, the Government of Rajasthan (GOR) delineated 881.11 km 2 of Sariska as ' critical tiger habitat ' in 2007. This included the Reserve Forest (602.97 km 2 ) and the Protected Forest (276.14 km 2 ) in Sariska (GOR 2004). In 2016, the Forest Department added an area of 332 km 2 as a buffer zone, bringing the total area to 1,213 km 2 (Bhardwaj 2016). Twenty-six villages are located inside Sariska ' s critical tiger habitat (Joseph 2017), and forty more adjoin Sariska ' s boundaries (Jain and Sajjad 2016). Thus, as most Indian tiger reserves, Sariska maintains a high human presence inside and adjacent to its boundaries.

Local residents ' dependence on the forest complicates implementation of the park ' s conservation policies. Year-round grazing of the thousands of livestock in the reserve results in significant ecological stresses (Jain and Sajjad 2016). The immense biomass extraction from villagers living inside and along Sariska ' s periphery greatly threatens the integrity of the ecosystem (GOR 2004) and tiger reintroduction success. With these stresses and regionally increasing human population, 4 milk production is a livelihood at odds with the health and sustainability of Sariska ' s ecosystem. 5

To reduce villagers ' biotic pressures on the landscape, the Forest Department has employed restrictions on grazing, new construction, producing mawa (which requires ample firewood), and agriculture (Jain and Sajjad 2016). These restrictions have, of course, led to people -park conflict. Conflict between local communities and protected area management personnel is common and often escalates when laws are implemented to limit or prohibit access to natural resources inside protected areas (Keleman, Goodale, and Dooley 2010; Shahabuddin 2014). Within this fraught conservation context, women ' s intimate relationship with Sariska as a place of work, resources, and risk has been generally overlooked.

This research, in part, seeks to be exemplary in finding the questions we need to ask to avoid failure from underestimated social impacts. To do so, a variety of qualitative research methods were undertaken. Fifty-two focus groups (FGs) over the course of three fieldwork stages provided a variety of individual perceptions from diverse stakeholders, with various livelihoods and differing proximities to Sariska and tiger territories. FGs conducted in 2014 and 2015 were mixed-gender FGs (MGFGs), yet answers and discussion primarily came from the male participants. This gender imbalance, along with new areas of participant-driven concerns specific to women ' s experiences, reflected the influence of patriarchy on women ' s lives and on my research and necessitated the implementation of WOFGs, which I carried out in 2016 and 2017 (see Doubleday and Adams [2019] for details on the application of grounded theory, allowing for unexpected linkages to be prioritized in the research). Women in these groups, then, felt safe and comfortable disclosing their views on topics of

tiger conservation, livelihood, risk, and household dynamics. Indeed, for women to tell stories safely, patriarchal social structures must be addressed (Mannell, Ahmad, and Ahmad 2018) -in methods, in theory, and in our empirical work. Because the lead translator and myself are married women, a question we were always asked, this also shaped our engagement by gaining respectability in that experience. Yet, my ability to understand married life in India and the expectations placed on married women is limited by the vast difference in lived experience specifically affecting what marriage means and implies in the United States versus in India, as well as more general cultural differences. I lean on Indian scholars and the words of 160 women who participated in the FGs to guide my understanding.

Through criterion and opportunistic sampling, a total of 256 people participated in the thirty-two MGFGs (2014, 2015), and 160 women participated in the twenty WOFGs (2016, 2017), for a total of 416 FG participants. The data for this study were collected in a 10-km buffer around Sariska (Figure 1). Of the FGs, 75 percent ( n ¼ 39) were conducted with communities that live 5 km or less from Sariska; 55 percent ( n ¼ 11) were either inside Sariska, on the boundary, or within 1 km of Sariska ' s boundary. Age of participants was the heterogeneous element used to stratify the FGs, because age is presumed to be a factor in attitudes toward tigers. Heterogeneous age then allowed for generational disagreement and insight into how tigers, conservation, and Sariska are perceived over time and by different generations to highlight ' untidy geographies ' or ' contextual differences … [in] experiences across time and space ' (Bosco and Herman 2010, 199) -all topics seldom discussed among themselves. 6 In addition, the study area was divided into four quadrants with thirteen FGs per quadrant to capture the varied forms of human -tiger encounters and histories across the plane of spatially inconsistent removal, reintroduction, and tiger dispersal. Translators with linguistic, locational, and contextual sensitivities were employed throughout this research project. Pseudonyms are used for all participants in this study.

Interviews, participant observation, and walking tours were also conducted. Forty interviews were conducted with one or two individuals at varying lengths. These interviews took place after logistical meetings for future FG discussions, after FG

Figure 1. Locations of mixed-gender focus groups (MGFGs) from 2014 and 2015 are indicated in black across the study area centered on Sariska Tiger Reserve. The remaining twenty WOFGs are not represented for confidentiality. MGFGs ¼ mixed-gender focus groups; WOFGs ¼ women-only focus groups; USDA ¼ U.S. Department of Agriculture; USGS ¼ U.S. Geological Survey; IGN ¼ Instituto Geographico Nacional; GIS ¼ geographic information systems.

<!-- image -->

discussions, or during participant observation of human -wildlife conflict resolution. These observations took place while volunteering more than 300 hours with self-described ' wildlife rescuers ' in and around Sariska, primarily relocating snakes. Families and neighbors would often talk with us at length about wildlife and Sariska during and after these removals.

I went on twelve walking tours with women after FGs. Five of these walking tours were longer than an hour, one way, to collect fodder and wood in the morning. For various safety and logistical reasons on my part, however, I was not able to complete a full day ' s back-and-forth routine with any groups to quantify their walking distance and other resource collection facts. This is a shortcoming of this work, leaving the details of women ' s daily routines up to their own descriptions.

## Findings

Kaplan-Hallam and Bennet (2017) provided a conceptual representation of human well-being for social impact assessments in environmental management. The framework has five domains of ' human wellbeing, ' conceptualized as an individual ' s or communities ' values, goals, and experiences (Breslow et al. 2016): governance, economic, health, social, and cultural. Within each of these domains are several subdomains. In Sariska, each of these domains for women ' s well-being is affected by (1) milk production as the primary livelihood, (2) patriarchal society, and (3) Sariska ' s management for conservation. All three of these preconditions interlink to greatly affect women ' s well-being, experiences, and attitudes (Figure 2).

These connections (Figure 2) were revealed through grounded theory -guided qualitative research applying the lens and framework of FPE. Together this FPE research shows how women ' s well-being must be considered as a significant facet of long-term tiger conservation in human -tiger landscapes.

The following sections present empirical findings of FGs in narrative form, concentrating on the hidden costs of tiger reintroduction. The quotes that follow are all from WOFG participants ' descriptions of their experiences within this socioenvironmental landscape. Two major findings follow: (1) Hidden costs outside the home include heightened risk of tiger encounter for women (and buffalo), which increases fear, risk of punishment from the government, and sacrifices to their well-being to maintain their status as ' good Indian wives, ' and (2) hidden costs inside the home materialize as GBV against women if they do not live up to the ideal of a ' good Indian wife, ' due to injury or predation decreasing their economic productivity. Thus, human -tiger cohabitation within this patriarchal society coupled with women ' s gendered labor roles results in the hidden cost of GBV. An FPE framework that takes seriously these factors can offer a more nuanced understanding of just conservation debates (Pooley and Redpath 2018; Vucetich et al. 2018) and human -wildlife conflict going forward.

Figure 2. The complex socioenvironmental network of women ' s subjectivities in Sariska exposing hidden costs related to gender-based relationships within families, gender-based divisions of labor, and gendered uses of space within a high -priority conservation landscape.

<!-- image -->

## Cultural Norms and the ' Good Indian Wife ' : Expectations, Risk, and Tiger Reintroduction

The findings detailed here are contextual to two major cultural factors of the landscape: the need to uphold the expectations of ' good Indian women ' combined with their low position within a patrilineal, patrilocal hierarchy of households (Doubleday and Adams 2019). Haq (2013) stated that ' good Indian women ' are brought up to accept ' that suffering in this life is bearable by hoping for a better life after death, only if they are patient, pious and persistent in graciously bearing the burden of this life through selfsacrifice ' (174). Although there might be caste-based differences of performativity of the ideal ' good Indian wife, ' this standard is in large part sustained by a masculine identity that ' cuts through distinctions of caste and class ' in much of India (Vindhya 2007, 349; see also Lau [2014] for analysis of the ' good Indian woman ' trope in Indian women ' s writings and Gold [2015] for discussion on the related ideal of women as pativrata [a husband-devotee]). The risk that women incur by venturing into tiger territory is for the welfare of their families, which, Ogra (2008) pointed out (in the case of Indian women at risk from elephants), supports the views that exposing oneself to animal-related risk can be part of the expected role of a ' good Indian woman '-an ideal enforced by relatives, community, the state, and religion.

The household unit in the Sariska landscape is defined by a patriarchal hierarchy, with variations from household to household depending on the number of children. For this research, the perspective of the daughter-in-law (a category most women embody for the majority of their lives) is central. Within the patrilineal, patrilocal household, 7 all resident women are ' outsiders, ' with new wives, of course, feeling this position most starkly. A daughter-in-law occupies the precarious position at the bottom of the household. Her in-laws are at the top, her husband is next, and then her sons; she and her daughters are at the bottom. 8 Because of their position in this hierarchy and their typical youth, compared to their mothers-in-law, daughters-in-law take over the difficult tasks that require the most time and physical exertion inside tiger territories (forests). Any fluctuation in women ' s roles as providers is a great danger and a substantial risk to their family and to their children ' s health, to their social status, and to their own well-being. These risks manifest as hidden costs both outside and inside the home, shaping women ' s lives and perceptions of conservation.

## Finding 1: Hidden Costs Outside the Home

In addition to the ' good Indian woman ' expectations and patriarchal household setting, women ' s distinctly gendered labor roles became evident during WOFGs. Specifically, in the Sariska landscape, women are responsible for feeding their families, raising children, housekeeping, farming and gathering fuelwood, and tending to livestock. Local residents are highly dependent on Sariska for their livestockbased livelihoods. This dependency is multifaceted but dominated by the need for green fodder to produce domestic Murrah water buffalo ( Bubalus bubalis ) milk for consumption and sale, which involves a gendered division of labor and gendered expectations regarding the allocation of household capital. Buffalo milk is the primary source of income inside (Jain and Sajjad 2016) and within Sariska ' s periphery (Shahabuddin, Kumar, and Shrivastava 2007), and this work is overwhelmingly performed by women. 9 According to the WOFGs, 75 percent of respondents considered buffalo milk a primary livelihood and the most reliable source of cash: ' milk is main source of income, we sell milk then we buy food and clothes for our kids ' (  6km from Sariska). This is in contrast with most men ' s intermittent work, which often includes farming or chopping wood (for the women to collect and bring back), working in nearby towns selling produce, working in cities, 10 mining, or working as laborers 11 ; this work is often sporadic or seasonal.

To feed a half-ton buffalo, women spend several hours a day collecting fodder from Sariska. Although it is not uncommon for women to shepherd their buffalo into Sariska, many leave the buffalo at home because ' in the jungle [tigers] will kill them, then what will we do? ' Instead, the women spend three to four hours every day collecting fodder from the jungle for their buffalo; ' it ' s not worth risking the buffalo ' s lives '-but it is necessary to risk their own lives (  4 km from Sariska). Averaging the hours reported by women from all twenty WOFGs, four hours are spent inside Sariska or the buffer zone daily collecting fodder (primarily), wood, and other forest products. Older women often talked about the difficulty of collecting fodder, because it requires extensive walking in Sariska ' s rocky terrain. When discussing the time spent in the forests, a fifty-year-

old woman said, ' Cannot bring [fodder and wood] in one go, sometimes two or three times we need to go to the jungle … we could be attacked [by predators] ' (  6km from Sariska). The group added their agreement and noted that each trip requires them to walk 5 to 6km each way: ' We need to go so far. The fear of tigers is there. Sometimes it may eat one of us ' (  6km from Sariska). Across FGs, women reported walking just over 11 km per trip for fodder or wood, with the majority of women citing two trips a day as average. We asked, ' Going this far, do the forest guards ever stop you? ' They said, ' Yes, they stop us. But we tell them if we will not go there, how would we eat? ' The women said it was necessary because they were not able to save much money, and their husbands only earned Rs 100 to Rs 200 per day for labor work, compared with Rs 270 or more per day from selling milk.

Three daughters-in-law summarized their fear, and the rest of the WOFG agreed wholeheartedly:

Geeta: We are scared, but we cannot keep our buffalo starving.

Neera: Yes, if we do not give them fodder, how would we get milk? And how would we earn money?

Priya: We run our house with that money only. This is how our children survive. (  2km from Sariska)

I asked the last woman in this exchange to explain what she meant by ' we run our house with that money only. ' She explained her husband ' s pattern of on-and-off labor employment, which other women echoed; his jobs do not provide a consistent income for daily needs. Women in all twenty WOFGs described similar circumstances, agreeing that men ' s work does not consistently provide to guarantee daily needs -milk is the means of daily survival for most.

Usha, one of the older mothers-in-law in this group, pointed to her daughter-in-law and said, ' She milks the cow, sells it, and earns the money. … When [the husband] gets the money, they are happy with their wives. ' Roopa, the daughter-in-law, replied, ' Women are responsible for this, to get the grass, take care of the buffalo, half our life is spent on this. It ' s our duty ' (  6km from Sariska). This weighty responsibility means that expectations are high and disruption of milk sales could incur mistreatment -the major form of disruption in Sariska is a tiger, leopard, or Forest Department guards restricting grazing and punishing women for fodder collection, punishment that women are well aware is connected to tiger conservation.

Women are at higher risk of repercussions from the Forest Department, because their responsibilities for resource collection are illegal. Even though there are restrictions on cattle grazing, the Forest Department is reportedly stricter with wood collection. Because women are primarily responsible for grazing and wood collection, they are at greater risk of official punishment that could also lead to family displeasure or sacrifice (children not being able to eat). When difficulties of Forest Department guard encounters emerged, we asked how women avoided detection. One of the young daughters-in-law in the group named Chetna said:

Chetna: We send them [buffalo] at night.

Translator:

Okay, and if the tiger eat your buffalo?

Chetna:

We go with them.

Translator:

But, even in the night?

Chetna:

We take a stick with us. (  2 km from Sariska)

Women and buffalo, then, can be exposed to even more risk during the dry season when those who cannot afford to buy fodder resort to taking their buffalo into Sariska during late evenings and nights -when tigers are active (6 -9 p.m. and midnight -3 a.m.; Modal et al. 2012). The risks posed to women (and buffalos) outside the home create a surrounding landscape of fear and contribute to the factors of sacrifice that women must make to embody the ' good Indian woman. '

## Finding 2: Hidden Costs Inside the Home

The web of dangers to which women are subjected in providing for their families extends beyond risks from predators and the Forest Department to encompass risk from their families. Many studies have traced domestic violence against Indian women to ' alleged failure of the wife to fulfill household responsibilities and obligations of a ' good wife '' (Vindhya 2007, 349; see also Dhawan et al. 1999; Sriram and Mukherjee 2001). This scenario manifests in Sariska if women do not live up to the ideal of a ' good Indian wife, ' due to injury or predation decreasing their economic productivity, and they suffer a hidden cost of GBV. Any GBV a daughter-in-law suffers from not meeting expectations is considered the daughter-in-law ' s fault

(Kaushik 2003). Therefore, women ' s, and particularly daughters-in-law ' s, subjectivities are rooted in their marginalized status within everyday life, Sariska, the network, and their labor responsibilities. Their spatiality (contextual factors) emerges from their performances as working mothers, providers, livestock feeders, and, obligatorily, tiger challengers. Underlining this embodiment is the need to replicate traditional Hindu standards of a ' good Indian wife. ' Although women ' s larger exposure to risk from human -wildlife conflict has been recognized by others, of primary interest here is the revelation of human -tiger cohabitation within the rural Indian patriarchal society combines with women ' s gender roles to result in the hidden cost of GBV. 12

In Sariska, ' good Indian wives ' must enter precarious areas to secure their family ' s survival and meet family expectations (only sometimes the same). Many women ' s ability to meet financial expectations has been affected, however, by the extirpation and reintroduction of tigers. During the tigerless period (2004 -2008, with limited presence before and after this time frame depending on tiger mobilities), fodder collection and grazing were ' better ' and thus the milk production, at times, was higher. Women feel that their families hold them to these past expectations when milk production was easier. WOFGs often turned to men ' s lack of appreciation for how tiger reintroduction has made all the ' pressures more heavy ' (  10km from Sariska). The tigers ' return ushered in a new boundary wall, tall enough to keep livestock out of the park (where it is erected) but not tall enough to keep in wild ungulates or predators. The wall ' s primary function, then, is to restrict fodder collection as part of the broader enforcement of conservation laws. These restrictions and their enforcement vary across the study area, but there is a consensus from women that it is more difficult to provide enough fodder for their livestock than before the tigers ' reintroduction.

When a WOFG turned to difficulties of collecting enough fodder, including fear of sighting tigers, we asked, ' So do the men come and ask why the supply has reduced? '

Radha:

Yes, they do fight us about this.

Translator:

Really?

Aparna: When the men return from the fields, they do ask.

Shruti: Yes, they do ask if there is money … why the production has reduced?

Chhaya: Yes, they are just concerned about the milk production … how and when they are not bothered about. (  6 km from Sariska)

The women went on to explain that daily milk production is very sensitive. In all sixteen WOFGs where buffalo milk is a primary livelihood, women described a typical pattern of not going to the forest for two or three days after a tiger sighting to protect themselves and livestock (e.g., temporally delayed hidden cost). The delay comes with another substantial hidden cost: ' It is that day … they [buffalo] will not produce. It is a challenge, ' a woman said of her buffalo ' s inability to graze after a tiger sighting. Women in all of these WOFGs stressed the immediate drop in milk production when buffalos are fed substandard fodder, significantly reducing cash flow: ' That is the problem, we are not able to meet expenses, and we have a big problem in the home ' (  3 km from Sariska). Consequently, during these two or three days of waiting, a woman described her anxiety at home: ' Without cash [milk sales], we do not want to stay home ' (  6km from Sariska). The translator asked for clarification on ' not [wanting] to stay home, ' to which Chhaya, a daughter-in-law, said, ' beatings, ' as her neighbor sitting next to her nodded and met my eye.

During this part of WOFGs, mothers-in-law repeatedly verbalized their understanding of the situation; it is not their daughters-in-law ' s fault for lower milk production as a result of truncated fodder collection and grazing after tiger sightings. Yet, they said that their voice did not reach the ears of their husbands and sons: Men had consistently high expectations. The reintroduction has not uniformly affected male family members ' expectations (for lower production); thus, women ' s risk of GBV from not meeting expectations has increased because milk sales are expected to stay constant.

A difficult conversation followed, adding more detail: ' [Men] are just concerned about milk production … not bothered ' about ' how ' the milk is produced. The women said that men ' s concern for production supersedes their worry for the women. Women discussed verbal abuse and physical abuse in the moments ' cash is discussed … beatings -it is all happening here. ' Radha, a thirty-one-year-old woman, added, ' A tiger does not matter to [my husband] ' when the milk quantity does not meet his expectations. Shruti added, ' We are living with our [in-laws], and it is expected … what we see [tigers]

does not matter ' (  6km from Sariska). In thirteen of the sixteen WOFGs citing buffalo milk as a primary livelihood, participants described physical abuse (over the last four years) as a consequence of not meeting milk production expectations as a result of tiger presence (i.e., a temporally delayed hidden cost), which subsequently materialized into a psychological or social cost (Ogra 2008) that has otherwise gone unnoted as a hidden cost of human -wildlife conflict.

In all twenty WOFGs, domestic violence was verbally confirmed as a regular occurrence by at least one WOFG participant, to varying degrees. Verbal abuse was also regarded as frequent and touching every family. These repeated experiences ' reinforce gendered and classed social differences materially shaping and constraining physical hardships and life opportunities ' (Truelove 2011, 147). This is not to say that men do not likewise have precarious work. Rather, it is to say that men ' s impermeable position at the top of the family hierarchy affords them little fear of repercussion or risk (e.g., GBV) of not meeting expectations. Meanwhile, women ' s overall well-being is affected by the many socioenvironmental conditions of their lives. Prerana, a fifty-year-old woman, ended a discussion on working inside Sariska by saying:

We are really very unhappy, very, very unhappy. In the city, there is peace and peace, but here it ' s only trouble and trouble. … I leave home at four in the morning to go to forest, just leaving the house as is … return by eleven and just start preparing food for lunch and then do the other house chores. That ' s just our daily routine … and to prepare the food for the children also. Then again in the evening we go to forest. Suffering. No happiness at all.

To this older woman ' s ominous portrait of life, a younger woman added, ' This is Rajasthan, and everyone over here is distressed ' (  6 km from Sariska). Although this was the only statement referencing the whole of Rajasthan, nine WOFGs included a similar ending, with the women making a generalized statement about their condition of unhappiness -and a general lack of well-being.

Mathur (2007) synthesized why violence against women is so ingrained in everyday life in Rajasthan as follows: ' The woman ' s body is continuously made to fit and mold to societal expectations with a severe denial of rights, her bodily integrity constantly violated ' (3). Expectations are linked to obedience in this cultural context (Bradley 2010), which often is generalized to obedience in gendered divisions of labor.

Scholars widely credit patriarchy as ' responsible for creating and maintaining a system that leaves women vulnerable to male control, which is often violent ' (Bradley 2010, 364). Embedded in this patriarchal context is the figure of the ' good Indian wife ' that involves specific expectations. Women shouldering the burden of an unpredictable and susceptible economic activity (milk production) means that women face GBV when incomes fall short -and their status at the bottom of the hierarchy is compounded.

## Discussion

## Compounded Risk Conceptual Framework

From these findings, I argue that there is a causal link to GBV because of the (a) cultural and socialcontext, (b) tiger presence and conflict, (c) accessand management of natural resources, and (d) gendereddivisions of labor and livestock-based livelihoods factors of women ' s lives in Sariska (Figure 3). Women in the WOFGs perceive tigers to be a disproportionately weighty factor in their experiences of GBV. These perceived links influence attitudes, which have cascading adverse effects on long-term tiger conservation.

Approached through an FPE framework, this study provides insight into women ' s position in society and the home, which results in their spatiality inside Sariska, producing a life of high emotional and physical risk (Figure 3). Male family members ' expectations and repercussions enact place-based divisions of labor that put women in danger outside and inside the home, creating an overlapping and everpresent risk geography. The aim of FPE in this case is to uncover not only the proximate but less obvious coupled lives (human, nonhuman) and context (landscape, culture) of gendered risk within the social -ecological network (humans, environment, culture, and nonhumans) of interlinking subjectivities, described in the previous sections. These data reveal women ' s fear and well-being; cohabitation with tigers is not solely dependent on fear of lethal tiger encounters but intensified by a preexisting social -ecological network of subjectivities. Thus, an FPE approach and attention to hidden costs of human -wildlife conflict contribute to the notion that women ' s vulnerability is not only gender-based but shaped by the confluence of traditional Indian family hierarchy, religion, environmental

Figure 3. Human -tiger conflict and coexistence, fundamental societal factors, access to natural resources, and livelihoods all overlap in Sariska to form a complicated socioenvironmental landscape that influences womens ' and tigers ' lives. Note: GBV ¼ genderbased violence.

<!-- image -->

positionality, and other factors (Agrawal and Gibson 2001). As Figure 2 and Figure 3 illustrate, the materialization of this risk is a result of a complex socioenvironmental network. Also evident is that tiger reintroduction alone does not create risk but several that converging factors produce the hidden cost of GBV. These theoretical contributions bring together diverse bodies of literature and elicit new ways of thinking about policy as well.

## Applied to Ogra ' s Hidden Costs Model

The findings previously outlined provide further evidence that the three primary hidden costs of human -wildlife conflict (Ogra 2008) are not isolated but that (1) uncompensated costs and (2) temporally delayed costs can lead to (3) psychological or social costs to women, as a result of the socioenvironmental network in which human -wildlife conflict is embedded. Women have influence and contribute to intrahousehold and extrahousehold (Agarwal 1997) decisions and attitudes. Intrahousehold decisions revolve around livelihood, and family welfare and extrahousehold decisions influence community ideas and policies. As the principal caregivers, women can communicate and strengthen knowledge and positive attitudes in their children, which has enduring effects for conservation (Carter and Allendorf 2016). As Carter and Allendorf (2016) pointed out, women have power at the community level to help ensure that tigers are conserved and laws are followed (Doss 2013). They argued that the more knowledgeable and positive women are about tigers, the safer tigers will be. Understanding and then addressing hidden costs of human -tiger cohabitation have to be precursors to that aim (Figure 4).

Figure 4. Conceptual representation of factors shaping human -environmental relations, women ' s devaluation, and women ' s risk in Sariska (A), including the major factors women in women ' s-only focus groups and mixed-gender focus groups, brought up explicitly and implicitly. Tiger presence and the sometimes consequential attack on people (women of concern here) and cattle (women ' s responsibility) are represented by (b); access to natural resources and park management are represented in (c). Moreover, the livestockbased livelihood of milk sales, which is highly gender based, is represented in (d). All of these internal factors shape the devaluation of women and girls and the larger human -environmental relations (attitudes, management, etc.) that affect each other and shape women ' s risk of GBV. This then joins with the external fear of tiger encounters (B), which together shape women ' s well-being (C). Women ' s well-being influences their attitudes and then influences their compliance, which affects success of reintroduction of tigers in a human -tiger landscape. GBV ¼ gender-based violence.

<!-- image -->

For instance, in attempts to alleviate the burden of negative side effects of conservation and mitigate future conflict, compensation for loss of cattle or human life is often standard policy. Damage compensation aims to reduce the economic burden and financial risk for those living alongside carnivores (Loveridge et al. 2010). Much of the discussion on predator conservation in India centers on reimbursements for livestock predation or postdeath compensation. Although this is an important component of tiger conservation, many scholars advocate strategies that target attitudes, arguing that compensation does little in the way of changing public perception of tigers. This study demonstrates new thinking, in that not only is the financial value of livestock at risk but so is the value of women for whom the well-being of livestock is essential for stabilizing household relations. This is important to conservation because economic losses from predation result in considerable local animosity toward tigers and support for activities that undercut tiger conservation (e.g., forest fires, hunting, poisoning wildlife, facilitating poachers, etc.; Johnsingh and Madhusudan 2009). This research highlights the hidden costs of current gendered divisions of labor that negatively influence women ' s wellbeing in many ways outside of economics. These

negative experiences affect how women perceive tigers, which percolates to their children (Figure 4). The hidden costs described here add significant emphasis to the necessity of adapting livelihood practices to conserve endangered tigers and benefit a local community ' s stability (as others have also argued; e.g., Nyhus and Tilson 2004; Chowdhury et al. 2008). The compound risk conceptual framework (Figure 2) provides guidance for the analysis of other complex human -environmental landscapes.

## Implications for Conservation

Women are noted as major actors in Sariska ' s degradation through grazing and resource collection (GOR 2004). Women are easily blamed as a result, overlooking the household dynamics that place them in this position. This research shows that the household and broader social systems reinforce gendered divisions of labor that support livelihood practices that transfer and complicate accountability.

GBV and risk of injury or death via human -wildlife conflict is dependent on silence. The Rajasthan Forest Department (and by extension the policies and forest guards who enforce them) silence women ' s risk. The fact that grazing inside and outside of Sariska is illegal, in addition to wood and fodder gathering, which is primarily a woman ' s role and more often punished by the Forest Department, means that women must be silent while working in Sariska. I hypothesize that because women, by a vast majority, undertake this risk and are socially less vocal, there is hesitancy in demand for livelihood adaptation. The current push for better compensation and village relocations result in visible, measurable outcomes toward the Forest Department ' s goals for tiger conservation but, in reality, maintain women ' s precarious role in supporting families in and adjacent to Sariska. In contrast, changing husbandry practices and familial expectations is slower and more difficult but might provide more powerful benefits to tiger conservation and women ' s well-being. The insights here further demonstrate that changes to livestock husbandry must be conceptualized through women ' s experiences if they are to be successful.

The Forest Department has put forth ambitious socioenvironmental plans to improve Sariska ' s habitat and suitability for forty to fifty tigers. Sariska ' s Tiger Conservation Plan (GOR 2004) includes ambitious goals for halting grazing in the park through multiple initiatives: village relocation, expanding periphery walls, creating alternate grazing areas, improving milk yields through breed improvement, promoting stall feeding, 13 encouraging farmers to grow fodder crops rather than cash crops, ' promoting non-cattle-based livelihood options, ' and stringent law enforcement (GOR 2004, 147). It is encouraging to see official documentation outlining these goals. Implementation, however, will continue to be very difficult due to politics, tradition, and logistics. This research specifically supports the Forest Department ' s proposal and would argue for the need to subsidize and intensify a system of stall-feeding buffalo, which would lessen women ' s risk and benefit habitat restoration. According to this research, focusing limited conservation funds into materials and education shifting from free-ranging to stall-fed buffalo husbandry would be cost and socially effective.

## Conclusion

In Sariska, women ' s personal stories of GBV in relation to tigers create a landscape of fear across home and work. This human landscape is in place because of women ' s historical invisibility and consequential low regard of their work. In the context of family dynamics, their roles in tiger territory are downgraded to ' necessary ' and ' not any more difficult. ' This devaluing of women ' s labor is part of the system that creates higher rates of resentment toward the forest guards, Sariska as a protected area, and the reintroduced tigers (Figure 4). Although women have long been undervalued (Haq 2013), this does not mean that they are not aware of this inequality of work, of risk, and of the disproportionate burden. This is compounded by women ' s responsibility to maintain the household, and it materializes in their prioritizing of other family members ' welfare at the cost of their own, which Ogra (2008) hypothesized might lead to greater resentment of carnivores, as this study substantiates (Figures 2 -4).

As Chowdhury et al. (2008) argued, to have a practical conservation policy an understanding of the undercurrent of a ' negative ecological cycle ' operative in tiger landscapes is needed, including insight into the eco-psychiatric aspect (ecological influence on mental health) of conservation: the aftermath and hidden costs of human -wildlife conflicts. In line with the argument of Chowdhury et al. (2008), this research highlights the effect of human -tiger

cohabitation on GBV, which influences eco-psychiatric consequences to women. This more complex understanding of women ' s experiences provides a guide for further analysis of the socioenvironmental network. Second, this study ' s findings might also enable local and regional women ' s groups and nongovernmental organizations to form pertinent narratives to improve ongoing campaigns for more equitable distribution of labor roles and less risky stall feeding.

Feminist scholars have articulated the political struggles involved in making women ' s work and daily realities more socially visible and economically viable (Wright 2004). The economic process that devalues women ' s labor often comes as the result of the female subject as socially obscure, ' as a subject who does not count in history, in the public sphere, in cultural practices, or even in conceptualizations of some place ' (Wright 2004, 372). Feminist geographers have illustrated the powerful compounding of this issue based on discourse associated with spatial practices (McDowell 1997; Lawson 1999) that create ' sociospatial circuits through which cultural and personal stories are circulated, legitimated, and given meaning ' by way of producing space and places (Pratt 1999, 218). ' So let us try not to fragment people and their lives, ' as Bhasin (2012) implored, but consider ' hierarchies, such as those of class, caste, race, and the north -south divide, majority versus minority … try[ing] to understand their interconnection ' (2 -3). This study seeks to provide an example of this type of nonfragmenting scholarship that considers hierarchies to understand the interworkings of a socioenvironmental network and how they can produce injustice.

In conclusion, research and conservation practices that involve gender-sensitive approaches contribute to more equal and inclusive strategies that strengthen conservation (e.g., Sodhi, Davidar, and Rao 2010). By illuminating why coexistence with carnivores is difficult for women who spend time in protected areas and collect forest products, we can better identify the drivers of negative perceptions and find ways to improve coexistence. This research is part of the larger body of literature redressing the preoccupation of wildlife conservation with masculinist perspectives and promoting the aim of more just conservation (Hunter, Hitchcock, and Wyckoff-Baird 1990; Carter and Linnell 2016). Not only do conservation practices need to be adapted, but pursuits highlighting and protecting women ' s rights and well-being must also be promoted. As scholars call for more mitigation in developing countries around human -wildlife conflict and better preparations for reintroductions, do they truly want to ' address ' the deeply culturally gendered disparities that are the ' conflict potential ' (Linnell, Nilsen, and Lande 2005, 171) within conservation zones for carnivores? If so, women ' s wellbeing within societies in conservation landscapes must be prioritized to ensure equity in conservation landscapes that do not despairingly disadvantage women based on culturally gendered labor and norms. This study provides analyses, highlighting how an FPE framework of the socioenvironmental can link disparate theory and literatures to illuminate new perspectives of women ' s complex role in a patriarchal society and their existence within conservation networks, providing a more nuanced understanding of just conservation and human -wildlife conflict.

## Acknowledgments

I would like to express my gratitude to the women and men who shared their wisdom, experiences, homes, and meals with me. This research would not have been possible without the local knowledge and translation skills of the research team: Chinmay Massey, Rodrick Roben, Aman Bhatia, Archna Merh, and Apporva Rana. Thank you to the editor, James McCarthy, and the reviewers for constructive comments.

## ORCID

Kalli F. Doubleday http://orcid.org/0000-00020520-784X

## Notes

1. The tigers were reintroduced from Ranthambhore Tiger Reserve, the only other arid zone metapopulation of tigers in the world, located 183 km due south of Sariska.
2. GBV against women has been defined as ' any act that results in, or is likely to result in physical, sexual, or psychological harm or suffering to women ' (United Nations 1996, 1).
3. Domestic abuse, partner abuse, and its intersections with culture, patriarchy, religion, and gender have been widely investigated across India (e.g., Kapadia 2003; Nayak et al. 2003; Ahmed-Ghosh 2004; Kumar et al. 2005; Bradley 2010), although not in the manner presented here.

4. The 2011 census reported that the district of Alwar, containing Sariska, had a 22.75 percent decadal growth rate, a sex ratio of 894 females per 1,000 males, and a population density of 438 people per square kilometer and that 75 percent of Rajasthan ' s population is rural (Census Organization of India 2011).
5. This has resulted in increased labor hours and distance needed to travel to find resources (De and Chauhan 2014).
6. This study was limited by the method of focus group discussions. FGs provided in-depth knowledge and, more important, allowed participants to drive the research describing truly hidden costs that I would not have inherently known to consider from a literature review. The topic of domestic abuse was unforeseen and the product of participant emphasis on the issue. This is the most significant benefit to FGs. I was not able to follow through with crosstabulation of demographics, however, such as livelihoods, age, religions, residence time, family size, or caste, because of my inability to accurately track each participant within the FG transcript at all times. For further discussion of the development of FGs, positionality, and volunteering in the communities, see Doubleday (2018) and Doubleday and Adams (2019).
7. Much domestic violence is partly credited to the pressures from joint family structure (e.g., Vindhya 1997).
8. Overall, the interfamily hierarchy is governed by age and then by men over women (Malhotra, Vanneman, and Kishor 1995).
9. Studies in India concerning gendered labor roles in livestock rearing indicate that women are primarily responsible for feeding, milking, cleaning, and caring for animals, as well as providing medical care (World Resources Institute 2003). Of note, the many articles that discuss livestock-based livelihoods in Sariska do not identify buffalo rearing as a primarily women-facilitated livelihood.
10. I cannot speak to the percentage of income from men who work in cities or government jobs. These rough estimates are not meant to be representative for all families in the Sariska landscape. Instead, they are intended to show the general consistency of income that women earn from buffalo milk.
11. Population increase across South Asia has contracted forest cover, depleted water tables, and fragmented naturally vegetated areas. Chemical fertilizers and pesticides have resulted in widespread soil degradation. Further, monsoon irregularity and failure, undercut by droughts and frequent flooding, have further jeopardized food security for much of South Asia. Because of these factors, rural South Asian men have increasingly sought urban employment and consequently further feminized agriculture; natural resource collection (management) has thus increased rural women ' s daily workload outside the home (Upadhaya 2005).
12. Private GBV is socially normalized. Rajasthan had the highest number of filed domestic cases across
10. India regarding the enforcement of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act between October 2006 and November 2007. Rajasthan women ' s high rate of filing domestic cases is a significant reflection of progress in women ' s agency in resistance to GBV. India currently ranks 125 on the Gender Inequality Index. According to the National Family Health Survey (NFHS)-3 (Government of India 2006), the most common form of violence that Indian women between the ages of fifteen and forty-nine experience is spousal violence. The NFHS-3 reported that 40 percent of evermarried women had endured spousal physical, sexual, or emotional violence. It also reported that 37 percent face domestic violence and that 46 percent of women in Rajasthan have experienced physical or sexual violence. Only 2 percent of the abused women have requested institutional assistance. In a study outside New Delhi, Kaur and Garg (2010, 246) found that nearly 20 percent of the women reported wife beating as a common occurrence even if husbands are not drunk. The women stressed that wife beating was a socially learned behavior and a means of demonstrating power and control; it was a greater issue in joint families, where in many instances the in-laws encouraged their sons to harass their wives (Kaur and Garg 2010). Further, the mothers-in-law were involved in 60 percent of the domestic violence cases (Kaur and Garg 2010). The widely reported involvement of mothers-in-law and even elder sisters-in-law in abuse is sometimes physical but even more so emotional, through support of the violence. NFHS data found that 50 percent of married women aged fifteen to eighteen in Rajasthan felt that husbands are correct in perpetuating violence ( ' Domestic Violence Victim Get HC Relief ' 2009). Likewise, husbands who were daily wage workers constituted 86 percent of violent cases (Prakash 2011). Thus, daily wage labor and alcohol, prevalent in the study area, are already major players in GBV in Rajasthan. Further, because men ' s work is typically less consistent, possible times of unemployment and deeper poverty could lead to stress and frustration (Babu and Babu 2011). This frustration might lead to GBV and a possible increase in alcohol consumption, which is also positively associated with GBV (Babu and Babu 2011). Women not meeting financial expectations, regardless of cause, can easily be imagined as a basis for further GBV.
13. Milk production is conducive to rural Rajasthani women ' s lives as the skills are well developed and passed from generation to generation; marketing is easy, because milkmen collect milk from all over; part of the work can be done from home; and milk enhances children ' s nutrition (Bisht et al. 2013). Thus, the Forest Department wants to promote stall feeding to maintain milk production without dependence on Sariska.

## References

- Agarwal, A. 1987. Bargaining and gender relations: within and beyond the household. Feminist Economics 3 (1):1 -51. doi: 10.1080/135457097338799.
- Agarwal, A. 1997. Bargaining and gender relations: Within and beyond the household. Feminist Economics 3 (1):1 -51. doi: 10.1080/135457097338799.
- Agrawal, A., and C. C. Gibson, eds. 2001. Communities and the environment: Ethnicity, gender, and the state in community-based conservation . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Ahearn, S. C., J. Ding, A. R. Joshi, and J. L. D. Smith. 2001. TIGMOD: An individual-based spatially explicit model for simulating tiger/human interaction in multiple use forests. Ecological Modelling 140 (1 -2):81 -97. doi: 10.1016/S0304-3800(01)00258-7.
- Ahmadia, G. N., L. Glew, M. Provost, D. Gill, N. I. Hidayat, S. Mangubhai, Purwanto, and H. E. Fox. 2015. Integrating impact evaluation in the design and implementation of monitoring marine protected areas. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 370 (1681):20140275. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2014.0275.
- Ahmed-Ghosh, H. 2004. Chattels of society: Domestic violence in India. Violence Against Women 10 (1):94 -118. doi: 10.1177/1077801203256019.
- Andam, K. S., P. J. Ferraro, K. R. E. Sims, A. Healy, and M. B. Holland. 2010. Protected areas reduced poverty in Costa Rica and Thailand. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (22):9996 -10001. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0914177107.
- Association for Women ' s Rights in Development. 2004. Intersectionality: A tool for gender and economic justice. Women ' s Rights and Economic Change 9:1 -8.
- Babu, G. R., and B. V. Babu. 2011. Dowry deaths: A neglected public health issue in India. International Health 3 (1):35 -43. doi: 10.1016/j.inhe.2010.12.002.
- Barua, M., S. A. Bhagwat, and S. Jadhav. 2013. The hidden dimensions of human -wildlife conflict: Health impacts, opportunity and transaction costs. Biological Conservation 157:309 -16. doi: 10.1016/j.biocon.2012.07.014.
- Bennett, N. J., R. Roth, S. C. Klain, K. Chan, P. Christie, D. A. Clark, G. Cullman, D. Curran, T. J. Durbin, G. Epstein, et al. 2017. Conservation social science: Understanding and integrating human dimensions to improve conservation. Biological Conservation 205:93 -108. doi: 10.1016/j.biocon.2016.10.006.
- Bhardwaj, D. 2016. Sariska Tiger Reserve to start ecotourism in buffer zone from July. Hindustan Times. Accessed July 5, 2016. http://www.hindustantimes.com/ jaipur/sariska-tiger-reserve-to-start-ecotourism-in-bufferzone-from-july/story-Wjb7OMRtZvD1ecyzIPYCSM.html.
- Bhasin, K. 2012. Feminist reflections on neo-liberalism, fundamentalism and survival. In The future of Asian feminisms: Confronting fundamentalisms, conflicts and neo-liberalism , ed. N. Katjasungkana and S. E. Wieringa, 1 -8. Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
- Bisht, A., A. Joshi, and H. Pant. 2013. Role of NGO ' s For eradication of rural poverty through women empowerment (Case study Reference of MATREE Tonk District of Rajasthan). International Journal of
- Trends in Economics Management &amp; Technology 2(1):33 -36.
- Bond, J., and K. Mkutu. 2017. Exploring the hidden costs of human -wildlife conflict in northern Kenya. African Studies Review 2017:1 -10. doi: 10.1017/asr.2017.134.
- Bosco, F. J., and T. Herman. 2010. Focus groups as collaborative research performances. In The Sage handbook of qualitative geography , ed. D. DeLyser, S. Herbert, S. Aitken, M. Crang, and L. McDowell, 193 -208. London: Sage.
- Boserup, E. 1970. Woman ' s role in economic development . London: Earthscan.
- Bradley, T. 2010. Religion as a bridge between theory and practice in work on violence against women in Rajasthan. Journal of Gender Studies 19 (4):361 -75. doi: 10.1080/09589236.2010.514208.
- Brandon, K., K. H. Redford, and S. E. Sanderson, ed. 1998. Parks in peril: People, politics and protected areas . Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Breslow, S. J., B. Sojka, R. Barnea, X. Basurto, C. Carothers, S. Charnley, S. Coulthard, N. Dol  sakb, J. Donatutog, C. Garc  ı a-Quijanoh, et al. 2016. Conceptualizing and operationalizing human wellbeing for ecosystem assessment and management. Environmental Science &amp; Policy 66:250 -59. doi: 10. 1016/j.envsci.2016.06.023.
- Carney, J. 1996. Converting the wetlands, engendering the environment. In Liberation ecologies: Environment, development, social movements , ed. R. Peet and M. Watts, 165 -87. London and New York: Routledge.
- Carter, N. H., and T. D. Allendorf. 2016. Gendered perceptions of tigers in Chitwan National Park, Nepal. Biological Conservation 202:69 -77. doi: 10.1016/j.biocon.2016.08.002.
- Carter, N. H., and J. D. C. Linnell. 2016. Co-adaptation is key to coexisting with large carnivores. Trends in Ecology &amp; Evolution 31 (8):575 -78. doi: 10.1016/j. tree.2016.05.006.
- Census Organization of India. 2011. Rajasthan population census data 2011. Accessed September 15, 2016. http://www.census2011.co.in/census/state/rajasthan.html.
- Chestin, I. E., M. Y. Paltsyn, O. B. Pereladova, L. V. Iegorova, and J. P. Gibbs. 2017. Tiger re-establishment potential to former Caspian tiger ( Panthera tigris virgata ) range in Central Asia. Biological Conservation 205:42 -51. doi: 10.1016/j.biocon.2016.11.014.
- Chhatre, A., S. Lakhanpal, and S. Prasanna. 2017. Heritage as weapon: Contested geographies of conservation and culture in the Great Himalayan National Park Conservation Area, India. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 107 (2):456 -64. doi: 10.1080/24694452.2016.1243040.
- Chowdhury, A. N., R. Mondal, A. Brahma, and M. K. Biswas. 2008. Eco-psychiatry and environmental conservation: Study from Sundarban Delta, India. Environmental Health Insights 2:S935 -76. doi: 10.4137/EHI.S935.
- Chua, P., K. Bhavnani, and J. Foran. 2000. Women, culture, development: A new paradigm for development studies? Ethnic and Racial Studies 23 (5):820 -41. doi: 10.1080/01419870050110913.
- Colfer, C. J. P., B. Sijapati Basnett, and M. Ihalainen. 2018. Making sense of ' intersectionality ' : A manual

for lovers of people and forests. CIFOR Occasional Paper No. 184, Center for International Forestry Research, Bogor, Indonesia.

- De, U. K., and K. Chauhan. 2014. Degradation of forest and biodiversity in Sariska National Park, India and the responsible factors. International Journal of Environment and Sustainable Development 14 (4):398 -426. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.2472569.
- Dhakal, N. P., K. C. Nelson, and J. D. Smith. 2011. Resident well-being in conservation resettlement: The case of Padampur in the Royal Chitwan National Park, Nepal. Society &amp; Natural Resources 24 (6):597 -615. doi: 10.1080/08941921003709633.
- Dhawan, N., D. Punetha, Y. Sinha, S. P. Gaur, S. L. Tyler, and F. B. Tyler. 1999. Family conflict/violence patterns in India. Psychology and Developing Societies 11 (2):195 -216. doi: 10.1177/097133369901100205.
- Domestic violence victim get HC relief. 2009 . Times of India , August 19.
- Doss, C. 2013. Intrahousehold bargaining and resource allocation in developing countries. The World Bank Research Observer 28 (1):52 -78. doi: 10.1093/wbro/lkt001.
- Doubleday, K. F. 2018. Human-tiger (re) negotiations: A case study from Sariska Tiger Reserve. Society &amp; Animals 26 (2):148 -70. doi: 10.1163/15685306-12341498.
- Doubleday, K. F., and P. C. Adams. 2019. Women ' s risk and well-being at the intersection of dowry, patriarchy, and conservation: The gendering of human -wildlife conflict. Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space . doi: 10.1177/2514848619875664.
- Dutt, S. 2019. Gender politics in India: An overview. Journal of the Gujarat Research Society 21 (9):54 -57.
- Elmhirst, R. 2011. Migrant pathways to resource access in Lampung ' s political forest: Gender, citizenship and creative conjugality. Geoforum 42 (2):173 -83. doi: 10. 1016/j.geoforum.2010.12.004.
- Folbre, N. 1988. The black four of hearts: Toward a new paradigm of household economics. In A home divided: Women and income in the third world , ed. D. Dwyer and J. Bruce, 248 -89. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Gold, A. G. 2015. Waiting for moonrise: Fasting, storytelling, and marriage in provincial Rajasthan. Oral Tradition 29 (2). doi: 10.1353/ort.2015.0000.
- Goldman, M. 2009. Constructing connectivity: Conservation corridors and conservation politics in East African rangelands. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 99 (2):335 -59. doi: 10.1080/ 00045600802708325.
- Government of India. 2006. National Family Health Survey (NFHS-3). Vol. 1 . New Delhi, India: Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
- Government of Rajasthan. 2004. Management plan for Sariska Tiger Reserve (2004 -2014) . Jaipur, India: Government of Rajasthan.
- Gray, T. N. E., R. Crouthers, K. Ramesh, J. Vattakaven, J. Borah, M. K. S. Pasha, T. Lim, C. Phan, R. Singh, B. Long, et al. 2017. A framework for assessing readiness for tiger Panthera tigris reintroduction: A case study from eastern Cambodia. Biodiversity and Conservation 26 (10):2383 -99. doi: 10.1007/s10531017-1365-1.
- Greiner, C. 2012. Unexpected consequences: Wildlife conservation and territorial conflict in northern Kenya. Human Ecology 40 (3):415 -25. doi: 10.1007/ s10745-012-9491-6.
- Haq, R. 2013. Intersectionality of gender and other forms of identity: Dilemmas and challenges facing women in India. Gender in Management: An International Journal 28 (3):171 -84. doi: 10.1108/GM-01-2013-0010.
- Holmes, G., and D. Brockington. 2012. Protected areas -What people say about well-being. In Linking biodiversity conservation and poverty reduction , ed. D. Roe, J. Elliott, C. Sandbrook, and M. Walpole, 160 -72. London: Wiley.
- Hunter, M. L., R. K. Hitchcock, and B. Wyckoff-Baird. 1990. Women and wildlife in southern Africa. Conservation Biology 4 (4):448 -51. doi: 10.1111/j. 1523-1739.1990.tb00321.x.
- Jadhav, S., and M. Barua. 2012. The elephant vanishes: Impact of human -elephant conflict on people ' s wellbeing. Health &amp; Place 18 (6):1356 -65. doi: 10.1016/j. healthplace.2012.06.019.
- Jain, P., and H. Sajjad. 2016. Household dependency on forest resources in the Sariska Tiger Reserve, India: Implications for management. Journal of Sustainable Forestry 35 (1):60 -74. doi: 10.1080/10549811.2015. 1099108.
- Johnsingh, A. J. T., and M. D. Madhusudan. 2009. Tiger reintroduction in India: Conservation tool or costly dream. In Reintroduction of top-order predators , ed. M. W. Hayward and M. J. Somers, 146 -63. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
- Joseph, J. 2017. Relocation of villages comes to a halt in Sariska. Times of India , January 30. Accessed February 10, 2017. http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/ relocation-of-villages-comes-to-a-halt-in-sariska/articleshow/56861893.cms.
- Kapadia, K., ed. 2003. The violence of development: The politics of identity, gender and social inequalities in India . New York: Zed Books.
- Kaplan-Hallam, M., and N. J. Bennett. 2017. Adaptive social impact management for conservation and environmental management. Conservation Biology 32 (2):304 -14. doi: 10.1111/cobi.12985.
- Kaur, R., and S. Garg. 2010. Domestic violence against women: A qualitative study in a rural community. Asia Pacific Journal of Public Health 22 (2):242 -51. doi: 10.1177//1010539509343949.
- Kaushik, T. S. 2003. The essential nexus between transformative laws and culture: The ineffectiveness of dowry prohibition laws of India. Santa Clara Journal of International Law 1 (1):73.
- Keleman, A., U. M. Goodale, and K. Dooley. 2010. Conservation and the agricultural frontier: Collapsing conceptual boundaries. Journal of Sustainable Forestry 29 (6 -8):539 -59. doi: 10.1080/10549811.2010.485676.
- Kumar, S., S. D. Gupta, S. Bhatt, A. George, and A. Bhattacharya. 2005. Men, masculinity and domestic violence against women . Jaipur, India: Indian Institute for Health Management and Research.
- Lau, L. 2014. No longer good girls: Sexual transgressions in Indian women ' s writings. Gender, Place &amp; Culture 21 (3):279 -96. doi: 10.1080/0966369X.2013.791252.

- Lawson, V. 1999. Questions of migration and belonging: Understandings of migration under neoliberalism in Ecuador. International Journal of Population Geography 5 (4):261 -76. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1099-1220(19907/ 08)5:4 &lt; 261::AID-IJPG151 &gt; 3.0.CO;2-5.
- Leach, M. 1992. Women ' s crops in women ' s spaces: Gender relations in Mende rice farming. In Bush base, forest farm: Culture, environment and development , ed. E. Croll and D. Parkin, 76 -97. London and New York: Routledge.
- Leisher, C., L. Samberg, P. van Buekering, and M. Sanjayan. 2013. Focal areas for measuring the human well-being impacts of a conservation initiative. Sustainability 5 (3):997 -1010. doi: 10.3390/su5030997.
- Linnell, J. D., E. G. Nilsen, and U. S. Lande. 2005. Zoning as a means of mitigating conflicts with large carnivores: Principles and reality. In People and wildlife: Conflict or co-existence? , ed. R. Woodruffe, S. Thirgood, and A. Rabinowitz, 162 -75. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Lovell, R., K. Husk, C. Cooper, W. Stahl-Timmins, and R. Garside. 2015. Understanding how environmental enhancement and conservation activities may benefit health and wellbeing: A systematic review. BMC Public Health 15 (1):864. doi: 10.1186/s12889-015-2214-3.
- Loveridge, A. J., S. W. Wang, L. G. Frank, and J. Seidensticker. 2010. People and wild felids: Conservation of cats and management of conflict. In Biology and conservation of wild felids , ed. D. W. MacDonald and A. J. Loveridge, 161 -95. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Lynam, A. J. 2010. Securing a future for wild Indochinese tigers: Transforming tiger vacuums into tiger source sites. Integrative Zoology 5 (4):324 -34. doi: 10.1111/j. 1749-4877.2010.00220.x.
- Malhotra, A., R. Vanneman, and S. Kishor. 1995. Fertility, dimensions of patriarchy, and development in India. Population and Development Review 21 (2):281 -305. doi: 10.2307/2137495.
- Mannell, J., L. Ahmad, and A. Ahmad. 2018. Narrative storytelling as mental health support for women experiencing gender-based violence in Afghanistan. Social Science &amp; Medicine 214 (August):91 -98. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.08.011.
- Mathur, K. 2004. Countering gender violence: Initiatives towards collective action in Rajasthan . New Delhi: Sage.
- Mathur, K. 2007. Body as site, body as space: Bodily integrity and women ' s empowerment in India. IDSJ Working Paper series, 148, Institute of Developmental Studies, Jaipur, India.
- McDowell, L. 1997. Capital culture and gender at work in the city . Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
- Mollett, S., and C. Faria. 2013. Messing with gender in feminist political ecology. Geoforum 45 (2013):116 -25. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2012.10.009.
- Mondal, K., Gupta, S., Bhattacharjee, S., Qureshi, Q. and Sankar, K., 2012. Response of leopards to re-introduced tigers in Sariska Tiger Reserve, Western India. International Journal of Biodiversity and Conservation , 4 (5):228 -36.
- Nayak, M., C. Byrne, M. Martin, and A. Abraham. 2003. Attitudes towards violence against women: A cross-
- nation study. Sex Roles 49 (7 -8):333 -42. doi: 10. 1023/A:1025108103617.
- Nightingale, A. 2006. The nature of gender: Work, gender, and environment. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 24 (2):165 -85. doi: 10.1068/d01k.
- Nightingale, A. 2011. Bounding difference: Intersectionality and the material production of gender, caste, class and environment in Nepal. Geoforum 42 (2):153 -62. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2010.03.004.
- Nyhus, P. J., and R. Tilson. 2004. Characterizing human -tiger conflict in Sumatra, Indonesia: Implications for conservation. Oryx 38 (1):68 -74. doi: 10.1017/S0030605304000110.
- Ogra, M. V. 2008. Human -wildlife conflict and gender in protected area borderlands: A case study of costs, perceptions, and vulnerabilities from Uttarakhand (Uttaranchal), India. Geoforum 39 (3):1408 -22. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2007.12.004.
- Pandey, M. 2017. India to get new tiger hubs, rise in big cat population expected. India Today , June 4. Accessed July 20, 2017. http://indiatoday.intoday.in/ story/india-tiger-population-national-tiger-conservationauthority-tiger-census-tiger-reserve-national-parks/1/ 970309.html.
- Pearson, R., and C. Jackson, eds. 1998. Feminist visions of development: Gender analysis and policy . London and New York: Routledge.
- Pooley, S., and S. Redpath. 2018. Speaking up for collaboration in conservation: A response to Vucetich et al. (2018) Just conservation: What is it and should we pursue it? Biological Conservation 223:186 -87. doi: 10.1016/j.biocon.2018.04.020.
- Prakash, N. 2011. Domestic violence against women in rural Rajasthan, India: A sociological analysis. In Democracies: Challenges to societal health , ed. B. Wejnert, 89 -102. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group.
- Pratt, G. 1999. From registered nurse to registered nanny: Discursive geographies of Filipina domestic workers in Vancouver, BC. Economic Geography 75 (3):215 -36. doi: 10.1111/j.1944-8287.1999.tb00077.x.
- Qin, Y., P. J. Nyhus, C. L. Larson, C. J. W. Carroll, J. Muntifering, T. D. Dahmer, L. Jun, and R. L. Tilson. 2015. An assessment of South China tiger reintroduction potential in Hupingshan and Houhe National Nature Reserves, China. Biological Conservation 182:72 -86. doi: 10.1016/j.biocon.2014.10.036.
- Radel, C. 2012. Gendered livelihoods and the politics of socio-environmental identity: Women ' s participation in the conservation projects in Calakmul, Mexico. Gender, Place and Culture 19 (1):61 -82. doi: 10.1080/ 0966369X.2011.617905.
- Rastogi, A., G. M. Hickey, R. Badola, and S. A. Hussain. 2012. Saving the superstar: A review of the social factors affecting tiger conservation in India. Journal of Environmental Management 113:328 -40. doi: 10.1016/ j.jenvman.2012.10.003.
- Rocheleau, D., B. Thomas-Slayter, and E. Wangari. 1996. Feminist political ecology: Global issues and local experiences . London and New York: Routledge.
- Sen, A. 1981. Poverty and famine: An essay on entitlement and deprivation . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

- Shahabuddin, G. 2014. The ' Tiger Crisis ' and the response: Reclaiming the wilderness in Sarsika Tiger Reserve, Rajasthan. In Shifting ground: People, mobility, and animals in India ' s environmental histories , ed. M. Rangarajan and K. Sivaramakrishnan, 252 -72. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Shahabuddin, G., and P. L. Bhamidipati. 2014. Conservation-induced displacement: Recent perspectives from India. Environmental Justice 7 (5):122 -29. doi: 10.1089/env.2014.0012.
- Shahabuddin, G., R. Kumar, and M. Shrivastava. 2007. Creation of ' inviolate space ' : Lives, livelihoods and conflict in Sariska Tiger Reserve. Economic and Political Weekly 42 (20):1855 -62. doi: 10.2307/4419608.
- Sodhi, N. S., P. Davidar, and M. Rao. 2010. Empowering women facilitates conservation. Biological Conservation 143 (5):1035 -36. doi: 10.1016/j.biocon.2010.02.014.
- Sriram, R., and S. Mukherjee. 2001. The unsafe nest: Analysing and treating the roots and reaches of marital violence. In Mental health from a gender perspective , ed. B. V. Davar, 219 -47. New Delhi, India: Sage.
- Sultana, F. 2011. Suffering for water, suffering from water: Emotional geographies of resource access, control and conflict. Geoforum 42 (2):163 -72. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2010.12.002.
- Terborgh, J., C. van Schaik, L. Davenport, and M. Rao, ed. 2002. Making parks work: Strategies for preserving tropical nature . Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Timko, J., and T. Satterfield. 2008. Seeking social equity in national parks: Experiments with evaluation in Canada and South Africa. Conservation and Society 6 (3):238 -54. doi: 10.4103/0972-4923.49216.
- Truelove, Y. 2011. (Re-)conceptualizing water inequality in Delhi, India through a feminist political ecology framework. Geoforum 42 (2):143 -52. doi: 10.1016/j. geoforum.2011.01.004.
- United Nations. 1996. Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women . Beijing.
- Upadhyay, B. 2005. Women and natural resource management: illustrations from India and Nepal. Natural
- Resource Forum 29 (3):224 -32. doi: 10.1111/j.14778947.2005.00132.x.
- Vindhya, U. 1997. Dowry deaths and domestic harassment of women in Andhra Pradesh: An analysis of socio-cultural dimensions and judicial outcome of cases . Unpublished manuscript, Indian Council for Social Science Research, New Delhi.
- Vindhya, U. 2007. Quality of women ' s lives in India: Some findings from two decades of psychological research on gender. Feminism &amp; Psychology 17 (3):337 -56. doi: 10.1177/0959353507079088.
- Vucetich, J. A., D. Burnham, E. A. Macdonald, J. T. Bruskotter, S. Marchini, A. Zimmermann, and D. W. Macdonald. 2018. Just conservation: What is it and should we pursue it? Biological Conservation 221:23 -33. doi: 10.1016/j.biocon.2018.02.022.
- Wildlife Institute of India. 2013. Status of tiger and prey species in Panna Tiger Reserve, Madhya Pradesh. Report submitted to Madhya Pradesh Forest Department and National Tiger Conservation Authority, New Delhi. doi: 10.13140/2.1.3974.9122.
- Woodroffe, R., S. Thirgood, and A. Rabinowitz, ed. 2005. People and wildlife: Conflict or coexistence ? Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- World Resources Institute. 2003. Women, water, and work: The success of the self-employed women ' s association . Washington, DC: World Resources Institute.
- Wright, M. W. 2004. From protests to politics: Sex work, women ' s worth, and Ciudad Ju  arez modernity. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 (2):369 -86. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8306.2004.09402013.x.

KALLI F. DOUBLEDAY is a Research Fellow in the Department of Geography &amp; the Environment at The University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712. E-mail: kdoubleday@utexas.edu. Her research interests center on the human dimensions of large carnivore conservation.