<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Mobility, Communication, and Place: Navigating the Landscapes of Suburban U.S. Teens

Meghan Cope &amp; Brian H. Y. Lee

To cite this article: Meghan Cope &amp; Brian H. Y. Lee (2016) Mobility, Communication, and Place: Navigating the Landscapes of Suburban U.S. Teens, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 106:2, 311-320

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2015.1124017

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 02 Mar 2016.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 118

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

## Mobility, Communication, and Place: Navigating the Landscapes of Suburban U.S. Teens

Meghan Cope* and Brian H. Y. Lee y

* Department of Geography, University of Vermont y School of Engineering and the Transportation Research Center, University of Vermont

In the context of sprawl and car dependence in U.S. metropolitan areas, young people-especially teens in middle-class suburbs-create new mobility practices with near-universal adoption of cellphones and high levels of access to automobiles. The growth in the use of handheld mobile devices for communication and information might enhance independent mobility and accessibility for higher socioeconomic segments of the youth population. In a project with teens in two high schools near Burlington, Vermont, representing somewhat different land-use contexts, we examined how often and in what ways teens use information and communication technologies (ICTs) to arrange transportation, what travel needs are being met and which transportation modes are used, and how household situations contextualize the use of ICTs for mobility. We explore the ways in which access to cellphones and cars affects how high school teens organize and enact their daily lives in suburban and rural contexts. We employ a conceptual framework that connects mobility, communication, and place based on the notion that contemporary teens generate new intersections among the built, digital, and social landscapes. Key Words: cellphones, information and communication technologies (ICTs), suburbs, teens, transportation.

在 美 国 大 都 会 地 区 的 蔓 延 和 车辆 依 赖 之 脉 络 中 , 年 轻 人 --特 别 是 中产 阶 级 郊 区 中 的 青 少 年 --随 着 近 乎 全 球 普 及 的 手 机 使 用 和 高 度 的 汽 车 可及 性 , 创 造 出 崭 新 的 能 动 性 实 践 。 将 手 持 行 动 装 置 用 于 通 信 与 信 息 的的 成 长 , 或 许 会 增 进 来 自 于 较 高 社 经 地 位 的 青 年 人 口 的 独 立 能 动 性 与 可及 性 。 我 们 在 佛 蒙 特 邻 近 伯 灵 顿 的 两 所 呈 现 出 些 许 不 同 土地 使 用 脉 络 的 高 中 , 与 年 轻 人 进 行 的 一 项 计 画 中 , 检 视 青 少 年 使 用 信 息 与 通 信 技 术 (ICTs) 来 安 排 运输 的 频 率 与 方 式 , 他们什 麽 样 的 移 动 需 求 受 到 满 足 , 使 用 何 种 运输 模 式 , 以 及 家 户 境 况 如 何 概 念 化 将 ICTs 运 用 至 能 动 性 的 使 用 。 我 们 探 讨 使 用 手 机 和 车辆 的 方 式 , 如 何 影 响 郊 区 与乡 村 脉 络 中 , 高 中 青 少 年 安 排 并 执 行 其 日 常 生 活 的 方 式 。 我 们 根 据 当 前 青 少 年 在 建 成 、 数 码 与 社 会 地 景 中 形 成 新 交 汇 之 见解 , 运 用 连 结 能 动 性 、 通 信 与 地 方 的 概 念 架构 。 关 键 词 ： 手 机 , 信 息 与 通 信 技 术 (ICTs), 郊 区 , 青 少 年 , 运输 。

En el contexto de la descontrolada expansi  on urbana y dependencia en el carro en las  areas metropolitanas de los EE.UU., la gente joven-especialmente los adolescentes de los suburbios de clase media-crean nuevas pr  acticas de movilidad con la adopci  on casi universal de los tel  efonos celulares y los altos niveles de acceso a los autom  oviles. El aumento del uso de aparatos m  oviles de mano para las comunicaciones y la informaci  on podr  ıa fortalecer la movilidad y accesibilidad independiente para los segmentos socioecon  omicos m  as altos de la poblaci  on joven. En un proyecto con adolescentes de dos escuelas de secundaria, cerca de Burlington, Vermont, que representan contextos de usos de la tierra algo diferentes, examinamos qu  e tan a menudo y c  omo usan los j  ovenes las tecnolog  ıas de la informaci  on y las comunicaciones (TICs) para acordar transporte, qu  e necesidades de transporte se est  an abocando y cu  ales medios de transporte se usan, y de qu  e modos las situaciones del hogar contextualizan el uso de las TICs para movilidad. Exploramos las maneras como el acceso a los tel  efonos celulares y a los carros afecta el modo como los j  ovenes de la escuela secundaria organizan y viven sus vidas cotidianas, en contextos suburbanos y rurales. Empleamos un marco conceptual que conecta movilidad, comunicaci  on y lugar a partir de la noci  on de que los adolescentes contempor  aneos generan nuevas intersecciones entre los paisajes construidos, digitales y sociales. Palabras clave: tel  efonos celulares, tecnolog  ıas de la informaci  on y las comunicaciones (TICs), suburbios, adolescentes, transporte.

D rawing from research completed in 2011 and 2012 with teens (ages fourteen to eighteen) in two suburban school districts in the Burlington, Vermont, metropolitan area, we find evidence that contemporary teens in suburban settings develop their own 'mobility practices' (Kesselring 2006), in which they negotiate and traverse the intersections, boundaries, and sometimes the contradictions of daily life. We propose, based on this work, that the most relevant landscapes for our teen respondents are the built environment (characterized by land use, density, and transportation infrastructure), the digital networks of electronic information and communication (characterized by smartphone access, cellular coverage, and

communication practices), and the social environment (composed of family, friends, school, sports, and work). Teens in our study balanced opportunities enabled by these against a context of various constraints to organize their time, mobility, and obligations.

In this project we wondered: How is the proliferation of instant, mobile, digital technologies seen in the ways that high school teens organize and enact their daily lives? How do they do this in different geographic contexts with varying access to transportation? Kesselring's (2006) notion of mobility practice fits our findings well in terms of negotiations between broader structures of opportunity and constraint, along with individual goals and decisions. Kesselring (2006) explained:

[M]obility practice is structured by contextual situations, economic and social conditions, and power relations in general. . . . Mobility is often conceived of as a form of freedom, but in fact mobility results from the dichotomies of autonomy and hetero-nomy, production and adaptation. This is the very reason why mobility must be conceptualized in relation to flexibility as the ability of actors to adapt to the direction of flows . (270, italics added)

Although space constraints here allow only a brief hint at how a small sample of teens solved the dilemma of managing time, mobility, and activities, we hope that they provoke further exploration.

## Critical Youth Mobilities

Critical youth studies identify young people as active and knowledgeable social agents (Holloway and Valentine 2000); critical youth geographies further account for the ways in which space and place affect young people's lives while identifying how young people themselves construct spaces of opportunity, fun, work, and even resistance. Existing literature on the intersection of teens, transportation, and technology is disparate and interdisciplinary, ranging from transportation planning to critical youth studies, from the recent mobilities literature to cultural critiques of information and communication technologies (ICTs). We draw from these bodies of scholarship by exploring how teen mobility is influenced by changing technologies but also rooted in place-based infrastructure and family rules, practices, and expectations. Our contribution to these fields lies, in part, in blending critical youth geographies (seeing age as socially constructed and young people as active, mobile, social agents) with transportation planning perspectives (integrating the effects of land-use patterns, transportation infrastructure, and travel behavior).

Many studies examine the intersections of the built and social environments for teens, finding that teens' use of walking and bicycling and their engagement with public transportation are highly context-specific, varying by race, gender, class, etc. (Bungum et al. 2009; Blumenburg et al. 2012; Emond and Handy 2012). Looking at a national level, Clifton (2003) was quite clear about the disempowering places experienced by U.S. teens: 'The limited transportation choices and the low-density, segregated land use patterns of American cities may hold teens and their chauffeuring parents captive to the private automobile' (1). Arguably, U.S. policies and practices have generated landscapes that prioritize the car-driving, commuting population to the detriment of independent mobility of teens and other social groups who cannot or do not drive, ultimately producing a spatially unjust hierarchy of access. We have previously argued that this constitutes an 'adultist urbanism' (Lee and Cope 2012).

Since 2000 there has been a growing literature on the diverse ways in which young people blend physical mobility with use of ICTs, thus adding the digital landscape that includes cellphones and home-based Internet. In their exploration of the social networks, ICT use, and travel among 'youngish' adults, Larsen, Urry, and Axhausen (2006) examined 'how social networks are spatially distributed and how they are produced through networking practices of travel, communications and meetings' (5). Focusing on preteens and teens, Pain et al. (2005) found that some young people in the United Kingdom experienced an expansion of their geographic realm if they had their cellphones with them; being contactable by parents allowed greater freedom, within a context of other space-time restrictions and curfews. In work with eleven- to sixteen-year-olds, Holloway and Valentine (2003) found that, rather than fostering social isolation, ICT use allowed participants to complement and facilitate offline, in-person interactions.

Another significant study of young people, ICTs, and mobility is the longitudinal work of Thulin and Vilhelmson (2005, 2007, 2009, 2012), which began in 2000 with a sample of Swedish eighteen-year-old students and followed them over the years. The authors' key findings are diverse but can be summarized by the understanding that individuals' negotiations and navigation through daily life are influenced by geographic context, social-cultural power relations, personal agency, and material factors (e.g., availability and affordability of technologies). Through their case study approach, Thulin and Vilhelmson provided a

corrective to early speculations that ICTs would either completely substitute for physical travel (functioning as a sort of 'immobilizing' factor in work and social lives) or would so vastly improve our efficiency that we would use leisure time for nonelectronic activities. In fact, their participants demonstrated a wide range of balances among cellphone use, home-based ICT use, physical travel, and face-to-face social interactions that were often intensified or complemented by ease of communication. For example, Thulin and Vilhelmson (2009) noted a trend we saw repeatedly in our research, in which cellphones produced a sense of 'permanent access and instant reach' (139):

The mobile [phone] now makes it possible to constantly negotiate and renegotiate agreements for meetings and joint activities in real time as circumstances change. Plans for the day become more flexible and schedules become less fixed in time and space, allowing for more spontaneous or impulsive decision making. (Thulin and Vilhelmson 2009, 143)

In our own analyses we identified this phenomenon as the cellphone providing both certainty and flexibility for teens, their parents, and their friends.

The work of these authors and others writing in the first decade of the 2000s (e.g., Grinter and Palen 2002; Oksman and Turtiainen 2004; Hjorthol 2008) is valuable for this analysis, for their ground-breaking examination of technological impacts on daily life. Indeed, even with high levels of access to ICTs and cars, we found that geography still matters (distance, land use, residential density, cell-signal gaps) and that even teens with good access to resources negotiate multiple obligations, social groups, and family rules.

## Method

We collected data in 2011 and 2012 through a twophase, mixed-methods approach to examine the mobility practices of teens. The first phase (October 2011) consisted of linked online surveys, one for parents and guardians and another for their teenaged children, distributed to the entire student populations of two high schools outside Burlington, Vermont. The parent survey asked about household composition; the availability and use of different travel modes, particularly vehicle access and sharing; family rules about teen mobility, curfews, and driving privileges and responsibilities; communication and information resources (e.g., smartphones, Internet access); and sociodemographics. The teen survey was concerned with driving

Table 1. Travel and communications indicators for student respondents (based on surveys, October 2011)

|                                                     | SchoolA   | School B   |
|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------|------------|
| Number of teen respondents a                        | 60        | 86         |
| Teens with driver's license                         | 25%       | 37%        |
| Average age teens received license                  | 16.13     | 16.09      |
| Walk or bike to/from school                         | 14%       | 3%         |
| Ride bus to/from school                             | 35%       | 34%        |
| Drive or ride in car to/from school                 | 51%       | 63%        |
| Teen cellphone ownership                            | 95.0%     | 81.4%      |
| Teens' phones that are smartphones (with data plan) | 40.4%     | 42.9%      |

a Respondents were evenly split between male and female and all four grades were equally represented.

licensure and access to household vehicles; rules about where they can go, with whom, when, and by what modes; the places they go and places they cannot access and why; their friends and where they get together; and the availability and use of cellphones, particularly for activity and travel planning.

The second phase (June 2012) involved a half-day meeting to gather in-depth mobility information from a small group. We invited all 146 teen respondents (see Table 1) from the first phase who had agreed to being contacted for follow-up activities. Of these, five teens were interested and able to attend: two girls from one high school and a girl and twin boys from the other. First, an individual web-mapping exercise asked participants to locate their home and school and routes between them, other places teens went in the past week, and local places they would like to go but could not ('denied places'). Teens annotated their maps with notes about travel modes, companions, things to do on the way, and transportation obstacles. Second, the participants collaboratively identified important places in their communities and common transportation routes on large paper orthographic maps (Figure 1). This group setting encouraged the students to share their personal perspectives while revealing communal experiences and diverging views. Third, to gain insights on the interaction between communication and mobility, we created a 'text review' methodology, based on long-standing oral history techniques, where each teen was interviewed and asked to review the text messages on her or his phone to identify discussions with others about going to a place or doing an activity in the past week. 1 For those discussions, we asked the students with whom and when they were messaging, the destinations and activities being planned, other people involved, and the

Figure 1. Ramani and Eryn mapping common routes and destinations in their town. Photo by Meghan Cope. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

outcomes of their plans. Not only did the text review exercise reveal how teens use various forms of messaging to coordinate activity and travel plans, but it also provided insights on an emerging hierarchy of communication tools used (talking in person, e-mailing, texting, phoning) to execute these plans. Finally, we facilitated a focus group discussion with the students on mobility in their lives and constraints they face in getting where they want or need to go.

To summarize and analyze this wide variety of data and contextualize the quantitative data from the closed-ended survey questions, we wove information gathered in both phases of the study into short narratives we call vignettes 2 for the five students who joined us in the second phase; illustrative selections from three of those vignettes are presented here. To create the vignettes, we pulled household and contextual data from the surveys, responses to open-ended questions from the parents and guardians and the teens themselves, and data gathered from the second-phase meeting. Stitching these together also gave us a brief longitudinal perspective (seven months between the first and second phase), a period during which several participants experienced significant mobility changes by attaining a driver's license, getting a car, or getting a smartphone, thus greatly influencing their mobility and communications. Constructing the vignettes constitutes analysis because it allowed us to identify themes and generate concepts from this rich assortment of data that were relevant to the teens with respect to their mobility practices.

## Regional Context

The two high school districts we engaged with are both part of the Burlington metropolitan area with similar student enrollments of about 1,000 students and demographics of mostly white, fairly well-off, educated populations. The districts differ in housing and commercial densities, land uses and public transit options, and catchment areas. School A serves a single, suburban town of 18,500 people in thirty square miles and is located on a mixed-use, arterial corridor with regularly scheduled public bus service connecting it to other parts of the town and Burlington. Although the school district does provide busing service, many students also use public transit because it is free for them. The immediate surrounding area of the school has good nonmotorized infrastructure connecting to common teen destinations: part-time employment, recreation, civic activities, entertainment, food, and shopping. Housing density is mixed, with some areas of car-oriented subdivisions within the town but also denser clusters of residential neighborhoods with good bus and sidewalk and path connectivity.

School B serves four suburban and rural towns on the region's outer edge, with a slightly larger combined population of 22,500 in 166 square miles. It is located half a mile from a small village, off a two-lane state highway

with no public transit service and limited access by travel modes other than automobile. Short segments of multiuse path in front of the school and road shoulders provide walking access to a gas station and convenience store and a sandwich shop nearby. Most students rely on school buses or private automobiles.

Table 1 shows licensure rates and mode share for getting to and from school (there was no appreciable difference between modes to school and getting home, so the rates are combined here). The data provide some coarse indications of the mobility practices and communication options of teens related to the context of the place: School A students are more likely to walk or bike to school and less likely to ride in a car, and they are somewhat less likely to have their licenses. Students at School B are more car-dependent and have lower rates of phone ownership, in keeping with the rural location of the school and poor cell coverage in some contributing towns. Although some of these findings suggest differences in land use, density, and accessibility, they provide little insight into the trade-offs and decisions that teens and their families make about daily travel or the role that ICTs play in mobility; for a better understanding of these, we turn to the vignettes.

## Results: Vignettes

Three vignettes demonstrate how a small sample of teens construct and maintain mobility practices and how these are affected by digital technologies. We generated these narrative accounts of the teens' situations by combining information from both the parent and teen survey responses, the mapping and text review exercises, and the focus group (the sources of data for quotes and specific data are included in parentheses). By combining multiple sources of data we found more and deeper connections between teens' opportunities and constraints in the built environment, their navigations of the technological landscape, and their interlocking social relations. We chose to highlight two students from School A, which represents a highly favorable and resource-rich local context for teens, and one student from School B, with a relatively more challenging set of physical and digital landscapes for teens to navigate. 3

The teens represented here have some common and contrasting characteristics. The two from School A are both females with one younger sibling, and both rely heavily on their cellphones to coordinate their busy schedules. Eryn, 4 however, has her own car with an associated set of family obligations, and most of her activities are social; Ramani shares her mother's car and her activities are mostly college-oriented pursuits. The student from School B is male, also with a sibling, but does not have his license or depend on a cellphone for activity and travel coordination because of poor cellular coverage in his rural home area. His nonschool times are filled with sports and other extracurricular activities and he completely depends on his mother to drive him.

## Eryn

Eryn was sixteen, white, in Grade 11 at School A, and lived with her single mother, an 'executive' earning more than $100,000 annually, and brother, age fifteen (parent survey). The household had broadband access and all three had smartphones. Eryn got her license as soon as she turned sixteen; her mother bought a new car and gave Eryn her older SUV because 'I'm a single parent and needed help transporting my children. Eryn having a car made this possible' (parent survey). Her mother said the biggest household change since Eryn got her license was 'I'm not spending hours in my car each day. Our gas usage has actually gone down as [Eryn] drives the less economical vehicle much less than when I was driving it everywhere' (parent survey).

Using her smartphone extensively, Eryn texted and used social media a great deal. She used ICTs daily to plan travel (teen survey), which was reflected in her network of friends and activities plotted out in the map exercises. In her survey she said that getting her license allowed her to 'be involved in more activities and be with my friends more.' The teen survey asked for information about the participants' five closest friends and where and how often they get together; for the friends she listed, Eryn visited three girlfriends daily outside of school and she saw two boys three or four times a week. She drove herself alone or with others to friends' houses. At the time of the focus group (June 2012) Eryn did not participate in afterschool sports, but in her survey (October 2011) she mentioned field hockey practice. Other places she listed going include another school to watch a soccer game, a food store, and two other friends' houses (teen survey). Eryn mostly drove herself to these destinations and all trips except for one were with others.

According to both her and her mother's surveys, Eryn had no restrictions on where she could go, whether by her driving or using other travel modes, and there were no agreements on what activities Eryn could or could not do. Her mother said that Eryn was required to tell her what time she would be home

before leaving and Eryn had to follow state laws regarding who else can be in the car. When asked about other driving-based rules, her mother wrote 'obviously, no use of phone' while driving (illegal in Vermont). The understood deal between Eryn and her mother was that she would transport her brother where he needs to go (text review and focus group discussion). Eryn did not have to pay for operating or insuring the car but her mother provided only one tank of gas per monthbeyond that Eryn had to pay for fuel. As Eryn said in summary in her survey, 'I use my car all the time.'

## Ramani

Ramani was seventeen, South Asian, in Grade 11 at School A, and lived with her parents, grandmother, and sister, age fourteen (surveys). Her activities included cross-country running and golf, violin, and a university math class; these took her to four different towns (teen survey). At the time of the focus group, her texting communications were about prepping for college entrance exams in study groups and doing fundraising at school for the lacrosse team. Ramani claimed that she had no curfew (teen survey). In the parent survey, her father said that they had agreements about going places with parents or 'valid' drivers.

When she only had her driving permit (survey, October 2011), Ramani recorded a movie theater, shopping, a friend's house, and food store (all in neighboring towns) as 'denied places' due to having 'no way to get there.' She also indicated that she hung out with her five listed friends primarily at her house or their houses. In the final comments of the survey, she wrote:

It is difficult to get around when you have to rely on your friends and family for rides. In the summer, I am able to bike to more places because the weather is permitting. But, many places are too far away and I need to drive. But, with a permit, I can't drive by myself so I rely heavily on my parents for transportation. A lot of time is wasted waiting for rides as well. With my own car and a license, I could be much more efficient and get everywhere I need to go.

The following spring, having attained her license, Ramani was able to access these places, although she had to negotiate for use of her mother's car and noted she could get rides from friends who were also new drivers (paper map exercise). She stated that despite having her license, she still had to wait for rides with some frequency (focus group).

Ramani commented on infrastructure in several areas, both positively and negatively. In the digital mapping exercise she mentioned a bike path she used in the summer. There is a short sidewalk near her neighborhood but it ends abruptly before any useful destinations can be reached. She repeatedly lamented (teen survey, digital mapping) that the public buses do not come near her neighborhood and she was prevented from going places.

Ramani mostly texted or used Facebook messaging. At the time of the survey, she had a cellphone but no data plan, but by the time of the focus group, she had a smartphone. For transportation she usually texted and sometimes called, but when her cellphone was broken she relied on Facebook on her computer (focus group). She texted for urgent things but used Facebook for events that were farther out in time or with friends from other schools; as events became closer she switched to text. Ramani used e-mail primarily with adults. Two of the six threads of text messages she reviewed with us (text review) were group texts to organize gatherings. Four threads were with peers and, of those, three were follow-ups from conversations in school hallways. Four threads involved Ramani looking for a ride somewhere, and another involved organizing an event at her home.

## Jacob

Jacob is seventeen, white, in Grade 11 at School B, and lives with his parents and twin brother. His father earns more than $200,000 per year; his mother is home. There is little transportation infrastructure near their rural home, with no sidewalks, paths, or bus stops (parents' survey).

Jacob's life was filled with sports; his travel was all for practices and competitions, his friends were mostly teammates, and his communications were primarily about coordinating these activities (teen survey). He had no agreements or rules about where he could or could not go or how he got around, likely because he was totally dependent on his mother for transportation to school, sports practices, and games. At the time of the survey (October 2011), Jacob did not have his license or a cellphone, but by the focus group (June 2012) he had a learner's permit and a smartphone (although he mentioned poor cellular service at home).

In the survey, Jacob listed five important places that he went in the sample week: doctor's office, a friend's house, two parks, and a movie theater; all of these travels were as a car passenger. Looking at the friend network, Jacob listed five friends: four boys and his brother. Jacob saw his friends either at school, home (his brother), or out running. Jacob said his hometown 'is out in the

middle of nowhere. Lack of public transportation is a given, and everything is far away, so walking, or biking is impractical. You have to drive with either a friend or a family member to get around' (teen survey).

The mapping exercises reinforce the sense that Jacob mostly traveled to sports-related locations. In the text review, Jacob mentioned that he and his friends emailed well in advance for making arrangements, but texting is shorter and you can do it when you need to be quiet. His sample text was one to his brother inquiring how a tennis match was going at another court while Jacob himself was at the track and they were trying to figure out where to meet up afterward. He used the phone to call home for rides but not much with friends because most of his friends were on the same teams and he talked with them in person at and before and after competitions (text review, focus group).

## Analysis

The vignette accounts enable us to generate some new insights on teens' combinations of mobility, activity, and communication as well as confirm previous work by others. First, as Dal Fiore et al. (2014) found for adult 'digital nomads,' rather than substituting for trips, ICTs are both substituting and complementing teen travel behavior. Mobile devices allow teens to stay connected but digital interactions do not replace in-person activities, particularly because teens often have little discretion over where they are supposed to be at a given moment (school, home, sports practice, etc.). Teens do make discretionary arrangements in the social realm: Ramani made arrangements first in the hallways at school, which were then followed up and refined through messaging, to ultimately meet together in person. Eryn used her cellphone and car to make social gatherings possible and frequent, even in the context of available public transportation. For Jacob, texts and phone calls allowed him to stay in touch with his family and friends while he participated in sports and coordinated rides.

Second, teens engage in advance planning and they organize events at the last minute, seeming to use different communication methods (e-mail vs. text) depending on the event's time frame; this is similar to Ling and Haddon's (2008) finding that mobile devices impact teens' 'spontaneous, fluid nature of planning of if, where and when to meet' (145, italics added). Although ICTs allow teens to stay connected with family, friends, teachers, and coaches, tensions remain between the need to plan in advance and constraints due to decisions and resources that are out of teens' control. For instance, even with Ramani's license and smartphone, she was limited in her ability to finalize plans because she did not always know whether or not she would have access to her mother's vehicle. In addition to the influence of timing on the type of communication, we found evidence of teens using e-mail and telephone calls with adults but texting and messaging with peers, leading to an even more complicated kaleidoscope of time-space organization.

Third, older teens (sixteen and older) who have access to cellphones and cars operate in complex sets of social obligations with family, friends, extracurricular activities, work, and school. With these communication and transportation privileges also come responsibilities, such as Eryn's driving her brother around and paying for fuel beyond the first tank. Ramani's negotiations for her mother's car involved getting up very early to drive her mother to work so that Ramani could then use the vehicle or, on the other end, having to wait long periods after sports practice for a ride. Jacob's friend network overlapped entirely with his sports activities, therefore achieving a sort of efficiency in the context of a great deal of time spent in practices and long journeys to competitions. Thus, although access to cellphones and cars could conceivably ease the challenges of middle-class teens, evidence here shows that these tools actually foster heightened expectations and intensity of activities, responsibilities, and time-space management.

In examining the mobility practices of teens and how they organize and enact their daily lives, we noticed important intersections among the built environment, digital networks, and social groups. Although the built environment and digital networks are primarily designed and constructed by adults, and even teens' social groups are influenced by adults, our findings hint at ways that teens blend whatever resources they have to manage busy, mobile lives.

First, the built environments of the two school districts present opportunities and constraints to high school teens. In the context of School A, the relatively compact housing, mixed-use commercial development, strong transit, and bicycle and pedestrian facilities meant that teens were able to get around to some degree without a car, as reflected in Table 1. The low density and long distances of School B's district made teen destinations harder to reach, lengthened trips, and required more advanced planning. Second, the digital landscape is similarly varied in its combinations of opportunities and constraints. Cellphone

signals at the time of the study (late 2011 and early 2012) were fairly stable for teens in School A but very spotty in School B's catchment area. Broadband availability in the relevant areas also varied based on population density, terrain, remoteness, and the cable/ digital subscriber line coverage (Broadband VT 2010), resulting in near-universal access for School A residents but differential availability for School B teens. Uneven cellphone signals were a significant issue reported by students from the more rural towns served by School B and, indeed, seem to have influenced the rates of teens having cellphones: 95 percent of students at School A had cellphones, whereas 81 percent of students at School B did. Both rates were well above the U.S. national average among teens at the time of 77 percent (Madden et al. 2013), perhaps reflecting the wealthy demographics, but the difference between schools was, according to students themselves, due to poor rural cell coverage.

Further, the social landscape of teens is characterized by diverse relations between them and their parents, siblings, friends and peers, teachers, coaches, and employers. We found that individual teens occupied simultaneous positions of responsibility and dependence, particularly among sixteen- to eighteen-yearolds who had greater spatial mobility and, in most cases, driver's licenses. Perhaps in keeping with the uppermiddle-class demographics, most respondents in both schools demonstrated complicated schedules with extracurricular sports and other commitments; jobs and internships; homework and academic pursuits; socializing with friends; and, of course, school and family filling their days. In the teen survey, many respondents referenced the challenges they face in managing their activities, mobilities, and time-space commitments. Some activities were more rigid (e.g., sports games or performances) and required planning ahead, whereas other activities lent themselves to last-minute or flexible plans. Among the older cohort (sixteen and older), the diversity and intensity of activities increased, which in many cases was both made possible by and, in turn, necessitated teens' access to cellphones and cars.

Finally, the built, digital, and social landscapes are conditioned by individual contexts, and teen mobility practices depend on access to both public and private resources. For Eryn, this meant a trade-off of high levels of spatial freedom (her own car, largely paid for by her mother) for responsibility (driving her brother around). For Ramani, this manifested in daily negotiations (often by texting and phoning) for rides or access to her mother's car; despite the fact that her school is in a relatively transit-rich location, her spatially extensive and time-sensitive activities meant that she constantly employed digital and social resources to overcome challenges in the built environment. For Jacob, living in rural isolation, having his mother act as a driver and being friends with his teammates afforded him the ability to negotiate the challenges of distance and poor cellphone coverage. Thus, we found that teens navigate different contexts using multiple resources and strategies based on their situations and household and personal decision making.

## Conclusions

Although the development and adoption of new digital technologies vastly outpaces changes in the social and built environments, the fact that these dimensions overlap and interact with each other means that teen mobility practices will also continue to evolve. Building on research from the 2000s, cited earlier, we hope to provide a snapshot in time of a complex set of factors that are continually shifting, which in turn prompt and necessitate adaptation and innovation by future teens and ongoing research to understand societal shifts.

Research on teens' mobility practices that focuses on the intersections of the built environment, digital technologies, and social groupings and that highlights teens' agency in navigating, negotiating, and resisting constraints and opportunities will help us understand new combinations of mobility, communication, and place. Future investigations will also help destabilize, or at least contextualize, stereotypes about young people's mobility, such as the popular notion that driving is less important for millennials than for previous generations (U.S. Public Interest Research Group 2013), and instead pay attention to making all places more accessible to all groups. Similarly, as unevenness in the digital landscape continues to be relevant, there is a corresponding need for the public to negotiate important equity and social justice questions around the digital divide. Although the teens we worked with occupied positions of relative privilege, particularly in socioeconomic status, they experienced marginalization through the cumulative effects of adultist urbanism. Jacob, Ramani, and Eryn were able to make their busy lives work in part through the negotiations they made daily using access to cellphones and cars, but many other teens in our survey, especially those without licenses and in lower income households, were far more anchored to the key sites of teen life (home, school, etc.) and had

little access to ICTs. As Gilbert et al. (2008) pointed out, 'By learning what strategies are being employed successfully by marginalized populations, both at the individual and collective scales, we can gain a better understanding of how ICTs can be a part of improving quality of life' (923) for all populations.

## Funding

This research was funded in part by a grant from the U.S. Department of Transportation through the UTC Program at the New England University Transportation Center (at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology) and the University of Vermont Transportation Research Center.

## Notes

1. The phones remained in the hands of the students at all times and each teen was asked to reveal only information he or she was comfortable sharing. Leaving the phone in the teens' hands allowed them to curate their own summary of messaging and was important for respecting the teens' privacy.
2. This use of the term is distinguished from the practice of introducing hypothetical stories ('vignettes') to research subjects for the purposes of data collection, which is common in psychology and health sciences.
3. Due to space considerations we did not include all five students' vignettes. We feel that the three chosen represent sufficient richness and variety to illustrate our points. Jacob's twin brother had virtually the same daily patterns and friend groups, so we only chose to include one of the boys. The other female participant (School B) was fascinating and vocal in her resistance to using a car or a cellphone (although she owned both) but admitted that she was very much in a minority at her school. Although her perspectives were useful in putting her peers' views in more stark relief, her self-proclaimed 'outlier' status made it difficult to incorporate her story succinctly and within the page limit. We hope to revisit her position in a future paper.
4. Pseudonyms are used throughout.

## References

- Blumenburg, E., B. Taylor, M. Smart, K. Ralph, M. Wander, and S. Brumbaugh. 2012. What's youth got to do with it? Exploring the travel behavior of teens and young adults . Los Angeles: Institute of Transportation Studies, UCLA. http://www.uctc.net/research/papers/UCTC-FR-201214.pdf (last accessed 20 October 2014).
- Broadband VT. 2010. Coverage statistics and maps. http:// publicservice.vermont.gov/topics/connectivity/broad bandvt/12312010 (last accessed 29 January 2016).
- Bungum, T., M. Lounsbery, S. Moonie, and J. Gast. 2009. Prevalence and correlates of walking and biking to school among adolescents. Journal of Community Health 39:129-34.
- Clifton, K. 2003. Independent mobility among teenagers: An exploration of travel to after-school activities. Transportation Research Record 1854. http://www.ltrc. lsu.edu/TRB\_82/TRB2003-001412.pdf (last accessed 7 July 2014).
- Dal Fiore, F., P. L. Mokhtarian, I. Salomon, and M. E. Singer. 2014. 'Nomads at last'? A set of perspectives on how mobile technology may affect travel. Journal of Transport Geography 41:97-106.
- Emond, C., and S. Handy. 2012. Factors associated with bicycling to high school: Insights from Davis, CA. Journal of Transport Geography 20 (1): 71-79.
- Gilbert, M., M. Masucci, C. Homko, and A. Bove. 2008. Theorizing the digital divide: Information and communication technology use frameworks among poor women using a telemedicine system. Geoforum 39:912-25.
- Grinter, R., and L. Palen. 2002. Instant messaging in teen life. Paper presented at the Association of Computing Machinery 2002 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, New Orleans, LA.
- Hjorthol, R. 2008. The mobile phone as a tool in family life: Impact on planning of everyday activities and car use. Transport Reviews 28 (3): 303-20.
- Holloway, S., and G. Valentine, eds. 2000. Children's geographies: Playing, living, learning . London and New York: Routledge.
- ---. 2003. Cyberkids: Children in the information age . London and New York: Routledge-Falmer.
- Kesselring, S. 2006. Pioneering mobilities: New patterns of movement and motility in a mobile world. Environment and Planning A 38:269-79.
- Larsen, J., J. Urry, and K. Axhausen. 2006. Mobilities, networks, geographies . Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
- Lee, B. H. Y., and M. Cope. 2012. Teens on the move: Implications of land-use and transportation practices for youth mobility in northern Vermont, USA. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Association of American Geographers, New York.
- Ling, R., and L. Haddon. 2008. Children, youth and the mobile phone. In International handbook of children, media and culture , ed. K. Drotner and S. Livingstone, 137-51. London: Sage.
- Madden, M., A. Lenhart, M. Duggan, S. Cortesi, and U. Gasser. 2013. Teens and technology 2013 . Washington, DC: Pew Research Internet Project. http://www. pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Teens-and-Tech/MainFindings/Teens-and-Technology.aspx (last accessed 25 September 2013).
- Oksman, V., and J. Turtiainen. 2004. Mobile communication as a social stage: Meanings of mobile communication in everyday life among teenagers in Finland. New Media Society 6:319-39.
- Pain, R., S. Grundy, and S. Gill, with E. Towner, G. Sparks, and K. Hughes. 2005. 'So long as I take my mobile': Mobile phones, urban life and geographies of young people's safety. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 29 (4): 814-30.

- Thulin, E., and B. Vilhelmson. 2005. Virtual mobility of urban youth: ICT-based communication in Sweden. Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 96 (5): 477-87.
- ---. 2007. Mobiles everywhere: Youth, the mobile phone, and changes in everyday practice. Young 15:235-53.
- ---. 2009. Mobile phones: Transforming the everyday social communication practice of urban youth. In The reconstruction of space and time: Mobile communication practices , ed. R. Ling and S. Campbell, 137-58. London: Transaction.
- ---. 2012. The virtualization of urban young people's mobility practices: A time-geographic typology. Geografiska Annaler B 94 (4): 391-403.
- U.S. Public Interest Research Group. 2013. A new direction: Our changing relationship with driving and the implications for America's future. http://uspirg.org/

reports/usp/new-direction (last accessed 5 October 2015).

MEGHANCOPEis a Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405. E-mail: mcope@uvm.edu. Her research interests include critical urban geography, young people's geographies, qualitative methods, and historical experiences of American childhood.

BRIAN H. Y. LEE is an Assistant Professor in Transportation Systems at the University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05404. E-mail: bhylee@uvm.edu. He is an applied researcher with expertise in transportation and land-use analysis. He has keen interests in the travel of marginalized populations and a record of interdisciplinary collaborations on policy-relevant projects.