## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Error Analysis of Regional Migration Modeling

## Jianfa Shen

To cite this article: Jianfa Shen (2016): Error Analysis of Regional Migration Modeling, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2016.1197767

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2016.1197767

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 15 Jul 2016.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 3

View related articles

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

## Error Analysis of Regional Migration Modeling

Jianfa Shen

Department of Geography and Resource Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Much methodological advancement has been made in the modeling and analysis of regional migration. Previous migration modeling, however, has been done in a black box. The overall performance of a migration model is evaluated with the contribution of all explanatory variables, including regional attributes and spatial interaction effects. This research uses a new method to estimate migration modeling errors by their sources. Following the notion of migration spatial structure, the observed or estimated regional migration matrices of a migration system can be described by four factors: the overall effect, the relative emissiveness and the relative attractiveness of specific regions, and the effect of spatial interaction between pairs of regions. By calculating the contributions of migration factors to the modeling error, this article reveals which factors of the migration process can be modeled more or less accurately using the case of regional migration in China for the period between 2005 and 2010. A network spatially filtered Poisson migration model is estimated for China. Error analysis shows that the modeling errors of the constant K , the relative emissiveness, and attractiveness caused weighted absolute mean errors of 1.20 percent, 14.60 percent, and 15.57 percent in migration flows, respectively. The spatial interaction caused the greatest weighted absolute mean error of 31.55 percent in migration flows. Thus, the spatial interaction effect remains the most difficult to model. The findings of this research point to directions to improve migration modeling. More efforts should be made to improve the approach to model the effect of spatial interaction. Key Words: China, error analysis, migration modeling, regional attribute, spatial interaction.

区 域 迁 徙 的 模 式 化 和 分 析 ， 在 方 法 论 上 已 有 长 足 的 进 展 。 但 过 往 的 迁 徙 模 式 化 ， 却 是 在 不 透 明 的 过 程 中 完 成 。 本 文 运 用 所 有 的 解 释 性 变 异 数 ， 包 括 区 域 属 性 与 空 间 互 动 影 响 ， 评 估 迁 徙 模 型 的 总 体 表 现 。 本 研 究 运 用 崭 新 的 方 法 ， 以 迁 徙 模 式 化 的 来 源 评 估 其 偏 差 。 根 据 迁 徙 空 间 结 构 的 概 念 ， 一个 迁 徙 系 统 中 观 察 到 或 评 估 的 区 域 迁 徙 矩 阵 ， 可 用 四 项 因 素 进 行 描 绘 ： 总 体 效 应 ， 特 定 区 域 的相 对 放 射 性 和 相 对 吸 引 力 ， 以 及 每 对 区 域 之 间 的 空 间 互 动 效 应 。 本 文 运 用 中 国 2005 年 至 2010 年 间 的 区 域 迁 徙 案 例 ， 藉 由 计 算 迁 徙 因 素 之于 模 式 化 偏 差 的 影 响 ， 揭 露 迁 徙 过 程 中 的 何 项 因 素 ， 能 够 更 为 精 准 或 更 不 精 准 地 进 行 模 式 化 。 本 文 评 估 中 国 网 络 空 间 上 过 滤 的 泊 松 迁 徙 模 型 。 偏 差 分 析 显 示 ， 常 数 K ， 相 对 放 射 性 和吸 引 力 的 模 式 偏 差 ， 分别 导 致 迁 徙 潮 中 百 分 之一 点 二 、 十 四 点 六 和 十 五 点 五七 的 加 权 后 的 绝 对 平 均 偏 差 。 而 空 间 互 动 ， 则 导 致 了 迁 徙 潮 中 百 分 之三 十 一 点 五五 的 最 大 加 权 后 绝 对 平 均 偏 差 。 因 此 ， 空 间 互 动 效 应 仍 然 作 为 最 难 以 模 式 化 的 因 素 。 本 文 的 研 究 发 现 ， 指 引 改 进迁 徙 模 式 化 的 方 向 。 我 们 需 要 更 多 的 努力 来 改 进 模 式 化 空 间 互 动 效 应 的 方 法 。 关 键 词 ： 中 国 ， 偏 差 分 析 ， 迁 徙 模 式 化 ， 区 域 属 性 ， 空 间 互 动 。

En la modelaci  on y el an  alisis de la migraci  on regional se ha logrado notable progreso metodol  ogico. La anterior modelaci  on de la migraci  on, sin embargo, ha sido hecha en una caja negra. El desempe ~ no general de un modelo de migraci  on se eval  ua con la contribuci  on de todas las variables explicativas, incluso los atributos regionales y los efectos de la interacci  on espacial. La presente investigaci  on usa un nuevo m  etodo para calcular los errores de los modelos de migraci  on a trav  es de sus fuentes. Siguiendo la noci  on de estructura espacial de la migraci  on, las matrices de migraci  on regional de un sistema de migraci  on, observadas o calculadas, pueden describirse por cuatro factores: el efecto general, la emisividad relativa y atracci  on relativa de regiones espec  ıficas, y el efecto de la interaccion espacial entre pares de regiones. Al calcular las contribuciones de los factores de migraci  on en el error de la modelaci  on, este art  ıculo revela cu  ales factores del proceso migratorio pueden ser modelados con m  as o menos exactitud usando el caso de la migraci  on regional en China para el per  ıodo de 2005 a 2010. Se calcul  o un modelo de migraci  on Poisson de redes espacialmente filtradas para China. El an  alisis de error muestra que los errores de modelaci  on de la constante K , la emisividad relativa y la atracci  on causaron errores medios absolutos ponderados del 1.20 por ciento, 14.60 por ciento y 15.57 por ciento en los flujos migratorios, respectivamente. La interacci  on espacial caus  o el error medio absoluto ponderado m  as grande del 31.55 por ciento en los flujos migratorios. Entonces, el efecto de la interacci  on espacial sigue siendo el m  as dif  ıcil de modelar. Los hallazgos de esta investigaci  on apuntan hacia las direcciones con las cuales se puede mejorar el modelado de la migraci  on. M  as esfuerzos deben aplicarse para mejorar el enfoque con elcual se modela el efecto de la interacci  on espacial. Palabras clave: China, an  alisis del error, modelado de la migraci  on, atributo regional, interacci  on espacial.

M igration is an important component of population change (Rees et al. 1996; Stillwell et al. 2014) and has close relations with urban and regional development (Fan 2005a; Clark and Huang 2006; Clark and Ledwith 2006). Internal migration within a country is also a complicated phenomenon involving migration flows among various cities and regions. Many efforts have been made to model migration flows using distance, population, and other factors at the origin and destination to explain migration. Hua and Porell (1979) and Stillwell (2005) made detailed reviews of the gravity model and regional migration modeling. Only a brief review of the literature is provided here.

The gravity model was first applied to human interactions by Zipf (1946). Spatial interaction models based on entropy-maximizing techniques were formulated by Wilson (1970) and Alonso (1978) and were further extended by Fotheringham (1991) by including a competing destinations variable to remove the effect of spatial structure. Wilson (1967, 1970) made the most notable contribution by providing a theoretical base for the gravity model.

Extended demo-economic migration models and twostage migration models have also been developed (Lowry 1966; Isserman 1985; Stillwell and Congdon 1991; Shen and Spence 1996; Champion et al. 2003; Henry, Boyle, and Lambin 2003; Rees, Fotheringham, and Champion 2004). Lowry (1966) was probably the first to incorporate economic factors into a demo-economic migration model to explain migration explicitly. The volume edited by Stillwell and Congdon (1991) includes both micro and macro approaches and this is a key distinction in migration modeling. Plane (1987) made the first attempt to estimate a set of geographic components of temporal change in a system of interregional flows. Dynamic change in net migration is conceptualized to consist of system growth, system mobility, geographic mix, and competitive components.

Different model specifications and different estimation methods might produce different parameter estimates and goodness of fit (Congdon 1991). Many studies on migration have focused on the issue of model specification as well as distance measurement (Boyle and Flowerdew 1997; Shen 2015). A lengthy debate in the 1970s (Johnston 1973; Cliff, Martin, and Ord 1974; Sheppard 1979) focused primarily on the problems of autocorrelation in the mass terms and the map pattern effect in the distance decay parameters. It has been shown that origin-specific distance decay terms are likely to be related to the map pattern (Johnston 1973; Fotheringham 1981). The spatial interaction effect remains to be a key classical question in migration and geographical studies. It is still unclear whether the spatial interaction effect can be modeled accurately and this issue is addressed by this article.

Instead of a global model of migration with one set of parameters, a model with origin- or destination-specific parameters can be specified (Wilson 1970). Geographically weighted regression can also be applied to estimate parameters that change over space taking spatial nonstationarity into account (Nakaya 2001). This article uses a global model of migration and spatial autocorrelation is dealt with using an eigenvector spatial filtering approach.

A Poisson model is considered a more realistic description of migration processes than a normal log-linear model assuming a normal distributed random component (Flowerdew and Aitkin 1982). Spatial autocorrelation means that regions nearby the origin or the destination also affect the migration from the origin or to the destination. There are different ways to incorporate spatial autocorrelation into a spatial interaction model; for example, by specifying a spatial autoregressive process for the disturbance term and including spatial lagged terms (Fischer and Griffith 2008). An eigenvector spatial filtering approach has been developed recently to account for spatial autocorrelation caused by missing spatially correlated origin and destination variables (Griffith 2007; Chun 2008; Chun and Griffith 2011).

Willekens (1983) revealed the meanings of balancing factors and the first-order interaction effects in the loglinear model. Mueser (1989) made significant progress to decompose migration into sending effects, drawing effects, and separation effects using a general spatial interaction model. More recently, Rogers et al. (2002) suggested using the log-linear specification of a spatial interaction model to describe the migration spatial structure, in terms of the regional emissiveness, attractiveness, and level of spatial interaction. These studies provide a foundation to separate the contribution of regional attributes and spatial interaction to migration.

Previous studies on interprovincial migration in China have focused on the spatial patterns of migration (Liang and White 1997; Yang 2000; He and Gober 2003; Zhu 2003; Liang and Ma 2004; Zhu and Chen 2010; Sun and Fan 2011), regional concentration of migration flows (He and Pooler 2002; Ding et al. 2005), determinants of migration (Wei 1997; Hare 1999; Zhao 1999; Liang, Chen, and Gu 2002; Cai and Wang 2003; Li 2004; Fan 2005b), and the relationship between migration and regional development (Fan 2005a). Poncet (2006) found that aggregate migration costs declined between two periods of 1985 through

1990 and 1990 through 1995, along with the relaxation of migration restrictions. In summary, major factors contributing to increasing migration in China include rural reform, hukou (household registration) reform, and regional development (Shen 2012). Shen (1999, 2015) developed methods to decompose migration and the change of migration into different components.

It is clear that much methodological advancement has been made in the modeling and analyses of regional migration. Previous studies have paid much attention to the estimation of migration models, using population at origin, population at destination, distance, and other social, economic, and environmental variables to explain migration flows in a regional migration system. The main purpose of modeling migration flows between regions is to understand what factors are causing interregional migration, as a large inflow or outflow will affect regional development significantly. The results will be useful for regional and local governments to design specific policies to attract and retain migrants to their region. The causes and conditions of migration should be fully considered in the making of regional development plans. For example, the migration model in this article shows that people would not leave areas with high economic density (gross domestic product [GDP] per unit of area). Policymakers should therefore note this agglomeration effect and plan well to provide facilities and services for both existing population and migrants.

A black box approach is often adopted, however, for the best fitting of a migration model without due consideration of whether the migration model describes the migration mechanism adequately. Conventional migration modeling estimates all parameters in the same time and is not able to determine whether modeling errors are due to inadequate explanatory power of regional attributes or poor modeling of the spatial interaction. This is an important issue, as it is not useful to add more regional attributes into a migration model if the spatial interaction is poorly modeled. An ongoing research project will fill this research gap and develop an approach to address this issue using the regional migration of China in the period between 2005 and 2010 as a case study. An earlier article analyzed the roles of regional attributes and spatial interaction effects in modeling error based on a Poisson migration model (Shen 2016). This article extends the previous research in modeling error analysis by using a new migration model, a network spatially filtered Poisson model. The new model performs better and produces a new set of estimation of migration modeling errors. Several new statistics of mean errors are also used so that positive and negative errors would not be canceled out.

According to Rogers et al. (2002), all migration flows in a migration system can be fully described by four main factors: the overall effect, the relative emissiveness and the relative attractiveness of specific regions, and the effect of spatial interaction between pairs of regions. Thus, an observed migration matrix and an estimated migration matrix based on a migration model can be decomposed into four factors. The differences in these four factors can be used to assess their roles in modeling performance. The results of analysis can reveal which factor of the migration process can be modeled more accurately and which factor is the most difficult to model.

The rest of the article is organized as follows. The methods for the error analysis of regional migration modeling and the network spatially filtered Poisson model are presented in the next section. Then the modeling error of the regional migration model in China is analyzed. Some conclusions are reached in the final section.

## Method for the Error Analysis of Regional Migration Modeling

There are three steps in the error analysis. The first step is the estimation of a migration model for a specific regional migration system. Two sets of migration flows can be obtained, including one set of observed flows from census and another set of estimated flows based on the migration model. The second step decomposes each set of migration flows into the relative emissiveness, attractiveness, and level of interaction between pairs of regions according to Rogers et al. (2002). In the third step, the relative emissiveness, attractiveness, and level of interaction based on observed and estimated migration flows will be compared to calculate the modeling error. The error analysis focuses on the difference between observed and estimated migration flows. The observed migration flows are not perfect and might contain measurement errors in the process of population census and survey.

## Regional Migration Model

Various migration models have been developed and used in previous research (Stillwell 2005; Shen 2012, 2015, 2016). One simple and common model is the following normal log-linear gravity model:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here Mij is the estimated migration flow between regions i and j ; pi and pj are the population at region i and region j ;

dij is the distance between two regions; and e ij is assumed to be a normal distributed random variable.

As migration flow is a nonnegative integer and some flows are often zero (Flowerdew and Aitkin 1982), a Poisson model is a more realistic description of the migration process (Congdon 1991; Shen 1999, 2012). A Poisson gravity model with three variables is specified as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, the conditional mean mij is linked to a set of explanatory variables in a log-linear equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The preceding migration model that was used previously (Shen 2016) overlooks spatial autocorrelation. The eigenvector spatial filtering approach is used in this article to capture spatial autocorrelation by assuming that the spatial autocorrelation is caused by missing spatially correlated variables (Griffith 2007). Then unbiased parameters and their standard errors can be estimated (Chun 2008; Fischer and Griffith 2008). The spatial filter can be constructed from a linear combination of a subset of the eigenvectors of a transformed spatial link matrix. A stepwise regression procedure can be used to select those eigenvectors that account for the spatial autocorrelation in a response variable (Griffith 2007). The selection criteria can be based on the maximization of log-likelihood function or the minimization of spatial autocorrelation (Chun 2008).

Migration between two regions is also affected by other environmental, social, and economic factors (Henry, Boyle, and Lambin 2003). Thus, a general network spatially filtered Poisson migration model that includes socioeconomic and demographic variables can be specified. The conditional mean mij in Equation 2 is specified as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this model, migration flow is assumed to be a Poisson-distributed variable. W selected eigenvectors f l ( l D 1, 2, . . . W ) of a transformed spatial link matrix are used in the spatial filter. f lij is the value of the l th eigenvector for flow from i to j . It is noted that ln mij is a linear combination of explanatory variables.

The model in Equations 2 and 4 can be estimated using a generalized linear model (Poisson log-linear model) of the SPSS (Version 22) software. A hybrid method is used so that Fisher scoring iterations are performed before switching to the Newton-Raphson method.

## Relative Emissiveness, Attractiveness, and the Level of Interaction in a Migration System

Rogers et al. (2002) suggested that the parameters of the log-linear model of spatial interaction can fully describe the relative attractiveness Qj and emissiveness Pi of specific regions, as well as the level of interaction between pairs of regions Gij in a migration system as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

According to effect coding scheme that is used here, the K parameter represents the overall effect and is equal to the geometric mean value of all flows. Pi and Qj are the ratios of the geometric mean of row i and columns j to K , respectively (Rogers et al. 2002). Gij describes the spatial interaction. It can be calculated using the following equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Other coding schemes will estimate different but consistent sets of effects.

It is proposed that both the observed migration matrix and the estimated migration matrix can be decomposed into the same four factors. Then these four factors can be compared to determine whether modeling errors are due to poor performance of origin, destination attributes, or poor modeling of spatial interaction. The next subsection outlines a decomposition approach to detect the sources of error in migration modeling (Shen 2016).

## Estimating the Error of Regional Migration Modeling

According to the approach in the previous subsection, the observed and estimated migration flows, M1ij and M2ij , can be described by following equations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the following can be derived:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The total error of the estimated regional migration model, M2ij -M1ij , can be expressed as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The errors in migration flows caused by differences (or errors) in constant, relative attractiveness Qj , relative emissiveness Pi , and the level of interaction between pairs of regions Gij between two sets of observed and estimated migration flows are labeled by Ekij , Epij , Eqij , and Egij , respectively. Each one can be estimated by assuming different values for one factor but the same value in other factors.

For example, Ekij is estimated using Equation 10 by assuming the following: P2i D P1i , Q2j D Q1j , and G2ij D G1ij .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, we can get the following equations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A surplus compounding error Eoij can be calculated as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus the total error can be expressed as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## The Case of Regional Migration Model in China

This article extends the previous research in modeling error analysis by using a new migration model, a network spatially filtered Poisson model (Shen 2016). The regional migration model of China for the period between 2005 and 2010 is estimated first and then its modeling error is analyzed.

## Estimating the Regional Migration Model in China, 2005-2010

Internal migration in China was tightly controlled before the 1980s due to a strict household registration system ( hukou ). People could not migrate from one place to another without the approval of the Bureau of Public Security. A resident without local hukou was illegal and could not get access to land, housing, education, job, and welfare. The hukou system was relaxed, allowing people to move to other places as temporary residents without local hukou in the early 1980s. Thus, migration has increased significantly in postreform China since then (Shen 2002, 2012). The volume of interprovincial migration in China increased from 11 million between 1985 and 1990 to 34 million between 1995 and 2000 and 61 million between 2005 and 2010 (Population Census Office of State Council and Department of Population Statistics 1993; Population Census Office of State Council and Department of Population, Social, Science, and Technology Statistics 2002; Population Census Office of State Council and Department of Population and Employment Statistics 2012). Uneven regional development and urbanization have contributed to increasing migration in China.

This article uses a network spatially filtered Poisson migration model to model the interprovincial migration in China in the period between 2005 and 2010. The migrants in this period are defined as those whose usual place of residence changed from one province to another in the five-year period in the 2010 census. Multiple migrations and migrants who returned to the original province in the period would not be captured. Thus, the limitation of the migration data is that not all movements are counted. The quality of migration data is also affected by missing population in the census and migrants' inaccurate memory of previous migration. There are thirty-one provincial regions in China. Only interprovincial migration is considered, with a total of 930 flows. It is not desirable to include intraprovincial migration, as not all intraprovincial migrants are captured by census and it is problematic to define the distance for such migration. Distance refers to the highway distance between provincial capitals, which are also the population centers of provincial regions. Some twenty-five origin attributes and destination attributes are selected first for the migration model based on migration theories and previous

studies of interregional migration in China (Cai and Wang 2003; Fan 2005b; Shen 2012). Including distance, the total number of explanatory variables is fifty-one. To overcome the multicollinearity problem among these attributes, stepwise regression is applied to a log-linear migration model and the twenty-one most significant variables are selected and redundant variables are excluded. The variance inflation factor is also calculated to check for the existence of multicollinearity (Stern 2008). In the Poisson model, seventeen variables were retained as four variables became insignificant, including the distance variable (Table 1).

There are seven groups of demographic, social, and economic variables.

The first group is on demographic status. The size of regional population (POP) has been proven to be an important factor in many gravity-type migration models (Hua and Porell 1979; Fan 2005b). Population density (DENSITY) indicates the population pressure at destination. It is expected that a region with a high population density would attract fewer migrants. Household size (HHSIZE) at origin indicates the possibility of labor migration (Hare 1999; Shen 2002). Many households in China adopt a split-household

Table 1. List of regional attributes included in regional migration models

|                                       |                                                                                                              | Expected effect   | Expected effect   |
|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Attributes                            | Description                                                                                                  | At origin i       | At destination j  |
| Group 1: Demographic status           |                                                                                                              |                   |                   |
| POP i ; POP j DENSITY j               | Population in 2010, million Population density in 2005 at destination, person/km                             | C                 | C ¡               |
| HHSIZE i                              | Average household size in 2005 at origin, person                                                             | C                 |                   |
| MSTOCKS i                             | Share of population born out of the province in 2000 at origin,%                                             | C                 |                   |
| Group 2: Resource and climate         |                                                                                                              |                   |                   |
| ALRA i                                | Arable land per rural agricultural employee in 2005 at origin, ha/person Temperature severity index (average | ¡                 |                   |
| TEMPSEV j                             | temperature differences between January and July) in 2005 at destination                                     |                   | ¡                 |
| JULHUM i ; JULHUM j                   | Average relative humidity in July 2005                                                                       | C                 | ¡                 |
| Group 3: Level of development         |                                                                                                              |                   |                   |
| GDPA i                                | GDP per unit of area in 2005 at origin, RMB 1,000 per km 2                                                   | ¡                 |                   |
| RURALI j                              | Rural income per capita in 2005 at destination, RMBper person                                                |                   | C                 |
| Group 4: Economic structure           |                                                                                                              |                   |                   |
| E3S j                                 | Share of tertiary sector employment in 2005 at destination,%                                                 |                   | C                 |
| Group 5: Trade and foreign investment |                                                                                                              |                   |                   |
| EGDP i ; EGDP j ;                     | Export as a percentage of GDP in 2005,%                                                                      | ¡                 | C                 |
| Group 6: Economic growth rate         |                                                                                                              |                   |                   |
| GDPI i                                | Annual GDP growth rate over the period 2001-2005 at origin,%                                                 | ¡                 |                   |

Note : GDP D gross domestic product; CD positive effect; D negative effect.

strategy by sending some members to engage in labor migration (Fan 2008, 2009). Household size is expected to have a positive effect on outmigration from origins. The share of migrant stock in population is a proxy for the intensity of migrant network. It has been shown that migrant stock is an important predictor of regional migration in China (Fan 2005a).

The second group of attributes refers to resource and climate. Lack of arable land resources is considered an important push factor of rural-to-urban migration in China (Rozelle et al. 1999; Zhao 1999). Arable land per rural agricultural employee (ALRA i ) in 2005 at origin measures the land pressure in various regions. Previous studies show that interprovincial migrants favor regions with temperate climate in China (Fu and Gabriel 2012). Here temperature severity index (i.e., average temperature differences between January and July, TEMPSEV j ) at destination, and average relative humidity in July (JULHUM i and JULHUM j ) in 2005 measure regional climatic amenities (Liu and Shen 2014). It is expected that both of them have a negative effect on migration.

Uneven regional development is the main driving force of regional migration in China (Cai and Wang 2003; Zhu 2003; Fan 2005a; Fielding 2010). The third group of attributes measures the level of development. GDPA i measures economic agglomeration at origin. RURALI j measures rural income per capita at destination. It is expected that there is a positive effect at destination and a negative effect at origin.

The fourth group of attributes is on economic structure (E3S j ). Many temporary migrants from rural areas engage in manufacturing and services (Liang and Ma 2004). Urban areas and rural areas were the main destination and origin of regional migration between 1995 and 2000, respectively (Sun and Fan 2011). It is expected that a more advanced tertiary sector would attract more migrants. Trade and foreign investment have been instrumental in the rapid industrialization of China. The fifth group of attributes includes EGDP, which measures export intensity. It is expected that EGDP would have a positive effect on labor migration at destination (Fielding 2010). The sixth group of attributes includes the economic growth rate (GDPI i ). It is expected that GDPI i should have a negative effect on migration at the origin. These variables have also been used in previous modeling of migration in China (Shen 2015, 2016).

Average annual growth rate over the period from 2000 to 2005 was used to smooth annual fluctuation. Population at year 2010 was used to measure the impact of population size. For other indicators, data at the beginning of the period, 2005, are used to measure the socioeconomic status that influences migration in the subsequent period.

To formulate the spatial filter in the migration model (Equations 2 and 4) to capture spatial autocorrelation, a network dependence structure that accommodates the effects of competing destinations and intervening opportunities is adopted (Chun 2008). The spatial link matrix B measures the spatial link among flows between Z regions. The value of each element is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here bij,kl indicates the spatial link between the flow from i to j and the flow from k to l. b ij,kl takes a value of one if two flows are neighboring flows. Such neighboring flows must have the same origin (or destination) and their destinations (or origins) are neighboring areas. According to Chun (2008), each eigenvector of the transformed spatial link matrix represents a distinct map pattern that has a certain level of spatial autocorrelation and each eigenvalue is a Moran's I autocorrelation coefficient (MC) of that map pattern when matrix V meets certain conditions. V is obtained by applying an S-coding (variance stabilizing coding) scheme to B . The transformed spatial link matrix is defined as M [0.5( V C V T )] M . Here M D I11 T /N. I is an identity matrix. 1 is an N £ 1 vector whose elements are one (Chun 2008). N is the total number of flows and Z is the number of regions in the system, N D Z ( Z - 1). There are 930 interprovincial flows in China. Similar to matrix B , the transformed spatial link matrix has a dimension of 930 £ 930 and thus it is associated with 930 eigenvectors.

Of 930 possible eigenvectors, 224 have an adjusted MC value (i.e., MC/MCmax) of at least 0.25 (hence accounting for at least 5 percent of the geographic variance; Griffith 2007). The forty-six most significant eigenvectors are selected. Then a network spatially filtered Poisson model (Equations 4-5) is estimated with forty-six eigenvectors and sixteen explanatory variables to explain regional migration in China for the period between 2005 and 2010. For comparison, unfiltered Poisson models with only sixteen explanatory variables are also estimated (Table 2). To check for the existence of multicollinearity, the tolerance (over 0.10 for all variables) and the variance inflation factor (under ten for all variables) are calculated by using a regression

Table 2. Estimated parameters of the unfiltered Poisson model and network spatially filtered Poisson model for 2005-2010

|                       | Unfiltered Poisson model   | Unfiltered Poisson model   | Network spatially filtered Poisson model   | Network spatially filtered Poisson model   |
|-----------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| Variables             | Parameter                  | t value                    | Parameter                                  | t value                                    |
| Constant              | ¡ 23.5636                  | 8.0865 *                   | ¡ 22.8018                                  | 10.0855 *                                  |
| D ij                  | ¡ 1.2618                   | 33.3522 *                  | ¡ 0.9065                                   | 24.4379 *                                  |
| POP i                 | 1.1738                     | 17.1359 *                  | 1.1704                                     | 25.0066 *                                  |
| POP j                 | 0.7664                     | 16.3443 *                  | 0.9000                                     | 22.8925 *                                  |
| TEMPSEV j             | ¡ 1.4810                   | 13.3103 *                  | ¡ 1.0952                                   | 12.5376 *                                  |
| JULHUM i              | 1.5687                     | 6.6829 *                   | 1.3114                                     | 6.8133 *                                   |
| JULHUMj               | ¡ 1.2005                   | 3.7281 *                   | ¡ 1.4645                                   | 6.9399 *                                   |
| MSTOCKS i             | 0.4181                     | 5.3817 *                   | 0.0528                                     | 0.8831                                     |
| HHSIZE i              | ¡ 1.6024                   | 4.9143 *                   | 1.4161                                     | 5.3139 *                                   |
| DENSITY j             | ¡ 0.5269                   | 10.0113 *                  | 0.0355                                     | 0.9000                                     |
| ALRA i                | ¡ 0.4173                   | 6.0990 *                   | 0.0022                                     | 0.0431                                     |
| RURALI j              | 1.6667                     | 10.5762 *                  | ¡ 0.0308                                   | 0.2133                                     |
| GDPA i                | ¡ 0.3515                   | 9.3057 *                   | ¡ 0.0717                                   | 2.4243 *                                   |
| E3S j                 | 1.1014                     | 7.4150 *                   | 1.2897                                     | 10.3198 *                                  |
| EGDP i                | ¡ 0.4587                   | 8.1405 *                   | ¡ 0.3349                                   | 7.0138 *                                   |
| EGDP j                | 0.5768                     | 12.0243 *                  | 0.2814                                     | 7.1525 *                                   |
| GDPI i                | ¡ 0.6526                   | 2.4146 *                   | 0.6222                                     | 2.8889 *                                   |
| Eigenvector selection | -                          |                            | 46 eigenvectors used                       |                                            |
| R 2 (logged M )       | 0.8600                     |                            | 0.9391                                     |                                            |
| R 2 (unlogged M )     | 0.8958                     |                            | 0.9743                                     |                                            |
| Residual deviance     | 26,501,535                 |                            | 8,298,926                                  |                                            |
| Degree of freedom     | 913                        |                            | 867                                        |                                            |
| Log-likelihood        | ¡ 13,256,102               |                            | ¡ 41,547,978                               |                                            |
| Dispersion            | 29,027                     |                            | 9,572                                      |                                            |
| Moran's I             | 0.1182                     |                            | ¡ 0.0907                                   |                                            |

Note: t values are adjusted for overdispersion.

* Significant parameter at 0.05 level.

procedure in SPSS (Version 22). No multicollinearity is detected according to both measures (Stern 2008).

Table 2 shows the estimated parameters of the unfiltered Poisson model and network spatially filtered Poisson model for the period between 2005 and 2010. In the unfiltered Poisson model, all variables are significant at the 0.05 level. Some 86.0 percent of the variation of the logged migration flow and 89.6 percent of the variation of the migration flow are explained by the model. With one exception, the signs of parameters indicate expected positive or negative effects on migration. Average household size at origin (HHSIZE i ) has a negative effect on migration, different from the expected positive impact. Moran's I has a value of 0.1182.

In the network spatially filtered Poisson model, twelve variables and forty-six eigenvectors are significant at the 0.05 level. Some 93.9 percent of the variation of the logged migration flow and 97.4 percent of the variation of the migration flow are explained by the model, which are much better than those of the unfiltered Poisson model. Moran's I is reduced from

0.1182 to ¡ 0.0907. The use of spatial filters has reduced the extent of spatial autocorrelation in the Poisson migration model. Among twelve significant variables in the model, seven variables are more significant with larger T values than those in the unfiltered Poisson model. The model performance has also been improved partly because the model has been specified correctly and partly because the model includes fortysix additional variables (i.e., eigenvectors).

In the model, the share of population born out of the province in 2000 at origin (MSTOCKS i ), the population density in 2005 at destination (DENSITY j ), the arable land per rural agricultural employee in 2005 at origin (ALRA i ), and the rural income per capita in 2005 at destination (RURALI j ) are no longer significant. With one exception, the signs of parameters indicate expected positive or negative effects on migration. Average household size at origin (HHSIZE i ) has an expected positive effect on migration, which is different from the unexpected negative effect on migration in the unfiltered Poisson model. Annual GDP growth

rate over the period between 2001 and 2005 at origin GDPI i has a positive effect on migration, which is different from the expected negative effect on migration. One explanation is that the regions with high GDP growth rate in the previous period might have attracted many migrants and thus more migrants would migrate from such regions in the current period, 2005 to 2010.

In the network spatially filtered Poisson model, the absolute distance parameter is smaller than that of the unfiltered Poisson model, meaning that the estimated distance decay effect is smaller when the spatial autocorrelation is accounted for. The parameter of the population at origin is very stable with a similar value. It is over one, meaning that regions with larger populations send out more migrants. The parameter of the population at destination is bigger than that of the unfiltered Poisson model, meaning that the population size effect is much clearer when the spatial autocorrelation is accounted for. Its value is still less than one, however, meaning that regions with smaller populations attract more migrants proportionally if other things are equal.

In the order of the importance to migration based on the t value, the following variables are very important in the regional migration in China in the period between 2005 and 2010: the population at origin, distance, population at destination, temperature severity index in 2005 at destination, share of tertiary sector employment in 2005 at destination, and export as percentage of GDP in 2005 at destination and origin.

Table 3. Migration factors of observed and estimated migration flows in China, 2005-2010

| Factors             | N                   | Minimum             | Maximum             | M                   | SD                  |
|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Observed migration  | Observed migration  | Observed migration  | Observed migration  | Observed migration  | Observed migration  |
| M ij                | 930                 | 111.00              | 3,354,452.00        | 65,728.93           | 219,848.27          |
| K                   | 1                   | 15,276              | 15,276              | 15,276              | 0                   |
| P i                 | 31                  | 0.08                | 5.37                | 1.45                | 1.24                |
| Q j                 | 31                  | 0.07                | 8.78                | 1.66                | 1.96                |
| G ij                | 930                 | 0.18                | 29.15               | 1.59                | 2.34                |
| Estimated migration | Estimated migration | Estimated migration | Estimated migration | Estimated migration | Estimated migration |
| M ij                | 930                 | 159.33              | 3,217,718.11        | 65,728.93           | 203,855.96          |
| K                   | 1                   | 15,092              | 15,092              | 15,092              | 0                   |
| P i                 | 31                  | 0.15                | 6.46                | 1.48                | 1.35                |
| Q j                 | 31                  | 0.11                | 11.61               | 1.75                | 2.37                |
| G ij                | 930                 | 0.14                | 26.88               | 1.59                | 2.16                |

## Modeling Error Analysis

Estimated migration flows can be calculated using the parameters of the network spatially filtered Poisson model in Table 2. Four migration factors can be calculated for both observed and estimated migration matrixes according to the method described in the previous section. Table 3 shows the main results. For example, the constant K is 15,276 and 15,092, respectively, based on observed and estimated migration matrixes for 2005 to 2010 in China.

Figure 1 shows the attractiveness of observed migration flow and estimated migration flow by provincial

Figure 1. Attractiveness of observed migration flow and estimated migration flow based on the network spatially filtered Poisson model in China, 2005-2010. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 2. Provincial regions in eastern, central, and western zones of China.

<!-- image -->

regions in China in the period between 2005 and 2010. Figure 2 shows the thirty-one provincial regions in China. Five regions-Guangdong, Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Shanghai, and Beijing-had the highest attractiveness in China in the period between 2005 and 2010. Figure 3 shows the emissiveness of observed migration flow and estimated migration flow by provincial regions in China between 2005 and 2010. Four

Figure 3. Emissiveness of observed migration flow and estimated migration flow based on the network spatially filtered Poisson model in China, 2005-2010. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Table 4. Relative error as percentage of observed migration flow by factors of the network spatially filtered Poisson model, 2005-2010 (%)

| Factors                         |   N | Minimum   | Maximum      |        SD | Arithmetic mean error   | Weighted mean error   | Absolute mean error   | RMSE   |
|---------------------------------|-----|-----------|--------------|-----------|-------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|--------|
| M ij (Observed, absolute value) | 930 | 111.00    | 33,54,452.00 | 219848    | 65,728.93               | N/A                   | N/A                   | N/A    |
| Relative error of M ij (%)      | 930 | ¡ 85.71   | 1,656.82     |     89.61 | 17.25                   | 0.00                  | 27.29                 | 39.83  |
| K                               | 930 | ¡ 1.20    | ¡ 1.20       |      0    | ¡ 1.20                  | ¡ 1.20                | 1.20                  | 1.20   |
| P i                             | 930 | ¡ 53.56   | 79.65        |     25.65 | 3.12                    | 4.82                  | 14.60                 | 21.13  |
| Q j                             | 930 | ¡ 35.24   | 60.60        |     22.03 | 2.21                    | ¡ 1.77                | 15.57                 | 19.19  |
| G ij                            | 930 | ¡ 77.78   | 562.99       |     59.49 | 12.11                   | ¡ 6.82                | 31.55                 | 42.56  |
| O ij                            | 930 | ¡ 147.88  | 979.40       |     51.4  | 1.01                    | 4.97                  | 20.04                 | 26.64  |

Note

: RMSE D root mean squared error.

regions-Henan, Sichuan, Hubei, and Anhui-had the highest emissiveness in China in the same period. The correlation coefficients between emissiveness Pi , attractiveness Q j , and spatial interaction effect Gij based on observed and estimated migration matrixes are 0.979, 0.984, and 0.768, respectively. They are all significant at the 0.01 level. Correlation coefficients for emissiveness Pi and attractiveness Qj are much greater than that for spatial interaction effect Fij .

Various components of migration errors can be calculated using Equations 11 through 15. Table 4 shows the relative errors as percentage of observed migration flow by factors between 2005 and 2010. Four statistical error means are presented, including arithmetic mean, weighted mean, weighted absolute mean of errors, and weighted root mean squared error (RMSE). Each flow error is treated equally in the calculation of the arithmetic mean error that is used in the previous research (Shen 2016). The same error of a small flow would have the same contribution to the arithmetic mean error as that of a large flow. The weighted mean error is weighted by migration flow so that a larger flow would have more impact on the weighted mean error. The total error would be equal to the sum of five components, and positive and negative errors could be canceled by each other in these two means. The weighted absolute mean error takes the weighted average of absolute errors. This measure and the weighted RMSE will prevent positive and negative errors from canceling each other and the total error would not be equal to the sum of five components.

In terms of the weighted absolute mean error, the overall relative error is 27.29 percent. The modeling error in spatial interaction effect Gij caused the largest error of observed migration, 31.55 percent. The

Table 5. Relative error of outmigration due to various errors in migration factors (%)

| Region         | K            | P i     | Q j     | G ij    | O ij    |
|----------------|--------------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| Eastern        |              |         |         |         |         |
| Beijing        | 21.16 ¡ 1.20 | ¡ 33.49 | 0.33    | 22.62   | ¡ 9.43  |
| Tianjin        | 32.05 ¡ 1.20 | 3.13    | ¡ 7.63  | 29.99   | 7.75    |
| Hebei          | 13.18 ¡ 1.20 | 26.33   | ¡ 11.82 | ¡ 9.18  | 9.04    |
| Liaoning       | 8.75 ¡ 1.20  | 18.51   | 2.18    | ¡ 4.89  | 5.85    |
| Shanghai       | 20.78 ¡ 1.20 | ¡ 15.15 | ¡ 14.10 | ¡ 7.90  | ¡ 17.58 |
| Jiangsu        | 10.17 ¡ 1.20 | ¡ 16.35 | 8.76    | 13.82   | ¡ 15.20 |
| Zhejiang       | 46.25 ¡ 1.20 | ¡ 11.76 | 7.81    | 69.17   | ¡ 17.77 |
| Fujian         | 12.20 ¡ 1.20 | ¡ 30.37 | 25.74   | 19.74   | ¡ 26.10 |
| Shandong       | 1.38 ¡ 1.20  | ¡ 7.94  | 0.21    | 9.16    | ¡ 1.61  |
| Guangdong      | 6.88 ¡ 1.20  | 13.36   | 32.16   | ¡ 17.12 | ¡ 34.08 |
| Hainan         | 10.53 ¡ 1.20 | ¡ 4.70  | ¡ 2.30  | 8.45    | 10.27   |
| Central        |              |         |         |         |         |
| Shanxi         | 4.12 ¡ 1.20  | 4.06    | 9.63    | ¡ 5.98  | ¡ 10.63 |
| Jilin          | 22.49 ¡ 1.20 | 29.92   | ¡ 17.97 | ¡ 4.33  | 16.07   |
| Heilongjiang   | 4.32 ¡ 1.20  | 2.91    | ¡ 11.79 | ¡ 3.45  | 9.21    |
| Anhui          | 5.88 ¡ 1.20  | ¡ 13.62 | ¡ 20.20 | 5.91    | 23.23   |
| Jiangxi        | 6.97 ¡ 1.20  | 13.44   | 1.67    | ¡ 26.53 | 5.65    |
| Henan          | 1.81 ¡ 1.20  | 20.43   | 1.54    | ¡ 21.51 | ¡ 1.07  |
| Hubei          | 8.26 ¡ 1.20  | ¡ 2.81  | 15.39   | 0.56    | ¡ 3.67  |
| Hunan          | 3.33 ¡ 1.20  | 2.75    | 10.46   | ¡ 14.61 | 5.94    |
| Western        |              |         |         |         |         |
| Inner Mongolia | 5.10 ¡ 1.20  | ¡ 14.09 | ¡ 22.14 | 10.95   | 21.39   |
| Guangxi        | 6.64 ¡ 1.20  | 65.73   | ¡ 35.24 | ¡ 53.01 | 17.08   |
| Chongqing      | 13.97 ¡ 1.20 | ¡ 20.18 | ¡ 19.91 | ¡ 0.40  | 27.73   |
| Sichuan        | 0.58 ¡ 1.20  | ¡ 1.18  | ¡ 27.27 | ¡ 6.29  | 36.52   |
| Guizhou        | 0.36 ¡ 1.20  | 1.38    | 33.39   | ¡ 11.38 | ¡ 21.83 |
| Yunnan         | 13.65 ¡ 1.20 | 26.00   | 15.56   | ¡ 15.77 | ¡ 10.94 |
| Tibet          | 75.58 ¡ 1.20 | 79.65   | 60.60   | ¡ 3.39  | ¡ 60.08 |
| Shaanxi        | 4.17 ¡ 1.20  | 2.16    | ¡ 7.23  | ¡ 5.06  | 15.50   |
| Gansu          | 0.90 ¡ 1.20  | 12.00   | 14.66   | ¡ 12.58 | ¡ 13.79 |
| Qinghai        | 27.95 ¡ 1.20 | ¡ 1.11  | ¡ 13.09 | 24.20   | 19.14   |
| Ningxia        | 4.70 ¡ 1.20  | 1.13    | ¡ 15.81 | ¡ 3.06  | 14.24   |
| Xinjiang       | 52.66 ¡ 1.20 | ¡ 53.56 | 55.05   | ¡ 0.63  | ¡ 52.32 |

Note : In terms of the weighted absolute mean error.

modeling errors in emissiveness Pi and attractiveness Qj caused 14.60 percent and 15.57 percent of the error in observed migration, respectively. The modeling error in the constant K caused the smallest error of observed migration, 1.20 percent. The surplus compounding error Oij is 20.04 percent, which is due to the combined effect of the preceding errors. It is clear that the spatial interaction effect caused the largest modeling error in migration modeling. The result is similar in terms of weighted RMSE. The error contribution of the spatial interaction effect is more outstanding in terms of the arithmetic mean error and slightly less outstanding in terms of the weighted absolute mean error. It is noted that the overall weighted absolute mean error is 0 percent, which is a property of

Table 6. Relative error of inmigration due to various errors in migration factors (%)

| Region         | Total   | K        | P i    | Q j     | G ij    | O ij    |
|----------------|---------|----------|--------|---------|---------|---------|
| Eastern        |         |          |        |         |         |         |
| Beijing        | 1.79    | ¡ 1.20   | 7.95   | ¡ 3.61  | ¡ 3.48  | 2.13    |
| Tianjin        | ¡ 15.45 | ¡ 1.20   | 7.02   | ¡ 3.81  | ¡ 10.98 | ¡ 6.48  |
| Hebei          | 5.57    | ¡ 1.20   | 0.21   | ¡ 3.09  | 20.13   | ¡ 10.48 |
| Liaoning       | 3.60    | ¡ 1.20   | 4.76   | ¡ 9.05  | ¡ 2.98  | 12.07   |
| Shanghai       | ¡ 0.76  | ¡ 1.20   | ¡ 4.31 | ¡ 2.73  | 22.96   | ¡ 15.48 |
| Jiangsu        | 4.76    | ¡ 1.20   | ¡ 1.50 | ¡ 5.55  | 0.73    | 12.27   |
| Zhejiang       | ¡ 0.01  | ¡ 1.20   | 1.47   | 0.61    | ¡ 4.78  | 3.89    |
| Fujian         | 5.27    | ¡ 1.20   | 3.53   | 0.28    | ¡ 18.69 | 21.36   |
| Shandong       | ¡ 0.50  | ¡ 1.20   | 5.37   | ¡ 3.43  | ¡ 4.36  | 3.12    |
| Guangdong      | ¡ 1.00  | ¡ 1.20   | 13.08  | ¡ 3.64  | ¡ 28.24 | 18.98   |
| Hainan         | 40.47   | ¡ 1.20   | 7.62   | 1.47    | 32.99   | ¡ 0.41  |
| Central        |         |          |        |         |         |         |
| Shanxi         | 4.84    | ¡ 1.20   | 5.36   | ¡ 3.61  | ¡ 8.85  | 13.14   |
| Jilin          | 28.12   | ¡ 1.20   | 1.92   | ¡ 3.82  | 51.87   | ¡ 20.65 |
| Heilongjiang   | 19.34   | ¡ 1.20   | 6.32   | ¡ 4.69  | 22.24   | ¡ 3.33  |
| Anhui          | ¡ 18.74 | ¡ 1.20   | ¡ 3.55 | 4.03    | 5.50    | ¡ 23.52 |
| Jiangxi        | 10.01   | ¡ 1.20   | 0.11   | 9.71    | 10.51   | ¡ 9.13  |
| Henan          | 3.17    | 1.20     | ¡ 0.68 | 1.79    | 3.79    | ¡ 0.54  |
| Hubei          | 14.52   | ¡ ¡ 1.20 | 2.98   | 2.69    | ¡ 1.84  | 11.89   |
| Hunan          | 8.79    | ¡ 1.20   | 6.57   | 11.12   | ¡ 4.85  | ¡ 2.85  |
| Western        |         |          |        |         |         |         |
| Inner Mongolia | ¡ 22.86 | ¡ 1.20   | 6.84   | ¡ 2.27  | ¡ 5.07  | ¡ 21.16 |
| Guangxi        | ¡ 25.15 | ¡ 1.20   | 3.56   | 11.99   | 15.15   | ¡ 54.64 |
| Chongqing      | ¡ 16.31 | ¡ 1.20   | 0.91   | ¡ 3.75  | 3.42    | ¡ 15.69 |
| Sichuan        | ¡ 25.67 | ¡ 1.20   | 0.31   | 7.07    | 8.26    | ¡ 40.11 |
| Guizhou        | 17.87   | ¡ 1.20   | 1.40   | 0.99    | ¡ 11.21 | 27.89   |
| Yunnan         | 4.16    | ¡ 1.20   | 0.08   | ¡ 0.60  | ¡ 8.42  | 14.31   |
| Tibet          | 12.51   | ¡ 1.20   | 0.56   | ¡ 11.73 | ¡ 28.64 | 53.52   |
| Shaanxi        | 4.13    | ¡ 1.20   | 3.11   | 1.83    | 11.52   | ¡ 11.14 |
| Gansu          | 24.01   | ¡ 1.20   | 0.56   | ¡ 0.41  | 9.91    | 15.15   |
| Qinghai        | 4.58    | ¡ 1.20   | 5.40   | 2.34    | 17.99   | ¡ 19.95 |
| Ningxia        | ¡ 24.89 | ¡ 1.20   | 4.57   | 1.24    | ¡ 13.64 | ¡ 15.87 |
| Xinjiang       | 3.24    | ¡ 1.20   | 5.28   | ¡ 2.52  | ¡ 34.45 | 36.14   |

Note : In terms of the weighted absolute mean error.

the Poisson migration model. The weighted absolute mean error is used in the further analysis of migration errors by region in Tables 5 and 6 as the total error is equal to the sum of five components.

Tables 5 and 6 present details on how relative errors of outmigration and inmigration have been caused by various errors in the modeling of migration factors. For example, Zhejiang had a relative error of outmigration of 46.25 percent. Of this, 69.17 percent was caused by the error in the spatial interaction factor and ¡ 1.20 percent, ¡ 11.76 percent, 7.81 percent, and ¡ 17.77 percent were caused by errors in the constant K , emissiveness Pi , attractiveness Qj , and surplus compounding error Oij , respectively. Hainan had a relative error of outmigration of 40.47 percent: 32.99 percent was caused by the error in the spatial interaction factor and ¡ 1.20 percent, 7.62 percent, 1.47 percent, and ¡ 0.41 percent were caused by errors in the constant K , emissiveness Pi , attractiveness Qj , and surplus compounding error Oij , respectively.

## Conclusion

There has been much methodological advancement in regional migration modeling, but previous studies have focused on the modeling of the whole migration process and are not able to identify the bottlenecks that prevent the achievement of good model performance. Traditional migration modeling estimates all parameters at the same time and reports the overall performance of the migration model and the significance of individual variables. A lengthy debate in the 1970s focused on the problems of autocorrelation in the mass terms and the map pattern effect in the distance decay parameters (Johnston 1973; Cliff, Martin, and Ord 1974; Sheppard 1979; Fotheringham 1981). The spatial interaction effect remains a key classical question in migration and geographical studies. It is still unclear whether the spatial interaction effect can be modeled accurately, and this issue is addressed by this article.

This article has used a new method to determine whether modeling errors are due to the poor performance of origin, destination variables, or poor modeling of spatial interaction. There are three steps in the error analysis. The first step is the estimation of a migration model for a specific regional migration system. Two sets of migration flows can be obtained. The second step decomposes each set of migration flows into the relative emissiveness,

attractiveness, and level of interaction between pairs of regions according to Rogers et al. (2002). In the third step, the relative emissiveness, attractiveness, and level of interaction based on observed and estimated migration flows can be compared to calculate the modeling error. The results of this analysis reveal which part of the migration process can be modeled more accurately and which part is the most difficult to model.

Using regional migration of China in the period between 2005 and 2010 as a case study, this article extends the previous research in modeling error analysis by using a new network spatially filtered migration Poisson model (Shen 2016). The model is estimated for the period between 2005 and 2010. It performs better and produces a new estimation of migration modeling errors. Some 93.9 percent of the variation of the logged migration flow and 97.4 percent of the variation of the migration flow are explained by the network spatially filtered Poisson migration model, which are much better estimates than those of the unfiltered Poisson model. The use of spatial filters has reduced the extent of spatial autocorrelation in the Poisson migration model and has also improved the model performance.

The arithmetic mean error is used in the previous research (Shen 2016). Each flow error is treated equally in the calculation of the arithmetic mean error; thus, positive and negative errors would not be canceled out. Three more statistics of error means are used in this article, including weighted mean, weighted absolute mean of errors, and weighted RMSE, for better assessment of modeling error.

Error analysis shows that the modeling errors of the constant K , relative emissiveness, and attractiveness caused weighted absolute mean errors of 1.20 percent, 14.60 percent, and 15.57 percent in migration flows, respectively. The spatial interaction caused the greatest weighted absolute mean error of 31.55 percent in migration flows. It is noted that the relative emissiveness and attractiveness are explained by eleven variables in the migration model, whereas the spatial interaction is only explained by one distance variable. It is reasonable to see a large modeling error in the spatial interaction effect. Overall, the spatial interaction effect remains the most difficult to model in migration modeling. The findings of this research contribute to a better understanding of the migration process and point to directions to improve migration modeling. More efforts should be made to improve the approach to model the effect of spatial interaction, including better measurement and more sophisticated function of distance. Future work should seek a better model for modeling the interaction effect, moving beyond one simple distance variable to incorporate alternative determinants. Another line of future research is to analyze the modeling error of constraint models; that is, origin constraint model, destination constraint model, and double constraint model. Effort is needed to calibrate such 'constrained' network spatially filtered Poisson migration models (Tiefelsdorf and Boots 1995).

## Acknowledgements

Thanks are due to Mei-Po Kwan, the editor of the Annals of the American Association of Geographers , and two anonymous reviewers for their constructive and very helpful comments.

## Funding

The work described in this article was supported by a research grant from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong SAR (RGC Project No. CUHK451912).

## References

- Alonso, W. 1978. A theory of movement. In Human settlement systems: International perspectives on structure, change and public policy , ed. N. M. Hansen, 197-211. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
- Boyle, P. J., and R. Flowerdew. 1997. Improving distance estimates between areal units in migration models. Geographical Analysis 29 (2): 93-107.
- Cai, F., and D. Wang. 2003. Migration as marketization: What can we learn from China's 2000 census data? China Review 3 (2): 73-93.
- Champion, A., G. Bramley, S. Fotheringham, J. Macgill, and P. Rees. 2003. A migration modelling system to support government decision-making. In Planning support systems in practice , ed. S. Geertman and J. Stillwell, 269-90. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
- Chun, Y. 2008. Modeling network autocorrelation within migration flows by eigenvector spatial filtering. Journal of Geographical Systems 10 (4): 317-44.
- Chun, Y., and D. A. Griffith. 2011. Modeling network autocorrelation in space-time migration flow data: An eigenvector spatial filtering approach. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 101 (3): 523-36.
- Clark, W. A. V., and Y. Huang. 2006. Balancing move and work: Women's labor market exits and entrances after migration. Population Space and Place 12:31-44.

- Clark, W. A. V., and V. Ledwith. 2006. Mobility, housing stress and neighborhood contexts: Evidence from Los Angeles. Environment and Planning A 38:1077-93.
- Cliff, A. D., R. L. Martin, and J. K. Ord. 1974. Evaluating the friction of distance parameter in gravity models. Regional Studies 8:281-86.
- Congdon, P. 1991. An application of general linear modelling to migration in London and south east England. In Migration models: Macro and micro approaches , ed. J. C. H. Stillwell and P. Congdon, 113-37. London: Belhaven.
- Ding, J., Z. Liu, D. Cheng, J. Liu, and J. Zou. 2005. Areal differentiation of inter-provincial migration in China and characteristics of flow field. Acta Geographica Sinica 60 (1): 106-14.
- Fan, C. C. 2005a. Interprovincial migration, population redistribution, and regional development in China: 1990 and 2000 census comparisons. The Professional Geographer 57 (2): 295-311.
- ---. 2005b. Modeling interprovincial migration in China, 1985-2000. Eurasian Geography and Economics 46 (3): 165-84.
- ---.2008. China on the move: Migration, the state, and the household . London and New York: Routledge.
- ---. 2009. Flexible work, flexible household: Labor migration and rural families. In China, work and organizations in China after thirty years of transition , ed. L. A. Keister, 381-412. Bingley, UK: Emerald Press.
- Fielding, T. 2010. Inter-regional migration in a transition economy: The case of China. Working Paper No. 61, Sussex Centre for Migration Research, University of Sussex, UK.
- Fischer, M., and D. A. Griffith. 2008. Modelling spatial autocorrelation in spatial interaction data: An application to patent citation data in the European Union. Journal of Regional Science 48 (5): 969-89.
- Flowerdew, R., and M. Aitkin. 1982. A method of fitting the gravity model based on the Poisson distribution. Journal of Regional Science 22:191-202.
- Fotheringham, A. S. 1981. Spatial structure and distancedecay parameters. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 71:425-36.
- ---.1991. Migration and spatial structure: The development of the competing destinations model. In Migration models: Macro and micro approaches , ed. J. Stillwell and P. Congdon, 57-72. London: Belhaven.
- Fu, Y., and S. A. Gabriel. 2012. Labor migration, human capital agglomeration and regional development in China. Regional Science and Urban Economics 42:473-84.
- Griffith, D. A. 2007. Spatial structure and spatial interaction: 25 years later. The Review of Regional Studies 37 (1): 28-38.
- Hare, D. 1999. 'Push' versus 'pull' factors in migration outflows and returns: Determinants of migration status and spell duration among China's rural population. Journal of Development Studies 35 (3): 45-72.
- He, C., and P. Gober. 2003. Gendering interprovincial migration in China. The International Migration Review 37 (4): 1220-51.
- He, J., and J. Pooler. 2002. The regional concentration of China's interprovincial migration flows, 1982-90. Population and Environment 24 (2): 149-82.
- Henry, S., P. Boyle, and E. F. Lambin. 2003. Modelling inter-provincial migration in Burkina Faso, West
- Africa: The role of sociodemographic and environmental factors. Applied Geography 23:115-36.
- Hua, C., and F. Porell. 1979. A critical review of the development of the gravity model. International Regional Science Review 4 (2): 97-126.
- Isserman, A. M. 1985. Economic-demographic modelling with endogenously determined birth and migration rates: Theory and prospects. Environment and Planning A 17:25-45.
- Johnston, R. J. 1973. On frictions of distance and regression coefficients. Area 5:187-91.
- Li, S. 2004. Population migration and urbanization in China: A comparative analysis of the 1990 population census and the 1995 national one percent sample population survey. International Migration Review 38 (2): 655-85.
- Liang, Z., Y. P. Chen, and Y. M. Gu. 2002. Rural industrialisation and internal migration in China. Urban Studies 39 (12): 2175-87.
- Liang, Z., and Z. Ma. 2004. China's floating population: New evidence from the 2000 census. Population and Development Review 30 (3): 467-88.
- Liang, Z., and M. J. White. 1997. Market transition, government policies, and interprovincial migration in China: 1983-1988. Economic Development and Cultural Change 45:321-36.
- Liu, Y., and J. Shen. 2014. Jobs or amenities? Location choices of interprovincial skilled migrants in China, 2000-2005. Population, Space and Place 20:592-605.
- Lowry, I. 1966. Migration and metropolitan growth: Two analytical reports . San Francisco: Chandler.
- Mueser, P. 1989. The spatial structure of migration: An analysis of flows between states in the USA over three decades. Regional Studies 23 (3): 185-200.
- Nakaya, T. 2001. Local spatial interaction modelling based on the geographically weighted regression approach. GeoJournal 53:347-58.
- Plane, D. A. 1987. The geographic components of change in a migration system. Geographical Analysis 19 (4): 283-99.
- Poncet, S. 2006. Provincial migration dynamics in China: Borders, costs and economic motivations. Regional Science and Urban Economics 36 (3): 385-98.
- Population Census Office of State Council and Department of Population and Employment Statistics. 2012. Tabulations on the 2010 population census of the People's Republic of China. Vol. 3 . Beijing: China Statistical Press.
- Population Census Office of State Council and Department of Population Statistics. 1993. Tabulations on the 1990 population census of the People's Republic of China, Vol. 4 . Beijing: China Statistical Press.
- Population Census Office of State Council and Department of Population, Social, Science, and Technology Statistics. 2002. Tabulations on the 2000 population census of the People's Republic of China, Vol. 3 . Beijing: China Statistical Press.
- Rees, P. H., A. S. Fotheringham, and A. G. Champion. 2004. Modelling migration for policy analysis. In Applied GIS and spatial analysis , ed. J. Stillwell and G. Clarke, 259-96. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
- Rees, P., J. Stillwell, A. Convey, and M. Kupiszewski, eds. 1996. Population migration in the European Union . Chichester, UK: Wiley.

- Rogers, A., F. Willekens, J. Little, and J. Raymer. 2002. Describing migration spatial structure. Papers in Regional Science 81:29-48.
- Rozelle, S., L. Guo, M. Shen, A. Hughart, and J. Giles. 1999. Leaving China's farms: Survey results of new paths and remaining hurdles to rural migration. The China Quarterly 158:367-93.
- Shen, J. 1999. Modelling regional migration in China: Estimation and decomposition. Environment and Planning A 31:1223-38.
- ---. 2002. A study of the temporary population in Chinese cities. Habitat International 26 (3): 363-77.
- ---. 2012. Changing patterns and determinants of inter-provincial migration in China 1985-2000. Population, Space and Place 18:384-402.
- ---. 2015. Explaining interregional migration changes in China, 1985-2000, using a decomposition approach. Regional Studies 49 (7): 1176-92.
- ---. 2016. Modelling interregional migration in China in 2005-2010: The roles of regional attributes and spatial interaction effect in modelling error. Population, Space and Place . doi:10.1002/psp.2014
- Shen, J., and N. A. Spence. 1996. Modelling urban-rural population growth in China. Environment and Planning A 28:1417-44.
- Sheppard, E. S. 1979. Gravity parameter estimation. Geographical Analysis 11:120-32.
- SPSS, Version 22. Armonk, NY: IBM.
- Stern, L. D. 2008. A visual approach to SPSS for Windows: A guide to SPSS 15.0 . Boston: Pearson Education.
- Stillwell, J. 2005. Inter-regional migration modelling: A review and assessment. Paper prepared for the 45th Congress of the European Regional Science Association, The Netherlands.
- Stillwell, J., and P. Congdon, eds. 1991. Migration models: Macro and micro approaches . London: Belhaven.
- Stillwell, J., D. Konstantinos, B. Martin, and N. Lomax. 2014. The IMAGE studio: A tool for internal migration analysis and modelling. Applied Spatial Analysis and Policy 7 (1): 5-23.
- Sun, M., and C. C. Fan. 2011. China's permanent and temporary migrants: Differentials and changes, 1990-2000. The Professional Geographer 63 (1): 92-112.
- Tiefelsdorf, M., and B. Boots. 1995. The specification of constrained interaction models using SPSS's loglinear procedure. Geographical Systems 2:21-38.
- Wei, Y. 1997. Interegional migration in socialist countries: The case of China. GeoJournal 41:205-14.
- Willekens, F. 1983. Log-linear modelling of spatial interaction. Papers of the Regional Science Association 52:187-205.
- Wilson, A. G. 1967. A statistical theory of spatial distribution models. Transportation Research 1:253-69.
- ---. 1970. Entropy in urban and regional modelling . London: Pion.
- Yang, H. 2000. A comparative analysis of China's permanent and temporary migration during the reform period. International Journal of Social Economics 27 (3): 173-93.
- Zhao, Y. 1999. Labor migration and earnings differences: The case of rural China. Economic Development and Cultural Change 47 (4): 767-82.
- Zhu, Y. 2003. The floating population's household strategy and the migration's role in China's regional development and integration. International Journal of Population Geography 9 (6): 485-502.
- Zhu, Y., and W. Chen. 2010. The settlement intention of China's floating population in the cities: Recent changes and multifaceted individual-level determinants. Population, Space and Place 16 (4): 253-67.
- Zipf, G. K. 1946. The P1P2/D hypothesis: On intercity movement of persons. American Sociological Review 11:677-86.

JIANFA SHEN is Professor and Chairperson of the Department of Geography and Resource Management and Director of Research Centre for Urban and Regional Development, Hong Kong Institute of Asia-Pacific Studies, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong. E-mail: jianfa@cuhk.edu.hk. His research interests focus on migration analysis and modeling, urban and regional development, urban competitiveness, and governance in China.