## Universal and Specific Features of Urbanization in Estonia under Socialism:  The Empirical Evidence of the Sources of Urban and Rural Population Growth*

## Tiit Tammaru

University of T artu

Analysts of urbanization in socialist countries have often taken firm positions on the nature of urbanization under this particular social context, defending either universalistic or specific standpoints. It has been a remarkable contribution to the understanding of urbanization under central planning through formulating some of the key arguments. The issues at stake have not been resolved, however, and more empirical work would be welcome. An explorative approach is therefore taken in the current article, with a view to finding additional empirical evidence for or against the diverse set of arguments previously made. It focuses on the sources of urban and rural population growth in Estonia during the Soviet period (1945-1991). The analysis helps us to better understand how different causes intermingled to produce the process of urban and rural population change, which had some common features that hold true in crosscountry comparisons and some specific ones that Estonia offers to the mosaic of world urbanization. Key Words: central planning, Estonia, specific, universal, urbanization.

## Introduction

nalysts of urbanization in socialist countries have  often  taken  firm  positions  on  the nature of urbanization in this particular social context, defending either universalistic or specific  standpoints.  This  analysis  has  made  a remarkable contribution to the understanding of urbanization in socialist countries by formulating  some  of  the  key  arguments.  Enyedi (1996) argues that the process of urbanization is similar under different social contexts. What could these universal features upon which this argument is based be? A

Probably the most common framework is provided by the theory of mobility transition (Zelinsky  1971).  Rural-to-urban  migration  increases considerably with the start of demographic transition and industrialization.  Industrializationor, more broadly, modernization-and urbanization go hand in hand (Zelinsky 1971, 222; Lewis and Rowland 1979, 2-10; Mendels 1981). This is primarily due to economic (Lewis and Rowland 1979, 5), or more broadly productionist (Geyer 1996, 52-53), motives of migration. Because of the typical age-composition of migrant populations, migration flows reshape the age structure of both sending (rural) and receiving (urban) populations (Pandit and Withers 1999). This in turn decreases the potential for both out-migration and natural increase in rural areas, and brings about  higher  natural  increase  in  urban  ones. However, at a certain point in time, the process of deconcentration replaces the process of population concentration. This takes the form first of suburbanization and later of counterurbanization, driven mainly by environmentalist considerations (Geyer and Kontuly 1996, 191-96).

According to  Enyedi  (1996,  103),  all  these features are part of the urbanization process in socialist  countries.  Others,  stressing  the  specific  character  of  urbanization  under  central planning, look at it differently. Most of the latter base their arguments on the phenomenon of shortage economy that is produced by central  planning.  The  existence  of  a  shortage economy in the sense offered by Kornai (1992) leads  to  lower  levels  of  urbanization  as  compared  to  those  in  capitalist  countries,  a  phenomenon that has entered the literature under the  label  'underurbanization'  (Konrád  and Szelényi  1974,  1977;  Murray  and  Szelényi 1984; Szelényi 1996). One example of underurbanization is the inefficient socialist economic system's need for more labor in rural areas for agricultural production.

The current article aims to analyze sources of  urban  and  rural  population  change  in  the

* I would like to thank Orjan Sjoberg, Stockholm School of Economics, and the anonymous referees for the comments on the paper. However, I am responsible for the article's final content.

light  of  the  diverging  views  on  urbanization under central planning outlined above. It focuses on four main research questions. First, how common or specific were the sources of urban and rural population growth in one of the republics of the former Soviet Union, Estonia?  Second,  how  could  central  planning  in general  and  the  ideological  context  in  the former Soviet Union in particular have penetrated the process of urban and rural population growth? Third, did this bring along specific  patterns  of  urban  and  rural  population growth, and related urbanization? Finally, if so, what is  the  impact  of  Soviet  urbanization  on postsocialist urbanization?

The article addresses these questions as follows.  In  the  second  part,  I  introduce  data sources used in the current article. In the third section, I discuss the overall process of urbanization in Estonia. The fourth and central section contains analyses of sources of urban and rural  population  change.  In  the  penultimate section, I discuss the impact of Soviet legacy on today's urbanization in Estonia and other Republics of the former Soviet Union. Finally, I draw out the conclusions about common and specific  features  of  urbanization  in  Estonia under socialism.

## Data Sources

Most of the data for the article has been collected from the published but poorly circulated statistical publications of Eesti Statistikaamet, the  Estonian  Statistical  Office  (ESO).  The poor circulation is due to the well-known fact that during the Soviet time, much of the population  statistics  was  available  only  for  official

Figure 1 Urbanization in Estonia between 1782 and 1991. Source: Estonian Statistical Office.

use, and statistical compilations, analyses, and other output were directly handed to relevant institutions. T oday, these publications are available  through  the  ESO  and  in  major  libraries and universities. In spite of the fact that some of the key data series were republished in the 1990s (see, e.g., ESO 1990, 1996, 1997), much is still to be done in this field. T oday, data on the following areas can be derived from various ESO sources: population numbers (ESO 1975, 1978, 1982b, 1987a, 1997); vital statistics (ESO 1975, 1978, 1982a, 1982b, 1987a, 1987b, 1996);  age  composition  of  population  (ESO 1975,  1982b,  1987a,  1995);  and  migration statistics  (republished  in  ESO  1996).  In  the following  text,  these  sources  are  not  cited separately.  Rather,  a  common  name,  Estonian Statistical Office, is used unless otherwise specified.

## Urbanization in Estonia until the End of Socialism

The first urbanization drive in Estonia started in the mid-nineteenth century with the beginning of industrialization in the Russian Empire, of which Estonia was then part (Figure 1; see also Kant 1933, 71-72; Palli 1996, 22). Urban population growth was based both on rural-tourban migration and immigration from Russia. The  percentage  of  Estonia's  total  population that was urban also increased due to considerable out-migration of rural population to Russia  (see  Kulu  1998).  Driven  by  these  factors, this percentage increased from 5-6 percent at the end of the eighteenth century to 20 percent by  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Rapid urban population growth continued until World

<!-- image -->

War I, primarily due to the military industrialization  of  T allinn,  the  capital  city  of  Estonia, where three enormous military shipyards were established  to  serve  the  needs  of  the  Russian Empire (Ainsaar 1997, 25).

World War I changed the geopolitical situation in Europe. As part of these realignments, Estonia succeeded in establishing its independence  in  1918.  Political  changes  and  related structural transformations across the economy, in which large-scale industry (producing mainly  for  Russian  market)  was  replaced  by agriculture,  forestry,  and  small-scale  industry (producing  mainly  for  local  market),  slowed down urbanization (see T ammaru 2000). As a result, Estonia was still rural at the beginning of World War II, with only a third of its total population residing in urban areas (T able 1).

World  War  II  and  related  political  agreements redistributed power in Europe yet again, with  Estonia  being  annexed  by  the  Soviet Union. Not only did Estonia's political status change during these turbulent years, but war losses had considerable consequences for postwar population development as well. However, both rural and urban areas lost approximately the same number of people during World War II. Thus, the percentage of Estonia's population  that  was  urban  remained  33  percent  in 1946.  This  forms  the  baseline  for  urbanization during the Soviet period (1945-1991). As had been the case during the industrialization drive  in  the  nineteenth  century  under  the Russian  Empire,  new  and  even  more  large-

Table 1 Population Dynamics in Estonia, 1940-1991

|                                | Rural Population   | Urban Population   | Total Population   |
|--------------------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| 1940                           | 750,000            | 370,000            | 1,120,000          |
| 1946                           | 625,000            | 310,000            | 935,000            |
| 1991                           | 445,000            | 1,120,000          | 1,565,000          |
| Change between 1940 and 1946 a | 83%                | 84%                | 83%                |
| Change between 1940 and 1991 a | 59%                | 303%               | 140%               |
| Change between 1946 and 1991 b | 71%                | 361%               | 167%               |
| Share in 1940                  | 67%                | 33%                | 100%               |
| Share in 1946                  | 67%                | 33%                | 100%               |
| Share in 1991                  | 29%                | 71%                | 100%               |

scale industrial investment programs began to have  an  impact  on  urbanization  in  Estonia. Despite the political changes and related suffering these produced, a fairly typical urbanization curve with three clearly distinguished phases can be identified: modest urbanization until  World  War  II,  quick  takeoff  and  rapid increase in the level of urbanization up to the 1970s, and slowdown of the process thereafter (Figure 1).

The main causes of this process were typical as  well.  Urbanization  was  closely  related  to industrialization  (Marksoo  1999,  82).  As  the process of industrialization slowed down in the 1970s, urbanization did so as well. Urbanization  bore  a  close  relation  to  demographic developments. The end of the demographic transition in the former Soviet Union in the 1960s brought about decreased out-migration potential for the rural population in the immigration hinterland of Estonia (mainly Russia, the Ukraine, and Belarus).

In conclusion, the overall process of urbanization in Estonia was quite typical with respect both  to  observed  patterns  and  to  identified main causes. As a result of this process, by the end  of  socialism  in  Estonia  in  1991,  fully  71 percent  of  the  country's  population  lived  in urban areas. However, processes that are similar at the surface can hide more than they reveal (Sjöberg  1991,  15).  We  should  not  take  the above line of reasoning, and the patterns upon which it is based, at face value. Rather, one way to  learn  about  the  processes  at  work  is  to decompose them into their constituent parts. I do this in the next section by turning to analyses of the sources of urban and rural population change in Estonia.

## Sources of Urban and Population Change

As is well known, three main factors influence urban  and  rural  population  growth:  administrative  changes,  net  migration,  and  natural increase. Since the quality of data has improved over the past four decades or so, and as sources of  urban  and  rural  population  growth  have changed over time, I have separated pre-1959 and post-1959 periods in the following analyses (Table  2).  Over  the  entire  time  period,  from 1946 to 1991, external migration was the most important source of urban population growth

Table 2 Evaluation of Components of Population Change between 1946 and 1991

|                              | Urban     | Rural     | Total     |
|------------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| 1946-1959                    |           |           |           |
| Population 1946              | 310,000   | 625,000   | 935,000   |
| Population 1959              | 675,000   | 520,000   | 1,195,000 |
| Change between 1946 and 1959 | + 365,000 | - 105,000 | + 260,000 |
| Administrative change        | + 40,000  | - 40,000  | 0         |
| Natural increase             | + 65,000  | - 5,000   | + 60,000  |
| Net migration                | + 265,000 | - 65,000  | + 200,000 |
| Including internal migration | + 120,000 | - 120,000 | 0         |
| Including external migration | + 145,000 | + 55,000  | + 200,000 |
| 1959-1991                    |           |           |           |
| Population 1959              | 675,000   | 520,000   | 1,195,000 |
| Population 1991              | 1,120,000 | 445,000   | 1,565,000 |
| Change between 1959 and 1991 | + 445,000 | - 75,000  | + 370,000 |
| Administrative change        | + 5,000   | - 5,000   | 0         |
| Natural increase             | + 185,000 | - 10,000  | + 175,000 |
| Net migration                | + 260,000 | - 65,000  | + 195,000 |
| Including internal migration | + 110,000 | - 110,000 | 0         |
| Including external migration | + 150,000 | + 45,000  | + 195,000 |

Note: Due to rounding, not all data rows sum exactly.

Sources:

Evaluation is based on Estonian Statistical Office; Sakkeus (1991); Kala (1992, 512); Tiit (1993a, 1993b); Tepp (1994,

12-16); Marksoo (1995, 186; 1996, 5; 1998).

in  Estonia  under  socialism:  it  added  about 295,000  inhabitants.  As  such,  Estonia  represents  a  typical  example  of  the  then-Soviet republics. The second most important source of such growth was natural increase (adding approximately 250,000 inhabitants), followed by internal net migration (230,000) and relocation of  population  due  to  administrative  changes (45,000)  followed  this.  However,  the  most important  source  of  urban  growth  changed over time, from external migration to natural increase. The major source of rural population loss  was  internal  net  migration,  which  was counterbalanced by positive net external migration (100,000).

By contrast, no major change in the sources of  rural  population growth occurred between the pre- and post-1959 periods. Only the negative  influence  of  administrative  changes  on rural  population  decreased  over  time.  These general figures suggest urban population change, which was much bigger than rural population change, generated  the  major  influence  on urbanization:  the  urban  population  increased almost four times, while rural population losses were less than a third. This is the most striking feature of Estonia's urbanization under socialism, hidden behind the fairly typical curve of its urbanization. It encourages us to take a closer look  at  factors  that  may  have  influenced  the growth of the urban and rural population.

## Administrative Changes

During the Soviet period, administrative changesprimarily  the  reclassification  of  settlements from  rural  to  urban  status-added  approximately 45,000 inhabitants to the urban population. This formed 6 percent of the urban population  increase  and  24  percent  of  the  rural population decrease. The major period of administrative changes fell within the immediate postwar  decades,  up  through  1963  (see  Kurs 1972). These changes were directly related to power  relations  in  the  former  Soviet  Union and  played  an  important  role  in  the  political management of the newly annexed country of Estonia  (Nõmmik,  Kurs,  and  Koorits  1969, 167). One of the aims of the new communist power  was  to  bring  political  management closer to localities, which had to help to suppress  grass-roots  movements  ( Järvesoo  1978, 134).  As  part  of  the  political  rhetoric,  the eleven counties inherited from the pre-Soviet period  were  considered  to  be  an  unsuitable base for building a socialist society in Estonia (Nõmmik, Kurs, and Koorits 1969, 170) and were  replaced  by  thirty-nine  smaller  units. This brought about the reclassification of many settlements-primarily those that became the centers of these newly established countiesfrom rural to urban ones. Additionally, many industrial settlements, mainly in resource-rich Northeast Estonia, were accorded urban status.

By  1945, Estonia contained forty-nine towns,  as  opposed  to  thirty-three  in  1940. Later, more settlements were shifted from rural to urban status. However, while the number of towns kept growing (Figure 2), the county system returned to the presocialist situation step by step, with no more than fifteen counties by 1963. The major administrative reforms were launched during the immediate postwar decades as part of gaining better control over Estonia's  territory  (policy  and  power  argument).  When  this  was  achieved,  a  gradual return was made to the previous administrative system, guided  by the  economic-efficiency argument (the small administrative units were costly to run) (Kurs 1973, 135). Aside from a few industrial towns in northeast Estonia (especially Kohtla-Järve and Sillamäe), the majority of the newly established towns did not grow into large ones.

## Migration

The number of administrative changes in Estonia  was  considerable.  However,  the  influence of  these  changes on the level of urbanization remained modest. Migration, on the other hand, made a substantial contribution to urban and rural population change. It comprised the single most important factor influencing the number of people in the former Soviet Union (Ball and  Demko  1978,  96).  In  Estonia,  migration increased the urban population by about 525,000 inhabitants,  as  much  as  65  percent  of  total urban population growth from all causes. Net migration loss of rural population totaled approximately 130,000 people, or 70 percent of the  total  population  decrease  in  rural  areas. The biggest growth of urban population took place  during  the  immediate  postwar  decades; the decrease of rural population was more evenly spread out over the entire postwar period.

Analyses of the migration flows indicate that high  in-migration  rates  caused  the  high  net migration gains in urban population during the immediate  postwar  years  (Figure  3).  During the second half of the 1950s, urban migration gains were reduced, largely due to the increased housing shortage experienced at the time. This was followed by a new increase of gross and net migration  in  the  1960s,  again  primarily  as  a result  of  increased  urban  in-migration.  This was the heyday of socialist industrialization in

Figure  2 Map  of  Estonian  towns  by  time  of  establishment.  Towns  in  lower-case  letters  were established before socialism. TOWNS in upper-case letters were established under socialism. Tallinn is the capital city.

<!-- image -->

Figure  3 Dynamics  of  arrivals and departures of urban population  between  1946  and  1990. Source: Estonian Statistical Office.

<!-- image -->

Estonia, coupled with standardized housing construction  programs  similar  to  those  launched throughout the Soviet Union and many other socialist  countries  at  that  time.  As  migration was  the  major  source  of  urban  population growth and as in-migration flows subsequently decreased, this brought about both decreased gains through net migration from the 1970s on and, as a result, the slowdown of urbanization as such. In the middle of the 1980s, in-migration and out-migration flows were balanced; 1990 saw the first negative net migration in urban areas.

However,  internal  and  external  migration had  slightly  different  roles  to  play.  With  respect  to  the  former,  rural  population  losses and urban  population  gains  through  internal migration stood at about 230,000 inhabitants. This made up 28 percent of urban population growth  and  44  percent  of  overall  migration growth.  Net  internal  migration  was  at  its height just after World War II, when the most extensive  relocation  of  people  from  rural  to urban areas took place. This can be explained by the severe hardships that the rural population suffered under the standard Stalinist growth strategy, particularly as the collectivization drive got under way in Estonian agriculture. 1  Internal migration was partly the people's reaction to the new political context. Although net migration loss of the rural population was only  about  120,000  inhabitants  during  the period  from  1946  to  1959,  rural  population changed  dramatically  in  terms  of  turnover: according to Tiit's (1993b, 1856) estimates, half of  it  changed  during  these  years.  Among people arriving in rural areas, one could find many  ideological  workers-mainly  malewho  had  to  suppress  grass-roots  movements and organize the collectivization of agriculture (Matin  and  Bronchtein  1959).  Women  made up the majority of those who left rural areas, as the  hard  working  conditions  and  limited  job availability  made  a  rural  way  of  life  even  less attractive  for  women  than  for  men  (Marksoo 1987).

After the difficult immediate postwar years, living  and  working  conditions  in  rural  areas started to improve. This was part of the slow but  steady  change  of  priorities  in  the  Soviet Union in general and in Estonia in particular as policies started to attach more significance to agriculture (for overall discussion see Sjöberg 1999). Gradually, the gap between agricultural salaries and industry income closed. As a result, collective farms became more and more competitive with industrial enterprises located in towns. This was the case not only with Estonia, but also with Russia. This, in turn, had a double impact on migration flows in Estonia. First, internal net migration decreased; second, immigration from rural areas of Russia, the main migration  hinterland  of  Estonia,  decreased  as well, reducing the migration gains of Estonian towns.

While  the  number  of  people  going  from rural to urban areas decreased, the number of people going from urban to rural areas increased  in  the  1980s,  as  compared  to  the 1970s. This led to an internal migration turnaround  in  Estonia  in  1983,  when  rural  areas started to gain population and urban areas began to  lose  population  (Marksoo  1990,  64;  1995, 185-89). This continued until the end of the Soviet period. On the surface, the change was similar to the process of counterurbanization in Western countries that had first been observed

a decade earlier. However, the causes were different and the process could be explained with reference to two factors (see T ammaru 2001). In addition to changing economic priorities in Estonia, one of the important food producers in  the  former  Soviet  Union  (Marksoo  1998), another important reason was the overstaffing needed in agriculture, as in industry, in socialist countries. This overstaffing was caused by the low  labor  productivity  present  under  central planning (see Kornai 1992, 223). In short, the workings of central planning initially to favor rural retention policies and also gave rise to the subsequent turnaround in internal migration in Estonia  in  the  1980s.  This  process  was  supported by Estonia's strong rural identity, inherited  from  the  interwar  period  (Unwin  1998, 297-300).

Thus, most of the migration gains in urban areas  from  the  1970s  on  came  about  due  to external migration in Estonia. Fully 98 percent of  urban-bound  immigrants  originated  from other parts of the former Soviet Union. Urban population gain due to external net migration totaled approximately 295,000 people, the equivalent of 36 percent of total urban population growth. Unlike other sources of population change, external migration also had a positive  net  impact  in  rural  areas,  adding  about 100,000  new  inhabitants  to  the  countryside. Although  this  counterbalanced  negative  net internal  migration,  in  due  time  many  of  the immigrants  left  for  urban  areas  in  Estonia, thereby  contributing  to  negative  net  internal migration for towns (Marksoo 1996, 6).

The dynamics of urban external  migration bears  many  similarities  to  internal  migration flows with a small temporal shift. Up until the mid-1960s, both internal and external migration  helped  the  urban  population  to  grow. From that point on, external migration dominated. External migration remained high due to the typical reproduction of migration processes once set in train by state priorities. That is,  people  who  entered  Estonia  through  the management  of  central  planning  during  the immediate  postwar  decades  reproduced  later migration  flows  through  family  reunification and marriage migration, which gained impetus from the 1970s on (Mängel 1989, 13).

Both urban and rural areas enjoyed positive net gains through external migration, but the effect on the ethnic composition was felt only by the urban population (Figure 4). This can be explained in two ways: first, immigrants entering rural areas included ethnic Estonian return migrants  (Kulu  1998);  second,  many  of  the immigrants coming to rural areas ended up in Estonian  towns  as  their  final  destinations  of migration. As a result of this,  the  percentage of Estonians  in  rural  areas  remained  stable; in contrast,  changes  in  ethnic  composition  in towns were dramatic. Before World War II, 82 percent  of  urban  dwellers  were  of  Estonian origin; by the end of the Soviet period, the figure had dropped to 50 percent. In T allinn and industrial towns in northeast Estonia, the percentage of Estonians fell even below that level. The  sharpest  decline  occurred  during  the 1940s  and  1950s,  as  might  be  expected  from the analyses of migration trends.

Although urban external net migration remained positive until the end of the Soviet period, its relative importance decreased. This forms a base for the conclusion that the major shifts  in  population  redistribution  in  Estonia

Figure 4 Dynamics of the proportion  of  ethnic  Estonians in urban,  rural,  and  total  populations between 1934 and 1989. Source: Estonian Statistical Office.

<!-- image -->

occurred  in  the  1940s  and  1950s,  when  the political  and  ideological  considerations  that started immigration-based industrialization were  the  guiding  factors  of  Estonian  urban growth, working through both administrative changes and migration. This could be labeled a period  of  priorities-led  urbanization  (Sjöberg 1999).  In  turn,  this  suggests  that  although urbanization in Estonia was rapid after World War II, and the urbanization curve followed a fairly typical and universal sequence of growth (that is, slow growth followed by rapid growth and  subsequent  saturation),  the  urbanization experience of ethnic Estonians was similar to what happened in formerly socialist countries in East and Central Europea (T ammaru 2002). Ethnic  Estonians  remained  relatively  ruralor  underurbanized,  as  Szelényi  (1996)  would have it-with only 60 percent living in urban areas  by  the  end  of  the  Soviet  period,  as opposed  to  90  percent  of  non-Estonians. Thus, behind the high levels of urbanization recorded,  one  can  find  underurbanization  of Estonians and very high levels of urbanization of non-Estonians. This is also the main reason for the dramatic differences in urban and rural population growth.

Migration-or,  more  precisely,  immigration-was  the  leading  factor  fueling  urban growth  in  Estonia,  and  it  had  many  indirect influences on fertility and mortality in urban and rural  areas  as  well.  These  influences  worked through  the  age  structure  of  population,  to which I shall now turn. The next section analyzes changes in the age structure of urban and rural population, leading to the analyses of fertility and mortality patterns of rural and urban population.

## Age-Sex Composition

Migration not only affected the ethnic composition of the population, but also brought along changes in age structure (Figure 5). In 1939, the age structure of urban population was relatively even, but with respect to sex ratio women dominated.  The  population  contained  more women  over  the  age  of  20  than  men.  They formed the majority in rural areas as well, especially in the older age groups. Migration processes that began after World War II had a double  impact  on  the  structure  of  this  baseline population. First, they improved the sex ratio of urban areas. Although women dominated in internal  net  migration,  men  contributed  the most to external net migration gains. As external migration outpaced internal, this brought about an improved sex ratio of urban population as well.

In contrast, the impact of migration on age structure was negative. While the age structure of the population in urban areas was relatively even at the end of the 1930s, high postwar inmigration flows brought about the overrepresentation of younger age groups in those areas. The 1970 population age structure is indicative of this: both the first wave of in-migrants, then typically  in  their  fifties,  and  another  peak  centered on those in their thirties. The latter include both the children of first-wave migrants and the subsequent wave of in-migration to urban areas. The  aging  of  urban  population  continues  to deepen sharply today, as the people from the first in-migration wave reach retirement age.

During  the  Soviet  period,  the  impact  of migration on the urban population had a double edge-improving the sex ratio and making age composition uneven-but its influence on the rural population was solely negative. Both the events related to World War II and the negative  net  migration  balance  thereafter  worsened the rural imbalance between the sexes and the  age  structure  of  rural  population.  Outmigration  from  the  villages  was  driven  by women, and the overall aging in rural areas was a fact of life until the end of socialism. In short, young  men  and  older  women  dominated  in Estonian villages at the end of the Soviet period.

## Natural Increase

Migration  influenced  vital  population  events through  the population age structure. Inmigration to urban areas kept the population young there, as revealed by the growing importance  of  natural  increase  to  change  in  urban population over time. All in all, natural increase added  approximately  250,000  inhabitants  to urban areas, contributing some 31 percent to urban population growth. During the pre-1959 period, natural increase's contribution stood at 18 percent,  while  the  post-1959  contribution was more than 40 percent of total urban population  growth.  High  natural  growth  in  urban areas  resulted  from  an  increased  number  of births and only a modest increase in death levels due to the young age structure. Life expectancy was  also  higher  in  urban  areas  than  in  rural

Figure 5 Dynamics of urban and rural population age structure between 1939 and 1989. (A) Urban population, 1939. (B) Rural population, 1939. (C) Urban population, 1970. (D) Rural population, 1970. (E) Urban population, 1989. (F) Rural population, 1989. Source: Estonian Statistical Office.

<!-- image -->

ones. The rural population declined by 15,000 inhabitants  due  to  natural  decrease,  approximately 8 percent of the total population decrease in rural areas.

Such a sequence of developments-high inmigration reshaping the urban population age structure and bringing about increased natural increase, paralleled by natural decrease in rural population  due  to  out-migration-is  a  fairly typical  pattern  of  urban  and  rural  population change.  As  any  new  addition  to  the  growing urban population is of diminishing importance, and as fertility levels are usually lower in urban areas as compared to rural ones, urban population  growth  rates  tend  to  fall  across  this sequence  of  events,  leading  to  maturation  of urbanization levels.

## Implications of the Past on Today's Urbanization

In  1991,  Estonia  regained  its  independence. The  urbanization  experience  during  the  first decade of new independence has owed much of its character to the Soviet legacy. Estonia thus represents a typical case among the successor states  of  the  former  Soviet  Union.  As  in  the majority of the former republics, urban population's share of the total population of Estonia increased during the last decade of Soviet rule, only to decrease in the 1990s (Figures 6 and 7). This decline results directly from ethnic differentials  in  urbanization  under  socialism.  The immigration-led urbanization that was prevalent under socialism turned to emigration-led

Figure 6 Changes in the share of urban population in total population between 1980 and 1989.  Source:  Central  Statistical  Office  of  the Soviet Union (1991); World Bank (2001).

<!-- image -->

deurbanization  in  1990,  primarily  due  to  the departure of non-Estonians-mainly Russians going  to  Russia.  In  other  former  republics (excluding  Estonia  and  the  other  two  Baltic republics), this process had already started by the  1980s  (Zayontchkovskaya  1992),  but  it increased in the 1990s. As the majority of nonEstonians reside in the largest towns in Estonia,  including  T allinn,  these  towns  have  witnessed major population losses during the past ten  years.  However,  the  high  proportion  of rural dwellers among ethnic Estonians has left Estonia with a considerable potential for urbanward migration. Thus far, this appears to have  materialized  on  a  rather  modest  scale compared to external migration (Sjöberg and Tammaru 1999).

As  was  the  case  throughout  much  of  the Soviet period, external migration-now in the form of emigration-continued to be a dominant factor behind urban population change in the  1990s.  In  the  coming  decade,  internal migration flows are likely to become more important. This can be expected to be the case in other  successor  states  of  the  former  Soviet Union  as  well.  It  will  probably  lead  to  an increased concentration of population again, as the main flows of internal migration in Estonia are targeting major towns and their immediate

Figure 7 Changes in the share of urban population in total population between 1989 and 1999.  Source:  Central  Statistical  Office  of  the Soviet Union (1991); World Bank (2001).

<!-- image -->

hinterland (T ammaru and Sjöberg 1999; Estonian Statistical Office 2000, 4). This migratory process has taken a clear form of suburbanization  involving  both  the  building  of  new  residential areas and the conversion of Soviet-era summer cottages into permanent houses. Tallinn and its surrounding area head the process, but the same trends can also be observed in the T artu and Pärnu areas.

The  other  important  factor  behind  urban population decline is also partly inherited from the previous era: namely, the low levels of natural increase are related to the fact that the first postwar  immigration  cohorts  have  reached older ages, resulting in reduced birth rates and increased death rates. This process will probably  speed  up  as  well  as  the  members  of  new, large immigrant groups age.

## Conclusions

Analysts  of  urbanization  under  central  planning have often aimed to prove either the universal  or  the  highly  specific  features  of  the urbanization  process.  It  is  time  for  a  more detached  evaluation  of  these  standpoints.  For that reason, I have taken an explorative approach in this article to analyzing empirical trends of urban and rural population change in Estonia

under  socialism.  During  the  period  between 1945 and 1991, the percentage of urban population more than doubled, from 33 percent to 71 percent. As might have been expected, different causes combined to produce the observable  outcome  of  urban  population  growth, which  had  both  common  features  that  stand firmly in cross-country comparisons and specific ones that Estonia offers to the mosaic of world urbanization.

Empirical analyses brought out the following universal features of urbanization in Estonia: (a) a sequence of slow urbanization before World War II, rapid take-off of urbanization in the 1940s and 1950s culminating in the 1960s, and gradual maturation since then; (b) a close relationship  between  urbanization  and  industrialization; (c) changing sources of urban population growth, with natural increase replacing migration in later stages of the process; (d) the aging of the rural population and the decrease of out-migration potential as a result; and (e) reproduction of migration flows once started.

The process of urbanization in Estonia also manifested  socialism-specific  features,  as  both central planning and ideological considerations penetrated into it: (a) a priorities-led extensive industrialization gave industry much  more influence  on  urbanization  in  Estonia  than  in Western countries; (b) a less efficient centrally planned economic system resulted in the need to keep a larger proportion of people in rural areas to produce agricultural goods than was the case in  Western  countries;  and  (c)  administrative methods  for  managing  migration,  used  in  all countries  under  central  planning,  were  more successful during the immediate postwar period in  Estonia,  when  population  growth in Estonia's main immigration hinterland, Russia, was still high and the first phases of the industrialization drive were helping to manage migration flows.

In addition to the above factors, factors characteristic of the former Soviet Union could be distinguished. Ideological considerations in the former  Soviet  Union  favored  immigration  as the main method of filling newly created jobs. This helped to dramatically change the ethnic composition of the urban population in Estonia,  a  process  paralleled  in  other  republics  of the former Soviet Union. Also, Estonia's small size and low level of natural increase in population compared to those in other regions of the former  Soviet  Union  were  instrumental  in making external influences heavily felt.

This  empirical  analysis  of  urban  and  rural population  growth  in  Estonia  under  central planning indicates that it is time to say farewell to  the  current  emphasis  of  the  discussion. Rather  than  continuing  to  focus  on  universal versus  specific  factors  of  urbanization  under central planning, it would be more worthwhile to direct attention and research toward a more many-sided and locally sensitive understanding of the processes at work (compare Sjöberg 1991, 15). Such a change of direction would also help us to build a better base for analyses of postsocialist patterns of urbanization, which probably have both common and specific features. Immigration-based urbanization under socialism led to emigration-based deurbanization in Estonia and other successor states of the former Soviet Union in the  1990s.  The  coming  decade  will witness  an  increased  importance  of  internal migration flows on urbanization which will probably lead to increased attraction for migrants of major towns and their immediate hinterlands.

## Note

1 For a more general discussion of Stalinist growth strategy,  see  Fitzpatrick  (1997);  for  Estonia,  see Parming (1978, 31).

## Literature Cited

- Ainsaar, Mare. 1997. Eesti rahvastik T aani Hindamisraamatust tänapäevani (Estonian population from Liber  Census  Daniae  up  to  nowadays).  T artu: Tartu Ülikooli trükikoda.
- Ball,  Benjamin,  and  Georg  Demko.  1978.  Internal migration in the Soviet Union. Economic Geography 54 (2): 95-114.
- Central Statistical Office of the Soviet Union. 1991. Narodnoye khozyastvo SSSR v 1990 godu (National economics  of  USSR  in  1990).  Moskva:  Central Statistical Office of the Soviet Union.

Enyedi,  György.  1996.  Urbanization  under  socialism.  In Cities  after  socialism:  Urban  and  regional change and conflict in postsocialist societies , ed. Gregory Andrusz, Michael Harloe, and Ivan Szelényi, 100-18. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

- Estonian Statistical Office (ESO). 1975. Estestvennoje i  mehanit eskoje  dvizenije  naselanija  Estonskoi  SSR: Statistit eskii sbornik (Natural increase and migration in Estonian SSR: Statistical collection). Tallinn:  T sentralnoje  Statistit eskoje  upravlenije Estonskoi SSR. ˇ s ˇ s s ˇ

- ---. 1978. Estestvennoje i mehanit eskoje dvizenije naselanija  Estonskoi  SSR  v  1971-1976  gg.  Statistit eskii sbornik (Natural increase and migration in Estonian  SSR  in  1971-1976:  Statistical  collection). T allinn: T sentralnoje Statistit eskoje upravlenije Estonskoi SSR. ˇ s ˇ s s ˇ

---. 1982a. Eesti NSV rahvamajandus: Statistiline aastaraamat  1981 (Economics  of  Estonian  SSR: Statistical yearbook 1981). T allinn: Eesti raamat.

---. 1982b. Estestvennoje dvizenije i migratsija naselenija  Estonskoi  SSR  v  1976-80:  Statistit eskii sbornik (Natural increase and migration in Estonian  SSR  in  1976-1980:  Statistical  collection). Tallinn:  T sentralnoje  Statistit eskoje  upravlenije Estonskoi SSR. ˇ s s ˇ

- ---. 1987a. Estestvennoje dvizenije i migratsija naselenija  Estonskoi  SSR  v  1981-85:  Statistit eskii sbornik, I t ast (Natural increase and migration in Estonian  SSR  in  1981-85:  Statistical  collection, part  1).  T allinn:  T sentralnoje  Statistit eskoje  upravlenije Estonskoi SSR. ˇ s ˇ s s ˇ

---. 1987b. Estestvennoje dvizenije i migratsija naselenija  Estonskoi  SSR  v  1981-85:  Statistit eskii sbornik, II t ast (Natural increase and migration in Estonian  SSR  in  1981-85:  Statistical  collection, part  2).  T allinn:  T sentralnoje  Statistit eskoje  upravlenije Estonskoi SSR. ˇ s ˇ s s ˇ

- ---. 1990. Eesti V abariigi maakondade, linnade ja alevite  rahvastik: I osa: Rahvaarv rahvuse, perekonnaseisu, hariduse ja elatusallika järgi: 1989 aasta rahvaloenduse andmed (Population of counties, towns, and urbanlike areas in Estonian Republic: Population by ethnicity, civil status, education, and source of income: 1989 census returns). T allinn: Eesti Statistikaamet.
- ---. 1995. Rahvastiku vanuskoosseis: Eesti linnad ja maakonnad (Population  age  structure:  Estonian towns and counties). T allinn: Eesti Statistikaamet. ---. 1996. Rahvastikustatistika teatmik 3/95 (Reference book of population statistics 3/95). T allinn:
- Eesti Statistikaamet.

---. 1997. Eesti Statistika aastaraamat 1996 (Statistical  yearbook of Estonia 1996). T allinn: Eesti Statistikaamet.

---. 2000. 2000. aasta rahva ja eluruumide loenduse esialgsed tulemused (Preliminary results of population  and  housing  census  2000).  T allinn:  Eesti Statistikaamet.

Fitzpatrick, Sheila. 1997. Stalin's peasants. New York: Oxford University Press.

Geyer, Hermanus. 1996. Expanding the theoretical foundation of the concept of differential urbanization. Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 87 (1): 44-59.

Geyer,  Hermanus,  and  Thomas  Kontuly  1996.  A theoretical foundation for the concept of differential urbanization. Reprinted in Differential urbanization:  Integrating  spatial  models ,  ed.  Hermanus Geyer and Thomas Kontuly, 290-308. London: Edward Arnold.

- Järvesoo, Elmar. 1978. The postwar economic transformation. In A case study of a Soviet republic ,  ed. Tõnu  Parming  and  Elmar  Järvesoo,  131-90. Boulder: Westview Press.

Kant,  Edgar.  1933.  Ümbrus,  majandus  ja  rahvastik Eestis:  Ökoloogilis-majandusgeograafiline  uurimus (Environment, economy, and population in Estonia: An ecological and economic-geographical survey). Ph.D. diss., University of T artu.

Katus,  Kalev.  1989. Eesti  demograafiline  areng  läbi sajandite (Estonian demographic development throughout centuries). Working paper. EKDK RU Series B :9.

Konrád,  György,  and  Ivan  Szelényi.  1974.  Social conflicts and urbanization. In Urban and social economics in market and planned economies: Policy, planning, and development , ed. Alan Brown and Joseph Licari, 206-26. New York: Praeger.

- Konrád,  György,  and  Ivan  Szelényi.  1977.  Social conflicts  of  underurbanization.  In Captive  cities: Studies in the political economy of cities and regions , ed. Michael  Harloe,  157-73.  London:  John  Wiley and Sons.
- Kornai, János. 1992. The socialist system: The political economy  of  communism. Princeton,  NJ:  Princeton University Press.
- Kulu, Hill. 1998. Ethnic return migration: An Estonian case. International Migration 36 (3): 313-36.
- Kurs, Ott. 1972. On general tendencies in the development of the administrative division of the Estonian S.S.R. Estonia: Geographical Studies 144-50.

---. 1973. Territooriumi administratiivse jaotuse printsiibid ja nõuded (Principles and requirements of  territorial  administrative  division). Geograafia Seltsi Aastaraamat (Yearbook of Estonian Geography Society) 133-41.

- Lewis, Richard, and Richard Rowland. 1979. Population redistribution in the USSR: Its impact on society 1897-1977. New York: Praeger Publishers.
- Mängel,  T oivo.  1989.  Nekatorõje  aspektõ  migratsjonnoi politiki v Estonskoi SSR za poslevojennõi period (Some aspects of migration policy in Estonian SSR during the postwar period). In Podhodõ k upravleniju migratsjonnõm razvitiem (Strategies to manage  migration), ed. Kalev Katus,  11-18. Tallinn: Valgus.
- Marksoo, Ann. 1987. Naiste rände seaduspärasusest Eestis (Regularities of female migration in Estonia). Geograafia Seltsi Aastaraamat 22:98-112.

---.  1990.  Tallinn  Eesti  rahvarände  süsteemis (Tallinn in Estonian migration system). Eesti Geograafia  Seltsi  Aastaraamat (Y earbook  of  Estonian Geography Society) 25:53-66.

- ---. 1995. Estonian urban system in transition. In Acta Wasaensia: Urban development and urban life , ed. Mauri Palomäki and J. A. Karunaratne, 17992. Vaasa, Finland: University of Vaasa.
- ---. 1996. Role of external migration in urbanization  of  Estonia.  Paper  presented  at  28th

- International Geographic Congress, The Hague, 4-10 August.
- ---. 1998. Urbanization and migration in Estonia  (period  after  World  War  II).  Unpublished manuscript, Stockholm School of Economics.

---. 1999. Restructuring of urban and rural settlement  in Estonia. In Shock-shift in enlarged Europe , ed. F . Carter and W. Maik, 81-102. Aldershot: Ashgate.

- Matin, V., and Mihhail Bronchtein. 1959. ENSV põllumajanduse kollektiviseerimine  ning  selle  sotsiaalsed ja  majanduslikud  tulemused (Collectivization of Estonian agriculture and its social and economic outcomes). T allinn: Eesti riiklik kirjastus.
- Mendels, Franklin. 1981. Social mobility and phases of industrialization. In Industrialization and urbanization , ed. Theodore Rabb and Robert Rotberg, 59-82. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Murray, Pearse, and Ivan Szelényi. 1984. The city in the transition to socialism. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 81 (1): 90-107.
- Nõmmik,  Salme,  Ott  Kurs,  and  V.  Koorits.  1969. Eesti NSV administratiivsest rajoneerimisest (About  the  administrative  division  of  Estonian SSR). Geograafia Seltsi  Aastaraamat (Y earbook  of Estonian Geography Society) 166-80.
- Palli,  Heldur.  1996. Eesti  rahvastiku  ajaloo  lühiülevaade (Short  history  of  Estonian  population). Tallinn: Sisekaitseakadeemia kirjastus.
- Pandit, Kavita, and Suzanne Withers, eds. 1999. Migration and restructuring in the United States: A geographic perspective. Boston: Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers Inc.
- Parming, Tõnu. 1978. Population changes and processes. In A case study of a Soviet republic , ed. Tõnu Parming  and  Elmar  Järvesoo,  21-74.  Boulder: Westview Press.
- Sakkeus, Luule. 1991. Postwar migration trends in Estonia. Working paper. EKDK RU seeria B:15.
- Sjöberg, Örjan. 1991. Urbanization under central planning: The case of Albania. Uppsala: Reprocentralen.
- ---. 1999. Shortage, priority, and urban growth:
- Towards the theory of urbanization under central planning. Urban Studies 36 (13): 2217-35.
- Sjöberg,  Örjan,  and  Tiit  T ammaru.  1999.  T ransitional  statistics:  Internal  migration  and  urban growth in post-Soviet Estonia. Europe-Asia Studies 51 (5): 821-42.
- Szelényi,  Ivan.  1996.  Cities  under  socialism-and after.  In Cities  after  socialism:  Urban  and  regional change and conflict in postsocialist societies , ed. Gregory Andrusz, Michael Harloe, and Ivan Szelényi, 286-317. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
- Tammaru, Tiit. 2000. Differential urbanization and primate  city  growth  in  Soviet  and  post-Soviet Estonia. Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 91 (1): 20-30.

---. 2001. Suburban growth and suburbanisation under central planning: The case of Soviet Estonia. Urban Studies 38 (8): 1341-57.

---. 2002. The Soviet Union as a deviant case? Underurbanization in Soviet Estonia Urban Geography 22 (6): 584-603.

- Tammaru,  Tiit,  and  Örjan  Sjöberg.  1999.  On  the move:  Explaining  migration  patterns  in  Estonia during the transition period. International Journal of Population Geography 5:241-60.
- Tepp, Lembit. 1994. Rahvastiku välisrände lathe-ja sihtkohad  (Origins  and  destination  of  Estonian external migration). ESA Kuukiri (Monthly Bulletin of Estonian Statistical Office) 10:11-19.
- Tiit,  Ene-Margit.  1993a.  Eesti  rahvastik  ja  selle probleemid  (Estonian  population  and  its  problems, part 1). Akadeemia 5 (8): 1654-79.
- ---. 1993b. Eesti  rahvastik  ja  selle  probleemid (Estonian  population  and  its  problems,  part  2). Akadeemia 5 (9): 1847-66.
- Unwin, Tim. 1998. Rurality and the construction of nation  in  Estonia.  In Theorizing  transition:  The political  economy  of  postcommunist  transformations , ed.  John  Pickles  and  Adrian  Smith,  284-306. London: Routledge.
- World Bank. 2001. http://www.worldbank.org/data/ wdi2001/pdfs/tab3\_10.pdf  (last  accessed  5  September 2002).
- Zayontchkovskaya, Zhanna, ed. 1992. Migratsija naselenija (Migration of population). Moskva: Nauka.
- Zelinsky, Wilburn. 1971. The hypothesis of mobility  transition. The  Geographical  Review 61  (2): 219-49.

TIIT TAMMARU is a Lecturer at the Institute of Geography, University of T artu, T artu 51014, Estonia.  E-mail:  ttammaru@ut.ee.  Research  interests cover internal migration and urbanization, and external migration and ethnic relations in Estonia.