This article was downloaded by: [University of North Texas]

On: 28 November 2014, At: 19:53

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,

37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## Connecting and Disconnecting People and Places: Migrants, Migration, and the Household in Sri Lanka

P . Hewage a , C. Kumara a &amp; Jonathan Rigg b

a Department of Geography , University of Ruhuna , Matara, Sri Lanka

b Geography Department , Durham University , UK

Published online: 14 Dec 2010.

To cite this article: P . Hewage , C. Kumara &amp; Jonathan Rigg (2011) Connecting and Disconnecting People and Places: Migrants, Migration, and the Household in Sri Lanka, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 101:1, 202-219, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2010.532741

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2010.532741

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## Connecting and Disconnecting People and Places: Migrants, Migration, and the Household in Sri Lanka

P. Hewage, ∗ C. Kumara, ∗ and Jonathan Rigg †

∗ Department of Geography, University of Ruhuna, Matara, Sri Lanka † Geography Department, Durham University, UK

Domestic and international migration provide the point of entry for an investigation of social and economic transformations that are altering the function and functioning of the household at two sites in rural Sri Lanka. Based on a survey questionnaire of one hundred households complemented by interviews with a subsample of fifty migrants or their families, the article views migration not as just connecting people and places but being constitutive of those places. Domestic migration is shown to be an 'escape' strategy, whereas international migration is pursued as part of a household livelihood strategy undertaken for the sake of the family. In the former, an individualization of activity occurs as young women and men become partially independent wage earners, whereas in the latter migration raises the bargaining power and status of the migrant but in the context of the household, rather than separate from it. We look inside the household to illuminate the status, place, and role of migration and keep doing so as household-migration interactions evolve. Taking this approach, we seek to explain a series of conundrums relating to migration. Key Words: household relations, migration, social and economic change, Sri Lanka.

本文以国内和国际移民作为研究切入点，对斯里兰卡的两个农村地区进行了社会和经济变革的研究，这种变革正在改变着 并实现着家庭功能。通过对一百个家庭进行问卷调查，并对其中的五十个移民或他们的家庭成员进行访谈，本文认为，居 民迁移不仅仅连接了人和地方，还在本质上构建了那些地方。国内迁移被证明是一种"逃"的策略，而国际迁移是一个家 庭为生计而采取的战略的一部分。在前者，年轻妇女和男了成为部分独立的打工仔，是一种个体化的活动，而在后者，在 家庭范围内，迁移提高了移民的交涉能力和地位，但并没有从家庭中分开而去。我们通过研究家庭住户的内部来展示迁移 的状态，地点和迁移的作用，通过继续的研究来分析家庭和迁移之间的互动演化。我们采取这种方法以试图解释有关移民 的一系列难题。关键词：家庭关系，移民，社会和经济变革，斯里兰卡。

La migraci´ on dom´ estica e internacional sirven de punto de entrada a una investigaci´ on sobre las transformaciones sociales y econ´ omicas que est´ an alterando la funci´ on y el funcionamiento de los hogares en dos sitios del ´ area rural de Sri Lanka. Con base en un estudio con cuestionarios aplicados en cien hogares, complementado con entrevistas a una submuestra de cincuenta migrantes o sus familias, el art´ ıculo visualiza la migraci´ on no solo como la conexi´ on de gente y lugares sino como elemento constitutivo de esos lugares. La migraci´ on dom´ estica es vista como una estrategia de 'escape,' mientras que la migraci´ on internacional se la utiliza como parte de la estrategia de vida del hogar en bien de la familia. En el primer caso, ocurre una individualizaci´ on de la actividad cuando mujeres y hombres j´ ovenes se transforman en jornaleros parcialmente independientes, en tanto que en el otro caso la migraci´ on eleva el poder de regateo y estatus del migrante pero en el contexto del hogar, m´ as que fuera de ´ este. Miramos dentro del hogar para iluminar el estatus, lugar y papel de la migraci´ on, y seguimos haci´ endolo a medida que evolucionan las interacciones hogar-migraci´ on. Al adoptar este enfoque, buscamos explicar una serie de acertijos relacionados con migraci´ on. Palabras clave: relaciones del hogar, migraci´ on, cambio social y econ´ omico, Sri Lanka .

I n an agenda-setting article published in 2006, Sheller and Urry made the case for a 'new mobilities paradigm.' They argued that although 'all the world seems to be on the move,' social science 'has largely ignored or trivialized the importance of the systematic movements of people [and] much social sci- ence research has been 'a-mobile'' (Sheller and Urry 2006, 208). They suggested that social science theory is resolutely sedentarist, with the result that stability is 'normal' and movement and instability are 'abnormal.' Although the desire to think afresh about mobility is welcome, their work privileges the experience of the

(rich) North over the (poorer) South and mobility as an articulation of modernity (through, for example, an emphasis on automobility, mobile phones, airport encounters, the global media, network sociality, and the Internet) over mobility in traditional and modernizing societies.

Scholarship on rural areas of the Global South 1 has suggested that migration and mobility were probably rather more pronounced than the paradigm of the sedentary, immobile peasant allows. De Haan (1999) argued that 'population movement [was] the norm rather than the exception' (7) in Asia and Africa, and Gardner and Osella (2004) noted the 'resounding silence on internal migration in South Asia, despite irrefutable evidence that movement, both within rural areas and between villages, towns and cities, has always been, and continues to be, a central feature of life in the subcontinent' (xii; see also Perera 1992; Rigg 2007, 118-43). The tendency to see rural people as a 'world to themselves' (Elson 1997, 33) has also informed policymaking and shaped the general tendency among officials to view migration as 'problematic' and something to be controlled and, preferably, minimized. Gill (2003) in rural Nepal and Deshingkar and Start (2003) in India lamented the failure of policymakers to acknowledge the important and growing role of mobility in livelihoods: The 'official awareness of the magnitude of seasonal migration or the importance of it in the lives of the [rural] poor' is, they wrote, 'abysmally low' (Deshingkar and Start 2003, 1).

If we take the view that migration and a degree of mobility have always been features of rural life, then it is not possible to see migration as an outcome or product of 'modernization.' That said, social, economic, and infrastructural transformations in the Global South, although they might not have caused migration, have reshaped the process, sometimes in quite profound ways (see World Bank 2009, 146-69). We should be cautious, therefore, of reading off from the fact that migration and mobility have some historical depth the assumption that the sources and implications of migration are similarly unchanged. Migration is a powerful signifier or marker of change. For villagers, it becomes a way of getting by in the modern world, perhaps of accumulating funds for productive and social investments (McKay 2003; Rogaly and Coppard 2003); for parents, it harbors risks for the reputations of their daughters (Koning 2005); for migrants, it offers the possibility of a new life and the potential to transform established patterns of living (Wolf 1990, 1992; Mills 1997, 1999;

Silvey 2000; Gardner and Osella 2004); for government officials, it can be regarded as undermining in situ rural development efforts and creating ructions in rural society; for the commercial sector, migration offers a pliant and abundant workforce that is partly supported by its links to rural villages (Hancock 2000). It is no wonder, therefore, that migration has become a leitmotif of change in countries of the Global South such as Sri Lanka and, for researchers, as an object of abundant study.

In geography, the push-pull approaches to migration, which were often economically determinist and empiricist in tenor, have been supplanted by approaches that embed migration and mobility in social context. Thus, articles examining themes such as migrant subjectivities and identities (Silvey and Lawson 1999; Gilmartin 2008); migration and belonging (Lawson 1999); and migration, translocalism, and transnationalism (Boyle 2002; Silvey 2006; Conway and Potter 2007; Ho 2008) have developed into significant subfields of study. Accompanying this broadening of interest-essentially taking migration out of and beyond its home in population studies-has been a shift in method away from survey-based, quantitative studies and toward studies that employ qualitative approaches and ethnographic methods. Of course, none of these is absolute: Empirical, economic studies remain prevalent, as do those that adopt a survey-based approach (Silvey and Lawson 1999).

These are all rich and important additions to the study of migration, but in cutting new furrows of research, two areas of work have been, relatively speaking, pushed to the margins. First, the role and importance of 'place' have been deemphasized (Gilmartin 2008). Second, there has been a redirection of interest away from source communities and migrants in households, to destination places and migrants as separate (and separated) from their natal communities and families. An important exception is those studies that have sought to interrogate the connections between sending and destination sites, illuminating a shifting social field that embraces both contexts. For Ley and Kobayashi (2005), for instance, 'return' does not capture the nature of transnational sojourns by Hong Kong migrants returning from Canada because it overlooks the ways in which such transnational movements are linked to life course transitions: 'Their continuing itinerary over time undercuts conventional accounts that portray return migration as circular with its own logic of arrival, assimilation and closure. Instead, there is a perennial

openness to further movement at distinctive passages in the life cycle' (Ley and Kobayashi 2005, 123; see also Kobayashi 2007).

Arejuvenated interest in migration and mobility has helped to reenergize the debate over the migrationdevelopment nexus, and the important questions of whether migrants can be regarded as agents of positive change (Conway and Potter 2007) and, more broadly, whether migration is an avenue for development (Datta 2009). In this way, although migration studies have not turned full circle, they have started to return to debates of an empiricist and problem-oriented nature that characterized work in the 1970s (see Connell et al. 1976). Allied to this direction is a renewed interest in migrants as constitutive of wider social (families, households) and geographical (villages, communities) formations. Thus, migration does not just connect people and places but is constitutive of those places; at the same time, migration is not just about migrants but about migrants in social context. These two issues can be illustrated by reference to work that links migration with households and livelihoods (see Curry and Koczberski 1999; de Haan 1999, 2002; Hampshire 2002; Mosse et al. 2002; Rogaly and Coppard 2003).

Research undertaken in different parts of the world and at different times shows considerable variation in the contribution of factory work to rural poverty reduction and household livelihoods. In part, these differences pertain to the relationship of the migrant to her or his natal household and the role the migrant is expected to play in the household. Is migration, in other words, part of a household livelihood 'strategy,' or is the process better understood as an outcome of a decision made by an individual for personal reasons and benefit?

Some scholars, such as Wolf (1990, 1992) in Java, depict young female workers as independent wage earners who are not expected to contribute to the household budget and have made the decision to migrate for a set of reasons largely linked to individual desires and personal needs. Elmhirst (2002, 2004), also in Indonesia, similarly noted how young factory daughters from Sumatra were initially assumed out of the household during the period they were working away from home, with no compunction to remit funds. She also noted, however, how such positioning of migrants and migration in local terms changed over the course of the 1990s and, particularly, following Indonesia's monetary crisis at the end of the decade (Elmhirst 2002). In her work in Thailand, Mills (1997, 1999; see also Jones and Pardthaisong 1999) focused on the tensions between young workers and their desire to be 'modern' ( than samai ) women through the purchase of fashionable clothes and makeup and social interaction with friends in new environments, and their desire, at the same time, to be dutiful daughters by remitting income 'home' and by their willing contribution to the household labor force. 2 This latter compunction is emphasized in Esara's (2004) work, which focused on married female labor migrants in Bangkok who, on marriage, relinquish their status as independent income earners to fulfill their 'conjugal contract,' playing a central role in the maintenance of the household economy. Finally, scholars have also illuminated how the relationship of female factory workers to their natal households can change over time as factory work becomes established and income is 'captured' for the sake of the household, particularly during periods of economic hardship (e.g., Hancock 2000, 2001; see also Kobayashi [1994] for a historical view of late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Japanese migrants in Canada).These studies direct attention to a consideration of how migration is shaped by and, in turn, reshapes the operation of the household. Sen's (1990; see also Hicks 2002) cooperative-conflict model views cooperation within the household and the benefits that are derived from this cooperation being predicated on the variable bargaining power that individuals can wield. Intrahousehold relations embody both conflict and cooperation and it is on the basis of negotiation that these are reconciled, with such negotiation reflecting asymmetrical power relations often linked to gender and generation. The model emphasizes that we need to look inside the household if we are to understand how it operates:

[T]he members of the household face two different types of problems simultaneously, one involving cooperation (adding to total availabilities [i.e. aggregate household prosperity]) and the other conflict (dividing the total availabilities among the members of the household). Social arrangements regarding who does what, who gets to consume what, and who takes what decisions can be seen as responses to this combined problem of cooperation and conflict. (Sen 1990, 129, emphasis in original)

The studies just reviewed illuminate a series of apparent paradoxes or contradictions in research on migration from rural areas of the Global South. To begin with, migration separates and connects. It provides young women, for example, with a space for agency separate(d) from the family; at the same time, social and cultural expectations continue to infuse and shape

young migrant women's activities. Migration involves both cooperation and conflict, as Sen's (1990) work notably highlighted, reflected, for example, in a continuing but evolving tension between migration 'for the sake of the family' and individual and individualized desires. Even so, migration can be seen to be driven by individual desires and family or household needs and is not easily pigeonholed. Moreover, migration itself is shaped, often at different times, by economic logics and by social and cultural forces. Finally, research shows that migration can, simultaneously, stabilize the village and the household and be a cause of disruption in both. It is these double movements that we explore in the rest of the article, particularly with regard to the ways in which the process and experience of migration variously connects and disconnects migrants from their households and villages of origin. We do this through research in two sites in rural Sri Lanka, one in Galle District in the south of the country and the other in Kurunegala District on the margins of the Dry Zone.

## The Migration and Research Contexts: Field Sites and Research Methods

The study sites of Kumburegama South in Galle and Alut Henegama outside Kurunegala have contrasting development contexts (Figure 1 and Tables 1 and 2). 3 These contexts, although they do not determine the migration that occurs and its effects, do significantly

Table 2. Survey household profiles

|                                                                 | Kumburegama South   | Alut Henegama   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|-----------------|
| Access to land (hectares)                                       | 0.65                | 0.97            |
| Household size (total)                                          | 5.6                 | 4.4             |
| Household size (present)                                        | 4.2                 | 3.5             |
| Adult members (present)                                         | 2.7                 | 2.1             |
| Mean income (Rs)                                                | 25,800              | 14,600          |
| %migrant households                                             | 70% ( n = 35)       | 64% ( n = 32)   |
| Remittance dependency (whole sample)                            | 20%                 | 27%             |
| Remittance dependency (migrant households only)                 | 26%                 | 48%             |
| %heads of household with primary occupation reported as farming | 48%                 | 92%             |
| Rice sufficiency (months) N                                     | 3 months 50         | 6 months 50     |

Note: The remittance dependency rate is annual remittances as a proportion of total income.

Source:

Survey 2007.

inform the process. The fact that in 2004 the divisions to which Kumburegama South and Alut Henegama belong, Thawalama and Polpithigama, officially recorded 62 and 491 departures, respectively, for overseas work as housemaids, is partly illustrative of the differences set out below (GoSL 2004).

Kumburegama South is a rural community of 308 households in Galle's Thawalama Division. Tea, introduced in the 1950s, is the main crop and dominates the sloping, higher ground. Wet rice is grown on the valley

Table 1. The research contexts: Kumburegama South and Alut Henegama

|                                             | Kumburegama South                                                                                               | Alut Henegama                                                                                                                           |
|---------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Village economy                             | Tea cultivation, migrant laboring, tea picking, rice cultivation, tea factory work                              | Marginal with poor soils and intermittent rainfall; vegetable farming (beetroot), rice, coconuts, and cashew on illegally occupied land |
| Sustainability of village-based livelihoods | ∼ 20% landless; 55% land deficient; ∼ 25% land sufficient; local wage laboring to make ends meet                | Farming rarely sufficiently productive to support households; high levels of poverty                                                    |
| Prevalence of migration                     | ∼ 16% of households with migrant absent at time of survey; ∼ 32% had engaged in migration in past               | ∼ 18% of households with migrant absent at time of survey; ∼ 36% had engaged in migration in the past                                   |
| Type of migration                           | Mainly domestic, to garment factories in Colombo and Galle; some international migration                        | Rather more international than domestic migration, and the former mostly to Middle East                                                 |
| Migrant                                     | Domestic factory migrants: unmarried, young women and men; international migrants: largely older, married women | International migrants largely married with children and working as housekeepers in Middle East                                         |

Sources:

Interviews and survey questionnaire, 2007.

<!-- image -->

floor. Among Kumburegama South's 308 households, about 50 had current migrants at the time of the survey in 2007, and a further 100 households had engaged with migration in the past. Most of these migrants were young, unmarried women and men who had left home to work in the garment factories of Galle, the Koggala Free Trade Zone, and Colombo (Table 3 and Figure 1). 4 We were told that the first young person to leave the

Figure 1. Sri Lanka and the field sites.

village and take up garment factory work left Kumburegama South in 1997. There were also a small number of international labor migrants-mostly women and usually married-and some men who had joined the police or the army and been posted away (Table 3).

There is, therefore, a significant migration stream from Kumburegama South to other places. That said, the area itself is far from economically depressed,

Table 3. Domestic and international migrants and their characteristics

|                         | Domestic garment factory workers   | International migrants   |
|-------------------------|------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| Gender                  |                                    |                          |
| Female                  | 59%                                | 96%                      |
| Male                    | 41%                                | 4%                       |
| Marital status          |                                    |                          |
| Single                  | 78%                                | 5%                       |
| Married                 | 22%                                | 95%                      |
| Age (years)             |                                    |                          |
| M                       | 24 years                           | 35 years                 |
| 0-16                    | 3%                                 | 0%                       |
| 17-30                   | 86%                                | 32%                      |
| 31-50                   | 11%                                | 60%                      |
| 51 +                    | 0%                                 | 8%                       |
| Location                |                                    |                          |
| Kumburegama South ( n ) | 24                                 | 4                        |
| Alut Henegama ( n )     | 13                                 | 21                       |
| Total ( n )             | 37                                 | 25                       |

Source:

Survey 2007.

and migration cannot be easily interpreted as distress induced. In the local vicinity there are some eighteen tea factories that are important sources of employment. Indeed, these factories and the surrounding tea fields have propelled a parallel in-migration of women and men from less prosperous areas of Sri Lanka. It is significant that many of the local young people we interviewed regarded these occupations as low status and unattractive, reflected in the fact that some tea factory managers have to actively recruit in the Dry Zone, traveling there annually to seek out workers. 5

Alut Henegama lies almost 80 km from Kurunegala in Polpithigama Division, on the edge of the Dry Zone. The final 8 to 10 km to Alut Henegama is along a dirt track. The 'village' consists of six settlements spread over several square kilometers, with dirt tracks crisscrossing a rather untidy, part-cultivated scrubland of beetroot fields, trees, and grassland. Combined, the six settlements support 550 households and a population of more than 2,000. This is a traditionally poor and environmentally marginal area, and Alut Henegama is the poorest village in the division. There is no electricity and no water supply except from wells. International and domestic migration has become an established fact of life and, at a settlement level, migration can be viewed as induced by distress. The village officer estimated that of these 550 households, 100 had a current (as of mid-2007) migrant absent from their household and a further 200 had experienced migration in the past. International migration, the prevalent migration stream in Alut Henegama, is almost exclusively to the Middle East and undertaken by married women over thirty years of age; domestic migration is largely for garment factory work and involves single women younger than thirty (Table 3). In the village, vegetable farming is the main economic activity and the principal cash crop is beetroot. Some subsistence rice, coconuts, and cashews are also cultivated. Holdings tend to be small, however, and no one has title to their land because this is an area of forest reserve that was illegally encroached on from the mid-1970s. 6 Farming rarely delivers an adequate livelihood, and with no other employment opportunities in the area, many households have to engage in migration to meet basic needs. The remittance dependency rate (annual remittances as a percentage of total income) among survey migrant households in Alut Henegama was 48 percent, compared with 26 percent in Kumburegama South, reflecting the centrality of migration to household survival in Alut Henegama (Table 2).

## Research Methods

The field research was based on a four-tier research protocol (Table 4). The first task was to identify the research sites. The choice of Kurunegala and Galle districts (in the Wayamba and Southern provinces, respectively) was guided and informed by local knowledge and past field experiences of the Sri Lankan authors of the article. Having made the initial district choice, available secondary information and background data (primarily economic and demographic) were collected during the first half of 2007. This was followed by a reconnaissance trip to Kurunegala and Galle districts during which the field sites were confirmed, initial meetings were held with local leaders and government officials, and local permissions were obtained. We were then also in a position to collect secondary data and information pertaining to the specific settlements where we aimed to work.

The second stage of the research, in June 2007, involved a further reconnaissance visit to the settlements to undertake more structured interviews with local officials, local leaders, and migrants (current and former) and their families. These sometimes took the form of group discussions and sometimes individual interviews, depending on the circumstances. The intention was to gain as full an initial picture as possible of the research sites in general, their economies, household

Table 4. Field methods and sequencing

|   Research stage | Methods                                                                                                                                                                                           | Data and information collected                                                                                                                                                      |
|------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                1 | Desk study, reconnaissance field visit and unstructured interviews with key informants to identify appropriate research sites and to obtain support and permission of local officials and leaders | Secondary data and information on research districts and settlements; initial familiarization with research sites                                                                   |
|                2 | Second field visit to interview local officials (11 in total), former and current migrants and the families of current migrants (17 interviews), and other key informants (4 interviews)          | Additional secondary information; qualitative information based on interviews and group discussions                                                                                 |
|                3 | 100 semistructured questionnaires (50 in each research site), carried out with the household head in most instances                                                                               | Baseline data on household size, education levels, livelihoods, land ownership, land use, wealth, household services, assets, and patterns and prevalence of migration and mobility |
|                4 | 50 interviews with migrants or their families, purposively drawn from the 100 semistructured questionnaires                                                                                       | Qualitative information on motivations, strategies, and experiences to complement the baseline data                                                                                 |

livelihoods, and, more specifically, the incidence and forms of migration prevalent in the areas. In Kumburegama South we interviewed the Village Officer or Grama Niladhari (GN), the Divisional Secretary (DS), the HumanResourceDevelopmentAssistantfortheDS Office, and the Land Use Planning Assistant. Other key informants interviewed included two tea factory proprietors and two factory managers. Finally, in Kumburegama South, we interviewed five villagers (both returnee migrants and the husbands of absent international migrants) and seven tea factory workers (four in-migrants from the Dry Zone and three workers drawn from the local area). In Alut Henegama we interviewed an equivalent range of officials and local people: the DS Officer, the Village Officer, the Skills Development Assistant, the Human Resource Development Assistant, the Assistant Administrative Officer (GN), and the Assistant Divisional Secretary; and five former migrants and the families of absent migrants.

These largely unstructured interviews and discussions informed and guided the third stage of the research, a semistructured questionnaire that was piloted in August 2007 in a village outside Matara. The questionnaire was then carried out during August and September 2007 among fifty households in each of the two research sites (one hundred households in total) selected on the basis of a quota sample according to migration experience. The head of the household was interviewed where possible, and a time convenient for the respondent agreed on beforehand. The data were analyzed using SPSS.

The fourth and final part of the research process, undertaken in March 2008, was a series of follow-up interviews with fifty respondents drawn from the original one hundred households included in the survey questionnaire. The sampling was purposive (or judgmental) in that we wished to gain a deeper insight into the migration motivations, pathways, 'strategies,' and experiences of a range of migrants (and migration types). Wethus interviewed ten returned female international migrants, ten household heads (or de facto household heads) of currently absent international migrants, five domestic male migrants, the household heads of fifteen current domestic female migrants, and ten female domestic migrants. Because of the patterns of migration in the two sites, the majority of the interviews relating to international migration were held in Alut Henegama and those relating to domestic migration were concentrated in Kumburegama South. The interviews were also used as a means to crosscheck the information gathered through the survey questionnaire.

Prior to each interview, the relevant questionnaire was reread and background information was noted. A checklist of questions relevant to the particular circumstances of the household or individual was then drawn up in addition to a list of generic questions encompassing questions related to attachment, communication, and contact between migrant and home; the motivations for migration and for staying away; views of home (household and village) and the reintegration of returnees; and income generation, remittances, and skills acquisition. The interviews generally took between thirty and sixty minutes to complete. Although this article draws on the semistructured questionnaire to inform and contextualize the discussion, the majority of the primary material referred to is drawn from the interviews.

## Migration Experiences

The study sites were selected to reflect different migration streams and to embody different migration experiences (Table 1). In Kumburegama South, the dominant mode of out-migration was of unmarried women and men, mostly in their twenties, leaving home to work in domestic garment factories; international migration was limited. In Alut Henegama, there was rather more international than domestic migration, and most of these international migrants were married women over thirty years old who were traveling to the Middle East to take up work as domestic maids. We discuss each in turn to illustrate how these two streams, from different migration contexts, differently shape household relations and livelihoods, thus connecting process, people, and place.

## Domestic Factory Work: Disconnecting Migrants from the Household

Traditionally, migration has been interpreted as being driven by economic forces, most classically in the work of Ravenstein (1889) and in the Harris and Todaro (1970) model. Ravenstein (1889), after reviewing migration in Europe and North America, deduced from the 'vast array of facts and figures . . . certain principles or laws which appear to me to guide all migratory movements' (286). Although Ravenstein noted the role of other factors in driving migration (bad or oppressive laws, an unattractive climate, uncongenial social surroundings, compulsion), 'none of these currents of migration can compare in volume with that which arises from the desire inherent in most men to 'better' themselves in material respects' (286). 7

In Kumburegama South the economic (pecuniary) attractions of factory work over other locally available opportunities were not clear cut. Returns, per day, were broadly similar (see Table 5), and the financial costs of living away from home were invariably higher. 8 Tharindu's eldest daughter (twenty years old), for example, was employed in a garment factory in the Matara area and although she earned 8,000 Rs per month, this was said to barely cover her living expenses. 9 Our interviews with migrants and migrant families showed that it was the social opportunities that arose from living away from home, engaging with people from other places, and experiencing the modern, urban, and factory world that seemed to entice young women to leave, as much as the economic benefits that might accrue. On their monthly visits home, factory workers would show off their new-

Table 5. Wage rates and salaries: 2007

| Activity                                             | Wage                                                     |
|------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| Local work                                           |                                                          |
| Farm laboring in Alut Henegama                       | 300-400 Rs per day without meals, 8,000 Rs per month     |
| Tea factory work (male or female), Kumburegama South | 8,000-10,000 Rs per month with overtime (20 Rs per hour) |
| Dometic migrant work                                 |                                                          |
| Garment sector work in Matara (female)               | 6,000 Rs per month; 8,000 Rs per month with overtime     |
| Garment sector work in Koggala FTZ (female)          | 7,000 Rs per month                                       |
| Machinist, garment factory, Colombo (male)           | 12,000 Rs per month                                      |
| Overseas migrant work                                |                                                          |
| Housekeeper, Bahrain (female)                        | 11,000 Rs per month, all found                           |
| Housekeeper, Kuwait (female)                         | 13,000 Rs a month, all found                             |

Note:

At the time of the research, US$1 = 115 Rs.

Sources:

Interviews with villagers, government officials, and key informants.

found sophistication by wearing jeans, sporting mobile phones, and walking confidently through the village. It is significant, perhaps, that although there were opportunities to take up garment factory work while continuing to live at home by commuting, the tendency was for young, unmarried women to leave the village. 10 A similar set of considerations appeared to be at work regarding other opportunities in the area, particularly in the numerous tea factories: Work in such factories was widely seen as low status and indicative of considerable hardship, in part because of the nature of the work involved, which was viewed as less 'modern' than the garment factory alternative, manually handling a traditional crop rather than assembling a manufactured product. It would be easy, on this basis, to see factory work by young people from Kumburegama South as a lifestyle choice, a rite of passage, and an opportunity to see the wider world. It was not quite this straightforward, however, because there were also risks in leaving home.

As other studies of factory work in Sri Lanka have noted, garment factory workers are often stigmatized as 'Juki girls,' with the term's associated connotations of sexual promiscuity. 11 Just as Mills (1997) explored in the Thai context, female garment factory workers in Sri Lanka are careful to cultivate an image as 'good girls'' rather than 'Juki girls.' As Lynch (2007) wrote: 'In the face of the social changes brought by liberalization, many [female factory workers] have

wrestled with how to reconcile their concern for duty, obligation, tradition, and social convention with their desires to experience and enjoy new opportunities and accompanying new ways of thinking about and acting in the world' (127).

Evidently, there is a puzzle in the migration story already outlined. Returns to work at home and away were broadly similar and, in addition, leaving home harbored the threat that young, unmarried women would be stigmatized. Yet, most of the young women we interviewed preferred to leave than to stay. To be sure, the attractions of breaking out of the constraining family and village contexts were significant, but we also offer an alternative economic explanation associated with the spatial disconnection that factory work engenders.

In essence, spatial distance and migrant absence enabled daughters and sons to extract themselves partially from the household socially and economically, as well as physically. The household head had fewer claims on the income generated by migrants who no longer returned home each evening, less knowledge of how it was being spent, and less ability to capture this income for the wider good of the family. Migration, therefore, permitted a partial individualization of economic and social behavior, allowing the migrant to make decisions not filtered and mediated through the household.

This observation concerning the disconnection of the migrant from home opens up an alternative view of the economics of migration. Although in household terms the economic attractions of such migration might not be clear-cut, in individual terms they could well be. If, because of migration, the household is no longer able to capture income earned for the collective good, then living away from home provides much greater scope for the migrant subjects-and especially female migrants from poorer backgrounds-to save and spend money in their own personal interests. In the past, the goods and cash needed to fund a dowry were assembled by parents. The higher the value of the dowry the 'better' the marriage prospects of the daughter. The inability of poorer parents to fund a dowry that might permit some upward mobility through marriage is a particularly powerful incentive to take up factory work. It also creates a moral justification for such individualized behavior: If parents are unable to provide an adequate dowry for their daughter, then the daughter should, through factory work, be able to pursue the means for a dowry herself.

In addition to individualized behavior, physical disconnection can also make temporary social disconnection more permanent. As Erfurt (2005) wrote, 'The growing economic independence of women workers and the assumption by the worker of the responsibility for collecting a dowry enables them to enjoy more autonomy in the selection of their future companion' (32). Factory work provides an opportunity to find a husband (or wife) outside the narrow confines of the village. Having found a husband who lives elsewhere, the young woman will leave home and depart from the village. This process, of course, is not only to be associated with migration; it needs to be seen set within the wider context of Sri Lanka's economic liberalization and the progressive commoditization of rural life. Lynch (2007) maintains that one outcome of liberalization has been 'that often parents simply [can] not collect enough to secure a desired match' (174).

Working away from home in a factory, therefore, can represent an opportunity for a young woman to exert her own agency in a context that was traditionally family and village centered and patriarchal. The income earned, if some is saved, is rarely for the 'good of the family' but for the good of the migrant herself. It could be used to finance her escape from the village and, in the case of those from less prosperous households, to propel the migrant into better marriage prospects than would otherwise be the case. At issue, therefore, is not just respective wage rates between different activities (as in Table 5) but how the location of these activities leads to different hierarchies of control over the wages earned. This issue of control also extends to such strategic household decisions as marriage as well as more mundane, everyday decisions over social interaction and entertainment, which become progressively removed from the authority of fathers (and mothers). The twenty-five-year-old eldest daughter of the Muhandiram family, for example, left home as an unmarried woman to work in a garment factory in Colombo. There she fell in love and married. The couple now lives in Katunayake, close to Colombo, still working together in a garment factory. Although this young woman has continued to remit a portion of her income to her family in Kumburegama South to support the education of her younger brothers and sisters, the process of disconnection has been set in motion.

At a general level, we see the migration of young, unmarried women being both a household-based decision with a household motive and an outcome of the individualization of accumulation strategies, the latter tending to become further accentuated over time. Especially among poorer households where the parental bargain cannot be sustained in the context of a modernizing economyandsociety, parents can no longer expect their unmarried children to take part in household-based

accumulation strategies. Lakshika, seventeen years old whenweinterviewedthehousehold,hadjustcompleted her schooling but was already working in a garment factory in Colombo, notwithstanding the resistance of her father, mother, and two elder, unmarried brothers. Her parents, with just half an acre of land (0.2 ha), could not afford to support the family beyond a meager standard of living, giving Lakshika the moral latitude to strike out on her own. Like several other young women we interviewed, Lakshika saw little attraction in remaining in Kumburegama South, either in terms of employment opportunities, livelihood prospects, or, for that matter, lifestyle and living patterns.

In addition to gaining a degree of financial and social independence through migration, workers' worldviews and their expectations change. The village officer in Kumburegama South told us that young women with an experience of factory work tend to look down on 'stayat-home' young men whose horizons are not as broad as their own. 12 As a result, he told us, village men become less valued and attractive as marriage partners. A striking number of female migrants had married men while working away from home, around 20 in a settlement of 150 current and former migrant households, according to the village officer in Kumburegama South. The social changes associated with migration of this type in Kumburegama South have had follow-on effects in supporting a secondary in-migration stream. The women who migrate to the village from poorer regions of Sri Lanka to work on the tea lands and tea factories of the area are also attracted, it was suggested to us on several occasions during interviews, by the prospects of finding a marriage partner among the 'left behind' men of the village.

Thepreceding discussion highlights the difficulties of coming to firm views about the roots and outcomes of factory migration, whether in economic or social terms. The experience of factory work does, we propose, lead to a degree of social separation to accompany the spatial separation of migration. The familial bargain is not easily fractured, however, and a fraying of this bargain is morecommonasyoungwomenattempttoreconcilethe tensions and inconsistencies of being modern and being dutiful. Although relative poverty might mean that single women have greater latitude to accumulate funds for their dowries, relative poverty also provides a moral compunction to remit funds home to sustain household living standards. In addition, it is important to see migration implicated in a process of social and economic transformation; this process, furthermore, works its way out differently between individuals and house- holds (and villages) for a range of locally contingent factors. Finally, and to complicate matters still further, there is, as Lynch (2007) observed, a mismatch between discourse and practice. Female factory migrants wish to be viewed locally as good village girls; they also wish, however, to cross the rural-urban, traditional-modern, simple-sophisticated divide. The difficulty of overtly crossing this line, however, is that in doing so they might become tainted with the Juki girl label. 13

## International Migration: Connecting the Household, Unsettling the Family

International migration from Alut Henegama, almost exclusively to the Middle East, is undertaken mainly by married women who take up positions as housekeepers and maids (Table 6). Whereas almost 80 percent of domestic factory migrants were unmarried women and men with a mean age of twenty-four years, among migrants to the Middle East almost all were married women and with a mean age of thirty-five years. 14

Unlike migration for domestic factory work, international migration is not part of an 'escape' strategy, whether from a stultifying household and village context or out of an impoverished situation; it is mainly pursued as part of a household livelihood strategy and for the sake of the family. Even though the distance traveled is considerably greater, the period away considerably longer, and the opportunities to maintain contact during the period of absence considerably fewer and more costly, this form of migration does much more to 'fix' the migrant in the household. The logic and rationale for migration is firmly rooted, particularly to begin with, in a desire and need to accumulate funds for household expenditure and investment, whether that is in the construction of a new house or the extension of an existing one, the setting up of a small business, or meeting school fee payments for children. Given the depressed state of the local village economy and the limited employment opportunities in the area, migration exists not just as a more attractive alternative to in situ possibilities (as in Kumburegama South) but as a necessary, even essential, pillar of many household livelihoods. To reiterate, the survey revealed that the remittance dependency rate among migrant households in Kumburegama South was 26 percent, and in Alut Henegama it was 48 percent. In other words, in Alut Henegama migrants were contributing almost half of the income of their households (Table 2). In Kumburegama South, remittances were making a not inconsequential contribution to the household budget; in

Table 6. Profile of international migrants from Alut Henegama to the Middle East

| Interview #   | Migrant (age)        | Destination                          | Dates                | Abuse and difficulties abroad                                                                       | Difficulties at home arising from migration                          |
|---------------|----------------------|--------------------------------------|----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1. #27        | Wife and mother (39) | Kuwait, housemaid                    | 2006-2008            | Lack of food; nonpayment of salary for 3 months                                                     | -                                                                    |
| 2. #28        | Wife and mother (32) | Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, housemaid   | 2001-2003, 2004-2006 | -                                                                                                   | Alcoholism; mismanagement of funds by husband                        |
| 3. #29        | Wife and mother (29) | Saudi Arabia, housemaid              | 2004-2006            | -                                                                                                   | Difficulties for husband in raising young daughters                  |
| 4. #30        | Wife and mother (25) | Kuwait, housemaid                    | 1997-1999            | Sexual harassment; underpayment                                                                     | -                                                                    |
| 5. #31        | Wife and mother (21) | Dubai and Saudi Arabia, housemaid    | 1998, 2003-2005      | Sexual harassment; underpayment                                                                     | -                                                                    |
| 6. #32        | Wife and mother (33) | Saudi Arabia, housemaid              | 2004                 | Sexual harassment; physical beatings; underpayment; returned home early                             | -                                                                    |
| 7. #33        | Wife and mother (32) | Middle East, housemaid and childcare | 2005-2007            | Sexual harassment; physical beatings; migrant moved five times before finding a nonabusive employer | -                                                                    |
| 8. #34        | Wife and mother (26) | Dubai, housemaid                     | 1998-2000, 2006-2008 | Sexual harassment leading to pregnancy and birth of daughter fathered by employer in Dubai          | Alcoholism; mismanagement of funds by husband; breakdown in marriage |
| 9. #35        | Daughter (26)        | Qatar, housemaid                     | 1997                 | Sexual harassment; lack of food; underpayment; returned home early                                  | -                                                                    |
| 10. #36       | Wife and mother (38) | Kuwait, housemaid                    | 2000-2002, 2002-2003 | -                                                                                                   | -                                                                    |
| 11. #37       | Single mother (37)   | Saudi Arabia, housemaid              | 2004                 | Sexual harassment; returned home early                                                              | -                                                                    |
| 12. #39       | Wife and mother (32) | Kuwait, housemaid                    | 2004-2008            | -                                                                                                   | Alcoholism; inability to work land; problems taking care of daughter |
| 13. #41       | Wife and mother (22) | Dubai and Kuwait, housemaid          | 1999-2004, 2006-2008 | -                                                                                                   | Alcoholism; breakdown in relations between husband and wife          |
| 14. #42       | Single mother (32)   | Middle East, housemaid               | 1993-                | -                                                                                                   | -                                                                    |
| 15. #43       | Wife and mother (45) | Middle East, housemaid               | 2003-2004, 2005-2008 | Sexual harassment                                                                                   | Alcoholism; breakdown in relations between husband and wife          |
| 16. #45       | Wife and mother (38) | Kuwait, housemaid                    | 2004-2006, 2007-2008 | -                                                                                                   | -                                                                    |
| 17. #46       | Wife and mother (37) | Kuwait, housemaid                    | 2004-2008            | -                                                                                                   | -                                                                    |
| 18. #47       | Wife and mother (24) | Kuwait, housemaid                    | 1999-2001, 2007-2008 | -                                                                                                   | Difficulties raising daughters                                       |
| 19. #48       | Daughter (23)        | Saudi Arabia, housemaid              | 2001-2003, 2004-2008 | Sexual harassment causing the migrant to change                                                     | -                                                                    |
| 20. #49       | Husband              | Middle East, driver                  | 2007-2008            | employers four times -                                                                              | -                                                                    |
| 21. #50       | Wife and mother      | Kuwait and Saudi                     | 2003-2004,           | Lack of food; underpayment                                                                          | -                                                                    |
|               | (43)                 | Arabia                               | 2004-2006            |                                                                                                     |                                                                      |

Note:

Age is given as age at first departure.

Alut Henegama, remittances were essential to keeping many of the households concerned from sinking into destitution.

There is a widely held view, among villagers as well as local officials in the DS Office in Polpithigama, that international migrants are likely to suffer harassment, often of a sexual nature, while they are abroad. It is for this reason that vulnerable, unmarried daughters were actively dissuaded by parents from engaging in international migration; the perceived likelihood of sexual harassment might harm their marriage prospects. These risks are not imagined. In our interviews with twentyone households in Alut Henegama that had engaged in international migration, nine reported a negative experience in the migration destination, five reported problems at home, and two households reported problems in both the destination and at home (Table 6). Most common was sexual harassment, but also reported were physical abuse, lack of food, and underpayment. One interviewee in Alut Henegama who worked in the Middle East between 2005 and 2007 had to move five times before she found acceptable employment, telling us that 'even if I die without food, I will never go to the Middle East [again] to work as a house maid!' Difficulties at home included alcoholism on the part of the left-behind husband, mismanagement of funds remitted, troubles raising children, and marriage breakdown. Just five households (one of which involved the sole male international migrant) out of the twenty-one interviewed reported no significant difficulties during their time away.

Nonetheless, many women, even following such experiences, returned to the Middle East for a second or even a third sojourn. International labor migrants become'lockedin'totheprocess and even failed migrants often tried again and again given the possibility for considerable income generation and savings. Although significant numbers of migrants failed to achieve their hopes with respect to income generation, others succeeded, and these success stories were well known and much talked about.

Anushka first traveled to Kuwait in 2000, returning in 2002 before leaving for a second foray later in the same year. Over four years she managed to remit home more than 300,000 Rs. To put this figure into perspective, this remitted income is equivalent to the gross income that would be generated from 1,000 days of agricultural work (at 300 Rs per day) in the local area, or some forty months of garment factory employment (at 8,000 Rs per month; see Table 5). Lakshika's remittances enabled the family to rise up the village social ladder, a point that her husband was keen to emphasize. They now live in a large and well-built house with modern sanitation facilities and solar power, and they own a television, motor vehicle, motorbike, and mobile phone. Although their improvements might not have fed into the creation of a sustainable village-based livelihood for the household-two of the couple's three children work in garment factories-they have led to a comparatively comfortable life. Compare their experience, however, with that of Sanduni, who took two trips to Dubai, first in 1998 for two years, and then again in 2006. The first trip was successful, but her husband took to drinking and frittered away the money Sanduni remitted. Relations with her husband subsequently deteriorated, but even at the risk that these might worsen further, Sanduni felt compelled to leave again for a second disastrous trip to Dubai in 2006. She was sexually harassed by her employer, became pregnant, and had to return home after four months to give birth to a daughter. Her husband rejected the daughter, the couple separated, and Sanduni herself is shunned by other villagers.

In addition to 'locking in' households to international migration, notwithstanding the evident and common negative social effects, there is another process at work. Unlike domestic migration, which can be seen as a means of escape from the village offering the possibility of an exit from poverty for young women from poorer families, international migration is motivated and propelled by the need to support, sustain, and enhance household livelihoods; however, long-term absence regularly creates marital tensions and difficulties. Women who previously were under the control of their husbands return home with newfound confidence and earning power and begin to exert greater control over decision making. Dutiful wives become 'new' women, wearing new clothes, sometimes insisting on controlling their own money, and with new habits and attitudes. A mental, experiential, and physical (in terms of appearance) gap opens up between the stay-at-home husband and the migrant wife, one that is inherently destabilizing and hard to bridge. 15 In an interview with Chathu, who had undertaken three trips to the Middle East, two to Kuwait and one to Lebanon, we were told that she now knows what 'is right and wrong' in the house, knows how to cook properly, and is uncomfortable without all the equipment and facilities she became used to in Kuwait, leading to a feeling of frustration and inadequacy on her part. Although most attention has traditionally focused on financial remittances, which are relatively easily measured, at least as important are

the direct and indirect social, cultural, and political remittances that migration engenders. In the context of rural China, Murphy (2002) wrote of 'taste transfer' (88) from urban to rural areas as migrants become avid consumers as well as disciplined workers. In a similar way, the return of women to the Middle East even after sometimes quite serious harassment might reflect not just the way in which households become dependent on remittances but also the elevated lifestyle expectations that arise.

These outcomes of international migration are well appreciated by local people, which raises the question of why husbands do not prevent their wives from leaving in the first place. Here two factors, we propose, are at work. To begin with, whereas parents have considerable (but not absolute) power over their daughters, wives have more agency and can challenge and go against the wishes of their husbands. Nuwan, for example, a thirtyseven-year-old man in Kumburegama South with one daughter and a wife working as a housemaid in Kuwait, told us that he did not want his wife to look for work in the Middle East and did not support her efforts, but that she went anyway and 'without my permission.' Nuwan talked of the difficulties he faced looking after their daughter, who was eight years old when her mother first left for the Middle East in 2002 and was fourteen at the time of our interview. 16 At the same time, there is the pressing need to secure income to supplement the meager livelihoods possible from either limited land resources or limited local opportunities outside farming. This means that some husbands feel they have little or no choice in the matter. Nuwan, for example, reported that his wife had remitted 105,000 Rs over four years and the household's ownership of a motorbike and mobile phone was only possible because of engagement with work overseas.

The melding of increased economic buoyancy and deteriorating household social relations is illuminated in the case of Madushani, who made her first sojourn to Jordan to work as a housemaid in 2001. Not long married and with a young daughter, she left against the wishes of her husband and her mother-in-law. 17 Living alone and struggling to take care of his daughter, albeit with the support of his mother, Madushani's husband turned to drinking. Madushani returned to KumburegamaSouthin2004,buttheirmaritalrelationship quickly became difficult as she tried to deal with her husband's alcoholism and he struggled to handle his newly self-confident wife with her modern clothes and ways of talking. Unwilling to stay at home, Madushani left for Jordan for a second time the following year, stay- ing until January 2008. The experience of this couple shows how the social transformations wrought by migration can be deeply destabilizing from a family standpoint, even though they might be empowering for the individual. In her first overseas foray to Jordan in 2001, Madushani left home, in Ravenstein's (1889) terms, to achieve the 'desire inherent in most [wo]men to 'better' themselves [and households] in material respects' (286); by the time of her second trip in 2005, Madushani gave the clear impression in the interview that migration was now propelled equally by the desire to escape from home. It should be added that these repeated forays have been economically successful and at the time of the interview in early 2008 the family was building a new house.

Unlike domestic migration, where we suggest there occurs an individualization of activity as young women and men become partially independent wage earners with increased decision-making space to act in their own perceived self-interests rather than in the interests of their wider household, international migration raises the bargaining power, status, and decision-making authority of the migrant in the context of the household, rather than separate from it. Both forms of movement and work can be seen to be raising women's status and influence, but in the first case outside and, over time, increasingly separate from the household and in the second, within the context of the household.

## The Operation of the Household: Reflections on One Process in Two Sites

Our work in Kumburegama South and Alut Henegama stresses that not only do we have to open the household box and peer inside, as Sen (1990) encouraged, but that we also need to keep looking again and again inside the household if we are to understand the transformative effects of migration and the work that accompanies (and justifies) migration. Household members are continually engaged in (re)negotiating their place and position in the household, with the result that the household itself-the social 'container'-is in flux, partly because of the way that its members pressure the structural scaffold and moral envelope of the household and its operating principles and partly because of the buffeting of the household by wider forces of social and economic transformation. The so-called patriarchal bargain (Kabeer 1997) justifies intrahousehold gender asymmetries of power through the protection that men can offer women by means of

the social framework of the household. In this context, women who opt out of the household, although they might be in a position to control their income, lose the support, protection, and insurance that come from being part of a male-headed household. This bargain is under pressure in Sri Lanka (and elsewhere), however, with a liberalizing economy and society. As Murphy (2002) said in her study of migration and rural change in China, migrants do 'sometimes pursue strategies that run counter to family ideals and so, for example, sons may be disloyal and mothers may be unreliable' (66). In this regard, she noted the increasing tendency for young female migrants to eschew arranged marriages and make their own marriage decisions and for new brides to continue to work away from the village against the wishes of their husbands (Murphy 2002).

At first sight, the key difference between the prevalent migration streams in Kumburegama South and Alut Henegama is that the former is predominantly domestic and the latter mainly transnational. This difference leads into a discussion that places the emphasis on geographical distance and cultural difference, stressing that women working in the Middle East travel several thousand kilometers and live and work in a cultural context very different from their own (religion, language, diet, dress, etc.). Although we can see these factors playing a role, the more important distinction lies elsewhere, in the migrant subject's relationship to the household. This difference directs attention to the migrant worker as daughter in Kumburegama South and the migrant worker as wife and (often) mother in Alut Henegama.

Domestic factory work and migration operate in tandem to produce the effects outlined in our study. Factory work alone would not be (as) transformative as we have sketched out. It is not, therefore, just the experience of working in a modern factory and earning an income that is significant; equally important is the act of leaving home and living outside the household. It is the combination of migration and factory work that restructures gender and generational relations, reworks intrahousehold dependencies, shifts the balance of bargaining power, creates new spaces of agency for women, and builds confidence. Like Kabeer (1997), we propose that the transformative outcome of factory work owes much to its spatial location outside the village.

It is all too easy to see the tensions and disconnections that we have outlined reflecting intrahousehold divisions of a gender and generational nature. Many parents, however, supported their children's efforts to secure work outside the village. Sampath's two sons are both garment factory workers in Colombo, yet he and his wife were pleased they had widened their horizons, found something other than work on the tea lands of Kumburegama South, and might find partners from outside the area. Ambivalence, even confusion, was common when it came to migration, both for migrants and their wider households. Young female factory workers wished to be modern and progressive but saw the risks to their reputation from being seen as too modern; they wished to maintain their image as good village girls, but not if this meant staying in the village and working on the land; there was a moral compunction to work for the sake of the family but also a growing degree of individualization of accumulation over time. In the case of international migration, husbands were very aware of the risks, challenges, and ructions that arose from their wives' working in the Middle East but appreciated the economic benefits that might accrue. Even village officers were torn between what they perceived to be the potentially corrosive effects of migration and the necessity for poorer households in marginal areas to source work and income beyond the local area.

In his study of women workers in two of Sri Lanka's export processing zones (in Kandy and Katunayake), Hancock (2006) speculated about the contradictory results he obtained from his qualitative interviews and quantitative survey regarding the question of whether such work was leading to 'empowerment.' He wrote that 'the major conclusion to be drawn from these contrasts is that the participants in my research were leading complex lives, in which processes of empowerment and disempowerment were working simultaneously' (237). The other complication is that we should be careful to keep some explanatory and conceptual space between questions of agency, empowerment, well-being, and material prosperity. As some of the cases briefly presented in this article indicate, it is possible, for example, to raise prosperity while undermining well-being or to achieve agency in one context while remaining disempowered in another.

## Conclusions

We see migration being connected to four axes of change. First, the temporal dimension of migration involves the dynamics and perturbations in society and economy that arise and emerge from engagement in the process. Migration brings with it social interactions, cultural contacts, economic opportunities, and livelihood risks that would not have arisen in the absence

of migration. Second, migration alters the spatial dimensions and reach of the individual, household, and settlement. The livelihood footprints or spatial signatures of each of these units stretch to new contexts linking them with people, places, and activities often spatially far removed from their former ambits. To understand the household economy we need to factor in nonlocal activities; to interpret the sustainability of the settlement, we are increasingly required to view the settlement as functioning within a broader theater of economic activity.

The third axis of change concerns the way in which migration is implicated in wider transformations in Sri Lankan society and economy, as we have described earlier with regard to the collection of dowry. As Pfeiffer (2003) wrote in his study of intrahousehold cooperative conflict in Mozambique, 'the increasing commoditization of agricultural societies can have a transformative effect on intrahousehold dynamics' (90). Finally, we have sought to reveal the disorder of ordinary lives. There are some general patterns we can identify from the two villages studied and their populations' engagement with migration. It is, moreover, important to identify these patterns. What is also obvious, however, is that households and individuals-from their

## EXAMPLEOFAMULTI-SITEDHOUSEHOLD

Figure 2. Ahousehold in change: Spatial, social, and economic ructions. Source: Interview 6, Kumburegama South, 7 March 2008.

<!-- image -->

perspectives-were taking risks and gambling on the basis of uncertainty. Beneath the general picture of change is a degree of turbulence that is far from incidental and far from trivial, as Table 6 shows.

In toto, migration in the two study areas alters contexts, processes, and situations. 18 Migration changes relations between the genders and the generations. Established norms that structure how men and women, young and old, and parents and children relate to one another are altered by migration. As we have attempted to show, however, these effects do not occur in such a way that it is possible to read off migration's effects in a singular manner. Multiple and parallel processes of connection and disconnection are underway in the research sites. Changing household relations are, in turn, situated within the wider context of changing spatial relations between the village and the world beyond. We do not suggest that, formerly, settlements in Sri Lanka were worlds unto themselves, but we do note the intensifying manner of the incorporation of households and settlements into wider cultural, social, and economic circuits. In addition, migration reshapes and redirects the livelihood paths that individuals mark out for themselves and sometimes for their families. Figure 2 illustrates some of these spatial, social, and economic

ructions in the context of a single, extended household in Kumburegama South. It shows how the household is becoming spatially fragmented with household members living away from home, even abroad; it hints at how wives and daughters and daughters-in-law are pressing against the norms of society; and it also illustrates how rural households are coming increasingly to rely on nonfarm and ex situ work to sustain their standards of living. Migration is, evidently, not the only show in town, but it does play a centrally important part in these changes.

Toend,whatoftheconnection-disconnection motif that has structured the article? The theme of connection focuses on the degree to which migration becomes part of established patterns of activity in economy and society. It emerges from such normal patterns and, if anything, further supports and cements them. 19 Migration does not become a destabilizing and transformative process but rather a sustaining one. In addition, the theme of reconnection addresses the transformative possibilities that arise and emerge from migration. Here, migration becomes a force for change, whether in economic (driving a process of accumulation), social (reshaping the modus operandi of the household), or cultural (altering aspirations and worldviews) terms. This claim echoes Thieme's (2008) recent argument that migration causes people to enter new social fields and their engagement with these fields can lead to changes in the grammar of living (habitus). Such changes are communicated back to the source community or household whether directly through return or indirectly through various forms of remittance (social and political as well as financial). We can see this process 'in action' in some of the cases recounted earlier: wives who bring back newfound beliefs about acceptable practice and attempt to reproduce them at home and daughters who make decisions about their marriage partners, challenging the patriarchal bargain that structures the operation of the household. Finally, the theme of disconnection pays attention to the way that migration can lead to the dissolution of the household and the progressive alienation and detachment of the migrant from their household and village.

In Kumburegama South and Alut Henegama, connection, reconnection, and disconnection are all in evidence, often operating side by side as the process of migration, the forces of social and economic transformation, the exigencies of sustaining livelihoods, and the continuities and resilience of established norms come together in a mosaic of change. Households and communities with significant levels of migration can only be understood when the actions, activities, and outlooks of migrants are integrated into any analysis. Migration, self-evidently, causes the spatial separation of people from their homes and families; it also, though, connects places, identities, and social processes and results in a dual tendency, on the one hand, to forge new or entrench established connections and dependencies (whether social or spatial) and, at the same time, to challenge or dissolve existing connections and dependencies.

## Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to the British Academy for its generous financial support (grant code SG-45093). In addition we would like to acknowledge the time and hospitality provided by the villagers, tea factory workers, tea factory managers, and government officials interviewed during the research.

## Notes

1. In this article, we use Global South as denoting the developing, less developed, or Third World-or the South (see Rigg 2007, 3).
2. This tension was also explored at length in Lynch's (2007) study of migrant factory workers in Sri Lanka.
3. These village names are pseudonyms, as are the names of all the individuals mentioned in the article.
4. Table 4 shows that female migrants from Kumburegama South outnumbered men by only a small proportion. Most studies indicate-or assume-that women dominate such migration streams (see Erfurt 2005; Lynch 2007), and most academic attention has been directed at women factory workers. In this regard it is worth noting that the actual numbers belie this balance of scrutiny and attention. In 2005, taking into account employment in all of Sri Lanka's export processing zones and industrial parks, the respective employment figures for women and men were 92,124 and 34,929, with men therefore making up 28 percent of the total labor force (Hancock 2006).
5. We interviewed two tea factory managers who reported that two thirds of their combined workers were nonlocal.
6. The area began to be settled in the mid-1970s as individuals and families from other parts of the district and beyond began to move into the forest. The government did not prevent this process of invasion and settlement, and the authorities have since given their tacit support to the village by regularizing such things as schooling and putting it under the auspices of the Division Office. Onthis basis, villagers hope that in time the government will recognize their rights and give them ownership of the land.
7. Eighty years later, Cebula and Vedder (1973) opened their paper by writing, 'We begin by postulating a theoretical framework in which the decision to migrate is treated as an investment decision' (205).

8. Several interviewees noted that it was possible to earn more working in the village than in a garment factory.
9. Another factory worker interviewee in Kumburegama South estimated that the costs of boarding house rental and meals amounted to around 6,000 Rs per month, representing a very significant slice of take-home income. At the time of the research, US$1 = 115 Rs.
10. One garment factory, 21 km from Kumburegama South, operated a daily bus service picking up workers from the village and other settlements in the vicinity.
11. Juki is the brand name of a Japanese manufacturer of industrial sewing machines commonly used in garment factories in Sri Lanka and the female workers in our research sites are often called 'Juki girls,' as they are in Lynch's (2007) study. Other names used in our research sites include garment kello , garment keli , garment badu , and garment baduwa. All these terms are demeaning to the workers.
12. In a study in rural China, women were said to favor men with migration experience because they had 'more in their heads than soil' (Murphy 2002, 113).
13. For another study of the challenge of negotiating 'shame,' see Lindquist's (2004) work on Indonesia.
14. For a broad background to the political economy of Sri Lanka's international migration, see Sriskandarajah (2002).
15. This social gap that arises following migration is not dissimilar to that noted earlier with regard to domestic factory work. The key difference is that in the case of married international migrants it is reflected back into the household, creating tensions that cannot be easily accommodated.
16. Nuwan's wife worked in Kuwait from 2002 to 2005 and left for a second sojourn in 2007. At the time of our interview with Nuwan, she was still absent.
17. In five other cases it was evident that women had taken up work in the Middle East against their husbands' and families' wishes.
18. With regard to her research in rural China, Murphy (2002) wrote, 'the values internal to rural society that inform rural spending practices are continually reinvented to suit emerging social and economic contingencies, and many of these contingencies are precipitated by migration' (91). '[M]igration and remittances promote change not only by infusing cash and modern goods into the countryside but also, and more significantly, by transforming the shared values and social practices that are associated with spending on life-cycle goals' (103).

## References

- Boyle, P. 2002. Population geography: Transnational women on the move. Progress in Human Geography 26 (4): 531-43.
- Cebula, R. J., and R. K. Vedder. 1973. A note on migration, economic opportunity, and the quality of life. Journal of Regional Science 13 (2): 205-11.
- Connell, J., B. Dasgupta, R. Laishley, and M. Lipton. 1976. Migration from rural areas: The evidence from village studies. Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
- Conway, D., and R. B. Potter. 2007. Caribbean transnational return migrants as agents of change. Geography Compass 1 (1): 25-45
- Curry, G., and G. Koczberski. 1999. The risks and uncertainties of migration: An exploration of recent trends amongst the Wosera Abelam of Papua New Guinea. Oceania 70:130-45.
- Datta, K. 2009. Transforming South-North relations? International migration and development. Geography Compass 3:1-27.
- deHaan, A. 1999. Livelihoods and poverty: The role of migration-A critical review of the migration literature. Journal of Development Studies 36 (2): 1-47.
- ---. 2002. Migration and livelihoods in historical perspective: A case study of Bihar, India. Journal of Development Studies 38 (5): 115-42.
- Deshingkar, P., and D. Start. 2003. Seasonal migration for livelihoods in India: Coping, accumulation and exclusion. Working Paper 220, Overseas Development Institute, London. http://www.odi.org.uk/publications/ working papers/wp220.pdf (last accessed 15 January 2009).
- Elmhirst, R. 2002. Daughters and displacement: Migration dynamics in an Indonesian transmigration area. Journal of Development Studies 38 (5): 138-66.
- ---.2004. Labour politics in migrant communities: Ethnicity and women's activism in Tangerang, Indonesia. In Labour in Southeast Asia: Local processes in a globalized world , ed. R. Elmhirst and R. Saptari, 387-406. London: Curzon-Routledge.
- Elson, R. E. 1997. The end of the peasantry in Southeast Asia: A social and economic history of peasant livelihood, 1800-1990s. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan.
- Erfurt, J. 2005. Those days and nowadays: Employment, poverty reduction and empowerment in Sri Lankan export manufacturing industries. Working Paper Series No. 7 (May), Centre for Poverty Analysis, Colombo, Sri Lanka.
- Esara, P. 2004. 'Women will keep the household': The mediation of work and family by female labor migrants in Bangkok. Critical Asian Studies 36 (2): 199216.
- Gardner, K., and F. Osella. 2004. Migration, modernity and social transformation in South Asia: An introduction. In Migration, modernity and social transformation in South Asia , ed. K. Gardner and F. Osella, xi-xlviii. New Delhi, India: Sage.
- Gill, G. 2003. Seasonal labour migration in rural Nepal: A preliminary overview. Working Paper 218, Overseas Development Institute, London. http://www.odi.org.uk/ publications/working papers/WP218.pdf (last accessed 15 January 2009).
- Gilmartin, M. 2008. Migration, identity and belonging. Geography Compass 2 (6): 1837-52.
- GoSL. 2004. Annual statistical report of foreign employment. Colombo, Sri Lanka: Bureau of Foreign Employment.
- Hampshire, K. 2002. Fulani on the move: Seasonal economic migration in the Sahel as a social process. Journal of Development Studies 38 (5): 15-36.
- Hancock, P. 2000. Women workers still exploited: Revisiting two Nike factories in West Java after the economic crisis. Inside Indonesia (April-June): 62.

- ---. 2001. Rural women earning income in Indonesian factories: The impact on gender relations. Gender and Development 9 (1): 18-24.
- ---. 2006. Women, work and empowerment: A portrait of women workers in two of Sri Lanka's export processing zones. Norwegian Journal of Geography 60:227-39.
- Harris, J., and M. P. Todaro. 1970. Migration, unemployment and development: A two sector approach. American Economic Review 60 (1): 126-42.
- Hicks, D. A. 2002. Gender, discrimination, and capability: Insights from Amartya Sen. Journal of Religious Ethics 30 (1): 137-54.
- Ho, E. L.-E. 2008. Citizenship, migration and transnationalism: A review and critical interventions. Geography Compass 2 (5): 1286-300.
- Jones, H., and T. Pardthaisong. 1999. The impact of overseas labour migration on rural Thailand: Regional, community and individual dimensions. Journal of Rural Studies 15 (1): 35-47.
- Kabeer, N. 1997. Women, wages and intra-household power relations in urban Bangladesh. Development and Change 28:261-302.
- Kobayashi, A. 1984. Emigration to Canada and the development of the residential landscape in a Japanese village: The paradox of the sojourner. Canadian Ethnic Studies 16 (3): 111-31.
- ---. 1994. For the sake of the children: Japanese/ Canadian workers/mothers. In Women, work, and place, ed. A. Kobayashi, 45-68. Montreal, Canada: McGill-Queen's University Press.
- ---. 2007. Transnationalism through the life course: HongKongimmigrants in Canada. Asia Pacific Viewpoint 48 (2): 151-67.
- Koning, J. 2005. The impossible return? The post-migration narratives of young women in rural Java. Asian Journal of Social Science 33 (2): 165-85.
- Lawson, V. 1999. Questions of migration and belonging: Understandings of migration under neoliberalism in Ecuador. International Journal of Population Geography 5 (4): 261-76.
- Ley, D., and A. Kobayashi. 2005. Back to Hong Kong: Return migration or transnational sojourn? Global Networks 5 (2): 111-27.
- Lindquist, J. 2004. Veils and ecstasy: Negotiating shame in the Indonesian borderlands. Ethnos 69 (4): 487-508.
- Lynch, C. 2007. Juki girls, good girls: Gender and cultural politics in Sri Lanka's global garment industry. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- McKay, D. 2003. Cultivating new local futures: Remittance economies and land-use patterns in Ifugao, Philippines. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 34 (2): 285-306.
- ---. 2005. Reading remittance landscapes: Female migration and agricultural transition in the Philippines. Geografisk Tidsskrift, Danish Journal of Geography 105 (1): 89-99.
- Mills, M. B. 1997. Contesting the margins of modernity: Women, migration, and consumption in Thailand. American Ethnologist 24 (1): 37-61.
- ---.1999. Thai women in the global labor force: Consumed desires, contested selves. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Mosse, D., S. Gupta, M. Mehta, V. Shah, J. Rees, and the KRIPB Project Team. 2002. Brokered livelihoods: Debt, labour migration and development in tribal Western India. Journal of Development Studies 38 (5): 5988.
- Murphy, R. 2002. How migrant labor is changing rural China. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Perera, J. 1992. Trends in agrarian change: Past and present in Wewegama, a village in the Mahaweli Development Project area, Anuradhapura District. In Agrarian change in Sri Lanka , ed. J. Brow and J. Weeramunda, 95-129. New Delhi, India: Sage.
- Pfeiffer, J. 2003. Cash income, intrahousehold cooperative conflict, and child health in Central Mozambique. Medical Anthropology 22:87-130.
- Ravenstein, E. 1889.The laws of migration. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 52(2): 241-305.
- Rigg, J. 2007. An everyday geography of the Global South. London and New York: Routledge.
- Rogaly, B., and D. Coppard. 2003. 'They used to go to eat, now they go to earn': The changing meanings of seasonal migration from Puruliya District in West Bengal, India. Journal of Agrarian Change 3 (3): 395433.
- Sen, A. 1990. Gender and cooperative conflicts. In Persistent inequalities: Women and world development , ed. I. Tinker, 123-49. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Sheller, M., and J. Urry. 2006. The new mobility paradigm. Environment and Planning A 38 (2): 207-26.
- Silvey, R. 2000. Diasporic subjects: Gender and mobility in South Sulawesi. Women's Studies International Forum 23 (4): 501-15.
- ---.2006. Consuming the transnational family: Indonesian Migrant domestic workers to Saudi Arabia. Global Networks 6:23-40.
- Silvey, R., and V. Lawson. 1999. Placing the migrant. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 89 (1): 121-32.
- SPSS. 2007 SPSS for Windows, release 17.0. Chicago, IL: SPSS, Inc.
- Sriskandarajah,D. 2002. The migration-development nexus: Sri Lanka case study. International Migration 40 (5): 283-307.
- Thieme, S. 2008. Sustaining livelihoods in multi-local settings: Possible theoretical linkages between transnational migration and livelihood studies. Mobilities 3 (1): 51-71.
- Wolf, D.L. 1990. Daughters, decisions and domination: An empirical and conceptual critique of household strategies. Development and Change 21:43-74.
- ---. 1992. Factory daughters: Gender, household dynamics and rural industrialization in Java. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- World Bank. 2009. World development report 2009: Reshaping economic geography. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Correspondence: Department of Geography, University of Ruhuna, Matara, Sri Lanka, e-mail: khewage@sltnet.lk (Hewage); chamindakumara03@yahoo.com (Kumara); Geography Department, Durham University, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK, e-mail: j.d.rigg@durham.ac.uk (Rigg).