<!-- image -->

## Geographical Review

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/utgr20

## THE ROLE OF NOSTALGIA IN (RE)CREATING PLACE ATTACHMENTS FOR A DIASPORIC COMMUNITY

## Holly R. Barcus &amp; Amangul Shugatai

To cite this article: Holly R. Barcus &amp; Amangul Shugatai (2021): THE ROLE OF NOSTALGIA IN (RE)CREATING PLACE ATTACHMENTS FOR A DIASPORIC COMMUNITY, Geographical Review, DOI: 10.1080/00167428.2020.1852406

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00167428.2020.1852406

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

曲

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor &amp; Francis Group, LLC.

Published online: 08 Feb 2021.

[Submit your article to this journal](https://www.tandfonline.com/action/authorSubmission?journalCode=utgr20&show=instructions)

Article views: 199

[View related articles](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/mlt/10.1080/00167428.2020.1852406)

[View Crossmark data](http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1080/00167428.2020.1852406&domain=pdf&date_stamp=2021-02-08)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## THE ROLE OF NOSTALGIA IN (RE)CREATING PLACE ATTACHMENTS FOR A DIASPORIC COMMUNITY

HOLLY R. BARCUS

and AMANGUL SHUGATAI

The concept of nostalgia implies a level of romanticization of a place or time period, a selective 'remembering' of a place held in the imagination of an individual or group of people. These imaginings  produce  a  narrative  that  both  extends  place  attachments  to  other  community members,  and  potentially  create  shared  myths  of  place.  We  use  the  Mongolian  Kazakh population  as  a  case  study  of  how,  over  time,  strong  place  attachments  evolve  into  placebased narratives of home and identity for diasporic communities. We argue that strong place attachments are the foundation of place-based narratives, but these narratives are nostalgic as well, highlighting key ethnic and cultural practices that reinforce ethno-cultural unity and create idyllic images of place to help maintain a collective place valuing despite residence far away. Keywords: Kazakh, mobility, Mongolia, nostalgia, rural idyll.

## IMAGINING  THE  'NATION'

Endless  open  land  stretches  into  apparent  infinity  across  much  of  the  Mongolian  landscape . . . Random gers , 1 roaming herds here and there, surrounded by nothing but nature's own sculptures, further contribute to the romantic notion that Mongolia is an unbounded land, where nomads wander free. (Myadar 2011 , 335 )

O rhon Myadar describes the images promoted by tourism agencies seeking visitors  to  Mongolia.  Myadar  continues,  critically,  to  unpack  these  images, writing:

The  essentialised  and  romanticized  construction  of  Mongolia  as  the  'timeless  home  of nomads' has endured - despite the fact that 'nomadic' hardly describes modern Mongolia or the majority of its people. Rather, the Mongolian landscape and Mongolian herders are used to construct and perpetuate the romantic, if medieval, portrayal of Mongolia in order to  serve  the  need  of  outsiders  for  an  imagined  Other  and  the  need  of  Mongolians  for a cultural demarcation and social bond. (Myadar 2011 , 336 )

As Myadar so succinctly illustrates, the romanticized images of rural people and places helps establish narratives and imaginaries that can bring populations together -a nationalist trope. Myadar is speaking broadly of Mongolia and the imagery that is  perpetuated  about  this  rapidly  developing  and  urbanizing  place.  These  images stand  in  contrast  to  reports  of  life  in  Ulaanbaatar,  where 45 . 7 percent  of  the

HOLLY  R.  BARCUS,  DeWitt  Wallace  Professor  of  Geography,  Geography  Department,  Macalester College, Saint  Paul,  MN 55105 ,  USA;  [barcus@macalester.edu].  AMANGUL SHUGATAI, Researcher, Regional Studies Department,  International Affairs Institute, Mongolian  Academy  of  Sciences, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia; [amangulsh@mas.ac.mn]

DOI: 10 . 1080 / 00167428 . 2020 . 1852406

2

3 . 1 million population resides (NSOM 2016 b, 27 ) and which Joseph Hincks gives the dubious  distinction  as  'the  most  polluted  capital  in  the  world'  ( 2018 ).  Myadar's comments speak to the influence of imagery on national social imaginations and the portrayal  of  idealized,  if  highly  unrealistic,  images  of  place.  But  these  images  are grounded in a history that many Mongolians remember. Mongolia's rapid development moved the nation from a socialist society where 57 percent of the 2 million population  resided  in  rural  places  in 1989 (NSOM 2003 , 79 )  to  one  that  is  now 68 percent urbanized (NSOM 2016 b, 50 ). But these images do not speak to all young Mongolians, who occupy a digital, globalized world, travel internationally, and seek the latest trends via their mobile phones, and who may see their history, but not their selves, represented in these nationalist rural images. As one young, affluent, Western educated Mongolian woman laments in flawless English,  '  . . .  they  still don't  have real coffee  in  the  countryside  . . .  '  Although  a  seemingly  offhand comment,  it  nonetheless  underscores  a  tension  between  place  imaginaries  and place  realities,  and  the  evolution  of  place  attachments  at  different  spatial  scales and across time periods and generations.

Much has been written about nationalism, ethnonationalism, and homelands as these concepts relate to the emergence of new nation-states in post-Soviet countries (Esenova 2002 ;  Diener 2009 ;  Tsuda 2009 ),  as  well  as  nationalism  specifically  in Mongolia (Batbayar 2002 ;  Bulag 1998 ;  Sneath 2010 ;  Diener  and  Hagen 2013 ).  The project of nation-building in Mongolia began during the Socialist period and was reoriented  during  the  early  transition  years  (from  early  to  mid1990 s)  when Mongolia  shifted  to  a  democratic  form  of  governance  and  capitalist  economy. Much of the imagery associated with Mongolia's nationalism reflect those images so aptly described by Myadar. These images depict landscapes and livelihoods that are common in Mongolia to the majority of the Khalkh ethnic group ( 84 . 5 percent in 2015 ), if not to the 22 other ethnic groups (NSOM 2016 b, 36 ). The Kazakh population,  however,  has  taken  a  different  path.  In  the  early 1990 s,  Kazakhs  became the  second  nationality  ( ündesten )  in  Mongolia  (Bulag 1998 ;  Sneath 2010 ).  This group,  comprising 3 . 9 percent  of  the  total  population  of  Mongolia,  is  not  only ethnically  and  culturally  distinct  from  the  dominant  Khalkh  ethnic  group,  but  is largely clustered in western Mongolia, primarily Bayan-Ulgii aimag (province) and Hovd aimag (Figure 1 ). In Bayan-Ulgii, Kazakhs comprised nearly 88 . 6 percent of the total population in 2015 , making the province an ethnic minority-majority area (NSOM 2016 a, 28 , 40 ). Mongolian Kazakhs are recognized by the state as a separate nationality  and  maintain  an  ethno-cultural  territory  in  an  isolated  region  of  the country, where they maintain a strong presence, despite successive and sometimes extensive migration flows to Kazakhstan (Diener 2009 ;  Werner and Barcus 2009 ) and more recently to Ulaanbaatar (Barcus and Shugatai 2018 ).  Holly  Barcus  and Cynthia Werner ( 2015 ) argue that regardless of the ebb and flow of migrants from this region, Mongolian Kazakhs continue to maintain strong place attachments to western Mongolia. These place attachments take the form of religiosity, kinship ties, and language versatility-elements visible on the landscape in the form of mosques,

and  Kazakh  language  business  signs  (Barcus  and  Werner 2015 ).  As  migration trajectories shifted towards Ulaanbaatar in the later 2000 s, many Kazakhs continued to remain in place, acting as cultural anchors of place attachment and ethnic identity for those who migrated away (Barcus and Shugatai 2018 ).

## Mongolia's Kazakh Population by Aimag, 2015

FIG. 1 -Kazakh Population in Mongolia.

<!-- image -->

In this paper, we argue that the strong place attachments, developed in western Mongolia  and  perpetuated  by  Kazakh  migrants  to  Ulaanbaatar,  are  evolving  into a form of rural idyll, which is passed to younger generations through images of bucolic places, material reminders of place, and community festivals and celebrations. Kazakh migrants to Ulaanbaatar actively seek to keep these culturally specific rural images vibrant for younger generations, despite having no inclination towards return migration.  We  build  our  conceptual  framework  around  three  key  literatures-nostalgia, place attachment and identities, and the rural idyll-in our attempt to better understand how connections to place evolve over time for populations who have moved away from the home place. Drawing from Leila Scannell and Robert Gifford's ( 2010 ) conceptual framework of a multidimensional place attachment, we build on the idea that  place  attachment  is  a  process  extending  from  the  individual  scale  to  broader community scales via social imagination and processes of memory and nostalgia. We use the Mongolian Kazakh population as a case study of how, over time, strong place attachments  evolve  into  place-based  narratives  of  home  and  identity  for  diasporic communities. In the next section we provide an overview of the literatures upon which we draw to develop our argument, followed in the third and fourth sections with our case study and methodology sections. Our analysis highlights our findings and the last section offers concluding thoughts.

CONCEPTUAL  FRAMEWORK: THE  IMAGINATION  OF  PLACE, MIGRATION, AND  NOSTALGIC REMEMBERINGS

## PLACE  ATTACHMENT  AND  PLACE  IDENTITIES

Since  Edward  Relph's 1976 book, Place  and  Placelessness ,  highlighted  the  question  of  whether  people  were  losing  their  connections  to  place,  scholars  have

4

sought  to  define  and  understand  the  connection  between  people  and  places. Relph focused on concepts of insideness, outsideness, and authenticity of place. Taking a different track, behavioral psychologists, such as Proshansky and others ( 1983 ),  consider  place  from  the  perspective  of  the  self.  For  Harold  Proshansky and others, '[Place Identity] is a sub-structure of the self-identity . . . consisting of  . . .  cognitions  about  the  physical  world  in  which  the  individual  lives'  . . . including ' . . . memories, ideas, feelings, attitudes, values, preferences, meanings, and  conceptions  of  behavior  and  experience  which  relate  to  the  variety  and complexity  of  physical  settings'  ( 1983 , 59 ),  basically  place  identity  is  about  the self, a form of self-identity. John Harner, however, argues that '[p]lace identity is a  cultural  value  shared  by  the  community,  a  collective  understanding  about social  identity  intertwined  with  place  meaning'  ( 2001 , 660 ).  Culture,  thus,  is deeply intertwined with place identities (Relph 1976 ), although individual agency mediates  the  extent  to  which  either  place  identities  or  cultural  practices  are internalized or practiced.

In 2010 ,  in  response  to  the  growing  number  of  definitions  and  dimensions within the place-attachment literature, Scannell and Gifford proposed a  multifaceted  definition  for  place  attachment,  which  they  termed  the  PersonProcess-Place (PPP) Model ( 2010 )  (Table 1 ).  'According  to  [the]  person-processplace framework, place attachment is a bond between an individual or group and a  place  that  can  vary  in  terms  of  spatial  level,  degree  of  specificity,  and  social  or physical features of  the place,  and is  manifested  through affective,  cognitive,  and behavioral psychological processes' (Scannell and Gifford 2010 , 5 ). This framework is useful for laying out the nuances of place attachment, how at different scales place attachment  can  be  both  highly  specific  to  an  experience  of  one  person  while capturing  a  broader  sense  of  connection  for  the  group.  It  also  helps  us  consider disentangling the existence of place attachments from the process of creating place attachments.

Evaluating the PPP Model and other definitions of place attachment, Bernando Hernández  and  others  assert  that  much  attention  has  been  paid  to  defining  and

TABLE 1 -'THE  TRIPARTITE  MODEL  OF  PLACE  ATTACHMENT' (ADAPTED  FROM  SCANNELL  AND  GIFFORD 2010 , 2 )

| PLACE ATTACHMENT                   | PLACE ATTACHMENT     | PLACE ATTACHMENT     | PLACE ATTACHMENT                 | PLACE ATTACHMENT                               | PLACE ATTACHMENT           | PLACE ATTACHMENT   |
|------------------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|
| PERSON                             | PERSON               | PROCESS              | PROCESS                          | PROCESS                                        | PLACE                      | PLACE              |
| INDIVIDUAL                         | CULTURAL / GROUP     | AFFECT               | COGNITION                        | BEHAVIOR                                       | SOCIAL                     | PHYSICAL           |
| Experience Realizations Milestones | Religious Historical | Happiness Pride Love | Memory Knowledge Schemas Meaning | Proximity- maintaining Reconstruction of place | Social arena Social symbol | Natural Built      |

measuring the 'person' aspect of the PPP Model, with more attention needed on the 'process' and 'place' dimensions (Hernández and others 2014 , 134 ). While one aspect of  process  is  how  place  attachments  develop  for  either  an  individual  or  a  group, another perspective is to consider how place attachments change through time. In other words, once one establishes that place attachments exist, do these same attachments remain static through time? Two recent dimensions of this research include the importance of 'memory as an enabler of place attachment' (Lewicka 2014 , 49 ) and the interplay between mobility and place attachment. As others have noted, there is much evidence  that  length  of  residence  in  a  place  affects  place  attachments,  with  place attachment often increasing with length of residence (Gustafson 2014 ; Lewicka 2014 ). However, as astutely pointed out by Maria Lewicka, although this association seems clear, it is of moderate strength with many additional factors clearly contributing to an overall  sense  of  place  attachment  ( 2014 , 50 -51 ).  Mobility  and  place  attachment, however,  are  also  not  mutually  exclusive;  rather,  many  examples  exist  of  highmobility societies with strong place attachments (Gustafson 2014 , 38 ).

Place  attachments  and  identities,  when  viewed  from  afar,  whether  by  geography or time, and especially when held in comparison to a challenging living environment  in  the  present,  may  simultaneously  take  on  positive  images  and lose negative aspects. The imagined home place takes on a mythical existence in personal  and  group  narratives,  complete  with  key  social  and  familial  practices, and bucolic images of peaceful, beautiful places. Such narratives can be specific to an individual, a group, or indeed a nation, as Myadar ( 2011 )  so  aptly notes.

## LINKING  PLACE  ATTACHMENT, PLACE  ELASTICITY, NOSTALGIA, AND  MIGRATION

Migration away from a beloved home place, whether voluntary or forced, can create a desire to remain connected, however imperfect, through cultural practices, oral histories, or storytelling that evoke portrayals and imagery of a faraway place. Family histories and genealogies, for example, are a means by which individuals establish connections to the past, inclusive of people and places (Lewicka 2014 , 53 -54 ).  The concept of place elasticity further describes how individuals who move away from a home place seek to maintain connections and identities associated with that place, including  strong  place  bonds,  permanence,  and  portability  (Barcus  and  Brunn 2010 ).  Place  elasticity  is  premised  on  an  individuals'  connection  to  a  place-that there  is  a  reason  to  perpetuate  connectedness  between  people  and  place.  In a  previous  article,  we  argued  that  '  . . .  immobile  populations  play  a  key  role  in maintaining and perpetuating cultural narratives for ethnic minority populations by anchoring cultural narratives to place' (Barcus and Shugatai 2018 , 8 ). For example, places  such  as  summer pastures, or  local  institutions,  or  burial  sites  might  foster strong place bonds through direct experience with these places. Out-migrants may also maintain a continued dialog with a place (portability) by staying up-to-date on local news and events via social media or other telecommunications technologies, visiting, or attending family events. Lastly, permanence describes a ' . . . desire to

6

perpetuate place bonds through time and generations . . . .' (Barcus and Shugatai 2018 , 8 ). In this article, we see place elasticity as establishing a connection between migrants and western Mongolia, and a broadly shared sense of identity specific to place.  In  other  words,  these  are  not  just  cultural  or  ethnic  identity  practices  but rather  they  are  cultural  and  ethnic  identities  that  are  associated  with  a  specific territory  or  place  that  is  at  once  experienced  and  reimagined  through  time.  It  is this aspect that we see connecting to concepts of nostalgia.

The concept of nostalgia implies a level of romanticization of a place or time period, a selective 'remembering' or 'creating' of a place held in the imagination of a person or group. Such rememberings or imaginings are held not only by individuals, but begin to produce a narrative that both extends place attachments to other community members and also potentially creates shared myths of place  dependent  as  much  upon  selective  forgetting  as  selective  remembering. 'Nostalgia  is  adaptive-it  helps  to  put  together  broken  parts,  builds  a  bridge between  past  and  present,  increases  self-esteem  and  life  satisfaction,  and  reinforces  social  ties'  (Lewicka 2014 , 53 ).  Nostalgia  and  place  elasticity,  then,  find common ground linking people and places through memory and imagination.

While the concept of place elasticity helps us understand how people remain connected to a specific place after migration, the idea of nostalgia describes how memory  and  imaginaries  interact  to  (re)create  or  preserve  particular  valued characteristics  of  a  specific  location,  thus  potentially  transferring  place  attachments across generations.

## CREATING  A  RURAL  IDYLL?

Although discussed extensively in Global North studies of rurality (Bunce 1994 ), scholars  have  not  sufficiently  applied  the  concept  of  the  rural  idyll  to  Global South and Global Middle 2 countries. In the rush towards urbanization, modernization,  and  'development,'  sentiment  for  the  rural  and  the  old  somehow seems to have escaped the scholarly gaze in these world regions. Or more likely, the quest for the modern, global urban lifestyles portrayed on television and the Internet can leave rural places seemingly distant and disadvantaged in comparison. But the view from within a population that has moved away may be quite different from outsider perspectives.

Writing of the origins of the rural idyll concept in his book The Countryside Ideal , Michael Bunce describes the link between 'agrarian simplicity and rural nostalgia.' 'At heart it is an idea which romanticizes pre-industrial culture, casting the traditional rural  lifestyle  and  communities  of  the  past  in  nostalgic  contrast  to  the  dynamic individualistic culture of the present. Perhaps the most important element of this is the  attachment  of  reverential  status  to  farming  as  a  way  of  life'  (Bunce 1994 , 29 ). Although, for Mongolia, we might substitute 'herding' for 'farming,' Bunce captures the sentiment of nostalgia for rural places and the associated imagery of the rural idyll in North America. He further asserts that the theme of rural nostalgia is, historically,

a  relatively  common  '  . . .  social  response  to  the  urbanization  process  . . .  '  (Bunce 1994 , 5 ). Key terms that embody the concepts of the rural idyll include 'Nostalgic/part of  national  identity,  traditional,  problem  free,  closely  knit/friendly,  better  environment, place for play, simpler/more natural,' while the rural anti-idyll is described as 'backward,  unsophisticated,  unfriendly,  environmentally  damaged,  dull,  boring, poorly provided with services, sleepy' (Yarwood 2005 , 24 ). Each set of terms reflects a  different  perspective  on  rural.  Richard  Yarwood,  however,  is  making  a  broader point, which is at least in part about how rural places are interpreted differently by different groups of people, and the images and associations with rural vary accordingly ( 2005 , 21 ).

While nostalgia is a key aspect of the rural idyll (Yarwood 2005 ), linking nostalgia to  national  identity  is  also  important  for  the  development  of  a  rural  idyll.  These linkages have been less common in Global South and Global Middle countries where the rush to 'develop' often depicts rural places in terms similar to the rural anti-idyll. Mongolia,  in  this  case  departs  from  this  portrayal  of  its  rural  spaces,  at  least  on a national scale. Instead, bucolic rural images are the essence of nationalist images in Mongolia, despite scholarly critique (Batbayar 2002 ; Myadar 2011 ).

In  summary, memory, nostalgia, and the narratives of place attachments and identity  shared  by  migrants,  with  each  other  and  across  generations  in  the  new destination,  perpetuate  a  shared  place  attachment  that  reinforces  social  imaginations of a place. The following case study provides an example of this process. We argue  that  linking  ideas  of  nostalgia,  place  attachment,  and  the  rural  idyll  are increasingly  important  in  Global  Middle  countries,  where  newly  affluent  urban populations  may  reflect  on  aspects  of  their  rural  origins  that  are  less  present  in their  urban,  modern  lifestyles.  By  using  memory,  knowledge,  stories,  narratives, artifacts,  pictures,  language,  and  urban  festivals,  former  residents  of  western Mongolia create a 'rural idyll' for younger generations. Western Mongolia becomes a social symbol of Kazakh culture and history-a rural idyll that, while specific to the Kazakh population, also embraces the images of landscape and rurality common to the broader nationalist images utilized by the Mongolian government.

## CHANGING  MOBILITIES  AND  PLACE  ATTACHMENTS  AMONGST  THE  MONGOLIAN  KAZAKHS

To develop our argument, we focus on recent urban in-migrants, whose ethnicity and  cultural  histories  are  closely  tied  to  a  particular  remote,  rural  region  of Mongolia,  to  explore  the  permutations  of  place  attachment  and  identities  as expressed through daily life. We further explore how these place attachments are communicated  to  younger  generations,  typically  children,  whose  only  personal experiences with the rural home of their parents or grandparents is through stories and short visits. In these ways and in everyday rememberings, place is invoked and created through memories and imaginations of others, thus creating in the social imagination  of  ethnic  Kazakhs  in  Ulaanbaatar,  a  level  of  nostalgia  for  the  rural places from which they or their kin migrated.

8

## WHO  ARE  THE  KAZAKHS  IN  MONGOLIA?

Kazakhs comprise the second largest ethnic group in Mongolia ( 3 . 9 percent of the total  population),  after  ethnic  Khalkh  Mongols,  although  the  overall  size  of  the Kazakh population is quite small (NSOM 2016 b). From the perspective of cultural, linguistic,  and  religious  practices,  Kazakhs  are  distinct  from  the  Khalkh  Mongol majority,  as  most  Kazakhs  are  Muslim,  whereas  Buddhism  and  Shamanism  are more  common  among  other  ethnicities  in  Mongolia.  In  Bayan-Ulgii,  while Mongolian  is  the  language  of  interethnic  communication  and  official  business, ethnic  Kazakhs  primarily  utilize  Kazakh  as  their  first  language.  In  a  relatively isolated and borderland province such as Bayan-Ulgii, this practice did not represent significant challenges to the Kazakh population and was one aspect of a strongly felt  sense  of  ethnic  identity  in  the  region.  The  presence  of  mosques, especially in towns and in the provincial center Ulgii, further cemented a sense of place specific to this ethnic group (Barcus and Werner 2015 ). In essence, then, Bayan-Ulgii Aimag, despite  being  sparsely  populated  and  on  the  borderlands  of  Mongolia,  has a distinctively Kazakh human landscape; the mosques are both visible and audible, as the calls to prayer occur throughout the day. Kazakh is the primary language and celebrations, food ways, gers (portable, round dwellings), and handicrafts all reflect the influence of this ethnic group. Importantly, this is also a place in which ancestors are  buried,  and  this  is  an  important  element  of  Kazakh  place-based  identities (Barcus  and  Werner 2015 ).  The  experience  of  having  both  a  visible  landscape reflective of the presence and material artifacts of the Kazakh population, as well as the ability to converse in Kazakh, creates a sense of place that is distinct culturally and linguistically from other places in Mongolia.

Movement away from western Mongolia can represent a significant disruption in an individual's sense of identity and place. It is not the intention of this research  to  ascribe  identities  and  interpretations  of  individual  identities  to a  group or individual, but rather to describe how living in this particular place with many coethnics can create a living environment and coethnic community that  is  not  easily  replicated  elsewhere.  It  is  also  an  important  aspect  of  place elasticity  and  nostalgia-when  an  individual  is  far  from  a  treasured  place  or home, elements of daily life may be ascribed more significance in remembering than might have been given originally.

## THE  CASE  STUDY

The physical, cultural, and social landscapes of western Mongolia stand in stark contrast  to  those  of  Ulaanbaatar.  As  the  primate  city  and  capital  of  Mongolia, Ulaanbaatar  is  a  sprawling,  densely  populated  urban  area  with  extensive  ger districts,  significant  pollution  issues,  congestion,  and  social  competition  for employment  and  education.  In  our  interviews,  Kazakh  respondents  revealed levels of discrimination in access to services, as well as small acts of discrimination that make daily life much harder in Ulaanbaatar.

Internal  migration  from  the  countryside  is  a  top  challenge  facing  urban planners in Ulaanbaatar, including issues of overwhelming levels of air pollution, traffic congestion, and lack of infrastructure development (NCPH and UNICEF 2018 ).  The  city  is  divided  into  districts,  including  areas  in  which  the  residences are  primarily  apartments  and  those  that  are  dominantly  ger  districts.  Ger districts  are  areas  of  housing  and  commerce  characterized  by  small,  privately owned lots often utilizing the traditional felt ger. These districts lack water and sewer  infrastructure  and  are  largely  unplanned  and  sprawling,  although  they include  householders  with  a  range  of  income  and  education  levels.  Nearly 60 percent  of  the  population  in  Ulaanbaatar  reside  in  the  ger  districts  (NCPH and UNICEF 2018 , 15 ).

Kazakhs  comprise  only  a  small  portion  of  the  overall  migrant  flow  to Ulaanbaatar,  are  widely  dispersed  across  the  city,  and  compete  with  other migrants and residents for education, health care, and other basic social services and  employment.  While  several  districts  are  home  to  a  larger  number  of Kazakhs,  they  are  not  significantly  clustered  into  neighborhoods  and  therefore individuals must seek out coethnics through friend and family networks. A few large  mosques  exist  in  Ulaanbaatar  (Figure 2 ),  but  they  are  distant  from  many Kazakh  households  so  individuals  must  either  travel  greater  distances  or  find alternative spaces to observe religious practices.

## METHODOLOGY

We  draw  on 100 questionnaires  and 36 in-depth  life-history  interviews  with ethnic  Kazakh  migrants  to  Ulaanbaatar  who  previously  lived  in  rural  places, mostly  in  Bayan-Ulgii  and  Hovd  aimags  in  western  Mongolia.  Questionnaires were  collected  during  the  summer  months  of 2015 and  life-history  interviews were conducted during the summer months of 2016 .  All  data  were  collected  in Ulaanbaatar. We chose participants using a nested quota sample incorporating age,  sex,  and  migration  experience,  although  we  utilized  a  snowball  sampling method  to  find  potential  participants.  The  majority  of  respondents  migrated post1989 ,  with  a  small  handful  migrating  pre1989 .  Respondents  have  highly diverse levels of education, life experience, and human capital. Some migrated to Ulaanbaatar to attend university, others came with families to create better lives for their children, and others moved as professionals. The life-history interviews included  a  subset  of  the 2015 questionnaire  sample  as  well  as  additional  interviewees  and  are  evenly  divided  between  male  and  female  respondents.  About 33 percent  are 18 -34 years, 39 percent  are 35 -54 years,  and 28 percent  were 55 years and over. Questionnaires and life-history interviews covered a wide range of  topics  including  demographic,  occupational,  and  household  information; migration  histories  and  questions  about  migration;  social  and  economic  situations;  access  to  services;  and  perspectives  on  cultural  practices  and  life  in Ulaanbaatar.

10

FIG. 2 -Mosque in Ulaanbaatar. Summer 2016 . Photo by Holly Barcus.

<!-- image -->

Our  sample  is  intentionally  divided  to  include  respondents  with  different living experiences spanning the ger districts and apartments. We also added field notes and observations of the ways in which place attachments and nostalgia are expressed and intertwined in homes and daily lives. These include observations about  how  place  is  discussed,  connections  to  place  that  may  be  displayed  or evidenced  in  respondents'  homes,  and,  occasionally,  the  foods  served  and  discussed during our interviews. All life-history interviews and questionnaires were conducted by the authors, in Kazakh, Mongolian, or English, depending on the preference of the interviewee, although the majority were conducted in Kazakh. Interviews were transcribed and translated in English, and Atlas.ti was utilized to identify  preliminary  themes  in  the  data.  The  authors  are  native  speakers  of Kazakh  or  English  and  one  author  is  fluent  in  Mongolian.  Interview  location varied,  although  most  interviews  took  place  in  interviewees  homes,  other  locations included workplaces, parks, or cafés. In this article we primarily utilize the life-history interviews, although some questionnaire data are incorporated.

One  advantage  of  this  work  is  our  long  association  with  this  population. While  the  research  team  has  changed  over  the  years,  several  of  the  original members remain part of the team. We, the authors, self-identify as women, and represent insider and outsider perspectives to this population. Engagement with this  community  includes  multiple  fieldwork  periods  in  Bayan-Ulgii,  including 2006 , 2008 ,  and 2009 ,  as  well  as  two  fieldwork  periods  in 2015 and 2016 in Ulaanbaatar,  and  informal  visits  during 2014 and 2019 .  Migration  trajectories have  changed  over  these  time  periods,  and  it  is  not  unusual  to  interview individuals  in  Ulaanbaatar  during  the  later  fieldwork  periods  ( 2015 , 2016 )  that we interviewed in Bayan-Ulgii during the earlier fieldwork periods. We did not seek  these  individuals  out  specifically,  but  their  insights  over  time  illuminate variation in migration priorities that evolve at the individual level in response to policy  changes  and  social  and  economic  opportunities  or  challenges  in  both Mongolia and Kazakhstan over this extended period of time.

Finally,  official  statistics  from  the  National  Statistics  Office  of  Mongolia (NSOM) allow for a tabulation of the total number of ethnic Kazakhs residing in Ulaanbaatar at different points in time. As we have noted in previous articles, the  migration  patterns  of  ethnic  Kazakhs  in  Mongolia  have  shifted  over  time, favoring migration from Mongolia to Kazakhstan (and return) during the early and  middle  years  of  the  economic  transition  ( 1990 s  to  early 2000 s)  and  then shifting towards Ulaanbaatar in more recent years. There are many reasons for the  shifting  mobility  patterns,  not  least  of  all  including  practical  citizenship considerations  as  well  as  more  subjective  imaginings  of  home  and  homelands (Werner and Barcus 2009 ;  Barcus and Shugatai 2018 ).  Interviews and ethnographies are important qualitative means of collecting information about place and migration  and  in  particular,  about  the  nuances  of  both  the  migration  process, outcomes, and insights into home and place (McHugh and Mings 1996 ; McHugh 2000 ;  Mendoza and Morén-Alegret 2012 ).

12

## ANALYSIS  AND  FINDINGS  ~ PERPETUATING  PLACE  ATTACHMENTS

Our data and field notes reveal three dominant themes supporting the contention that place attachments are reimagined and (re)created by those who move away forming a nostalgic and often idyllic narrative of a rural home place for this small and dispersed population.

## BUCOLIC  LANDSCAPES  AND  HAPPY  PEOPLE

Telling and retelling of particular family and community narratives encourages a  group-based  nostalgia  for  western  Mongolia.  We  situate  this  within  the process-place  dimensions  of  the  PPP  framework.  The  narratives  highlight  specific  themes  that  underscore  social  and  physical  place  characteristics  that  are difficult to replicate in Ulaanbaatar. They include narratives of close-knit family, friend  networks,  and  reciprocal  caretaking;  ease  of  communication;  a  shared appreciation of religion, language, and foodways; and stories of nature, environment, and place. While these are descriptive of place, they are also essential  to the process of reaffirming a particular place as important to this particular group of people. These portrayals, whether oral or symbolized in artifacts and practices, exemplify Yarwood's description of the rural idyll as, 'Nostalgic/part of national identity,  traditional,  problem  free,  closely  knit/friendly,  better  environment, place for play, simpler/more natural' ( 2005 , 24 ).

For  example,  the  first  theme  from  our  life-history  interviews  is  the  importance  of  the  physical  environment.  We  see  this  manifest  not  only  in  the  interviews,  but  also  in  artifacts  and  images  present  in  some  of  the  interview  spaces and  the  stories  told  by  our  respondents.  Common  elements  of  these  stories include  animals  such  as  horses  and  sheep,  gers,  activities  such  as  milking  the animals, and natural features such as mountains and rivers. The environmental images are bucolic in nature, never indicating the harshness of the real environment, but rather focusing specifically on positive images, such as the beauty of the landscape.

Gulnar, 3 for  example,  is  a 34 -year-old  mother  of  two  with  an  economics degree from a Mongolian university. She and her husband travel widely due to their  respective  occupations,  but  own  an  apartment  in  Ulaanbaatar  where  we conducted the interview. Gulnar (LH\_ 1 \_ 0016 ) is deeply concerned about the loss of Kazakh culture and the process by which they are educating their two young children. The family speaks only Kazakh at home, attends festivals when possible,  and  seeks  to  educate  their  children  in  Kazakh  practices.  When  speaking about  western  Mongolia,  she  talks  softly  and  thoughtfully,  clearly  drawing a picture for us of her experiences there. Her fondest memories include feeding and milking the animals and playing outside her family's ger. 'I was too small for the horses but I learned how to milk the goats and the sheep the first time. It was really amazing . . . ' (LH\_ 1 \_ 0016 ).

Her memories of western Mongolia, like many other respondents, reflects the peak summer season experiences, when landscapes are beautiful and green, the weather is mild, and there is sufficient food for animals and humans (Figure 3 ). A  middle-aged  male,  Bolatkhan,  also  from  western  Mongolia,  draws  a  similar sense  of  longing  for  this  place  (LH\_ 802 \_ 119 ):  'My  birthplace  is  very  close  with my  heart.  Sometimes  I  miss  my  birthplace.  The  beach  by  the  river,  herding livestock. I love them.' He tells us that his most important reminders of western Mongolia are ' . . . the clean environment. The water is clear, there is also clean air. Here [in Ulaanbaatar] there is no fresh air. [In western Mongolia there are] cool and nice places.' Both Gulnar and Bolatkhan tell these stories to us, but it is clear  that  these  are  also  the  images  and  stories  frequently  relayed  to  their children.

These memories and images of place describe the physical landscape and are deeply entwined with positive images of social and familial experiences. Alikhan, a 30 -year-old male, for example, links the closeness of the auls (encampments of interlinked families in the countryside) to feelings of belonging and happiness. 'The main difference is that in the small provinces we're close, you know everybody. So in that sense, I think that the atmosphere of life and the day-to-day life is that you can interact with everyone you know and say, 'Hi. How are you?' . . . I kind of remember mostly  playing  together  with  the  other  kids.  Activitywise,  we  went  out  in  the morning and came back at night' (LH\_ 3 \_ 0018 ). Again, these stories are frequently told to children about life in the countryside. For a widely dispersed urban population, these narratives portray Kazakh families as tightly linked and closely woven into the fabric of the broader community.

FIG. 3 -Pastures in Western Mongolia. Summer 2009 .  Photo by Holly Barcus.

<!-- image -->

14

In  each  account,  the  respondent  conjures  images  of  bucolic  rural  landscapes, creating  an  idealized  and  nostalgic  version  of  rural  life,  of  life  in  the  summer pastures. These images, however, are not stand-alone. Each also includes a social landscape  that  is  equally  harmonious.  For  example,  Beibut,  a 67 -year-old  male respondent living in the ger districts tells us of his childhood: 'When I was young, I had three sisters and a little younger brother and I was the eldest boy in my family. When I was a little boy, I remember riding a horse. My father had many horses and he participated in horseracing. I enjoyed it very much. I was riding a horse still when I was 16 years old. In the summer my family moved [to the summer pastures] from Tsengal to Dayan. It was a nice place to camp. In the summer we usually milked the mares. All our relatives were living there. It was nice' (LH\_ 19 \_ 0034 ). Our interview took place at his home in Ulaanbaatar, a compound we described in our notes as a bit worn, with two aging gers occupying the center of the area. Beibut, a retired scientist,  worked with the Russians until 1990 .  He  lived  in  Bayan-Ulgii until 1997 when he migrated to Ulaanbaatar, bringing his family to live with him later. On the  day  of  our  interview,  he  was  dressed  in  white  with  an  embroidered  Kazakh tebeteika (an  embroidered hat worn by Muslim men), surrounded by traditional handicrafts, including felted wool rugs ( syrmaqs ) with tus kiiz's (traditional embroidered wall hangings). Behind him were black-and-white pictures of family members, as well as medals for horse riding and eagle hunting. He is active in the Kazakh community and interested in preserving Kazakh culture. In this theme, the importance of both the environmental and social landscapes convey a sense of belonging and  beauty  ascribed  to  western  Mongolia.  These  images  stand  in  contrast  to experiences in Ulaanbaatar, where Kazakhs are rarely able to converse in Kazakh, except at home, and the environment is more urban and industrial.

## MATERIAL  REMINDERS  OF  PLACE: TEXTILES  AND  ARTIFACTS

A second theme linking place attachment to nostalgia and the creation of a rural idyll is the presence of material artifacts in many homes. Traditional textiles are often  subtly  displayed,  integrated  amongst  everyday  items,  and  used  for  daily activities.  For  example,  in  many  kitchens  where  we  conducted  our  interviews over  tea  and baursak (a  type  of  fried  bread),  the  small  kitchen  tables  were covered with pieces of Kazakh embroidery overlain with clear plastic for protection. Other textiles were often visible in homes; textiles that are clearly not made for  general  consumption,  but  rather  either  produced  by  or  for  the  household specifically.

Syrmaqs are felted wool rugs (Figure 4 ), handmade by women and often given to a young couple as a marriage gift from the bride's family (Portisch 2009 ). Although we never witnessed syrmaq production in Ulaanbaatar, it was clear that households used them for various purposes. In one home, Ainur, a middle-aged woman, was caring for a group of young children. As we conducted the interview, the children were  settled  in  an  adjoining  room  watching  cartoons  on  television  and  having

a  snack  while  sprawled  on  several  layers  of  overlapping  syrmaqs.  Portisch  writes about how textiles, and syrmaqs in particular, are often incorporated into the daily living and life lessons of children.

For  a  child  learning  about  syrmaq,  this  process  may  begin  in  a  number  of  different situations.  The  child  may  begin  to  learn  to  recognize  and  remember  this  artifact  as a  woolly surface that is rough and itchy to sit on against the bare skin. It may be warmer sitting on a syrmaq than elsewhere on the floor, and the child may have a visual impression of the colours and patterns as well as an olfactory impression of the syrmaq, which smells of the unwashed lamb's wool it is made of. Later, the child might know this type of artefact as an object that has been designed and created by her mother or grandmother, and is used in certain situations. (Portisch 2009 , 476 -477 )

Syrmaqs, tus kiiz's (Figure 5 ), and other embroidered textiles did not dominate living spaces, but were subtly integrated with more contemporary furnishings. They nonetheless point to a connection between place and community. Discussing craft production in Bayan-Ulgii, Guldana Salimjan writes that '[j]ust as falconry became a vital connection to the Kazakh historical past, natural environment, and traditional culture across Eurasia, handicrafts have also allowed Kazakhs to maintain their identity and traditional  knowledge  as  an  ethnic  minority  in  Mongolia,  and  have  become  an attribute  of  'authentic'  Kazakhness'  ( 2018 , 2 ).  Unlike  falconry,  which  takes  on a  somewhat  iconic  symbolism,  crafts,  such  as  syrmaqs  and  tus  kiizs,  are  everyday reminders  of  ethnic  identity  and  place  connection.  Handicrafts  are  dominantly produced  in  households  in  rural  places  and  they  are  unique  to  the  individual women  who  produce  each  item.  Typically  this  is  a  family  member.  Tus  kiiz,  for

FIG. 4 -Kazakh Syrmaq. Summer 2009 .  Photo by Holly Barcus.

<!-- image -->

16

example, may be passed from mother to eldest daughter at marriage, thus creating another familial link to place and identity, as, in these cases, the textiles were produced by  women  in  western  Mongolia  and  passed  through  the  generations-a  further reminder of the importance of place passed along between generations.

Salimjan  writes  that  '[t]us  kiiz  is  a  medium  for  such  traditional  knowledge transmission as well  as identity  formation  . . .  Material  culture  speaks  to  embodied memories around interpersonal relations and people's connections to land and the materials around them' ( 2018 , 14 -15 ). Finding tus kiiz in our respondents' homes, and additionally, similar embroidered pieces that are reimagined into everyday items, such as tablecloths, reflects the connections that Kazakhs residing in Ulaanbaatar still wish to maintain to western Mongolia. Such material reminders of place underscore the reflective, nostalgic aspects of place attachment for migrants living far from western

FIG. 5 -Kazakh Tus Kiiz. Summer 2009 . Photo by Holly Barcus.

<!-- image -->

Mongolia, acting as reminders of place and home and continuing to connect migrants to  a  distant  but  important  place.  They  become  the  everyday  items  that  younger generations now also see as part of their connection to this faraway place.

## THE  PRACTICE  OF  PLACE: FESTIVALS, COMMUNITY, AND  LANGUAGE

The third theme emerging from the interviews is the role of food, festivals, and language in perpetuating place attachments and cultural identities. Festivals and festival attendance are one manifestation of culture on the landscape. Two large and widely celebrated events for Kazakhs in Mongolia include the Eagle Hunting Festival(s) and Nauryz (the Kazakh New Year celebration). Family events such as the birth of a child, weddings, and funerals are also important festive gatherings of  kin.  As  one  respondent  notes,  'It  is  very  difficult  to  keep  our  religion  and culture  and  tradition.  We  are  a  small  ethnic  group  in  Mongolia.  So  we  often organize  Kazakh  religious  and  cultural  events'  (LH\_ 36 \_ 0051 ).  From  our  questionnaires, we know that 82 percent of respondents attended at least one Kazakh festival  in  Ulaanbaatar  in  the  year  preceding  the  interview  and  only 2 percent had no knowledge of Kazakh festivals (Barcus and Shugatai 2018 ).

Celebrations,  whether  public  or  family-based,  create  an  atmosphere  of  shared culture and reinforce place attachments and cultural identities across generations. For example, Nauryz is publically celebrated but also has an after-party among smaller kin and friend groupings of Kazakhs. Gulnar, a 34 -year-old female respondent tells us, 'Yes recently I attended Nauryz . . . All the Kazakhs in Ulaanbaatar gathered there and they  also  gathered  together  [after  the  official  celebration]  and  celebrated  Nauryz together  in  a  big  hotel  and  had  a  ceremony'  (LH\_ 1 \_ 0016 ).  The  Eagle  Hunting Festival, of which there are several, including one in Ulaanbaatar and one in BayanUlgii,  also  provides  a  level  of  public  pride  in  cultural  identity. The  Eagle  Huntress movie  released  by  Sony  Pictures  in 2016 ,  for  example,  displayed  to  the  world  the unique cultural practice of falconry with golden eagles that is tied specifically to the Kazakh population and now, through this mass media form, to western Mongolia specifically.  Another  way  in  which  Kazakhs  evoke  images  of  western  Mongolia  at these  public  and  private  gatherings  or  celebrations  is  through  music  and  musical instruments. Jennifer Post argues that musical expression, particularly with ' . . . the dombra ,  a  long-necked lute widely considered a symbol of Kazakh identity . . . ', is utilized by Kazakhs as a component of place-making in a community context ( 2007 , 47 ).  There  are  also  NGOs  that  provide  Kazakh  language  instruction,  dance  and dombra lessons for children, and a 'Kazakh Students Bolashak Association' in several universities in Ulaanbaatar. Children may attend after-school or weekend 'cultural classes' to learn Kazakh dance, music, and language, performing later at recitals or Kazakh festivals. In these ways, place attachment and cultural identities are perpetuated across generations through performance and public group affirmations.

Lastly, while most questionnaire respondents ( 87 percent) reported speaking Kazakh  at  home  at  least  sometimes,  gatherings  provide  a  community-based

18

forum for collectively speaking Kazakh, a sense of unity that is not possible when engaging with non-Kazakhs in daily life. Language and its perpetuation come up in  every  life-history  interview-the  importance  of  maintaining  the  Kazakh  language, of speaking it at home and teaching children, and of the desire for Kazakh language and cultural schools in Ulaanbaatar are common threads. Encouraging children  to  learn  Kazakh  is  significant  to  many  families,  even  those  that  noted how important fluency in Mongolian or English, and sometimes Russian, was for social  mobility  in  Ulaanbaatar.  Some  Kazakh  migrants  see  a  lack  of  fluency  in Mongolian,  or  speaking  with  an  accent,  as  an  impediment  to  finding  employment  or  doing  well  in  Ulaanbaatar,  where  the  remainder  of  the  population speaks Mongolian. Interviewees perceive speaking English as essential for international  business,  and  to  some  extent  Russian  is  still  valued,  albeit  distantly  to Mongolian  and  English.  Memories  of  western  Mongolia  center  on  the  ease  of language and communication  and  not  needing to worry about speaking Mongolian. By extension, there is also an underlying fear that the children will not learn to speak Kazakh and so the language will be lost.

By using memory, knowledge, stories, narratives, artifacts, pictures, language, and urban festivals, former residents of western Mongolia create a 'rural idyll' for younger generations. These are integrated into daily living as well as through events  such  as  festivals.  Western  Mongolia  becomes  a  social  symbol  of  Kazakh culture  and history-a rural idyll for this small population. Children are active participants  in  these  activities  and  practices,  absorbing,  as  children  do,  their parents and grandparents attitudes. Within the PPP model, this connects directly to ideas of cognition (memory, knowledge, and meaning) and affect (happiness, pride, and love) [Table 1 ].

For many Kazakh children, these three threads come together during summer holidays  when  families  and  sometimes  only  the  children  spend  time  in  western Mongolia with relatives. 'In summer vacation [children] should go to their grandparents [in the countryside] . . . .it is important to keep language and religion and respect  our  language  and  religion'  (Batima,  age 22 ,  female,  LH\_ 25 \_ 0040 ).  In  the countryside, children are further exposed to traditional lifeways as these visits most often  involve  extended  stays  in  summer  pastures,  living  in  traditional  gers,  and engaged  in  daily  practices  of  milking,  food  preparation,  horse  riding,  and  living amongst an extended family. Children are fully immersed in the Kazakh language. Families generally return to the same pastures each year and this becomes another aspect of inscribing place and identity through everyday practices for children who ultimately will return to the city.

It  is  important  that  these  place  attachments  and  their  perpetuation,  however nostalgic, also reflect the types of nationalist images that Myadar ( 2011 ) depicts in the opening  paragraphs  of  this  paper.  These  images  and  narratives  have  a  specific Kazakh  flare,  exemplifying  Kazakh  culture  and  practices.  Post  argues  that  '[n] ational  markers  (including  language,  food,  clothing,  social  patterns,  religion,

musical instruments and musical expression) reinforced nationally and internationally  have few connections to the everyday lives of the Kazakh people' ( 2007 , 47 ). Belonging to the Mongolian nation is an important aspect of Kazakh existence in Mongolia, but so too is the specificity of this particular region of western Mongolia. The  two  sets  of  images  align  generally,  but  the  place  attachments  expressed  by Mongolian Kazakhs are much more specific to their cultural and ethnic identity, inclusive of language and religious practice, and to the western Mongolia communities  in  which  the  social  networks  and  social  ties  also  complement  the  rural imagination.

## CONCLUDING  THOUGHTS

This work suggests that the process by which individuals and groups selectively develop narratives of history and place serves to underscore a collective valuing of  place  through  signifiers  of  place  attachment,  and  illustrates  how  the  process of  creating place attachments manifests at both individual and collective scales. We  contribute  to  the  discussion  of  how  rural  place  attachments  evolve  over time  and  that  place  attachments  can  be  as  much  symbolic  as  experienced. There  is  also  a  generational  dimension  to  these  rememberings,  where  those who grew up in western Mongolia offer nostalgic, bucolic images of life on the steppe to  younger Kazakhs, thereby perpetuating positive imagery and imaginings  of  western  Mongolia.  The  younger  respondents  offer  equally  thoughtful and  positive  images  of  western  Mongolia,  but  are  clear  that  life  there  would not be desirable. Thus, life in  western Mongolia,  for the  Kazakh  ethnic minority  population living in Ulaanbaatar, is evolving into  something  of a  mythical  place-a  place  where  the  air  is  clear,  the  scenery  is  beautiful, where  all  Kazakhs  take  care  of  one  another,  and  where  Kazakhs  collectively speak  their  own  language  and  practice  their  religion.  In  the  absence  of  discussion  about  the  challenges  of  poverty  and  environmental  hazards  ( dzud ),  the narrative has evolved into one of nostalgia-a set of images and ideals that are now  passed  along  to  a  much  younger  generation,  through  small  everyday practices  and  experiences  as  well  as  through  attending  and  participating  in festivals and summer holidays spent in western Mongolia. Bayan-Ulgii, with its majority Kazakh population, is likely to live in the memories and imaginations of  Mongolia's  Kazakh  population  as  this  mythical  place,  despite  many  of  its more-harsh  economic  and  environmental  realities.

Our work underscores how place attachments are  carried  with  migrants  to new destinations (place elasticity) and then passed along to younger generations through  stories,  material  artifacts,  cultural  practices,  and  images.  This  contributes  to  our  understanding  of  the  process  and  place  dimensions  of  placeattachment  literatures  as  proposed  by  Scannell  and  Gifford  ( 2010 ).  We  also pose  the  question  of  whether  the  concept  of  the  rural  idyll  can  be  applied  to Global South and Global Middle countries. So far, the concept has largely been

20

reserved  for  the  Global  North.  But  as  populations  continue  to  move  to  urban places,  can  we  expect  that  the  rural  imagination  will  expand?  That  instead  of being  viewed  negatively,  as  the  place  left  behind,  there  will  be  elements  of nostalgia  and  positive  imagery  shaping  the  narrative  of  particular  populations, especially ethnic minorities who find themselves widely dispersed after migrating to urban places.

We move the literature forward by seeking to integrate the notion of nostalgia into the  conversation  about  rural  place-making  and  place  identities  or  attachments. Nostalgia  exemplifies  the  positive  aspects  of  place  and  pushes  us  to  consider  how rural  imagery  and  imaginations  influence  the  place-making  and  place-attachment process, which begs the question of whether the rural idyll concept can be extended beyond the Global North. Rural Mongolia, with its wide-open spaces, green rolling grasslands, horses, gers, and blue skies inhabits the imagination of tourists and is a key component  of  nationalist  images  promoted  by  the  Mongolian  government.  It  is, however, unusual to suggest that a rural idyll has emerged in a Global Middle country. We argue that while the urban elite of Mongolia still view the rural as undeveloped, the narrative of the idyll is indeed emerging for smaller, ethnic minority populations for whom  the  urban  environment  is  often  alienating  and  hostile.  Nostalgia  for  the simplicity  of  a  remote,  rural  territory  takes  on  greater  meaning.  It  is  romanticized and  narrated  to  younger  generations,  much  like  the  rural  idyll,  but  not  with  the expectation of return migration.

## FUNDING

This work was supported by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation [New Directions Fellowship].

## NOTES

- 1 'A portable round dwelling, typically made of felt and wood' (Myadar 2011 , 357 ).
- 3 We use pseudonyms to protect interviewee identities.
- 2 Mongolia is considered a Global South country as well as a 'Lower Middle Income Country' by The World Bank (World Bank, 2020 ,  https://data.worldbank.org/?locations=MN-XN).

## ORCID

Holly R. Barcus http://ORCID.org/0000-0002-3841-5725

## REFERENCES

- Barcus,  H.  R.,  and  S.  D.  Brunn. 2010 .  Place  Elasticity:  Exploring  a  New  Conceptualization  of Mobility  and  Place  Attachment  in  Rural  America. Geografiska  Annaler:  Series  B,  Human Geography 92 ( 4 ): 281 -295 .
- Barcus, H. R., and C. Werner. 2015 .  Immobility and the Re-imaginings of Ethnic Identity among Mongolian Kazakhs in the 21 st  Century. Geoforum 59 : 119 -128 .

- Barcus, H. R., and A. Shugatai. 2018 .  Immobile Populations as Anchors of Rural Ethnic Identity: Contemporary Kazakh Narratives of Place and Migration in Mongolia. Population , Space and Place 24 ( 4 ):  DOI: 10 . 1002 /psp. 2148
- Batbayar, T. 2002 . Geopolitics and Mongolia's Search for Post-Soviet Identity. Eurasian Geography and Economics 43 ( 4 ): 323 -335 .
- Bulag, U. E. 1998 . Nationalism and Hybridity in Mongolia .  New York: Oxford University Press.
- Bunce, M. 1994 . The Countryside Ideal: Anglo-American Images of Landscape .  London: Routledge.
- Diener,  A. 2009 . One  Homeland  or  Two?  The  Nationalization  and  Transnationalization  of Mongolia's  Kazakhs .  Stanford,  Calif  and  Washington  D.C.:  Stanford  University  Press  and Woodrow Wilson Press.
- Diener, A., and J. Hagen. 2013 .  From Socialist to Post-Socialist Cities: Narrating the Nation through Urban Space. Nationalities Papers: The Journal of Nationalism and Ethnicity 41 ( 4 ): 487 -514 .
- Esenova, S. 2002 . Soviet Nationality, Identity and Ethnicity in Central Asia: Historic Narratives and Kazakh Ethnic Identity. Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs 22 ( 1 ): 11 -38 .
- Gustafson,  P. 2014 .  Place  Attachment  in  an  Age  of  Mobility.  In Place  Attachment:  Advances  in Theory,  Methods  and  Applications ,  edited  by  L.  C.  Manzo  and  P.  Devine-Wright, 37 -48 . New York: Routledge.
- Harner, J. 2001 . Place Identity and Copper Mining in Sonora, Mexico. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 91 ( 4 ): 660 -680 .
- Hernández, B., M. C. Hidalgo, and C. Ruiz. 2014 . Theoretical and Methodological Aspects of Research on Place Attachment. In Place Attachment: Advances in Theory, Methods and Applications , edited by L. C. Manzo and P. Devine-Wright, 125 -137 . New York: Routledge.
- Hincks, J. 2018 . Life in the Most Polluted Capital in the World. Time , 23 March 2018 .  https://time. com/longform/ulan-bator-mongolia-most-polluted-capital/Last accessed 1 / 8 / 2020 .
- Lewicka,  M. 2014 .  In  Search  of  Roots:  Memory  as  Enabler  of  Place  Attachment.  In Place Attachment:  Advances  in  Theory,  Methods  and  Applications .  Edited  by  L.  C.  Manzo  and P. Devine-Wright, 49 -60 .  New York: Routledge.
- McHugh, K. 2000 . Inside, Outside, Upside Down, Backward, Forward, Round and Round: A Case for Ethnographic Studies in Migration. Progress in Human Geography 24 ( 1 ): 71 -89 .
- McHugh, K. E., and R. C. Mings. 1996 .  The  Circle  of  Migration:  Attachment  to  Place  in  Aging. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 86 ( 3 ): 530 -550 .
- Mendoza, C., and R. Morén-Alegret. 2012 .  Exploring Methods and Techniques for the Analysis of Senses of Place and Migration. Progress in Human Geography 37 ( 6 ): 762 -785 .
- Myadar, O. 2011 . Imaginary Nomads: Deconstructing the Representation of Mongolia as a Land of Nomads. Inner Asia 13 ( 2 ): 335 -362 .
- NCPH [National Center for  Public  Health]  and  UNICEF. 2018 .  Mongolia's  Air  Pollution  Crisis: A Call to Action to Protect Children's Health. Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar.
- NSOM  [National  Statistical  Office  of  Mongolia]. 2003 .  Mongolian  Population  in  XX  Century. National Statistical Office of Mongolia. Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar.
- ---. 2011 .  N Mongolia National Census 2010 Provision Results. Archived September 15 , 2011 (in Mongolian).
- ---. 2016 a. 2015 Intermediate  population  and  housing  census .  Mongolia:  Ulaanbaatar.  (in Mongolian).
- ---. 2016 b. 2015 Population  and  Housing  By-Census  of  Mongolia:  National  Report .  Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar.
- Portisch, A. O. 2009 . Techniques as a Window onto Learning: Kazakh Women's Domestic Textile Production in Western Mongolia. Journal of Material Culture 14 ( 4 ): 471 -492 .
- Post, J. C. 2007 . 'I take my Dombra and Sing to Remember My Homeland': Identity, Landscape and Music in Kazakh Communities of Western Mongolia. Ethnomusicology Forum 16 ( 1 ): 45 -69 .
- Proshansky, H. M., A. K. Fabian, and  R.  Kaminoff. 1983 . Place-Identity: Physical  World Socialization of the Self. Journal of Environmental Psychology 3 : 57 -83 .
- Relph, E. C. 1976 . Place and Placelessness .  London: Pion.

22

- Salimjan, G. 2018 .  The  Afterlives of Yurt Wall-hangings: Tus Kiiz. The CESS Blog: A Blog of the Central Eurasian Studies Society. [thecessblog.com/ 2018 / 07 /the-afterlives-of-yurt-wallhangings-tus-kiiz-by-guldana-salimjan-university-of-british-columbia/].
- Scannell, L., and R. Gifford. 2010 . Defining Place Attachment: A Tripartite Organizing Framework. Journal of Environmental Psychology 30 : 1 -10 .
- Sneath,  D. 2010 .  Political  Mobilization  and  the  Construction  of  Collective  Identity  in  Mongolia. Central Asian Survey 29 ( 3 ): 251 -267 .
- Tsuda, T. 2009 . Conclusion: Diasporic Homecomings and Ambivalent Encounters with the Ethnic Homeland. In Diasporic  Homecomings:  Ethnic  Return  Migration  in  Comparative  Perspective , edited by T. Tsuda, 325 -350 .  Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
- Werner, C.A. and H.R. Barcus. 2009 . Mobility and immobility in a transnational context: changing views of migration among the Kazakh diaspora in Mongolia. Migration Letters 6 ( 1 ): 49 -62 .
- Yarwood, R. 2005 . Beyond the Rural Idyll: Images, Countryside Change and Geography. Geography 90 ( 1 ): 19 -31 .