<!-- image -->

## Geographical Review

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/utgr20

## CROATIAN RURAL FUTURES IN 2030: FOUR ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS FOR POSTSOCIALIST COUNTRYSIDE IN THE NEWEST E.U. MEMBER STATE

Aleksandar Lukić , Petra Radeljak Kaufmann , Luka Valožić , Ivan Zupanc , Marin Cvitanović , Dane Pejnović &amp; Ivan Žilić

To cite this article: Aleksandar Lukić , Petra Radeljak Kaufmann , Luka Valožić , Ivan Zupanc , Marin Cvitanović , Dane Pejnović &amp; Ivan Žilić (2021): CROATIAN RURAL FUTURES IN 2030: FOUR ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS FOR POSTSOCIALIST COUNTRYSIDE IN THE NEWEST E.U. MEMBER STATE, Geographical Review, DOI: 10.1080/00167428.2020.1871298

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00167428.2020.1871298

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 21 Jan 2021.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 45

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## CROATIAN RURAL FUTURES IN 2030 :  FOUR ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS FOR POSTSOCIALIST COUNTRYSIDE IN THE NEWEST E.U. MEMBER STATE

ALEKSANDAR LUKIĆ ,  PETRA RADELJAK KAUFMANN ,  LUKA VALOŽIĆ , IVAN ZUPANC, MARIN CVITANOVIĆ ,  DANE PEJNOVIĆ and IVAN ŽILIĆ

ABSTRACT.  The  academic  picture  of  a  globalized  European  countryside,  and  particularly  of rural areas in postsocialist, new member states of the European Union, is one of huge and increasing complexity, diversity, and uncertainties about the future. The aim of this research is to construct alternative scenarios for rural Croatia in 2030 , acknowledging its postsocialist transition  as  an  important  framework.  Future development scenarios were constructed by integrating quantitative and qualitative approaches. The main methods used were: factor and cluster analysis; Monte Carlo simulation; and Delphi method, involving 37 rural experts in two  rounds  of  written  questionnaires.  Four  scenarios  were  developed:  Rural  Renaissance, Shift, Road to Nowhere, and Growth without Development. These scenarios provide a set of well-documented and reasonable assumptions to aid in thinking about possible future paths for  the  Croatian  countryside,  while  at  the  same  time  allowing  for  the  discussion  of  rural development  paradigms. Keywords:  diversity,  neoendogenous  development,  rural,  scenario method, typology.

T he overwhelming academic picture of the European countryside has been, for some time now, one of great and increasing  complexity,  diversity,  and  heterogeneity (Halfacree 2006 ; Cloke 2006 ; OECD 2006 ; Rienks 2008 ; Copus et al. 2011 ; Woods et al. 2015 ).  In  general,  the  contributing  factors  are  well-researched  and related  to  the  impacts  of  interconnectedness,  the  importance  of  linkages  and flows, and the changing relational aspects of rural and urban (Copus et al. 2011 ; Woods et al. 2015 ; Dax and Copus 2016 ). As global linkages and connections are eased by technological changes and influenced through political frameworks of deregulation, local urban-rural interactions are taken over by a web of interactions  on  multiple  spatial  levels  (local,  regional,  national,  European,  and  global) (Copus et al. 2011 ),  increasing rural heterogeneity.

Furthermore,  stronger  integration  of  rural  areas  into  wider  spatial  systems has simultaneously brought a higher level of dependence on numerous external factors-economic, political, social, cultural, and environmental-to rural Europe, raising uncertainties for its future development. For example, exposure

ALEKSANDAR LUKIĆ, University of Zagreb Faculty of Science, Department of Geography, Marulićev trg 19 , Zagreb, 10000 Croatia;  [alukic@geog.pmf.hr].  PETRA RADELJAK KAUFMANN,  University  of  Zagreb  Faculty  of  Science, Department of Geography, Zagreb, Croatia; [radeljak@geog.pmf.hr]. LUKA  VALOŽIĆ, University of Zagreb Faculty of Science, Department of Geography, Zagreb, Croatia; [lvalozic@geog.pmf.hr]. IVAN ZUPANC, University of Zagreb Faculty  of  Science,  Department  of  Geography,  Zagreb,  Croatia;  [izupanc@geog.pmf.hr].  MARIN CVITANOVIĆ, Bournemouth  University,  Department  of  Life  &amp;  Environmental  Sciences,  Poole,  United  Kingdom  of  Great Britain and Northern Ireland; [mcvitanovic@bournemouth.ac.uk]. DANE, PEJNOVIĆ, Zagreb, Croatia [dane.pejnovic@gmail.com]. IVAN ŽILIĆ, Institute of Economics Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia; [izilic@eizg.hr].

2

2 0 3 0

to  external  threats  from  changing  terms  of  trade  has  proven  to  be  a  very important  issue  in  rural  Europe  (Rizov 2006 ),  as  has  climate  change  (see  the EDORA  Final  Report 2011 ). Academic  response  to  the  increased  level of uncertainties has raised interest in applying the scenario method in investigating possible  ways forward for diversified European  rural areas (for example, ATEAM; SCENAR 2020 and SCENAR 2030 ;  EURURALIS; or ET 2050 ).

New member states (NMS) from Central, Eastern, and Southeast Europe. 1 have,  along  with  globalization  and/or  as  a  part  of  it,  undergone  major transformations  in  the  last 30 years:  political  and  economic  transition  and accession  to  the  E.U.  These  processes  have  brought  additional  levels  of complexity  to  discussing  possible  pathways  into  the  future,  especially  for the countryside. The NMS have been more or less present in a series of E.U.wide  research  projects  concerning  modeling  and  scenario  planning  in  rural areas.  However,  unlike  E.U.15 countries,  for  which  numerous  national  scenarios,  including  rural  areas,  have  been  produced,  scenarios  are  rare  for  the NMS (see  Bański 2017 ).  This  paper  contributes  to  filling  recognized  gaps  by presenting  the  results  of  four  alternative  scenarios  for  rural  Croatia  in 2030 , in  the  context  of  rural  development,  transition,  and  accession  to  the  E.U.

## THEORETICAL  BACKGROUND

## CHANGING  PARADIGMS  OF  RURAL  DEVELOPMENT

Our hypothesis is that the alternative future prospects of rural areas are related to differentiated outcomes of the interactions between the unique setup of natural and social capital (endogenous resources) available in the region on one hand, and the exogenous conditions,  actors,  and  processes  on  the  other.  This  follows  from  the change of modernization's paradigm to a new concept of rural development (Ray 1999 ;  Van  der  Ploeg  et  al. 2000 ;  Van  der  Ploeg  and  Marsden 2008 ;  Woods 2011 ). Instead of the linear development trajectory of modernization theory, which mainly focuses on progress in agriculture, industrialization, and urbanization, the paradigm of new rural development is characterized by a web of nonlinear multitude or, as Jan Douwe Van der Ploeg et al. ( 2000 ) argued in their seminal paper at the turn of the twenty-first century, by its 'multi-level, multi-actor and multi-facetted nature.' In their later work, Van der Ploeg and Marsden ( 2008 ) recognized six components of the (new) web of rural development: endogeneity, novelty, market governance, new institutional frameworks, sustainability, and social capital.

Woods  ( 2011 )  further  summarizes  the  differences  between  the  new  rural development  paradigm  and  the  modernization  paradigm  by  acknowledging  its distinguishing  features:  endogenous  development,  bottom-up  innovation,  territorially  based  integrated  development,  social  capital,  sustainable  development, information infrastructure,  consumption, small-scale  niche  industries,  valorization of tradition, and local embeddedness.  Ray ( 2006 ) in particular has further explored the idea of the multiactor character of new rural development.

He  argues  that  besides  local  actors  who  mobilize  cultural  capital-that  is, 'territorial  intellectual  property  or  place-specific  factors  of  production'  (Ray 2006 , 283 )-through bottom-up development, various actors from the 'extralocal environment' are potential supporters of the local population in their development strategies. He expressed these 'various manifestations of the extralocal' by adding  the  prefix  'neo'  to  endogenous  development,  thus  coining  the  term 'neoendogenous rural development.' In the E.U. context, the most visible pragmatic expression of the new paradigm of rural development is usually attached to  LEADER  Programme.  Although  its  advantages  for  rural  areas  have  been recognized,  there  has  also  been  criticism,  mostly  regarding  the  lack  of  real participation,  inclusiveness,  innovation,  and  capacity  to  address  problems  of structural  disadvantages,  which  are  also  related  to  the  limited  and  insufficient financial  resources  of  the  CAP  budget  (Marquardt  et  al. 2010 ;  Dax  et  al. 2016 ; Dax and Copus 2016 ;  Lukić and Obad 2016 ).

## SCENARIO  METHOD  AND  RURAL  AREAS

A further aspect of (new) rural development theory is related to the discussion about  the  future  of  rural  areas.  Van  der  Ploeg  et  al.  ( 2000 )  argued  that  the concept of rural development was primarily 'a heuristic instrument . . . (that) . . . represents a search for new futures . . . ' The scenario as '[a]  description  of a  future  situation  and  the  course  of  events  that  allows  us  to move from the original  situation  to  the  future  situation'  (Godet  and  Roubelat 1996 , 166 ) was chosen to reflect this aspect of rural development in our research.

The origins of the scenario method can be traced to the period during and after the Second World War, when it was used for military purposes (Schoemaker 1993 ).  The  scenario  method  further  developed  through  its  use  in public policy and corporate/business planning, as well as in the scope of urban and  regional  planning,  primarily  in  the  United  States  and  France  (Godet  and Roubelat 1996 ;  Bradfield  et  al. 2005 ).  Although  the  interest  in  scenarios  has fluctuated  somewhat  over  the  years,  it  increased  in  the 1990 s  and  especially 2000 s  (Ringland 2006 ;  Varum  and  Melo 2010 ).  Scenario  construction  leads  to scenario analysis and scenario planning where, in essence, by examining several alternatives  of  how  the  future  might  unfold  and  comparing  the  potential  consequences of different future contexts, one 'can make decisions which are more resilient to the throes of tomorrow' (Shearer 2005 , 68 ).

Since  the 1990 s,  there  have  been  a  number  of  important  research  projects/ programs  exploring  European  rural  futures,  such  as  Ground  for  Choices, ATEAM,  ACCELERATES,  SCENAR 2020 and  SCENAR 2030 ,  EURURALIS, ESPON, FARO-EU, EDORA, TIPTAP, ET 2050 ,  and  VOLANTE.  For  example, within  the  European  Development  Opportunities  for  Rural  Areas  (EDORA) Project,  opportunities  and  constraints  for  different  kinds  of  rural  areas  were considered  over  the  course  of  two  decades.  Narrative  scenarios  were  formed

4

2 0 3 0

based  on  the  relationship  between  two  'external'  variables,  namely  climate change (and responses) and economic governance (EDORA Final Report 2011 ).

Some of the recent topics in rural research explored via the scenario method include  studies  of  complex  rural  development  changes  (Bański 2017 ),  land  use and land-cover change (Holman et al. 2017 ;  Kindu et al. 2018 ), and the future of farming  areas (Zagaria et al. 2017 ). The  scenario method  is  regarded  as a participatory and strategic planning tool that provides a sound basis for policy and decision making, and facilitates communication among stakeholders (Soliva et al. 2008 ; Gullino et al. 2018 ). Different scenario typologies classify scenarios in relation  to  two  basic  questions  to  which  scenarios  respond:  regarding  the development  that  could  happen  and  the  development  that  should  happenthat is, scenarios that are explorative or normative in nature (Radeljak Kaufmann 2016 ).  A  plethora  of  methods  and  techniques  used  in  developing scenarios  encompass  modeling  approaches  (Holman  et  al. 2017 ;  Zagaria  et  al. 2017 ;  Kindu et al. 2018 ),  Delphi-based surveys (Trammell et al. 2018 ),  participatory workshops or stakeholder meetings (Soliva et al. 2008 ;  Holman et al. 2017 ), focus groups (Gullino et al. 2018 ), and rural stakeholder/expert interviews (Soliva et  al. 2008 ;  Rawluk  and  Curtis 2017 ;  Gullino  et  al. 2018 ).  Various  methods  and sources are often combined (Priess et al. 2018 ).  Interactive scenarios result from creative  processes  and  interactions  among  people  (experts  or  users)  and  endogenous or exogenous models, either during the formation of scenarios or during their use (Gordon and Glenn 2018 ).

SETTING  THE  SCENE: CHALLENGES  FOR  THE  RURAL  AREAS  IN  THE  NEW  MEMBER  STATES AND  CROATIA

A quarter of a century ago, the future looked bright and promising for countries in Central, Eastern, and Southeast Europe. Dreams of unifying Europe after the Cold  War  spurred  optimism.  Liberal  democracy,  freedom,  civic  society,  and a  market  economy  were  mostly  warmly  welcomed  (Sokol 2001 ).  Although accession  to  the  E.U.  was  still  far  away,  the  importance  of  the  E.U.'s  Common Agricultural  Policy  (CAP)  was  also  raising  hopes  that  rural  areas,  after  the turmoil of collectivization, negligence, and ideological subordination in industrially oriented state-socialist societies, would be given a new push. Fast forward to 2020 and  the  situation  in  most  of  the  rural  regions  in  the  NMS  is  certainly much more complex and worrisome than expected. The political and economic transition and the effects of E.U. accession have had both positive and negative effects (Spoor et al. 2014 ;  Swain 2016 ;  Cianetti et al. 2018 ).

On the positive side, the former significant differences between the NMS and the  EU15 in  GDP  per  capita,  economic  activity,  or  long-term  unemployment seem  to  have  decreased  (Sokol 2001 ;  Ezcurra  et  al. 2007 ;  Gorton  et  al. 2009 ). Furthermore, in the majority of the NMS the financial support to agriculture and

rural  areas  has  increased  and  accession  to  the  E.U.  is  generally  perceived  as having a positive impact (Rizov 2006 ;  Swain 2016 ).

On the negative side, some serious challenges for the future development of rural  areas  in  the  NMS  have  been  noted:  persisting  and/or  deepening  regional disparities, polarization, and peripherization of rural areas (Sokol 2001 ;  Ezcurra et  al. 2007 ;  Macours  and  Swinnen 2008 ;  Kovács 2010 ;  Cosier  et  al. 2014 ;  Spoor et  al. 2014 ;  Swain 2016 ;  Páthy 2017 ;  Loewen  and  Schulz 2019 );  inadequacy  of agricultural  transformations  related  to  the  E.U.'s  Common  Agricultural  Policy (CAP) (Rizov 2006 ;  Macours and Swinnen 2008 ;  Kovács 2010 ;  Swain 2016 );  and rural  shrinkage  (long-term  depopulation  and  youth  out-migration)  (ESPON ESCAPE 2019 ).

National  specificities  notwithstanding,  especially  direct  and  indirect  consequences of the Croatian War of Independence ( 1991 -1996 ), Croatia shared many of the analyzed features of postsocialist NMS. Between 2001 and 2017 Croatia lost (officially) 331 , 967 inhabitants  ( 7 . 5 percent).  In  that  period,  the  demography  of Croatia  was  characterized  by  a  decline  in  total  population,  continuous  natural depopulation, increased aging of the population, imbalanced age structure of the population, and a positive net foreign-migration balance (though this has been negative since 2009 ). At the moment, the Croatian population ranks among the top 15 oldest  world  populations,  and  the  share  of  older  people  in  the  total population is constantly increasing (Čipin et al. 2014 ).

Rural areas in Croatia, which encompass around 90 percent of the total land area and around 49 percent of the total population, bear many of the aforementioned national negative trends, but with even more undesirable tendencies. The typology of rural areas developed in this scenario study revealed that almost onefifth  of  the  rural  territory  belongs  to  areas  with  critical  demographic characteristics and economic limitations in development, while an additional 18 . 6 percent of territory is considered to be predominantly agricultural areas, with significant unemployment levels (Table 1 ).

Thus, almost 40 percent of the rural territory is burdened by socioeconomic decline  and/or  rising  unemployment  rates.  Although  rural  depopulation  and marginalization is a legacy process in Croatia, the Croatian War of Independence  and  numerous  economic  difficulties  in  the  transition  period  in the 1990 s  intensified  external  migration,  deepened  polarization  between  the wider  Zagreb  region  and  certain  touristed  coastal  areas,  and  most  of  the Croatian  countryside.  Rural  youth  out-migration  was  increased  after  Croatia's accession to the E.U. Regional inequalities and the urban/rural divide have also increased.  Prior  to  E.U.  accession,  agriculture  in  Croatia  was  considered  weak and unable to compete in the E.U. (Franić et al. 2014 ), while the consequences of the CAP have yet to be seen.

6

TABLE 1 -SHARE  OF  TERRITORY  (T) AND  POPULATION  (P) FOR  CLUSTERS/TYPES  OF  RURAL  AREAS  OF  CROATIA  IN 2017 AND  THE  FOUR  SCENARIOS

2 0 3 0

| GROWTH       | DEVELOPMENT            | P (%)                 | 23 . 6 10 . 4 10 . 7                                                            | 9 . 0 37 . 1                       | 7 . 8                       | 7 . 8                       |
|--------------|------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
| WITHOUT      |                        | T (%)                 | 24 . 7 11 . 4 2 . 8                                                             | 11 . 9 26 . 3                      | 22 . 8                      | 22 . 8                      |
| TO (%)       | NOWHERE                | P (%)                 | 19 . 3 4 . 6 18 . 7                                                             | 7 . 2 33 . 2                       | 15 . 7                      | 15 . 7                      |
| ROAD         | SHIFT 4                | P (%) T . 0           | 19 . 2 5 . 1 15 . 0 5 . 4                                                       | 9 9 . 3 1 33 . 4                   | 27 . 5                      | 27 . 5                      |
| 2 15 .       | (%)                    | (%) T 19 . 4 19       | . 5 15 . 3 19 . 9 . 2 4 . 5                                                     | 3 14 . 7 13 . 0 21 . 2 28 .        | 9 7 . 4                     | 9 7 . 4                     |
| RURAL P      | RENAISSANCE            | P T (%) 18 . 3 19 . 8 | 19 18 . 2 4 . 0                                                                 | 13 . 6 11 . 23 . 2 36 .            | 21 . 1 7                    | 21 . 1 7                    |
| TYPOLOGY IN  | 2017                   | T (%)                 | unemployment levels 18 . 6 20 . 0 16 . 4 dynamic areas, with lower 6 . 2 19 . 2 | 10 . 6 7 . 1 24 7 30 . 6           | limitations in 19 . 8 7 . 1 | limitations in 19 . 8 7 . 1 |
|              |                        | AREA                  | more                                                                            | and economically less .            | and economic                | and economic                |
|              |                        | RURAL significant     | with                                                                            | older areas areas, demographically | characteristics             | characteristics             |
|              | OF                     |                       | areas, demographically                                                          |                                    |                             |                             |
|              |                        | TYPE                  |                                                                                 |                                    |                             |                             |
|              |                        | (%)                   |                                                                                 |                                    |                             |                             |
|              |                        |                       | areas and                                                                       |                                    | demographic                 | demographic                 |
|              |                        |                       | agricultural                                                                    |                                    |                             |                             |
|              |                        |                       |                                                                                 | diversified                        |                             |                             |
|              |                        |                       | agriculture                                                                     |                                    |                             |                             |
|              |                        |                       | urbanized                                                                       | demographically                    |                             |                             |
|              |                        |                       | of                                                                              |                                    |                             |                             |
|              |                        |                       |                                                                                 |                                    | critical                    | critical                    |
|              |                        |                       | -Predominantly                                                                  |                                    |                             |                             |
| agricultural |                        |                       |                                                                                 |                                    |                             |                             |
|              |                        |                       |                                                                                 |                                    | with                        | with                        |
|              |                        |                       |                                                                                 |                                    | -Areas                      | -Areas                      |
|              | 2 threatened           | 1                     | 3                                                                               | 4 5                                |                             |                             |
|              | -Strongly significance |                       |                                                                                 |                                    |                             |                             |
|              | -Economically          |                       |                                                                                 |                                    |                             |                             |
|              | -Heavily               |                       |                                                                                 |                                    |                             |                             |
|              | -Touristic,            | -Touristic,           | -Touristic,                                                                     | -Touristic,                        | -Touristic,                 | -Touristic,                 |

METHODS  IN  EXPLORATIVE  SCENARIO  DEVELOPMENT  FOR  RURAL  CROATIA  UNTIL 2030

The process of constructing future development scenarios for rural Croatia until 2030 included multiple steps. The selection of quantitative steps in scenario development was partially based on a study of rural England, where the results of factor and cluster analyses served to create a model to simulate rural dynamics and, via a Monte Carlo process, to develop scenarios (Foa and Howard 2006 ; Lowe and Ward 2009 ).

In our study, rural Croatia was defined as incorporating rural and mixed rural/ urban areas,  whereby the spatial  units  in  the  analysis  were  local  government  units (LAU 2 ), excluding urban settlements with a population over 5 , 000 in 2011 . In the first step,  a  total  of 43 variables  (derived from the official statistical  sources and project analyses)  as  indicators  of  development  trends  in  rural  Croatia  were  used  in  factor analysis.  The  initial  factor  loadings  were  calculated  using  the  principal  component method, while  the  rotation  method  used  was  Oblimin  with  Kaiser  Normalization. Based on the proportion of variance explained by each of the seven resulting factors, a total of 15 leading variables were identified as key for the development of rural areas:

- 1 .  Proportion  of  persons  employed  in  accommodation  and  food-service activities in the settlement where they work, 2011 (empl\_accomm)
- 2 . Proportion of the population with property income in the total population, 2011 (pop\_prop)
- 3 . Coefficient of tourist functionality (number of tourist beds per inhabitant), 2011 (coeff\_tour)
- 4 .  Proportion of  persons employed in the tertiary sector of the economy in the  settlement  where  they  work  (excluding  real  estate,  information,  and  communication), 2011 (empl\_serv)
- 5 .  Proportion  of  the  population  aged 15 and  over  with  a  university  degree, 2011 (pop\_uni)
- 6 .  Proportion of the population aged 0 to 19 , 2011 (age 0 \_ 19 )
- 7 .  Proportion of the population aged 60 and over, 2011 (age\_ 60 ov)
- 8 .  Proportion  of  nonfamily  households  (singles)  to  the  total  number  of private households, 2011 (singl\_priv)
- 9 .  Natural population growth rate, 2001 -2011 (nat\_growth)
- 10 . Proportion of persons employed in the primary sector of the economy in the settlement where they work, 2011 (empl\_prim)
- 11 .  Proportion  of  agricultural  holdings  to  total  number  of  households, 2011 (agric\_hold)
- 12 .  Proportion of unemployed persons to economically active, 2011 (unemp)
- 13 .  The average size of the ARKOD arable land unit (ha), 2015 (size\_unit)
- 14 .  Proportion of built-up area, 2012 (built\_up)
- 15 .  Proportion of in-migrants in a settlement from another settlement of the same local government units to total population, 2011 (inmigr\_lgu)

8

TABLE 2 -MEAN  VALUES  OF  VARIABLES  IN  SIX  CLUSTERS  (TYPES  OF  RURAL  AREAS)  IN  TYPOLOGY  IN 2017 ,  RURAL  RENAISSANCE  AND  ROAD  TO  NOWHERE  SCENARIOS

TYPE EMPL\_ACCOMM POP\_PROP COEFF\_TOUR EMPL\_SERV POP\_UNI AGE 0 \_ 19 AGE\_ 60 OV SINGL\_PRIV NAT\_GROWTH EMPL\_PRIM AGRIC\_HOLD UNEMP SIZE\_UNIT BUILT\_UP INMIGR\_LGU

2 0 3 0

| 6 . 8           | 8 . 0           | 12 . 1       | 5 . 6           | 8 . 2           | 9 . 4                                     | 4 . 8           | 5 . 7           | 26 . 8        | 4 . 4           | 6 . 8                     | 5 . 4                   | 7 . 3        |              | 12 . 4         | 17 . 5          | 10 . 5          | 13 . 0 10 . 2   |
|-----------------|-----------------|--------------|-----------------|-----------------|-------------------------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|---------------|-----------------|---------------------------|-------------------------|--------------|--------------|----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|
| 2 . 5           | 2 . 3           | 8 . 6        | 2 . 5           | 3 . 4           | 1 . 0                                     | 3 . 1           | 3 . 5           | 8 . 1         | 4 . 7           | 7 . 5                     | 1 . 3                   | 2 . 7        | 2 . 3        | 9 . 8          | 2 . 8           | 3 . 2           | 1 . 9           |
| 2 . 4           | 1 . 1           | 0 . 5        | 0 . 3           | 0 . 4           | 0 . 5                                     | 3 . 1           | 1 . 9           | 0 . 5         | 0 . 3           | 0 . 6                     | 0 . 7                   | 2 . 8        | 1 . 1        | 0 . 6          | 0 . 3           | 0 . 5           | 1 . 5           |
| 25 . 4          | 18 . 3          | 14 . 8       | 14 . 0          | 15 . 9          | 25 . 5                                    | 20 . 5          | 14 . 2          | 9 . 8         | 8 . 7           | 10 . 2                    | 19 . 3                  | 28 . 4       | 16 . 6       | 16 . 2         | 17 . 1          | 18 . 3          | 27 . 7          |
| 17 . 3          | 38 . 6          | 7 . 0        | 17 . 1          | 18 . 1          | 14 . 6                                    | 19 . 5          | 40 . 1          | 4 . 8         | 13 . 2          | 16 . 6                    | 18 . 1                  | 12 . 6       | 37 . 3       | 8 . 3          | 15 . 7          | 15 . 2          | 22 . 3          |
| 24 . 6          | 49 . 4          | 3 . 5        | 13 . 3          | 8 . 1           | 14 . 1                                    | 23 . 6          | 47 . 7          | 2 . 8         | 11 . 9          | 5 . 8                     | 10 . 9                  | 17 . 9       | 38 . 7       | 5 . 0          | 12 . 7          | 8 . 2           | 27 . 8          |
| 23 . 3 - 36 . 7 | 24 . 1 - 62 . 6 | 20 . 9 0 . 7 | 29 . 2 - 55 . 3 | 21 . 4 - 27 . 9 | . 3 33 . 1 - 139 . 5 Renaisannce Scenario | 21 . 9 - 38 . 0 | 22 . 3 - 69 . 0 | 16 . 9 41 . 8 | 26 . 4 - 66 . 7 | 18 . 5 - 21 . 9 - 142 . 9 | 32 . 4 Nowhere scenario | . 6 - 32 . 6 | . 3 - 74 . 3 | 25 . 4 - 7 . 1 | 36 . 3 - 44 . 0 | 26 . 7 - 35 . 2 | 33 . 9 - 82 . 3 |
| 23 . 4          | 25 . 5          | . 2          | . 5             | . 7             | 35 Rural                                  | 22 . 3          | 23 . 0          | . 6           | 30 . 5          | 23 . 1 33 . 3             | to                      | 27           | 27           | . 1            | 37 . 1          | 28 . 7          | 36 . 7          |
| 23 . 0          |                 | 23           | 31              | 23              |                                           |                 |                 | 21            |                 |                           | Road                    | 28 . 7       | 33 . 9       | 27             |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | 22 . 1          | 20 . 8       | 17 . 5          | 22 . 0          | 16 . 5                                    | 21 . 4          | 22 . 5          | 24 . 4        | 18 . 7          | 23 . 7                    | 16 . 2                  | 15 . 1       | 14 . 9       | 16 . 2         | 12 . 4          | 16 . 0          | 14 . 0          |
| 5 . 5           | 4 . 9           | 14 . 0       | 13 . 1          | 7 . 9           | 6 . 3                                     | 8 . 6           | 8 . 4           | 16 . 8 18 3   | .               | 12 . 7 8 7                | .                       | 5 . 0        | 3 . 7        | 13 . 7         | 13 . 7          | 7 . 5           | 4 . 7           |
| 21 . 3          | 15 . 3          | 38 . 7       | 43 . 7          | 29 . 0          | 24 . 0                                    | 23 . 9          | 18 . 5          | 51 . 4        | 54 . 2          | 40 . 9                    | 29 . 8                  | 22 . 2       | 13 . 2       | 42 . 6         | 51 . 9          | 31 . 5          | 20 . 2          |
| 3 . 7           | 1 . 5           | 83 . 7       | 249 . 3         | 15 . 3          | 4 . 8                                     | 5 . 6           | 3 . 2 70 . 6    | 223 . 1       | 32 . 3          | 6 . 6                     |                         | 3 . 3        | 1 . 4        | 80 . 8         | 358 . 8         | 28 . 4          | 2 . 0           |
| 0 . 2           | 0 . 3           | 0 . 9        | 3 . 7           | 0 . 2           | 0 . 1                                     | 0 . 3           | 0 . 4           | 0 . 8         | 3 . 4           | 0 . 7 0 . 3               |                         | 0 . 8        | 0 . 5        | 1 . 8          | 8 . 8           | 0 . 3           | 0 . 4           |
| 4 . 7           | 2 . 9           | 12 . 2       | 24 . 6          | 6 . 5           | 5 . 2                                     | 8 . 8           | 4 . 4           | 19 . 9        | 28 . 3          | 11 . 8 8 . 7              |                         | 3 . 9        | 2 . 7        | 12 . 2         | 25 . 8          | 7 . 8           | 2 . 8           |
| C 1             | C 2             | C 3          | C 4             | C 5             | C 6                                       | C 1             | C 2             | C 3           | C 4             | C 5 C 6                   |                         | C 1          | C 2          | C 3            | C 4             | C 5             | C 6             |

Second, a cluster analysis was conducted where six different types of rural areas in  Croatia  were recognized (Tables 1 and 2 ).  Ward's  clustering method was used (squared Euclidean distance, values standardized by variable between 1 and 1 ).

The  following  step  in  our  scenario  construction  included  a  Delphi  study, consisting  of  two  rounds  of  written  questionnaires.  The  Delphi  panel  encompassed  academics  with  rural  expertise.  The  choice  of  panelists  was  based  on papers published by potential members, their scientific discipline,  and regional distribution.  Out  of 57 researchers  who  were  initially  contacted  via  e-mail, 37 participated in the first Delphi round, while 13 participated in the second round. The following disciplines were represented: agronomy ( 3 ), agricultural economics  ( 6 ),  anthropology  ( 2 ),  architecture  and  urbanism  ( 1 ),  demography ( 3 ),  economics  ( 3 ),  ethnology  ( 1 ),  forestry  and  environmental  protection  ( 1 ), geography  ( 9 ),  spatial  economics  ( 2 ),  social  work  ( 1 ),  and  sociology  ( 5 ).  The time frame was June/July 2017 for the first Delphi round, and August/ September 2017 for the second round. The first questionnaire was disseminated via  an  online  service  and  the  second  via  e-mail.  In  the  first  round  the  panel considered possible future development of each of the 15 key variables (through numerical  estimates  and  additional  explanations).  They  also  had  an  option  to describe other factors deemed important for the future development of Croatian rural areas, either in a national or international context. For the sake of clarity, the  questionnaire  was  prechecked  by  two  experts  who  later  participated  in  the Delphi panel; their comments helped improve the final questionnaire structure.

The analysis of the results was both quantitative and qualitative. Numerical estimates were used as input data for Monte Carlo simulations, resulting in the most likely  new types  of  rural  areas  (clusters)  in  the  final  year.  The  qualitative analysis of responses to open-ended questions was conducted with regard to the possible future developments of listed variables, including the specific characteristics  of  rural  area  types,  and  other  factors,  both  endogenous  and  exogenous. These results served as input in structuring the scenarios.

Scenarios  were  developed  using  the  scenario  axes  technique/ 2 x 2 matrix, which  Bishop  et  al.  ( 2007 )  refer  to  as  the  Royal  Dutch  Shell/Global  Business Network  matrix  approach.  The  approach  includes  identifying  the  two  most important  and  most  uncertain  factors  for  future  development.  The  aforementioned factors are represented by two axes, whereby opposite axes sections stand for extreme values of each factor. The resulting four quadrants set the frame for possible future developments within four different scenarios.

In  our  study,  two  axes  of  key  uncertainties  were  recognized  based  on  the qualitative analysis of the first  Delphi  round.  We  also  used  the  results  of a  questionnaire survey among 59 rural stakeholders who were participants at the First Croatian Rural Parliament. The selected key uncertainties were demographic state  and  processes,  and  a  combination  of  innovation-such  as  problem  solving, economic, and technological development-and actor networking (Figure 1 ).

10

2 0 3 0

## Scenarios on Croatian rural futures until 2030:scenario axes

FIG. 1 -Scenarios on Croatian rural futures until 2030 -scenario axes.

<!-- image -->

Numerical estimates for 15 key variables and different types of rural areas were organized along the two axes by the expert team, which served as the backbone for scenarios and an input into Monte Carlo simulations, and ultimately led to four new rural  typologies  (for  example,  Figures 2 and 3 ).  Scenario  narratives  were  based primarily on the qualitative analysis of the Delphi survey responses. In the second

FIG. 2 -Types of rural areas in Croatia in 2030 -Rural Renaissance scenario.

<!-- image -->

FIG. 3 -Types of rural areas in Croatia in 2030 -Road to Nowhere scenario.

<!-- image -->

Delphi questionnaire, the participants gave their comments on scenario narratives, including  the  consistency-check  and  the  results  of  numerical  simulations.  The constructed  scenarios  are  explorative  scenarios,  based  on  the  analysis  of  current trends and exploration of possible future developments.

## SCENARIOS  ON  CROATIAN  RURAL  FUTURES

## RURAL  RENAISSANCE

The Rural Renaissance scenario is based on economic development generated by synergistic  and  innovative  approaches  to  the  best  use  of  local,  endogenous developmental  resources,  in  an  encouraging  institutional  setting  and  business environment.  Positive  demographic  trends  follow  and  start  emerging  by 2030 . A  common  vision  for  local  populations,  often  arising  from  the  actions  of LEADER  Local  Action  Groups  (LAGs)  and/or  proactive  individuals,  would cause  the  strengthening  of  communal  activities  in  the  form  of  associations, cooperatives, clusters, and producer organizations that, in turn, would strengthen employment, competitiveness, and entrepreneurship. This results in a  more  successful  approach  to  the  market  by  small  farmers,  craftsmen,  and tradesmen, as well as the largest and most successful businesses. The success of small economic entities confirms the true strength of a rising economic sector. The  multisectoral  economy  becomes  a  reality  that  opens  a  variety  of  jobs  for people with varying levels of education. With respect to the various types of rural

12

2 0 3 0

areas, multisectoral economy encompasses market-oriented agricultural production  of  traditional  crops,  new  high-income  crops  and  organic  agriculture,  the combination  of  agriculture  and  tourism,  and  the  development  of  many  other selective forms of tourism based on natural and cultural heritage. In the vicinity of  urban  centers,  there  is  often  development  of  innovative  and  technologically advanced  industries.  Decisions  regarding  the  use  of  the  most  important  local development resources of rural communities are made with the consent of local, regional, and national governance levels. This represents the first step toward the successful decentralization of the institutional framework, which is experiencing positive change under the influence of an increasing number of different actors on one hand, and the demands that come with obtaining money from E.U. funds on the other. Administrative obstacles regarding entrepreneurship, as well as the uncertainty of the legal framework have been alleviated. More significant influence of funding from Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and other relevant E. U. funds is expected in the new budget cycle after 2020 ,  with the strengthening of absorption power on the local level. As a result of the aforementioned, rural development stakeholders would not allow a return to 'business as usual,' that is,  passive  observation  of  the  progression  of  negative  processes.  In  such  an atmosphere,  the  inefficient  and  uncoordinated  state  and/or  arbitrariness  of local  leaders  is  gradually  replaced  by  positive  engagement  of  local  stakeholders and various external factors in a relationship that transitions from paternalistic to partner relations. This enables better quality of planning and the development of  communal  and  social  infrastructure  that  is  essential  to  the  quality  of  life. Demographic measures are designed on the basis of  immigration  and  redistributive demographic policies, with a focus on young families; they are more than just  maternity  benefits  and  housing  support  funds,  and  are  primarily  oriented toward supporting the working and social environments. A growing number of young  urban  residents  who  have  just  finished  their  education  have  decide  to move  to  rural  areas  for  new  opportunities  for  employment,  to  start  their  own businesses,  for  the  rural  lifestyle,  and/or  due  to  insecurity  of  employment  in urban  centers.  As  a  result  of  the  lengthening  of  the  tourism  season,  seasonal workers  also  come  to  work  in  tourist  destinations  and  reside  in  nearby  rural areas, alongside immigrants from war-afflicted areas. The influence of potential E.U.  enlargement  to  Croatia's  neighboring  countries  and  general  geopolitical stability  could contribute to the strengthening of rural development in Croatia, both thanks to increased trade and the stabilization of cross-border relations.

## SHIFT

The Shift scenario portrays the future of a rural Croatia in which a new approach to  solving  key  rural  problems  is  applied,  but  with  a  continued  negative  demographic situation, emigration, and  depopulation as dominant  trends.  The described positive changes in the Rural Renaissance scenario also take place in

this  scenario, but they are slower and less intense, which does not result in the cessation of negative demographic trends by the end of the investigated period. An  important  innovative  turnabout  regarding  the  'activation'  of  the  older population,  however,  does  takes  place,  which  is  a  change  from  this  group's neglected  role  in  current  development  processes.  They  are  recognized  as  an important  factor  of  economic  development  due  to  their  skills  and  traditional knowledge, as well as their ownership of land and property. In this scenario, in contrast  to  multisectoral  economic  development  in  the  Rural  Renaissance  scenario,  the  advancement  of  agriculture  is  the  key  to  development.  This  is  the consequence of  innovative  approaches  to  solving  some  key  contemporary  problems,  such  as  land  ownership  relations  and  agricultural  land  management. When  attracting funds, the emphasis has primarily been on the Rural Development Programme within CAP and strengthening of agricultural competition.  Positive  effects  in  agriculture  are  evident:  holdings  grow  in  size,  the availability  of  various  forms  of  professional  education  grows,  the  position  of small agricultural producers improves due to innovative links to urban markets, and agriculture becomes increasingly multifunctional. The other strong pillar of economic  development  is  tourism.  Owing  to  innovative  approaches  in  the development  of  selective  forms  of  tourism,  areas  near  coastal  tourism  hubs enjoy  strong  tourism  development.  There  is  a  growing  need  for  workers  in both  economic  branches,  and  demographic  policy  measures,  despite  being planned and carried out, have not yet given results. The possibility of revitalization is found in the incentive for redistribution of population from other parts of Croatia; however, the 'import' of foreign workers from neighboring countries is used as the main compensatory economic measure. This then creates a permanent state of uncertainty in regard to the unstable geopolitical situation in Southeast Europe and the uncertain destiny of further E.U. enlargement.

## ROAD  TO  NOWHERE

The Road to Nowhere scenario is determined by emigration and depopulation, the  lack  of  innovation,  and  discordant  approaches  on  the  part  of  a  growing number  of  actors.  There  is  a  lack  of  development  incentive  on  the  local  level, primarily due to further weakening of human and social capital, and dependence of  the  economic  sector  on  large  entities,  primarily  in  agriculture  and  tourism. The strong outflow of the young, educated population continues, which brings about an irreversible loss of  new knowledge and new technological approaches in agriculture and the economy. The lack of human resources, especially youth, becomes the main factor of lagging behind in development.

Under  such  conditions,  the  institutional  framework  and  top-down  actors continue with paternalistic relations that result in the continuation of policies of political  and  fiscal  centralization,  with  emphasis  on  strong  local,  primarily political,  actors.  The  expected  positive  influences  of  the  Rural  Development

14

2 0 3 0

Programme  and  E.U.  funds  are  lacking,  with  a  few  exceptions,  due  to  weak usage, caused by disharmony on all levels of administration and a lack of experts. Furthermore,  the  funding  that  is  absorbed  does  not  have  a  wider  territorial effect,  because  it  is  hindered  by  numerous  bureaucratic  obstacles  (frequent changes  to  the  legal  framework,  stifling  tax  structure,  and  trade  difficulties). Demographic policy remains on the level of maternity benefits and some local measures, without a systematic approach.

Increasing  unemployment  is  a  key  factor  in  further  depopulation.  Under conditions  of  a  shrinking  local  job  market  and  vanishing  social  amenities,  it  is nearly  impossible  to  find  seasonal  workers  for  agriculture  or  tourism.  This encourages  unplanned  and  unselective  import  of  predominantly  unqualified workers. Along with the aforementioned processes, local development resources, primarily natural-freshwater, forests, biomass, stone, soil-become fundamental,  but  nameless,  sources  of  income,  mostly  in  the  hands  of  foreign  investors. Local  identity-natural  and  cultural  heritage-is  degraded  due  to  an  exclusive market orientation. The aspiration level of the remaining youth falls. Systematic, balanced,  and  overall  development  becomes  impossible  under  conditions  of increasing  peripheralization  of  rural  Croatia.  Border  areas  are  especially  threatened due to unsolved border disputes between Croatia and neighboring countries. In this sense, geopolitical issues and the consequences of the migrant crisis, if  it  continues, can have a strong negative influence on rural Croatia.

## GROWTH  WITHOUT  DEVELOPMENT

The Growth without Development scenario describes a future of rural Croatia in which  stagnation  or  population  growth  is  achieved  by 2030 ,  depending  on  the type of rural area. However, this happens in an environment that lacks innovative approaches to solving key development problems and does not advance the level of coordination and networking of key actors and stakeholders. Consequentially,  in  contrast  to  the  similarly  demographically  positive  Rural Renaissance  Scenario,  this  sort  of  quantitative  trend  is  not  reflected  on  the qualitative  level,  as  numeric  simulation  shows  that  the  share  of  youth  will continue to reduce along with a continual increase in the share of aged population.  This situation reveals that in-migration has primarily been a consequence of  external  trends,  of  which  the  most  important  are  further  tourism  and  an increase  in  the  number  of  second  homes  in  touristic  areas  of  Croatia  that become  seasonal/permanent  places  of  residence  for  an  increasing  number  of retired Europeans. For retirees, Croatia is an increasingly attractive, secure place with a favorable climate. Furthermore, after the first strong wave of emigration from eastern Croatia, the demographic situation there stabilizes, given that the younger and the more ambitious have left, and the remaining population is more passive,  and  also  because  owning  agricultural  land  offers  at  least  some  kind  of revenue.

The development of mass tourism at the seaside is the dominant trend in this scenario, which demands a large, less educated workforce, so immigration is on the rise but is very unselective and is the result of business interests of investors and owners of tourist facilities. In the European context, this scenario partially hints  at  the  idea  of  Croatia  as  a  'European  playground,'  highlighting  the country's weak importance in terms of the production sector, and its significance in terms of leisure and recreation-especially due to the growth in the number of affluent  retirees.  Geopolitical  processes  in  the  (wider)  neighborhood  are  of  key importance, because any sort of instability repels the main source of income and endangers economic development.

## SPATIAL  IMPACTS

Spatial  impacts  of  explorative  scenarios  were  visualized  through  four  scenariospecific  typologies.  Here  we  explore  the  examples  of  two  scenarios:  Rural Renaissance  (Figure 2 )  and  Road  to  Nowhere  (Figure 3 ).  The  mean  values  for each  of  the 15 variables  in  different  types  of  rural  areas  (Table 2 )  indicate  the difference  in  trends  in  the  Rural  Renaissance  and  Road  to  Nowhere  scenarios with regard to the original typology.

The Rural Renaissance scenario resulted in a significant increase in the number, area, and population in the cluster of touristic, demographically older areas ( 10 . 6 percent to 13 . 5 percent of territory, 7 . 1 percent to 11 . 3 percent of population). Owing to the development of selective forms of tourism in the hinterland, parts of mountainous Croatia near Kvarner, the island Krk, Istria, and Šibenik Zagora became a part of this type.  Furthermore,  parts  of  Slavonia,  in  the  wider  Osijek  region,  have  undergone positive  changes  in  terms  of  development  of  agriculture  and  general  employment level, which can be observed in their transition from predominantly agricultural areas, with significant unemployment levels, into heavily agricultural areas.

The Road to Nowhere scenario brings the most visible spatial changes in the distribution of types of rural areas. Areas with critical demographic characteristics and economic limitations in development had especially large growth in the number of spatial units and, consequentially, in the shares of surface area and population (increase were experienced from 19 . 8 percent to 27 . 5 percent of territory, and from 7 . 1 percent to 15 . 7 of population.) The second-expressed spatial change is the strong reduction of heavily agricultural areas (decrease from 20 . 0 percent to 5 . 1 percent of territory,  and  from 16 . 4 percent  to 4 . 6 percent  of  population),  which  is  a  direct consequence  of  the  aforementioned  spread  of  areas  with  critical  demographic characteristics and economic limitations in development.

## DISCUSSION  AND  CONCLUSION

Our study was guided by the idea that 'the theory of rural development does not deal with the world as it is-it is about the ways in which agriculture and landscape could be redesigned' (Van der Ploeg et al. 2000 , 396 ). By developing four alternative

16

2 0 3 0

scenarios with different demographic, economic, social, and spatial outcomes, we have offered a set of well-documented and reasonable assumptions that should help us to reflect on possible future paths for Croatian rural areas.

Numerical simulations have shown that alternative scenarios imply a change in  the  spatial  distribution  and  size  of  the  territory,  as  well  as  in  the  number  of inhabitants in a given rural area type compared to the current typology (Figs. 2 and 3 ).  Although  some  previous  research  has  also  warned  that  future  studies need more integrative and robust methods to use the concept of a heterogeneous countryside as a starting point (Foa and Howard 2006 ;  Lowe  and  Ward 2009 ), scenario exercises usually consider ex-post spatial impacts of developed scenarios in different types of rural areas. In our study, the diversity of rural areas was the starting  point  and  was  considered  simultaneously  with  the  development  of scenario narratives in an attempt to address identified challenges.

Furthermore, with regard to rural development theories, we would argue that the alternative  scenarios  developed  for  rural  Croatia  in 2030 consist  of  components  of both  the  modernization  paradigm  and  the  new  rural  development  paradigm.  This particularly concerns recognized factors that could influence future rural development in Croatia: endogenous development vs. inward investments, multilevel governance vs. paternalistic, centralized state, sustainable development vs. exploitation and control  of  nature,  consumption  vs.  production,  multisectoral  economy  vs.  sectoral dependency  (tourism),  and  peripheralization  vs.  balanced  regional  development. The Rural Renaissance and Road to Nowhere scenarios seem to correspond to the tension between the paradigms. Rural Renaissance is the most positive picture of the Croatian countryside in 2030 , and it is the multitude of different actors from different sectors of  society-institutions, enterprises, citizens, individuals-focusing on territorial  resources  and  working  in  vertical  and  horizontal  partnerships,  that  bring progress, reflecting the new paradigm of rural development, especially its neoendogenous aspect. In Road to Nowhere, however, the opposite is true; the lack of social and entrepreneurial energy due to weak human and social capital makes dependence on foreign investment and top-down development inevitable. Instead of sustainable development, which is emblematic of the new paradigm of rural development, Road to  Nowhere brings further exploitation  of  natural  resources,  sectoral  development, and dependence on imported financial capital, features that are related to the instruments associated with the unsuccessful application of the modernization paradigm. On the other hand, the two other scenarios are arguably much more mixed in terms of their components in relation to the rural development paradigms. For example, while the postproductivist, consumption countryside is usually considered as a domain of the  new  rural  development,  the  Growth  without  Development  scenario  depends strongly on tourism and the growing second-home sector in rural Croatia in 2030 , while there is no significant effort in the areas of integrated territorial development, networking, multilevel governance, and innovative approaches, important aspects of new approaches to rural development. Many of the Delphi respondents considered the aforementioned paradigmatically mixed two scenarios as more realistic versions of

the  rural  futures.  This  could  be  an  interesting  proposal  for  future  research  on  the currently dualistic and separate view of old and new theories of rural development.

Moreover, the scenarios emphasized the role of regional development for the future  pathways  for  rural  areas.  In  the  Road  to  Nowhere  scenario,  the  term 'peripheralization' was frequently used by experts in Delphi research to describe the process of deepening disparities between the capital city and its urban region on the one hand and lagging rural areas on the other. The experts shared the view that center-periphery relations are becoming one of the main obstacles to a systematic and  balanced  development  of  rural  Croatia.  Similarly,  polarization  processes between  urban/metropolitan  areas  and  rural  areas  have  been  identified  in  many NMS as negative impacts on intraregional cohesion and rural development (Binelli and Loveless 2016 ;  Gorton et  al. 2009 ;  Kisiała  and  Suszyńska 2017 ;  Brambert and Kiniorska 2018 ;  Pociūtė-Sereikienė  and  Kriaučiūnas 2018 ).  They  appear  to  be  of particular  importance  even  in  the  economically  better-off  NMS  such  as  Slovenia (Cosier  et  al. 2014 ),  where  studies  on  rural  development  also  suggest  that  the strengthening  of  urban-rural  links  in  terms  of  improving  the  employment  and residential  conditions,  infrastructure,  and  access  to  services  could  bring  mutual benefits to regional development of the county as a whole (Perpar 2014 ).

Finally,  the  question  could  be  raised  about  the  possibility  that,  due  to  the diversity  of  rural  areas,  there  could  be  a  mixture  of  scenarios  in  each  rural environment,  leading  to  potential  conflicts  of  interest  among  them  (Guštin and Potočnik Slavič 2020 ). Our modeling of the different scenarios, as illustrated by the changes in the case of Rural Renaissance and Road to Nowhere (Figs. 2 and 3 ,  Table 2 ),  statistically  express  the  most  likely  outcome  of  the  selected scenario at the spatial level of LAU 2 (municipality). However, we do not claim that only one scenario is possible within a particular type of rural area, especially in  municipalities  or  settlements  belonging  to  a  particular  type.  A  different approach  to  the  use  of  typology  in  the  study  of  rural  heterogeneity  was  taken by  Woods  et  al.  ( 2015 ),  who  developed  a  typology  of  rural  responses  to  the challenges  of  globalization.  They  identified  eight  different  types  of  regional responses  that  can  occur  in  different  rural  settings  (for  example,  Relocalizers, Global Conservators, and Resource-providers). However, in that study the comprehensive  view  of  the  territorial  typology-inclusion  of  all  territorial  units  in the spatial framework studied-is not present since the methodology is based on selected case studies. In future research, the combination of these two typologies, typology of rural areas and typology of rural responses, in a newly developed and methodologically robust framework could be a step toward new perspectives for understanding current and future processes in diversified rural areas.

## FUNDING

This work has been supported by the Croatian Science Foundation under the project number 4513 (project  title:  Croatian  Rural  Areas:  Scenario-based  Approach  to  Discuss  Planning  and Development).  Any  opinions,  findings,  and  conclusions  or  recommendations  expressed  in

18

2 0 3 0

this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Croatian Science Foundation.

## NOTE

1 In this paper the term 'new member states' (NMS) is used to denote ex-socialist countries of Central,  Eastern,  and  Southeast  Europe  that  entered  the  E.U.  in  the  last  three  waves  of  enlargement:  in 2004 (the  Czech  Republic,  Estonia,  Hungary,  Latvia,  Lithuania,  Poland,  Slovakia,  and Slovenia), 2007 (Bulgaria and Romania), and 2013 (Croatia). Although Malta and Cyprus joined the E.U. in 2007 ,  they  are not considered in this paper.

## ORCID

Aleksandar Lukić http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7884-5818 Petra Radeljak Kaufmann http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2738-4035 Luka Valožić http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5696-0367

Marin Cvitanović http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3741-0332

## REFERENCES

- Bański,  J. 2017 .  The  Future  of  Rural  Poland:  The  Main  Trends  and  Possible  Scenarios. Eastern European Countryside 23 ( 1 ): 71 -102 .  doi: 10 . 1515 /eec2017 -0004 .
- Binelli,  C.,  and  M.  Loveless. 2016 .  The  Urban-Rural  Divide. Economics  of  Transition  and Institutional Change 24 ( 2 ): 211 -231 .  doi: 10 . 1111 /ecot. 12087 .
- Bishop,  P.,  A.  Hines,  and  T.  Collins. 2007 .  The  Current  State  of  Scenario  Aevelopment:  An Overview of Techniques. Foresight 9 ( 1 ): 5 -25 .  doi: 10 . 1108 / 14636680710727516 .
- Bradfield,  R.,  G.  Wright,  G.  Burt,  G.  Cairns,  and  K.  van  der  Heijden. 2005 .  The  Origins  and Evolution  of  Scenario  Techniques  in  Long  Range  Business  Planning. Futures 37 ( 8 ): 795 -812 . doi: 10 . 1016 /j.futures. 2005 . 01 . 003 .
- Brambert, P., and I. Kiniorska. 2018 . Changes in the Standard of Living in Rural Population of Poland in the Period of the EU Membership. European Countryside 10 ( 2 ): 263 -279 . doi: 10 . 2478 /euco2018 -0016 .
- Cianetti, L., J. Dawson, and S. Hanley. 2018 .  Rethinking 'Democratic Backsliding' in Central and Eastern Europe - Looking beyond Hungary and Poland. East European Politics 34 ( 3 ): 243 -256 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 21599165 . 2018 . 1491401 .
- Čipin,  I.,  A.  Akrap,  J.  Knego,  P.  Međimurec,  and  K.  Đurđević. 2014 . Strucna  Podloga  Za  Izradu Strategije  Prostornog  Razvoja  Republike  Hrvatske:  Demografski  Scenariji  I  Migracije .  Zagreb: Sveuciliste  u  Zagrebu,  Ekonomski  fakultet,  Katedra  za  demografiju.  https://mgipu.gov.hr/ UserDocsImages//dokumenti/Prostorno/StrategijaPR//Demografski\_scenariji\_i\_migracije.pdf.
- Cloke,  P.  J. 2006 .  Conceptualizing  Rurality.  In Handbook  of  Rural  Studies ,  edited  by  P.  Cloke, T. Marsden, and P. H. Mooney, 18 -28 .  London: Sage Publications Ltd.
- Copus, A., M. Shucksmith, T. Dax, and D. Meredith. 2011 .  Cohesion Policy for Rural Areas after 2013 . A Rationale Derived from the EDORA Project (European Development Opportunities in Rural  Areas)  -  ESPON 2013 Project 2013 / 1 / 2 . Studies  in  Agricultural  Economics 113 : 121 -132 . doi: 10 . 7896 /j. 1113 .
- Cosier, J., E. Šabec, L. Verlič, A. Ponikvar, I. Jenko, K. Klemenčič, U. Gostonj, M. Kežar, M. Gamse, K. Uršič, J. Pavlovič, and I. Potočnik Slavič. 2014 .  Understanding Disparities in Slovenian Rural Areas: Various New Indicators. Geoadria 19 ( 2 ): 149 -164 . doi: 10 . 15291 /geoadria. 32 .
- Dax, T., and A. Copus. 2016 . The Future of Rural Development. In Research for AGRI Committee CAP  Reform  Post2020 -  Challenges  in  Agriculture,  Workshop  Documentation , 221 -303 . Brussels:  Directorate-General  for  Internal  Policies,  Policy  Department  B,  Agriculture  and Rural Development, Structural and Cohesion Policies, European Parliament.
- Dax, T., W. Strahl, J. Kirwan, and D. Maye. 2016 .  The Leader Programme 2007 -2013 :  Enabling or Disabling  Social  Innovation  and  Neo-endogenous  Development?  Insights  from  Austria  and Ireland. European Urban and Regional Studies 23 ( 1 ): 56 -68 .  doi: 10 . 1177 / 0969776413490425 .

- EDORA  [European  Development  Opportunities  for  Rural  Areas]. 2011 .  Final  Report,  Parts  A, B  and  C.  https://www.espon.eu/sites/default/files/attachments/EDORA\_Final\_Report\_Parts\_ A\_and\_B-maps\_corrected\_ 06 -02 -2012 .pdf.
- ESPON ESCAPE. 2019 . European Shrinking Rural Areas: Challenges, Actions and Perspectives for Territorial  Governance.  Inception  Report.  https://www.espon.eu/sites/default/files/attach ments/ESCAPE% 20 Inception% 20 Report\_Final\_ 13052019 .pdf.
- Ezcurra, R., P. Pascual, and M. Rapún. 2007 . The Dynamics of Regional Disparities in Central and Eastern  Europe  during  Transition. European  Planning  Studies 15 ( 10 ): 1397 -1421 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 09654310701550850 .
- Foa,  R.,  and  M.  Howard. 2006 .  Use  of  Monte  Carlo  Simulation  for  the  Public  Sector:  An Evidence-based Approach to Scenario Planning. International Journal of Market Research 48 ( 1 ): 27 -48 .  doi: 10 . 1177 / 147078530604800103 .
- Franić,  R.,  Ž.  Jurišić,  and  R.  Gelo. 2014 .  Food  Production  and  Rural  Development-Croatian Perspective within the European Context. Agroeconomia Croatica 4 ( 1 ): 16 -24 .
- Godet,  M.,  and  F.  Roubelat. 1996 .  Creating  the  Future:  The  Use  and  Misuse  of  Scenarios. Long Range Planning 29 ( 2 ): 164 -171 .  doi: 10 . 1016 / 0024 -6301 ( 96 ) 00004 -0 .
- Gordon, T. J.,  and  J.  Glenn. 2018 .  Interactive  Scenarios.  In Innovative  Research  Methodologies  in Management ,  edited by L. Moutinho and M. Sokele, 31 -61 .  Cham, U.K.: Palgrave Macmillan. doi: 10 . 1007 / 978 -3 -319 -64400 -4 \_ 2 .
- Gorton,  M.,  C.  Hubbard,  and  L.  Hubbard. 2009 .  The  Folly  of  European  Union  Policy  Transfer: Why  the  Common  Agricultural  Policy  (CAP)  Does  Not  Fit  Central  and  Eastern  Europe. Regional Studies 43 ( 10 ): 1305 -1317 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 00343400802508802 .
- Gullino,  P.,  M.  Devecchi,  and  F.  Larcher. 2018 .  How  Can  Different  Stakeholders  Contribute  to Rural Landscape Planning Policy? The Case Study of Pralormo Municipality (Italy). Journal of Rural Studies 57 : 99 -109 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.jrurstud. 2017 . 12 . 002 .
- Guštin, Š., and I. Potočnik Slavič. 2020 . Conflicts as Catalysts for Change in Rural Areas. Journal of Rural Studies 78 : 211 -222 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.jrurstud. 2020 . 06 . 024 .
- Halfacree, K. 2006 . Rural Space: Constructing a Three-fold Architecture. In Handbook of Rural Studies , edited by P. Cloke, T. Marsden, and P. H. Mooney, 44 -62 . London: Sage Publications Ltd.
- Holman, I. P., C. Brown, V. Janes, and D. Sandars. 2017 .  Can  We Be Certain about Future Land Use  Change  in  Europe?  A  Multi-scenario, Integrated-assessment Analysis. Agricultural Systems 151 : 126 -135 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.agsy. 2016 . 12 . 001 .
- Kindu, M., T. Schneider, M. Döllerer, D. Teketay, and T. Knoke. 2018 . Scenario Modelling of Land Use/Land  Cover  Changes  in  Munessa-Shashemene  Landscape  of  the  Ethiopian  Highlands. Science of the Total Environment 622 -623 : 534 -546 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.scitotenv. 2017 . 11 . 338 .
- Kisiała, W., and K. Suszyńska. 2017 .  Economic Growth and Disparities: An Empirical Analysis for the Central and Eastern European Countries Equilibrium. Quarterly Journal of Economics and Economic Policy 12 ( 4 ): 613 -631 .  doi: 10 . 24136 /eq.v 12 i 4 . 32 .
- Kovács, K. 2010 . Social and Administrative Crises Interlocking: The Misery of Rural Peripheries in Hungary. Eastern European Countryside 16 : 89 -113 .  doi: 10 . 2478 /v 10130 -010 -0005 -5 .
- Loewen, B., and S. Schulz. 2019 . Questioning the Convergence of Cohesion and Innovation Policies in  Central  and  Eastern Europe. In Regional and Local Development in Times of Polarisation. New Geographies of Europe ,  edited  by  T.  Lang  and  F.  Go rmar, 121 -148 .  Singapore:  Palgrave Macmillan. doi: 10 . 1007 / 978 -981 -13 -1190 -1 \_ 6 .
- Lowe,  P.,  and  N.  Ward. 2009 .  England's  Rural  Futures:  A  Socio-geographical  Approach  to Scenarios Analysis. Regional Studies 43 ( 10 ): 1319 -1332 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 00343400903365169 .
- Lukić,  A.,  and  O.  Obad. 2016 .  New  Actors  in  Rural  Development-The LEADER Approach and Projectification in Rural Croatia. Sociologija I Prostor 54 ( 204 -1 ): 71 -90 .  doi: 10 . 5673 /sip. 54 . 1 . 4 .
- Macours,  K.,  and  J.  F.  M.  Swinnen. 2008 .  Rural-Urban  Poverty  Differences  in  Transition Countries. World Development 36 ( 11 ): 2170 -2187 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.worlddev. 2007 . 11 . 003 .
- Marquardt,  D.,  S.  Wegener,  and  J.  Möllers. 2010 .  Does  the  EU  LEADER  Instrument  Support Endogenous  Development  and  New  Modes  of  Governance  in  Romania?  Experiences  from Elaborating an MCDA Based Regional Development Concept. International Journal of Rural Management 6 ( 2 ): 193 -241 .  doi: 10 . 1177 / 097300521200600202 .
- OECD. 2006 . OECD  Rural  Policy  Reviews:  The  New  Rural  Paradigm,  Policies  and  Governance . Paris: OECD Publishing.

20

2 0 3 0

- Páthy, Á. 2017 . Types of Development Paths and the Hierarchy of the Regional Centres of Central and Eastern Europe. Regional Statistics 7 ( 2 ): 124 -147 .  doi: 10 . 15196 /RS 070202 .
- Perpar,  A. 2014 .  Kljucni  Dejavniki  Razvojne  Uspešnosti  Podeželskih  Obmocij  V  Sloveniji  [PhD diss.],  Univerza v Ljubjani, Biotehniška fakulteta.
- Pociūtė-Sereikienė,  G.,  and  E.  Kriaučiūnas. 2018 .  The  Development  of  Rural  Peripheral  Areas  in Lithuania:  The  Challenges  of  Socio-Spatial  Transition. European  Countryside 10 ( 3 ): 498 -515 . doi: 10 . 2478 /euco2018 -0028 .
- Priess,  J.  A.,  J.  Hauck,  R.  Haines-Young,  R.  Alkemade,  M.  Mandryk,  C.  Veerkamp,  B.  Gyorgyi, R.  Dunford, P. Berry, P. Harrison, J. Dick, H. Keune, M. Kok, L. Kopperoinen, T. Lazarova, J. Maes, G. Pataki, E. Preda, C. Schleyer, C. Görg, A. Vadineanu, and G. Zulian. 2018 . New EUscale Environmental Scenarios until 2050 - Scenario Process and Initial Scenario Applications. Ecosystem Services 29 C: 42 -551 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.ecoser. 2017 . 08 . 006 .
- Radeljak  Kaufmann,  P. 2016 .  Metoda  Scenarija  U  Istraživanju  I  Planiranju  prostora/Scenario Method in Spatial Research and Planning. Hrvatski Geografski Glasnik 78 ( 1 ): 45 -71 . doi: 10 . 21861 /HGG. 2016 . 78 . 01 . 03 .
- Rawluk,  A.,  and  A.  Curtis. 2017 .  'A  Mirror  and  a  Lamp':  The  Role  of  Power  in  the  Rural Landscape  Trajectory  of  the  Ovens  Region  of  Australia. Society  &amp;  Natural  Resources 30 ( 8 ): 949 -963 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 08941920 . 2016 . 1264651 .
- Ray,  C. 1999 .  Towards  a  Meta-Framework  of  Endogenous  Development:  Repertoires,  Paths, Democracy and Rights. Sociologia Ruralis 39 ( 4 ): 521 -536 .  doi: 10 . 1111 / 1467 -9523 . 00122 .
- ---2006 . Neo-endogenous Rural Development in the EU. In Handbook of Rural Studies , edited by P. Cloke, T. Marsden, and P. H. Mooney, 278 -291 .  London: Sage Publications Ltd.
- Rienks, W. A. edited by 2008 . The Future of Rural Europe: An Anthology Based on the Results of the Eururalis 2 . 0 Scenario Study .  Wageningen: Wageningen University Research and Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency.
- Ringland,  G. 2006 . Scenario  Planning:  Managing  for  the  Future .  Chichester,  U.K.:  John  Wiley  &amp; Sons, Ltd.
- Rizov,  M. 2006 .  Rural  Development  Perspectives  in  Enlarging  Europe:  The  Implications  of  CAP Reforms  and  Agricultural  Transition  in  Accession  Countries. European  Planning  Studies 14 ( 2 ): 219 -238 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 09654310500418101 .
- Schoemaker,  P.  J.  H. 1993 .  Multiple  Scenario  Development:  Its  Conceptual  and  Behavioral Foundation. Strategic Management Journal 14 ( 3 ): 193 -213 .  doi: 10 . 1002 /smj. 4250140304 .
- Shearer, A. W. 2005 . Approaching Scenario-based Studies: Three Perceptions about the Future and Considerations for Landscape Planning. Environment and Planning. B, Planning &amp; Design 32 ( 1 ): 67 -87 .  doi: 10 . 1068 /b 3116 .
- Sokol,  M. 2001 .  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  a  Decade  after  the  Fall  of  State-Socialism:  Regional Dimensions of Transition Processes. Regional Studies 35 ( 7 ): 645 -655 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 00343400120075911 .
- Soliva,  R.,  K.  Rønningen,  I.  Bella,  P.  Bezak,  T.  Cooper,  B.  E.  Flø,  P.  Marty,  and  C.  Potter. 2008 . Envisioning  Upland  Futures:  Stakeholder  Responses  to  Scenarios  for  Europe's  Mountain Landscapes. Journal of Rural Studies 24 ( 1 ): 56 -71 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.jrurstud. 2007 . 04 . 001 .
- Spoor,  M.,  L.  Tasciotti,  and  M.  Peleah. 2014 .  Quality  of  Life  and  Social  Exclusion  in  Rural Southern, Central and Eastern Europe and the CIS. Post-Communist Economies 26 ( 2 ): 201 -219 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 14631377 . 2014 . 904107 .
- Swain,  N. 2016 .  Eastern  European  Rurality  in  a  Neo-Liberal,  European  Union  World. Sociologia Ruralis 56 ( 4 ): 574 -596 .  doi: 10 . 1111 /soru. 12131 .
- Trammell, E. J., J. S. Thomas, D. Mouat, Q. Korbulic, and S. Bassett. 2018 .  Developing Alternative Land-use Scenarios to Facilitate Natural Resource Management across Jurisdictional Boundaries. Journal  of  Environmental  Planning  and  Management 61 ( 1 ): 64 -85 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 09640568 . 2017 . 1289901 .
- Van der Ploeg, J. D., and T. Marsden, edited by 2008 . Unfolding Webs: The Dynamics of Regional Rural Development .  Assen, Netherlands: Van Gorcum.
- Van der  Ploeg,  J.  D.,  H.  Renting,  G.  Brunori,  K.  Knickel,  J.  Mannion,  T.  Marsden,  K.  de  Roest, E.  Sevilla-Guzman,  and  F.  Ventura. 2000 .  Rural  Development:  From  Practices  and  Policies Towards Theory. Sociologia Ruralis 40 ( 4 ): 391 -408 .  doi: 10 . 1111 / 1467 -9523 . 00156 .

- Varum, C. A., and C. Melo. 2010 . Directions in Scenario Planning Literature-A Review of the past Decades. Futures 42 ( 4 ): 355 -369 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.futures. 2009 . 11 . 021 .
- Woods, M. 2011 . Rural .  Abingdon, U.K.: Routledge.
- Woods, M., B. Nienaber, and J. McDonagh. 2015 . Globalization Processes and the Restructuring of Europe's Rural Regions. In Globalization and Europe's Rural Regions , edited by J. McDonagh, B. Nienaber, and M. Woods, 199 -221 .  Farnham, U.K.: Ashgate.
- Zagaria, C., C. J. E. Schulp, T. Kizos, D. Gounaridis, and P. H. Verburg. 2017 . Cultural Landscapes and Behavioral Transformations: An Agent-based Model for the Simulation and Discussion of Alternative Landscape Futures in East Lesvos, Greece. Land Use Policy 65 : 26 -44 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j. landusepol. 2017 . 03 . 022 .