Vemez,  G.,  and  D.  Ronfeldt. 1991.  The  current situation in Mexican immigration. Science 251:1,189-93.

Voss,  Stuart.  1982. On  the  Periphely o f NineteenthCentzlry  Mexico:  Sonora and Sinaloa 1810-1877. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.

West, Robert.  1993. Sonora: Its Geograpbical Personality. Austin: University of Texas Press.

Zelinsky, W.  1971. The hypothesis  of  the mobility transition. Geographical Review 61(2):219-49.

## The Place of Narrative in the Study of Third World Migration: The Case of Spontaneous Rural Migration in Sri Lanka*

## Berit Helene Vandsemb

University o f   T r o n d h e i m

Studies of  migration  in geography have most often been based on quantitative  research  approaches. Such studies cannot  adequately  shed  light  on  the  contextuality  of  migration  and  the  individual  decision-making processes involved. Personal narratives express individual experiences within a social context. The story o f   'Amma,' a female rural migrant  in  Sri Lanka, shows the role of  women in migration, the importance of  family ties, the contextual causes  of  migration, and  characteristics of  the  migration  flow per re. Personal  narratives  have  an  underutilized potential  of  capturing the variety  of  migrants' experiences and  the  complexity of  the  decision to migrate. Key Words: narrative, rural migration, Sri Lanka.

## Introduction

igration  plays a  central role  in  both  deM  termining  and  reflecting  social  change, but  it  is  a  complex  phenomenon  to  study. There is a wide range of migration types classified by criteria related to distance, time, composition of migration streams, and directionality.  These  distinctions  are  based  on  the  assumption that  types and  intensities of  change (social, economic, demographic, political, and cultural)  associated  with  migration  vary  according  to  the  type  of  movement.  Most  research  on migration  in  the Third World  has focused  on  the  urban  context  and  the  links between migration, urbanization, and development. Rural areas have been viewed as a reservoir  for  an  urban  labor  force. The impact of migration  on rural  areas has received  far  less attention  (Goldscheider  1984), and  the  great significance of  intra-rural  migration  is still insufficiently appreciated (Hill  1987). My study focuses  on  spontaneous  intra-rural  migration in Sri Lanka.

A number  of  different  research approaches have been tried in the study of migration, but few studies in geography have used  a  qualitative  approach.  At  the  individual level, migration is a process that easily lends itself to narrative  exploration. According to  Sayer (1989,

' I want to thank Michael Jones, Erik H. Nymoen, Venke Olsen, and the anonymous referees for valuable comments. I a m   grateful to the Norwegian Research Council for financial  support. Finally, I want to thank  'Amma' for spending time with me, and Ms. A. G. Seela and Ms. S. Arambepola for their translations.

JOHN HARNER is a graduate student in the Ph.D. program  in  the  Department of  Geography at Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-0104. His research  interests  focus  on  regional ties  between Arizona  and  Sonora,  involving  both  cultural  and political  economy elements.

262),  there has been an  'outrageous elasticity of the recent uses of the term 'narrative'.'  I am going to deal with narratives in the meaning of personal  narratives,  i.e.,  narratives  based  on individuals' stories. Although  personal narrative  is  a  relatively new  concept  in geography (at  least  explicitly),  it  has  become  a  central focus for  conducting research  in  other  social sciences, especially psychology and  education (Carter  1993). Social anthropology  has a long tradition of  collecting life stories and presenting them as accounts of a culture, but focusing on the analysis of individual life stories is relatively recent according to Langness and Frank (1981). Mitchell  (1981)  claims  that  narrative has become a positive source of insight for all branches  of  human  sciences.  The  methodological  approaches related  to'-the telling  of  a life  have  been  given  various labels in  the  different  disciplines  (e.g., life  stories,  personal narratives, biographies, oral histories),  and 'the meanings of  each spill over into the meanings of the other' (Denzin  1989, 47).

Research in human geography has changed significantly over the  last decade. An  increasing  recognition  of  the  complexity of  human existence and the importance of human agency has led to a search for new theories and methods. Thus geographers have started to experiment with a variety of qualitative methods that have been pioneered in  other disciplines such as anthropology  and sociology  (Eyles  and Smith 1988).  Although there is a long tradition of using narratives to describe places in historical  geography (e.g.,  Broek  1932; Darby  1976; Tuan  1991), there  has  so far not been  much narrative work in geography based on the stories  of  individuals.  One  rare  example  is  an ongoing project by Miles and Crush (1993) in which they are using life histories 'to  construct a series of scholarly  narratives of the individual and  corporate  experience of  Swazi women as migrants' (p.  85). Historical studies of migration  have  shown  greater  awareness  of  biographical issues than studies of present-day migration have done (Halfacree and Boyle 1993). In migration research the narrative or the story approach  has  the  potential  of  capturing  the variety and the indeterminacy of migrants' experiences and the complexity of the decision to migrate, aspects that the quantitative approach cannot reveal to the same degree. However, as Carter  (1993) points out,  these  are quite  tur- bulent  intellectual waters, and  much needs to be  learned  about the nature  of  the  story  and its value to research. My main purpose here is to illuminate some major issues that need to be considered  when  embodying  story  into  research and to argue for the relevancy of using narratives  in  migration  studies. I  will  discuss the  conceptions of  narrative and its contributions to the understanding of case in migration research.  Further, I will  exemplify  the  use  of narratives  in  migration  studies  by  telling  a story about 'Amma' and interpreting it in the Sri Lankan context.

## Narrative and Migration Research

~

As  mentioned  above,  a  commonality for  the traditional  approaches to  the  study of  migration is that they are mainly based on quantitative  methods  of  data  collection and  analysis. The quantitative studies are valuable for giving us  information  about  the  magnitude  and  the spatial patterns  of  migration  streams and migration  selectivity by  age,  sex,  marital  status, education,  and  occupation.  Such studies also attempt  to  explain  the  socioeconomic causes and consequences of  migration. They may be capable of  doing this on the macro level,  i.e., by  describing  the  sort  of  societies  that  are ejecting or attracting certain types of migrants. But  these  kinds  of  study  cannot  adequately shed light on the  complexity of  the  causes  of migration  and the  individual decision-making processes  involved.  Daniels  (1985)  points  to 'the  incapacity  of standard  statistical  techniques  to  describe the  fluency of  human  life . .  .' (p.  148). Consequently,  there  is  also  a need for studies of the circumstances in a particular place that  make  a  particular individual migrate. The individuals and  their  time-  and place-specific lives  disappear  in  the  statistics. Narratives give the numbers a human face. We can  never specify the  exact set of  factors that influence the individual in his or her decision to  migrate;  we  can  only set  forth  a  few  that seem  to  be  of  special  importance.  This  has especially been the case with quantitative studies. However, if we  let people tell their stories of migration  it  may  be  possible  to  capture more of the factors involved and thus to reveal a more complete picture.

A narrative is  a  sequence of  events told  in words, and the events are ordered chronologi-

cally. The dominant form of narrative in Western culture has been  the novel, but the novel is only one of  a number of narrative possibilities. According to Scholes and Kellogg (1968), a  narrative  is  distinguished  by  two  characteristics: the presence  of  a story and  a  storyteller. Further,  Scholes (1981) claims that  any set of  events that can be sequenced and related can also be  narrated.  Consequently, narrative is also a  relevant method  in scientific writing. Often in  scientific writing,  a simple narrative in  the  form  of  a  quotation  is  used  to supplement more quantitative data. Narrative is both phenomenon  and  method.  It  is  a  reasonably well-established practice to call the phenomenon 'story' and the inquiry or method 'narrative.'  People  by  nature  lead storied  lives  and tell  stories  of  those  lives,  whereas  narrative researchers collect and tell stories of such lives, and  write  narratives  of  experience (Connelly and Clandinin  1990).

Feminist  research has emphasized narrative as an alternative form of producing knowledge in academia (e.g., Gluck and Patai  1991).  The Personal Narratives Group (1989,4) maintains that:  'Since  feminist  theory  is  grounded  in women's lives and aims to analyze the role and meaning of gender in those lives and in society, women's personal narratives are essential primary documents  for feminist research. These narratives present  and  interpret  women's life experiences.' It has also been argued by some that  narrative  is  particularly  appropriate  for capturing  women's  knowledge  and  forms  of expression  (see  Belenky  et  al.  1986). Several authors  argue  that  story is  central  to the  organization of  knowledge and is  a  natural  and common way  of  thinking  for  human  beings (e.g.,  Mitchell 1981;  Sarbin 1986;  Polkinghorne  1988; Carter  1993). In creating stories, people are able to impose order and coherence on the  stream  of  experience and to work out the meaning of incidents and events in the real world.  Stories are  a  means of  interpreting  or reinterpreting events by  constructing  a causal pattern that integrates what is known about an event,  as  well  as  that  which  is  uncertain  but relevant  to  interpretation.  Stories  are  always subject  to  reformulation  in  the  face  of  new stories. Further, what we  tell and how we  tell it is a revelation of what we believe, and therefore a story is also a theory of something (Carter  1993). A story  is  a  construction  and  is  as much  about  social  perception  as  it  is  about reality. As told, it can be assumed to lie somewhere  between actual behavior and  social expectations, with possible added  distortions over time through subsequently changing values  and  norms  that  may alter  perception. To tell one's story is not only to talk and remember, but to reconstruct the meaning of the past from the viewpoint of  the present  and  also to give  meaning  to  the  past  in  a  way  that  has meaning  for  the  present (Stubbs 1984). Further, Stubbs claims that the subjectivity  or bias in a  life story  (what  the  informant chooses to remember and to tell or not tell, or what she believes and why)  can  be  as  significant as  the facts elicited.

There  are  certain  limitations  of narrative that need to be considered. First, narrative may give the illusion of presenting a complete story with  a  beginning, middle, and end, while real life  is  unstructured and  continues  after  the story is told. Thus  the narrative's representation  of  reality may be questioned. White (1973) raised the issue of  whether  a  narrative might  be  best understood  as the  construction of a  story about reality rather  than  as a direct representation  of  it. He claims that narratives can best be understood as a literary reconstruction of the reality that includes the ideological perspective of the author. Thus narratives have a moralizing value. 'It is only by virtue of what it teaches about moral wisdom, or rather about the irreducible moralism of  a life lived  under the  conditions  of  culture  rather  than  nature, that narrative can claim cognitive authority  at all' (White 1981a, 253). Mink (1981) opposes this  view  and  says  that  narratives  might  be presented  as  moral  tales,  but  most  are  not. This controversy is probably based  mostly on different  definitions  of  'moral.'  Most  narratives have  an explicit or implicit message. Storytellers have  their  own  strategies when  they tell  their  stories,  and  the  perspective  of  the researcher is present in the narrative. The results of narrative research cannot claim to correspond  exactly  with  whxt  has  actually  occurred,  ie., they  are  not  'true'  if  'truth' is taken to mean exact correspondence to reality.

The aim of narrative research is verisimilitude,  or  results  that  have  the  appearance  of reality  (Polkinghorne 1988).  White  (1981b) distinguishes  between  life  and  narrative;  he says that in narrative reality wears the mask of

a  meaning  that  we  can  only imagine but  not experience. According to Polkinghorne (1  988), White uses  the written  text  as  his  model  of narrative, and  in contrast to the written  story where all threads are tied up, life as lived seems confused and unstructured.  In contrast, Polkinghorne (1988,68) maintains that 'experience forms and presents itself in awareness as narrative.'  We  find  meaning  and  identity  as  a result  of  the  stories  we  tell  about  ourselves. Narrative  provides neither  an  'accurate' nor LLina~~~rate' description of preexisting real experience,  but  rather  helps  to  give  experience form. Therefore, a narrative approach to selfunderstanding is not a distortion of  reality but a  confirmation  of  it.  However,  the  narrative structuring of  experience is different from the narrative structuring of a written text. In a text all  the  'noise'  is  cut  and  only  those  events necessary to move  the  plot  along are related. A similar selection occurs in experience through the human capacity for attention, but the self is in the middle of its story and has to revise the plot constantly without knowing the end  of  the  story.  Despite  these  differences, there is  a  continuity between life as  lived  and the formation of  a written narrative (Polkinghorne  1988).

Narratives may also be criticized for emphasizing the individual at the cost of  social context.  However, the  power of  narrative is precisely its capacity to express life experiences in meaningful ways.  Further,  language in  narrative,  compared  to  other  scientific writing,  is less  abstracted from the  meaning of everyday life  because  it  is  mostly  conversational. The narrative is  constructed by  the researcher and the informant, and it functions as an argument in which we  learn something essential by understanding a life as lived. Geertz (1988) claims that the reader's acceptance of the text occurs not  because  of  its  factual weight  but  rather because of  its narrative strength,  i.e.,  by  convincing the  reader  that  the  author  was  really there.

Another objection to narrative is that it may give  an  illusion  of causality  because  of  the chronological order of events. However, there is  also  the  opposite  problem,  which  Sayer (1989) draws attention to: a tendency to underspecify causality in the  processes described in narratives. This is  partly  because narrative  is not  primarily  concerned  with  explaining the nature  and  implications  of  social  structures, and partly  because  the difference  between mere temporal succession and causality may be difficult to see. According to Sayer (1989), narratives  also  have  a  tendency  to  neglect  synchronic  relations  at  the  expense  of  temporal successions, because given the linearity of narrative,  it is  inevitably more  difficult to represent the  synchronic dimension than  the  temporal.  However,  Sayer  adds  that  these  criticisms  of  narrative  are  not  intended  to  imply that explanations of concrete situations through  conventional  analysis  are  necessarily better. Sayer (1989) argues for the realist concrete  study, which is  an  attempt to construct theoretically informed narratives that give appropriate  weight  to  the  synchronic  and  the temporal dimensions. However, he admits that this is  more easily said than done.

Despite  the  critique,  I think  the  narrative method  is  relevant  and  useful  in  migration studies and in development geography in general. According to McDowell (1992), we have reached a self-reflexive moment in human geography, influenced by  feminism, the  literary turn in ethnography, and postmodernism. Feminist geographers argue for a human geography that  is  based  on the  recognition  of  diversity, for theories rooted  in personal experience, and for a greater tolerance of difference. Narratives could  be  central in such a  geography,  since  narrative  techniques,  according to Miles and Crush (1993), have considerable potential  for  recovering hidden  stories, contesting academic androcentrism and eurocentrism, and reinstating the marginalized as makers of their own past; i.e., giving them a voice to be heard.  How people  understand  and  relate  to the opportunities and constraints they are facing are essential factors for the understanding of migration. Thus, in migration studies, people's stories are important. Narrative is a useful method  for  understanding cases  because  it seeks people's own formulations of  their  situation and how people come to make the decisions they make.  Elbaz (1993) claims that narratives are  needed  to explain connections between thought and action. The narrative unites thought  and  action in  an  intuitive and  direct way;  it  conveys how  humans  experience the world. Narratives can illuminate both the logic of individual action and the effects of structural constraints  within  which  life  courses  evolve.

Narrative  is  held  to  combine  things  that  are determined  by  general  laws  with  things  that are contingent,  producing  a plausible, because followable, story (Abbott 1992).

Further, narrative  includes  the  time and place  aspects to a greater  extent than  do data based  on questionnaire  interviews. By  using a questionnaire we  will most often get brief answers to the questions we pose, while through the narrative method  we  will  get the  informant's own  story, which relates the phenomena to  time  and  place.  Connelly  and  Clandinin (1990, 8) claim that 'Time and place .  .  . work together  to  create  the  experiential quality  of narrative.'  Place  is  where  the  events  occur, where  individuals  live  out  their  stories,  and where  socioeconomic  and  cultural  contexts play constraining  and  enabling roles.  Place is not  always  evident in  a  narrative,  but  a  good narrative should make clear from where people are speaking because place is central for understanding  action  and  thought.  According  to Connelly and Clandinin (1990), it may be that place is the more difficult  construction for narrative  researchers.  The  reason  for  this,  they argue, is that the necessary field notes for constructing the place are often lacking, due to the fact  that  during  data  collection  one  tends  to concentrate  on people rather than things. Geographers should  have an advantage  here, since  we  have  a  tradition  of  including  place characteristics in our  work.  Brown  (1991) stresses the need  for a  research approach that is  more  idiographic  than conventional  approaches to  migration  studies-both in  sense of  place  and  individual  level.  This  is  where narratives  may  contribute.  Narrative  is  one relevant way  of  trying  to grasp  the  combination  of  structural and individual causes of  migration,  i.e.,  the  ground  level  context within which  migration takes  place.  According  to Sayer (1989), narrative has the ability to capture and communicate processes and change in concrete  situations.  Narrative  explanation  is primarily  contextual,  not  causal;  it  explicates meaning through context. The personal narrative  conveys  how  the  individual  copes  with society, and also how society influences a person's life. Narrative explanations  are retrospective; they draw together events into an account that  makes the ending reasonable and believable. According to Polkinghorne  (1988,  171), they  'are genuinely  explanatory, for they  can answer  the  question  of  why  something  happened.' Further, the reasons a person gives for doing something are acknowledged as the impetus for the action.  The  insights  gained through  narratives may pose new avenues for inquiry,  as  well  as  inform  on  the  analysis  of quantitative data.

Narratives do not replace surveys in migration  research,  but  combining  these  methods will  increase the understanding  of  the migration  process  under  study.  Miles  and  Crush (1993)  emphasize  that  the  collection  of  migrants' stories will  increase the  sophistication of  the analysis and  also increase the  explanatory value of more quantitative data. Although surveys give room for exploring the motives of migration,  narratives make it possible to look at actual decisions and actions and to perceive behind  these  practices  the  network  of  social relations that allowed them to take place (Bertaux-Wiame  1982). By  linking individual stories into a group biography (e.g., collecting the stories of people migrating from the same village), one gains further insight into the social structures  underlying  the  migration  process. The  social  networks  change  over  time  and most  often  they  are not  formally established, i.e.,  they do not leave any trace behind  them. Hence the relevance of  the narrative method. The methods employed in migration research will  largely  be  determined  by  the  research questions addressed. I think  the  narrative  approach  is  especially  relevant  when  studying topics  such  as  the  meaning  of  migration  to migrants, gender relations of migration, social networks  (narratives  may  disentangle  men's and women's individual motivations and aspirations within a family context), the motivation and  multiple  reasons  for  migrating,  and  migrants' sense of  place. Further, a narrative approach  can  increase  the  researcher's  knowledge and understanding  of  the  places of  outand  in-migration.  The narrative  approach  allows one to take a new  look at old questions, to open new fields for inquiry, and to explore new  approaches  (e.g.,  an  ethnographic approach to the study of migration) (Bertaux and Kohli  1984).

## Background

I will attempt to illustrate the place of narrative in  the  study of  migration  by  telling the  story

of Amma. The material in her story sheds light on  the  role  of  women  in  migration  and  on theory concerning the nature of a rural migration  process. The narrative is  based  on informal  interviews  conducted  through  an  interpreter. It is based  mainly on what Amma  (and her son Gamini) told me, but I have included some of my own observations as well. This is not Amma's life story, but the story about her migration. It primarily tells what happened to her  as  I  learned  it.  I  visited  Amma  several times, and each time I learned more about her migration history. Van Onselen (1 993) stresses that  to  avoid  the  psychological  reductionism that sees individuals  moving society, one should also focus on the actions of  those who surround  the  principal actor. This  focus  also helps in understanding  the processes that  enclose  the  individual  actors.  In  Amma's story her  husband, children,  and  neighbors  are  included  to  show  the  context  in  which  she  is operating.  Amma  has  been  selected  as  the main  character because  she i s a  woman who has a  long migration  history  and  she had  established  a  family before  she  moved.  Hence, Amma  represents  life  both  before  and  after migration.

Sri Lanka is  roughly divided into  two  ecological  zones  (Fig.  1). The  great  majority of the population live in the wet zone, while the dry  zone  is  sparsely  populated,  although  it comprises  two-thirds  of  the  total  land  area. The dominant migration pattern  in Sri Lanka is  from  rural  areas  in  the  wet  zone  to  rural areas  in  the  dry  zone,  mostly  promoted  by government-sponsored settlement schemes. However, there are also a considerable number of  spontaneous migrants  who encroach  upon state  land  both  inside and  outside the  settlement schemes. My study focuses on the causes and  consequences  of  spontaneous  migration from the southwestern districts to Moneragala District in southeastern  Sri Lanka. People (all Sinhalese) move  from  old  traditional  villages based on  paddy  cultivation  and  permanent crops to new, loosely integrated villages composed of immigrants who cultivate chena (slash and burn cultivation).

## A Story About Amma

I first became acquainted with Amma on a hot and  cloudy  afternoon  in  November  1990 in Vijayapura, one of my study villages.  The in-

Figure 1: Sn Lanka and the study districts

<!-- image -->

migration area is  still relatively sparsely populated  and  no  major  colonization schemes are located there.  Thirty-five  years ago the  study area was mainly covered by forest, except for a few small scattered villages. The in-migration started  around 25-30 years ago and expanded rapidly from the early 1970s. The majority of the people in this village came here after 1981. I was  walking  on  a  footpath  along  a field searching for the sampled person to interview. I approached a small thatch-roofed wattle-anddaub  house,  and  an  elderly woman  (Amma) invited  me  inside.  She was  a  very  lively  and

hospitable  woman.  She  served  me  tea  and made sure that I was comfortable sitting on the edge  of  her  bed.  Amma's  smiling  face  was wrinkled  and  her  back was  bent  after  a  long life  of  childbearing  and  hard  work.  She was living with  her  son  Gamini,  who  was  an  encroacher  cultivating chena. Except for a short period  of  about  one  and  a  half  years  (when Gamini was  married  and lived with his wife's family),  Amma  and  Gamini  had  always  lived together,  moving  from  place  to  place.  Their migration  history  started  around  1972  when Amma  migrated  to  help  her  eldest  son  in chena  cultivation  and  brought  Gamini  with her.

I had come to interview her son-in-law, who lived  with  her  and  cultivated his  own land  in addition to helping Amma and Gamini. Amma enjoyed  talking  to  me,  so  when  I  asked  her son-in-law about his migration  she interfered and started to tell me about her children. She married in  1942 when she was about  18 years old, and her  first daughter was  born  in  1943. She had  11 children, almost all  of whom had left  because  of  the  lack  of  land  in  the  home village. Two sons and one daughter were still living there, while the others were cultivating chena near this area. She left the home village together with her son Gamini about  18 years ago, when he was about 12 years old. She had given birth  to  12  children,  but  the  youngest son died  as  an infant.  Gamini was  her second youngest child so she felt very attached to him; she could not go away without him. She said she wanted to go with him wherever he moved. In  1989 she told  him to stay inside the house all  the  time.  She was  afraid  something  might happen  to  him  during  those  days  of  trouble. He listened to her and did not go anywhere.

When  I met  Amma,  she  and  Gamini  had been  living  in  Vijayapura  for  the  last  five months, and this Maha season (the main cultivation  season  from  September  to  February) was  the  first  season  they  had  cultivated  this land. This was the third area they had lived in since they left their home village in Hambantota,  and  it  was  the  sixth  house  Gamini  had built for them. He had erected it near  a small tree  so they  would  have some shade, because around  the  house  there  were  only fields,  tall grass, and a few small bushes. At  some distance there were a few scattered large trees, the remnants  of  the  original forest. From their  house you  could  also see a  few  neighboring houses.

Those  were  also  non-permanent  houses  belonging to in-migrants.

Before Amma  and  Gamini  came here  they lived  in Weliara,  another  in-migration  village about  8  km  southwest  of  Vijayapura.  They stayed  there, as encroachers,  for  about 10 years. Amma said she was very sad when they left  that  place  because  they  had  nice  cashew, mango, and jak-trees in  their  garden  and she had  many  good  friends  there.  However,  she did not tell Gamini to stay in Weliara, because he  wanted  to come to this new land. He  was not satisfied in Weliara because it was difficult to  get  water  there  and  the  soil  was  shallow, only  one  foot  deep.  He  consulted  his  eldest brother  who also approved of this new place. After having cultivated the same land for such a  long time without using fertilizers, the harvests were  no  longer  sufficient for both  consumption and sale. Here they had seven feet of deep soil and a well in the garden for washing, and  they  lived  only  1/2 km from  the  road where they get drinking water from the tubewell.  But  Amma  was  not  satisfied  here.  She regarded  everything  as  good  except  for  the people.  She  had  no  friends  here,  so  she  felt lonely when she and Gamini were alone. However, Amma did not want to go back to live in their  home  village.  She  did  not  have  much contact with her husband and she did not miss him  either.  She  said:  'We  don't  miss  each other,  we  are  old,  we  have  come  over  that.' She  did  not  miss  him  when  she  left  the  first time  either,  because  she  loved  her  children, especially Gamini, and she wanted to stay with them. She did not feel sorry to leave the home village  because  only  one  daughter  was  not married, therefore  she was  free to go.

Her home village was situated in Hambantota  (about 80 km southwest of Vijayapura), a densely  populated agricultural  area characterized  by  increasing landlessness and unemployment. There, the whole family used to live together  in  an  old  thatch-roofed  wattle-anddaub house on family land inherited  from her father-in-law. They had  two  acres of  garden, all  under  permanent  crops  such  as  coconut, cashew, and  jak-trees.  All  paddy  land  in  the home village was owned by the village temple and  cultivated on ande (traditional sharecropping) by villagers. Amma's husband cultivated 3/4  acre  of  paddy  on  ande  in  a  neighboring village. Most people in the home village operated less land than Amma's family. Usually, the

family  land was  handed  over  to  the youngest son.  However,  since  Amma migrated  with Gamini,  an  elder  son  was  living in  the Muhugedera (parental home) with  his  family and the  father. This son  was  also working  in  the paddy fields, as  well  as  felling timber. There was  no work available in  that  area  except for agriculture.  People  who  got  jobs  elsewhere left, while others stayed and  did  nothing,  according  to  Amma.  A  lot  of  people  in  their neighborhood  had  left  to  cultivate  chena  in other places. Most of her children also had had to  move  out  to start  chena  cultivation. Actually,  the  daughter who lived  in the home village  was  also  dependent  upon  chena  cultivation  because  it  was  her  husband  who  was cultivating  the  land  next  to  Gamini's  land. Amma's four eldest children were all girls, and they  married chena  cultivators and  moved  to the  areas  around  Sevenagala. The eldest son, Aiyah, also migrated  to that area to cultivate chena. Amma went to visit him  and felt very sorry for him when she saw how he lived in a small hut and all  the hard work he had  to do alone.  She  decided  that  she  wanted  to  stay there  to  help  him.  She  went  home  and  discussed this with her husband and he approved because he also felt sorry for the boy. Thus she migrated there with her youngest son, Gamini, who had to drop out of  school in grade five.

First, she and Gamini stayed with one of her daughters for  some time.  Gamini  tried  gemming in  the  Uda  Walawe  river,  and  found  a few  stones worth  34,000 rupies  each. When Aiyah built a more suitable house, Amma  and Gamini  moved  in  with  him  to  help  in  the cultivation  and  household  work.  She  mainly did  the  household  work.  She  never  had  to work in  the  field. Her parents,  her  husband, and her children never let her work. Now she was  too  old. Once, when she went to cut citronella grass to earn some money, her husband was very angry with her when she came back. He was  angry because he did  not like her  to work  outside  the  home.  'We don't  have  to work, the husband is earning for us, no?' she said and smiled. But sometimes she has helped Gamini  harvesting,  even  though  he  has  told her not to do that.

Amma  and  Gamini  stayed  with  Aiyah  for about two years. Then people told  them  that if they  were  living  together  like  that  they would not get more land. Therefore, she and

Gamini  moved  and  encroached on new  land, and Gamini built their first house. They stayed in that same area for about four years, but they shifted land and houses a few times. However, around 1979  they had to leave the area because all  the  land had been allocated to the Sevenagala Sugar Company. The government wanted to  save  foreign  currency  by  increasing  local sugar production.  Amma  and  Gamini  had  to move  farther  east  to  find  vacant  land;  they came first to Weliara and then subsequently to Vijayapura where I met them.

Amma traveled often to visit her other children and their families. She was mostly traveling alone. Her children did not  like that, but she  did it  anyway.  She  laughed  and  said: 'Gamini is telling that they have  to buy me a vehicle so I can go around to see the family.' She especially liked to visit her eldest son since he  had  recently built a spacious and comfortable permanent house. She was very proud  of him  because  of  his  success. He had  land  for both paddy and sugar cane cultivation, and he owned  a  tractor  and  a  motorbike.  One  day when  I came to her  house Amma's youngest daughter and her three children were visiting. They had come together with another female relative to  help  in  the  harvesting. Amma  was very happy to have them there even though the small house was  crammed with people. They had  been  there  for  about  two  weeks, but  the next day her  daughter, son-in-law, and grandchildren  would go  home. Her  son-in-law would  come back after a week or two to cultivate, but her daughter would stay in the home village  for  two  or  three  months  or  more. Amma  was  also  going  with  them,  but  she would be back after three or four days. She did not like Gamini to be alone, even if he told her to go there and stay for some time. Amma was tired  of  moving  around  now.  She wanted  to live  the  rest  of  her  life  in  one  place. She was hoping that Gamini would  get land at Sevenagala  so  they  could  settle  down.  Gamini  had applied for land there some time ago in order to become a contract  farmer cultivating sugar cane for the sugar factory.

Gamini  actually  got  land  at  Sevenagala in May  1991.  I  was  there  to  say  goodbye  to Amma  and  Gamini  before I returned  home. Unfortunately, I did  not  meet Amma  because she had  gone to visit her  eldest son for a  few days.  But  Gamini  came rushing home  on his

bike while I was  there  talking to his brotherin-law. At a distance I could see that something had happened to him. He had apparently been cycling home  as  fast as  he could, and he was excited  and  jubilant  when  he jumped  off  the bike and waved a sheet of paper shouting, 'I've got  land  at  Sevenagala!' He showed  me  the contract and  a  map  of  the allocated land. He was  very  happy  because  his  land  was  located near  a road  and  a  channel.  He was  obligated to build  a  new  house and move there as soon as possible or he would lose the land. He also wanted to look after this land so nobody would steal his crops, so he planned to travel between the  two  places  until  the  harvest  season  was over.  He would  sell  his  old  land  to  a  friend from Weliara. By selling this land and the old land in Weliara  (both  encroachments), he  expected  to  get  enough  money  to  build  a  new house and establish himself at Sevenagala.  And Amma would of course go with him.

When  I met  Amma  and  Gamini  again  in 1993 they  were  established  in  a  new  wattleand-daub  house  at  Sevenagala. Twelve years after  having been  evicted from  that  area they had  benefited  from  the  establishment  of  the sugar company. Amma was very satisfied with this new place. She was living with her favorite son and her eldest son lived only two km away. In  addition,  most  of  her  other children  were living in the same region. Gamini had married again so she had  a daughter-in-law  to relieve her  of  the  housework.  She  was  also  happy because  of  the  security  the  land  entitlement had given them. She perceived this as her permanent home.

## Amma and the Spontaneous Migration Process

There are four main points in the story about Amma that I want to comment on: the role of women in migration, the importance of family ties,  the  contextual  causes  of  migration,  and the characteristics of the migration flow per re. These comments are influenced by my general knowledge of the migration process generated via the household survey I carried out prior to the  in-depth interviews.  Further,  the  comments are related to the transferability of  the story. I prefer to use the term transferability as suggested by Guba and Lincoln (1989, in Connelly and Clandinin  1990) instead of generali- zation,  because  the  latter  term  is  associated with  statistical  methods.  Although  the  story about Amma teaches us a lot-about the migration  in this  area, there  are problems of transferability related  to  individual stories.  But  as Carter (1993) says, that does not preclude the careful  framing  of  patterns  and  explanatory propositions.  One story may  give  knowledge about the  local community, because other individuals  belonging  to  the  same  culture  and the  same society will  have similar interpretations of  the situation. However, this does not mean that Amma's migration history is typical for all migrants.

My first main point  about Amma's story is that it was her initiative to migrate. She might not have done it if her husband had not given his  consent,  but  it was  her  own idea that she wanted  to  migrate  to  help  her  son.  A  tense relationship  with her  husband  may  have  contributed  to  her  decision to migrate,  although she  did  not  explicitly  say  so.  However,  she strongly  stressed  that  she  loved  her  children and wanted to stay with them. The restrictions on  women's mobility  are  considerably slackened after menopause; they may move around more freely and go outside the village. Consequently, Amma's husband did not have serious objections when she wanted to migrate. Amma's role in migration and decision making has  changed throughout  her  life, from  being an  active decision-making migrant  to accompanying  her  son  in  his  search  for  land.  She made the first decision to move, while Gamini emerged later as the decision maker. However, it would not be accurate to regard her as  only a passive  companion to Gamini.  She also had a  say  in  matters  and  their  migration  satisfied her own search for a permanent place  to live, since she did not want to go back to live in the home village. In rural migration studies it has often been a common assumption that women are just  accompanying their  husbands. Chant and  Radcliffe (1992,  15) put  it this  way:  'Indeed, until relatively recently, women's mobility has often been regarded as a simple mirrorimage of that of men.' Women's mobility has not been seen to be of much interest in its own right.  Analyses of  migration  have  often  been based  almost entirely on information gathered from  male  migrants.  Most microlevel migration studies have  focused on the household or the head of the household (i.e., the man); con-

sequently  they  cannot  illuminate  the  specific situation  of  female  household  members  (Palmer  1985). Thus, the  story  about Amma  informs  on this  conventional  assumption  by demonstrating her role in the migration process.  The  narrative  reveals  that  the  role  of women in the migration process can be  more important  than  has  been  conventionally  assumed. The case for narratives such as  this is to  expose  processes  not  visible  in  aggregate materials.  The  gender  relations  of  migration are not  easily conveyed through  studies based on aggregate data.

Second, the story about Amma  conveys her important role in keeping the family ties intact, despite  her children's  migration  to  various places. All  of   her  children  are moving, while she is traveling around visiting them and keeping the family informed about each other. In a way she can be seen as marginal, but she is also very important. Family ties are vital both psychologically  and economically.  Amma and Gamini consult her eldest son when important decisions have to be  made, such as  moving to new land. Because of his success they trust his judgment and advice. They do not have much contact with her husband in the home village. He is  old  now, and  her  eldest son has  taken over the  role as  the  patriarch. The story also conveys that family ties are of significant economic  importance  in  their  chena  cultivation. Several migration  studies (e.g.,  Connell  et al. 1976; Hugo  1981) emphasize the importance of  family  ties  in  migration,  and  many studies have  observed  that  women  tend  to  be  more committed  to  sustaining  ties  with  the  home village and with relations than are men (Chant and Radcliffe  1992). The details of these links back  to the home village and relatives may be difficult  to  reveal  in  a  conventional  research approach.

The third  point  of  importance  is  that  the narrative reveals a variety of  causes of  migration between places and individuals. The cause of  Amma's  first  move  was  her  motivation  to help her son, but also indirectly the local outcome of  structural  forces, i.e.,  the  unemployment  and  landlessness that  caused her  son to move. The first time  she and  Gamini  moved into a separate house, it was a joint decision by Amma and her  two sons, based  on the information people in the neighborhood gave them. The government had handed out land entitle- ments in other areas to encroachers who had been  living  there  for  more  than  seven  years. Therefore,  people expected the same thing to happen in Sevenagala, but it did not. The narrative shows the implications for individuals of processes o f   development  or industrialization in a  society, i.e., how people are evicted from areas  that  are  becoming restricted  because of government decisions to allocate land for other purposes. This event had  a decisive impact on Amma and Gamini's lives. They had to move from the area where most of Amma's children were  living to  find  new  land  for  cultivation. They were not the only household that had to move;  a  large  number  of  people  who  were encroaching there also had to leave. About 150 households  were  given  entitlements  to  new land  farther east. However, many did  not get any  form of  compensation, and  these  people also migrated farther east to encroach on new land.  Amma's  next  move  was initiated by Gamini's  desire  for  better  land,  while  their latest move indicates that knowledge from earlier  places  or  moves  influenced  later  moves. Amma  and  Gamini  had  been  evicted  from Sevenagala as  encroachers and  then  returned there  12  years  later, with  both  moves  caused by  government land policy.

The narrative conveys the  accumulated experience of migration, i.e., how the decision is made  on  the  basis  of  earlier  moves  and  the characteristics of  both  the  present  place  and the  new  place.  The  decision  to  migrate  is formed partly by the perception of  life in the present place  of residence compared with perception of life in the future place of residence, and partly by the obstacles of  migration itself. However, the reasons for moving are  not  located in the instance prior  to the physical  relocation (except in the case of eviction); instead the reasons are related to the individual's  past, present, and future. This means that migration is  rooted  in everyday life. Amma said she was tired  of  moving, but she accepted it as part of her  life, as  a  way  to  find  a place to live. The narrative attempts to convey the hardships of multiple  migrations.  Each  time  people  move they assume that the next place will be  a good place  to  settle  down,  and  then,  for  various reasons, they  decide to move  on. This shows an  inclination to adapt to situations and indicates  that  people's  bonds  to  traditions  and places are often weaker than expected in rural

societies in the Third World. However, migration decisions  are  not  a  sequence  of  independent adjustments to changing circumstances; instead the migrants have a long-term goal  in  mind  to  which  they  aspire,  such  as Amma's goal of getting land for Gamini and a permanent place for them to live.

Conventional migration studies tend to stress  either  individual  choices  or  structural causes  of  migration.  This  narrative  explores these aspects by showing that this spontaneous rural  migration is a response  to  structural forces  with place-specific  manifestations  as well  as  an  outcome  of  individual needs  and wants. Thus, the migration is not spontaneous in  the  sense  of  being  entirely  voluntary  and based on free choice. Structural forces such as increasing landlessness  and unemployment are the underlying  causes of  this migration, while place  characteristics  and  individual attributes are probably the final determinants of whether people  move  or  not  and  where  they  move. This  points  to  the  necessity of  a  theoretical approach that includes structural  forces, their place-specific  manifestations,  and individual behavior.

The final  point  here  is  related  to  various aspects of the migration flow per se. The story about Amma illustrates how this spontaneous migration process is characterized by chain migration  (Vandsemb  1994).  People  are  often moving to places where they have  established ties with kin  or friends. The concept of  stepwise migration is usually related to rural-urban migration, i.e., migration from a village through a series of places up the urban hierarchy. However, the story about Amma conveys that  this  type  o f   migration  flow  can  also  be found  in  rural  areas,  i.e.,  moving  through  a series of places from west to east.

## Methodological Considerations

The last decade has seen an increasing emphasis on a people-centered  development process. Some researchers have stressed the role of researchers and development workers as listeners and learners, while those whose lives they intend  to 'develop' are increasingly recognized as  the  teachers  and  experts  (e.g.,  Chambers 1983, 1993). A first step  must  be  to  acknowledge and respect the predominantly  oral culture  of  many  poor  communities.  Slim  and

Thompson (1993, 20) claim that: 'If the voice of  poor  communities  is  to  be  heard  more often, it will have to be predominantly through oral  encounters  and  exchanges.'  People  are used to both telling and relating to stories, and therefore  the  narrative  approach  seems to be especially relevant in development geography. Stories  may  also  help  foreign  researchers  to understand  situations in an unfamiliar culture. In addition, the narrative has considerable potential  for  giving  the  underprivileged  a  voice to be heard. Bringing together what people say and  think  in  the  form  of  personal  narratives, and then communicating those narratives, is a way of correcting a bias that runs through the whole development debate (Slim and Thompson 1993). Langness and Frank (1  98 1, 138) put it this way:  'Ordinary people can  be seen as the small heroes they often are and may be  taken  as  the  teachers  they  can  be.'  The narrative  also provides a  dynamic view  of  the migration  process. Few other methods  (quantitative  or  qualitative)  are  able  to  convey the experience of the dynamics of stepwise migration as well as narratives. Most migration studies have  been based  on  questionnaire surveys, and  the  fact  that  Amma  decided  to  migrate might  have  been  missed  through  an  ordinary survey.  The  first  time  I  interviewed  Amma about  the  migration  she  said  that  she  came with  Gamini  when  he  left home  (women are supposed  to  be  subservient to  men).  During one of our last conversations she revealed that it  was  her  decision  to  migrate  and  that  she brought  Gamini with  her  because he was  her youngest child. This illustrates the importance of  establishing a  collaborative relationship  or friendship with the informants in order to get them to tell their stories (Oakley 1981).

In the case of development studies, the narrative is often the product  of  a complex series of interactions between the researcher and the interpreter  and  between  these  two  and  the people interviewed. There must be a sense of equality  in  the  relationship  and  both  voices (informant's and  researcher's) must  be  heard (Smith 1993). To establish a  sense of  equality is  difficult when  research  is  carried  out  by  a 'rich' white  European  among poor  Sinhalese peasants.  But  despite  the  age,  class,  and  cultural disparities, I think both Amma  and I felt a  sense  of  equality  based  on  gender  and  on telling  each  other  about  ourselves.  Our  rela-

tionship was essentially a practical one that we both enjoyed. Amma participated in the interviews because she was curious about me. Eventually our relationship became more social, and my position to Amma  changed from that of a stranger to a  kind  of  member. She said  I was like a  daughter to her.  Despite  this,  our  relationship  was  inevitably  unequal.  The  advantages and disadvantages of the researcher being in  either  an  outsider  or  insider  position  in relation to the informant are discussed by various authors. Miles and Crush (1993) assert that if we  treat the narrative as  an interactive text, then  the  question  of  whether  outsider  or insider status produces better  or more  accurate results is  of  secondary importance. They further  argue  that  the  ideal  intimate  nonhierarchical  relationship  based on  simply  gender similarity  between  researcher  and  informant may be  more difficult to attain for the insider. Stubbs (1984) claims  that a  close similarity in social situation may lead to less inhibition but increased social conformity. According to my own experience  most  people,  especially  the women,  were  very  open  to  an  outsider.  Because of this I think that I managed to establish a  collaborative relationship  with  my  informants. My interpreter played  a  decisive role  in establishing this  relationship.  She  was  a  university graduate, but she was also from a poor peasant family herself and she was remarkably sociable.  An objection especially related to the use  of narrative in development studies is the language problem. When the narrative is  constructed  via an interpreter there is a real danger of distorted reality or loosing nuances during  the  translation  from  one  language to the  other.  However,  these  problems  are  not specific for narratives; they also apply to questionnaire interviews.

One  often  expects  to  obtain  an  increased quantity and quality of data when the relationship between the informant and researcher becomes  more  established. However,  the  more formal  relationship  at  the  beginning  of  the research process may also have its advantages. At  this  point  the  informant  expects  the  researcher to have little or no knowledge about the subject under discussion; consequently the informant  may  give  more  patient  and  clearer answers and explanations to the questions. It is also important to select informants carefully in order to utilize the full potential of the narra- tive method. This means not only a cross section of the community but also various personality types. There is a  danger of  interviewing only  the  more  confident  and  articulate  persons, who may well represent a distinct group in the local community. Such persons are usually  more  accustomed to  presenting  a public image  and  may  therefore  be  less  sincere  on personal recall. Amma is the main character in this narrative. Although she is relatively talkative, she does not represent the outwardly oriented articulate group of the local community. She  is  an  elderly woman  and  women  in  Sri Lanka do not traditionally express  their views in public; the man generally talks on behalf of the family.

I did  not  explicitly use  a  narrative approach when  collecting  the  data.  The  information about Amma's migration was  collected via  an interpreter  through  in-depth  interviews  and several  informal  conversations  with  her  and other  members  of  her  family (we  visited  her home village and  her  eldest son  also).  However, many of the things she told us were formulated as  short stories. We heard  only segments  of  her  migration  history each  time we met, although more rich in detail and personal aspects  over  time.  Sometimes  we  met  her alone, at other  times Gamini  or other  family members were present. I had chosen not to use a tape recorder because I feared it might make people  uncomfortable  and  thus  restrict  their willingness  to  talk.  Sometimes  I  took  notes during the interview, at other times I wrote it down after we  had  left her  house. The main purpose of the in-depth  interviews was  to record her migration history and how her migration  had  occurred. T o  write a  narrative based on field notes and the in-depth interviews and conversations I had with Amma  seemed to be a  suitable  way  of  presenting  the  data.  This provided an opportunity to present a full case story instead of spreading the data out as short quotations in a research report. Further, I find narratives more  readable than  interview transcripts. When editing the  story the  segments were  grouped  by  topic  and  sequenced  in  a loose chronological order. The chronology is loose because neither Amma nor Gamini could remember  the exact time things took place. A few  stories  not  central  to  the  theme  of  the narrative  were  left  out  (e.g.,  about  Gamini's marriage).

Working  with  narratives  raises  questions about  the  authorship:  Whose  story  is  told? Whose  voice  is  heard?  (Personal  Narratives Group 1989). The interviewer's  influence does not  cease with  the  end  of  the  interview; she also interprets, edits, and writes the narrative. Although Amma's story was told as a dialogue between us, the narrative is  my interpretation of  that story. Thus the  story  told  here  is  my narration  of  Amma's  story, or my  experience of her migration  experience as she conveyed it to  me.  I  have  tried  to  convey  her  migration history  as  told  by  her,  not  in  detail  but  in content. As such, the narrative does not represent Amma's direct voice; this is contained in my narrative. Preferably she should have been actively taking  part  in  the  production  of  the text  (cf.  Mbilinyi  1989). However, it was  not possible for me to involve Amma in the writing of  the narrative  since this  was  done after  the fieldwork  was  completed.  In  1993  I  got  the opportunity to see Amma again. The narrative was  read  to her  and  since  it made  sense and was  understandable  to her  I think  it provides an  adequate  interpretation  of  her  migration. The  story  about  Amma  is  depicted  as  one comprehensive story with a beginning, a middle, and  an  end. Her 'real' story  is certainly not  so  streamlined.  All  assessments,  doubts, and  coincidences are not  easily  conveyed, although  I have  tried  to focus on those I heard about.  Her migration  story is necessarily not finished even though it may appear so. Migration  is  part  of  life, and she might  move  again.

Despite the problems related to narratives, I want to argue that there is an unused potential for  narrative  research  in  migration  studies. The narrative  presented  here  is  a  short  and simple one, but I think it illustrates the advantages of narratives in revealing the contextuality  and  complexity  of  migration.  In  my  research project  the narrative  approach is combined with  a more  traditional  household  survey  approach. The narrative  functions mainly as  an  illustration  or  detailed  description  of  a migrant's reason for migrating.  The information  gathered through in-depth interviews has also increased my knowledge about the migration process and thus my ability to analyze the quantitative data. I think there is also a  scope for migration studies based  entirely on a  narrative  approach,  but  then  the narratives must be more detailed than the one I have been able to provide in this  short  article. The narrative approach can provide a new way  of looking at migration  through  the  eyes  of  the  migrants. Generalization  based  on  narrative  is  difficult, but if personal narratives are grouped together carefully they can  provide a variety of  experiences around  a  theme that  can overcome the unrepresentativeness  of any  one  individual story (Bartholomew 1991).

## Conclusion

My purpose in this paper has been to demonstrate  the  use  of  narratives  in  Third  World migration  studies  by  telling  the  story  about Amma. I have attempted to show that the narrative  can  be  of  central  importance  for  challenging  traditional  migration  studies in  geography. However, I am  aware that  this  means entering an unfamiliar and relatively turbulent discussion and that there is a great deal of work that needs to be  done. Not least, we  need  to become  more  self-conscious about  the  issues involved in story and narrative.

A single story can  be  used  imaginatively to convey wider societal phenomena  and change, which  I  have  attempted  to  do with  Amma's story. The individual story sheds light on the society in which the individual lives. Life stories  can  be  seen  as  a  synthesis of  individual action  and  motivation,  structural  forces,  and place characteristics.  Through detailed description  of  individual  cases  (narratives),  we may  acquire  a  better  understanding  of  the mechanisms at work related to migration. The narrative approach  is suitable  in situations where we  strive for understanding  and explanation rather than quantification of migration. Narrative  strengthens the qualitative approach in  migration  studies,  both  methodologically and  substantially,  but  it  should  not  exclude other methods, whether qualitative or quantitative. This is important because 'every method  of  data collection is only an  approximation  to knowledge. Each provides a  different and usually valid glimpse of reality, and all are limited when used alone' (Wanvick 1973, 190  in  Peshkin  1993). Whether  or  not  one uses narrative  depends on the object of  study and the purpose. Narratives based on the stories of  individuals explain individual behavior in relation  to structural  forces, but do not explain  the  structural  forces per se.  Other  ap-

proaches are needed for understanding the nature of  structural forces.  Another  point of  interest  for  migration  studies is  that  narratives may also help in constructing meaningful categories for quantitative studies.

A good narrative  constitutes an 'invitation' to participate.  Peshkin  (1985, 280 in Connelly and Clandinin  1990) puts it this way:  'When I disclose  what  I have  seen, my results  invite other researchers  to look where I did  and see what I saw . . . not necessarily  as  truth . . . , but as positions about the nature and meaning of  a phenomenon that may fit their sensibility and  shape  their  thinking about  their  own  inquiries.' The narrative  is seeing the individual as  a  whole,  functioning within  the  larger  sociocultural  context;  thus  it provides  a  holistic view.  Certainly,  we  can  never  understand  an individual ''wholly,'' but narrative permits us to understand aspects of  both action and thought that would otherwise be difficult to grasp. Narratives  are  focusing  on  human  experience  as well  as  being  a  fundamental structure of  human  experience.  As  Connelly  and  Clandinin (1990,  2) claim,  'Narrative is a way of  characterizing the phenomena of  human  experience and  its  study  which  is  appropriate  to  many social  science  fields.'  Consequently,  there  is also a place for narrative  in the study of Third World migration. W

## Literature Cited

- Abbott, A. 1992. What do cases do? Some notes on activity in sociological analysis. In What is a Case? Exploring the Foundations of Social Inquiry, ed. C. C. Ragin and H. S. Becker, 53-82.  Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
- Bartholomew, K.  1991. Women migrants in  mind. In Migrants,  Emigrants and  Immigrants: A  Social History  ofMiption, ed. C. G. Pooley and  I.  D. Whyte,  174-87. London  and  New  York:  Routledge.
- Belenky, M.  F.,  B.  M. Clinchy, N.  R.  Goldberger, and J. M. Tarule. 1986. Women's  Ways of Knowing: The  Development  of  SeK Voice,  and  Mind. New York: Basic  Books.
- Bertaux, D.  and M. Kohli. 1984. The life story approach: A continental view. Annual Revim o f Soci0 1 0 ~ 10:215-37.
- Bertaux-Wiame, I.  1982. The life history approach to  the  study of  internal migration: How women and men came to Paris between the wars. In Our Common History, ed. P. Thompson, 186-200. London: Pluto Press.
- Broek, J. 0. M.  1932. The Santa Clara  Valley, California:  A Study  in  Landscape Changes. Utrecht: N. A. Osthoek's Uitgevers.
- Brown, L. A. 1991. Place, Migration and  Development in the Third  World. London and New York: Routledge.
- Carter, K.  1993. The place of story in the study of teaching and  teacher  education. Educational  Researcher 22:s-12.
- Chambers, R.  1983. Rural  Development: Putting  the Last First. London and New York: Longman.
- . 1993. Challenging the Professions: Frontiers for Rural  Development. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
- Chant, S., and  S. A.  Radcliffe. 1992. Migration and development:  The importance of  gender. In Gender  and Migration  in Developing  Coumtries, ed. S. Chant, 1-29.  London and New York: Belhaven Press.
- Connell,  J., B.  Dasgupta,  R. Laishley, and M. Lipton. 1976. Migration fram  Rural  Ayeas:  The  Evidence fr o m Village  Studies. Delhi:  Oxford  University Press.
- Connelly, F.  M., and D. J. Clandinin. 1990. Stories of  experience  and  narrative inquiry. Educational Researcher 19:2-14.
- Daniels, S. 1985. Arguments for a humanistic geography. In The  Future of Geogvaphy, ed. R. J. Johnston, 141-58. London and New York: Methuen.
- Darby, H. C., ed. 1976. A N e w Historiral Geography o f England  after 1600. Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
- Denzin, N.  K.  1989. Interpretive  Biography. Qualitative  Research Methods Series  17. Newbury Park and London: Sage Publications.
- Elbaz,  F.   1993. Lectures given  at the  course: Case study  and  narrative.  Trondheim:  University  of Trondheim.
- Eyles, J., and  D.  M.  Smith, eds.  1988. Qualitative Methods  in Human  Geography. Cambridge: Polity Press.
- Geertz, C. 1988. Works and Lives.  The Anthropologist as Author. Cambridge: Polity Press.
- Gluck, S. B., and D. Patai, eds. 1991. Women's  Words: The Feminist  Practice  of  Oral  History. New  York and London: Routledge.
- Goldscheider, C., ed.  1984. Rural Migration in  Developing Nations:  Comparative Studies  of Korea,  Sri Lanka and  Mali. Boulder: Westview Press.
- Guba, E. G., and Y.  S. Lincoln. 1989. Pwsonal Communication. Beverly Hills: Sage.
- Halfacree, K.  H., and  P. J.  Boyle.  1993. The challenge  facing  migration research:  The  case  for  a biographical approach. Progress in Human Geogvaphy 17:3  3  3 4 8 .
- Hill,  P.  1987. Development  Economics  on  Trial:  The Anthropological  Case for a  Proseation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

- Hugo,  G. J.  1981. Village-community ties, village norms, and ethnic and social networks: A review of  evidence from the Third  World. In Migration Decision Making: Multidisctjdinaly  Approaches to Microlevel  Studies  in  Developed  and  Developing  Countries, ed. G. F.  De Jong and R. W. Gardner,  186224. New York: Pergamon Press.

Langness,  L.  L.,  and  G.  Frank.  1981. Lives:  A n Anthropological  Approach to Biography. Novato, California: Chandler &amp; Sharp.

- Mbilinyi, M.  1989. 'I'd have  been  a man.' Politics and the  labor process in producing personal narratives.  In Interpreting  Women's  Lives:  Feminist Theoly and  Personal Narratives, ed. Personal Narratives  Group, 20427.  Bloomington:  Indiana University Press.
- McDowell, L. 1992.  Multiple voices: Speaking from inside and outside 'the project.' Antipode 245672.

Miles, M., and J. Crush. 1993.  Personal narratives as interactive texts: Collecting and interpreting  migrant life-histories. Professional  Geographer 45:8494.

- Mitchell, W. J. T.,  ed. 1981. On Narrative. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Oakley, A. 1981. Interviewing women: A contradiction  in  terms.  In Doing  Feminist  Research, ed. H. Roberts, 3041. London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul.

Palmer, I.  1985. The impact ofMale Out-Migration on Women  in  Fanning. West  Hartford:  Kumarian Press.

- Personal  Narratives  Group,  ed.  1989. interpreting Women's Lives: Feminist Theoly and  Personal Narratives. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Peshkin, A. 1985. Virtuous subjectivity: In the  participant-observer's eyes. In Exploring Clinical Methodr for Social Research, ed. D. Berg  and K. Smith, 267-81. Beverly Hills: Sage.

. 1993. The goodness of qualitative research. Educational Researcher 22  :2+30.

Polkinghome, D. E. 1988. Narrative Knowing and the Human  Sciences. New  York:  State  University  of New York Press.

Sarbin, T., ed. 1986. Narrative Psychology: The Storied Nature o f Human Conduct. New York: Praeger.

Sayer, A. 1989. The 'new' regional geography and problems of  narrative. Environment  and  Planning D: Society and  Space 7:253-76.

Scholes, R.  1981. Language, narrative, and anti-narrative.  In On  Narrative, ed.  W. J.  T.  Mitchell, 200-08. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

- Scholes,  R.,  and  R.  Kellogg.  1968. The Nature  of Narrative. London  and  New  York:  Oxford  University Press.

Slim,  H.,  and  P.  Thompson.  1993. Listeningfor  a Change: Oral Testimony and  Development. London: Panos.

- Smith, S.  1993. Who's talking/who's talhng back? The subject of  personal  narrative. Signs 18:392407.

Stubbs, J.  1984. Some  thoughts  on  the  life  story method  in  labour  history  and  research  on  rural women. IDS Bulletin 15:34-37.

Tuan,  Y.-F. 1991.  Language  and  the  making  of place: A narrative-descriptive approach. Annals  of the Association o f American Geographers 8 1 :684-96.

Van Onselen, C. 1993.  The reconstruction of a rural life  from  oral  testimony:  Critical  notes  on  the methodology  employed  in  the  study  of  a  black South  African  sharecropper. 30umal o f Peasant Studies 20:494-5 14.

- Vandsemb, B.  H. 1994. Spontaneous rural in-migration  in  southem  Sri  Lanka.  The  attraction  of Tanamalwila and migrants' choice of destination. Department  of Geography, University of Trondheim.

Warwick, D. P.  1973. Survey research  and  participant observation: A benefit-cost analysis. In Comparative Research Methods, ed. D. P.  Warwick and 0. Osherson,  189-203. Englewood  Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

White, H. 1973. Metahistoly: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Centuly Europe. Baltimore: Johns  Hopkins University Press.

White, H. 1981a. The narrativization of real events. In  On Narrative, ed. W. J. T. Mitchell,  249-54. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

. 1981b. The value of narrativity in  the representation  of  reality. In On Narrative, ed. W. J. T.  Mitchell, 1-23.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

BENT HELENE VANDSEMB is Research Fellow at  the  Department of Geography,  University  of Trondheim,  7055 Dragvoll,. Norway.  Her  research interests include rural migration and women in development.