I

## From Columbus to Acosta:  Science, Geography, and the New World

Karl W. Butzer

Department of Geography,  University of Texas at Austin,  Austin,  TX  78712, FAX 511471-5049

Abstract.  What is called the Age  of Discovery evokes images of voyages,  nautical skills,  and maps.  Yet  the  European encounter  with the Americas also led to an intellectual confrontation with the natural history and ethnography of a 'new'  world.  Contrary to the prevailing view  of  intellectual  stasis, this  confrontation provoked novel methods of empirical description,  organization,  analysis,  and  synthesis  as Medieval deductivism and Classical ontogenies  proved  to  be inadequate. This essay demonstrates how the agents of that encounter-sailors, soldiers, government  officials, and  missionaries-made sense  of  these  new lands and peoples; it  highlights seven methodological  spheres,  by examining the work  of exemplary  individuals  who  illustrate  the  diverse backgrounds, abilities, and  interests characteristic of  the period.  These  examples include  the observational skills of Columbus in 1492,  the landscape taxonomy of  his son Fernando,  the  biotic  taxonomy  of  Oviedo,  the cultural recording  of Sahagun, the regional geography of Cieza, the pervasive  role  of Velasco in both geographical synthesis and town planning at the government level,  and finally,  the overarching scientific framework for the natural history and peoples of the New World proposed by Acosta in  1590. The evidence rehabilitates the reputation of Columbus who,  like so many others with little or no formal education, had  a  spontaneous capacity to observe and describe.  The origins of  Native American stereotypes  are  identified, but there  also  were remarkable 'insider' studies that,  in the case of  Sahagun,  touched  upon the  semiotics of culture and landscape. Although Sahagun and Acosta had scholarly training,  the confrontation  with  new  environments  and  unfamiliar peoples  probably  put  observers  with  rural backgrounds on an equal footing with those steeped in traditional academic curricula.  l a s t but not least, the essay points up the enormity of  the  primary  documentation,  compiled  by these Spanish contributors during the century after 1492,  most of it  awaiting geographical re-

appraisal.

Key Words: Acosta,  Columbus,  ethnography, geographical planning,  gridiron  towns,  history of science,  landforms,  L6pez de Velasco,  natural history, New World landscapes, Oviedo, relaciones geogriificas,  Renaissance, Sahagun,  Spanish geography.

The world is so vast and beautiful, and contains so many things, each different from the other  .  .  .

-Francisco Lopez de G6mara (1552)

## Renaissance Science

HE European encounter with the Americas  in 1492 falls  within  what  Western historians call the Age of Discovery. Humanists  have  long  been  fascinated  with  that encounter  as  a  source of myths  and  images (Green 1968, I l l , pt. 1 ;   Gerbi 1985;  Greenblatt 1991).  Historians  of  science  in general  and  of geography  in particular are preoccupied with navigation and cartography (Kimble 1938, chaps. 5,  9-10; Parry 1981;  James and Martin 1981, 63-95; Nebenzahl  1990; Harley  1990; Buisseret 1992). The thesis of this essay is that the  Spanish  encounter  with  the  New World also had a far-ranging impact on environmental and cultural understanding. T

The  boundless enthusiasm  with which the first writers described the landscapes and biota of  the New World was integral to the Renais-

sance, or reawakening of Western civilization. That Renaissance marked an  uneasy transition from the Medieval to the modern world, characterized by many cross-currents of  thought and expression. One hallmark of the  Renaissance was the rediscovery of Classical writings during the fourteenth  and fifteenth centuries and their translation from Greek into Latin,  a s a new source of  information,  ideas,  and  esthetic prototypes. But the resulting humanistic resurgence did not immediately lead to more critical  analysis,  let  alone  philosophical  reassessment.  The  deference once  given  to  the Bible or Christian theological authority shifted to that of leading Classical scholars, but empirical  contradictions to 'new' authorities such as Aristotle were only offered with hesitation. At its worst, the rediscovery  of Antiquity led to  an unproductive  antiquarianism that took precedence over new observations and stifled intel- lectual progress.

Medieval  science  had  already  included  a component of empirical, practical  observation, but  was dominated by scholastic  discussions  or the excerpting of older texts,  seldom introducing materials derived from  personal observation. The three realms of natural history, consisting of  animals,  plants,  and  minerals,  had been studied in a compartmentalized fashion, without a grasp of  fundamental interconnections, except a s   an expression  of a divine plan. In many ways  it was  a period of  introverted reflection on the self-sufficient  truths provided by theology, and the individual was  part of an ahistorical cycle of life and death, of suffering in the present and anticipated reward in the hereafter.

The rediscovery of Antiquity provided a new sense of  history,  identifying new role models of scholars-not only  soldiers or  kings-who had made their mark in a secular world of the living.  Renaissance scholarship included individuals who were motivated and willing to embark on a new search,  with a fresh curiosity. Only a  minority  of  these  had both the talent and boldness to emphasize the empirical and the inductive, to reexamine  deductive theories critically, and to draw conclusions from direct observation  or  experiment.  Although  timehonored religious beliefs set constraints  to discussion, the Renaissance  was the beginning of a spirit of free enquiry, with renewed interest in  verification, accuracy, and systematic understanding.

It can  be debated whether  Renaissance geography was  the  revitalization  of  a Classical tradition or the spontaneous product of a new intellectual  climate.  Two  personalities of  the later  Middle  Ages  illustrate  the  problem.  In 1410, the French Cardinal d'Ailly (1948)  wrote a world description based almost exclusively on Classical sources;  it begins with a series of interesting figures for  the astronomical subdivision of the globe, but his regional chapters are a mix of old fables and obsolete toponyms, for which endless fictional or mythological explanations are offered.  Quite unaffected by such ballast from Antiquity,  the Venetian merchanttraveler  Marco  Polo  (1958)  left  a  remarkable account of  his travels in Asia (1271-95)  that includes  vivid descriptions of landscapes and cultural  patterns.' Pierre D'Ailly  and Marco Polo represent two extremes among precursors of the Renaissance, but  the pattern remained.*  My point is not  that intellectual roots are unimportant,  but that  the  prevalent Renaissance paradigm overemphasizes the significance of Classical antiquity,  to the  degree that  it obscures the acuity and originality of Renaissance observational skills and comprehension.

The  discoverers,  explorers, and  observational scientists  of the Renaissance  were at best familiar with a  very limited  selection  of Classical works,  that were frequently  cited only for  effect,  sometimes in the final stages of  revision (see Cieza de Le6n 1984, xxxiii,  n. 12). Strabo, an  available and  obvious  source,  was  barely used, and Columbus's consultation appears to have been very selective and from a derivative digest in  his possession  (see Broc 1980,18,200; Harley  1990, 37, 42). More  influential  was Pliny's Natural History (1940-56), the  de facto encyclopedia of  the  Renaissance  (Broc 1980, 15). For cartography and navigation, the tables of geographical coordinates by Ptolemy (1932), and  the  maps  attributed  to  him,  provided  a direct  or  indirect  datum  for  most  large-scale charts from the mid-1300s to the early 1 5 0 0 ~ ~

Geography during this period was  a part of what was  called cosmography (Waldseemuller 1966),  which  included astronomy and nautical science,  particularly a s   applied to cartography. But between Waldseemuller  writing in  1507 and Munster (1968) in  1550, cosmography  also began to include what today would be called physical and cultural geography.

The present paper is directed to the origins, rapid  growth,  and  crystallization  of  physical

and cultural  geography as  a consequence of the Columbian Encounter. My  argument is that the European discovery of the New World required new  observational  and descriptive skills, a s   well a s   explicit discussion of environmental and cultural phenomena that could no longer be taken for granted: things were either different  or  similar  on  the  other  side  of  the ocean.  Geomorphology  soon  received a degree  of  attention  that  it had never been accorded in Antiquity, and biogeography was reinvigorated. Ethnographic observations gradually added greater depth to the appreciation of cultural phenomena, and these several geographical  strands  were integrated into  what could be called regional geography. All of this was abetted  by  the  Spanish  government's official role in normative urban planning.

The  study  focuses on Spain  and  the  New World,  rather than on research developments in other parts of  Europe. Renaissance geography in Italy, Germany, and France has received some  attention  (e.g., Baker 1963;  Beck 1973; Broc 1980),  but the originality  and quality  of Spanish geography during the period  has been underappreciated,  even  by  Spanish  authors (see  Becker  1917;  Martinez  1945;  Arija  1972, versus Menkndez Pidal1944), The emphasis is necessarily selective,  and several  key authors have been chosen for closer examination. This focus on individuals is not an attempt to create new icons;  it is essential  to elucidate the interests,  abilities,  and  limitations  of  the  period. The differences among  the individuals selected also  reveal the degree to which the evolution of  sixteenth-century  Spanish  geography was multilinear, not unilinear. Geography  itself was the  unifying theme,  rather than a by-product of this scientific evolution.

## Observation: Christopher

## Columbus

The discovery of the New World initiated an unprecedented interest in geography and natural history. Somehow, earlier maritime discoveries by Europeans had  failed to generate  evocative reports of  new lands and peoples. Even the  exploration  of  West  Africa  instigated by Portugal's  Prince Henry  'the  Navigator'  (see FernBndez Armesto 1987,185-200)  led to such dreary works a s   the Cronica da GuinC (Beazley and Prestage 1896-98),  a leaden saga of seafar- ing and slave hunting activities from 1434-48, punctuated by incidental comments on indigenous customs;  only its commercial  prospects stirred  interest  in Portugal. To the  credit  of Columbus (Cristobal  Colon), his voyage of 1492 inspired much more than additional coastlines on the portolan charts. Even though he  thought he was in East Asia,  Columbus recognized the novelty of the landscapes, flora, and people on the other  side of the ocean.  However observant were other captains or ship's  pilots of the period,  they lacked his ability to describe the novel in ways that would excite academic and lay curiosity in E u r ~ p e . ~

Columbus's credentials as  a scientific figure have long seemed unimpressive to his critics. Born  1451  in  Genoa  under  modest  circumstances (his father was  a weaver),  he went to sea  a s   early  a s   age fourteen.  During the mid1470s he sailed the Mediterranean, perhaps on a galley in  the service of France; about 1476-84 he was based in Lisbon and the Madeiras, sailing to West Africa,  probably with slavers.'  All we have to attest to his learning are the surviving letters  in his  handwriting  (see  facsimiles reproduced in Thacher  1967, I l l , 84490;  with discussion in  Varela 1982,  li-lvii); his script was bold and  sophisticated, varying  in execution according to the formality of the occasion, and comparable to  that  of  educated  scribes  and notaries of the time.6  Any doubts about Columbus's ability as a  cartographer and geometer  are  laid  to  rest  by  one  of  his  diagrams showing a three-dimensional  projection,  converted  from  a sphere to a  plane  (see  Harley 1990,  42, Fig.  36),  which  is  found  among his annotated copies of Ptolemy, Marco Polo, and D'Ailly  (see Taviani 1985, 446-55; Harley 1990, 34-43). His report on the Third Voyage (14981500) also makes numerous references to Classical authors then only  available in Latin (see Las Casas 1965,  I, 482-96).

Columbus was  essentially self-taught, as  he admitted in a letter of 1501 to the monarchs of

Spain:

In  navigation  [God] endowed  me generously,  of astronomy he gave me what was needed, and the same of geometry and arithmetic, with the talent of  mind and hand to draw this globe and upon it the cities, rivers and mountains, islands and ports, all in their proper place (Varela  1982,251; Las Casas

1965, I , 31) (all translations by author).

Accordingly,  he hewed to a pragmatic, cartographic tradition of the period, one concerned

I

making  of  geographically  realistic maps intended for the practical world of navi- with  the gation (see Campbell 1987).'

Columbus's  insight  and  intellectual  impact deserve  more  sympathy  than  has  been  accorded him by Carl Sauer (1966, chap. 2)  and Kirkpatrick Sale  (1990,  chap.  51,  Whatever his motives and however annoying his use of hyperbole, Columbus attempted to inform about the new lands he saw.  His descriptions of the people and their lifeways, incidental to his narratives about encounters with the indigenous inhabitants, contain much useful ethnographic information (see Sauer 1966, chap. 3) and novel insights on the  physical environments of  the New World.

Columbus was  untutored  in the  sciences, and his lack of botanical knowledge frustrated him: ' I believe  there are many plants  and trees (in the Bahamas) worth much in Spain a s   dyes or  medicinals but  I do  not  recognize them, which I greatly regret' (see Spanish transcription  of  the  First  Voyage  diary,  by  Dunn and Kelley [1988,  folio 15  recto, lines 25-28]). But his lack of formal training did not prevent his from venturing comparisons of the New World palms with those of West Africa or the Mediterranean: 'They have a  great number of palms of a different kind than those of Guinea or our own,  of  medium height, with smooth trunks and very large fronds'  (Dunn and Kelley 1988, folio 18 recto, 13-16),  nor from recognizing six to eight different classes  of palms (1493 letter in Varela 1982, 141). He also noted the distinctiveness of the trees,  fruits,  and plants of Cuba and of  Hispaniola (see Varela 1983, 141). And he commented on the unusual association of pines and  palms growing in one  river valley (vega),  whose surface alternated between level hills (montes Ilanos) and  low  plains (baxos) (Dunn and Kelley 1988, folio 29  recto, 26-28; see also Humboldt 1845-47, II, 56).

He likewise demonstrated an intuitive grasp of  geomorphology.  He  found  it  remarkable that  the  steep  slopes  of tall  mountains were densely vegetated and not rocky (Nov. 14 and 26,  1492),  and  that  broad  rivers debouching into the sea  lacked sand or gravel bars (Nov. 27),  both phenomena  that we would now attribute to deep tropical weathering. On another occasion he defined  a cala (a  local term  for drowned  valleys  of  the  Balearic  Islands  and Sardinia;  see  Butzer 1962) as  'a  narrow inlet where sea water enters the  land'  (Dunn and

Kelley 1988, folio 24 vuelto 45-25  recto I). Two sources derived from the lost diary of the Second Voyage (1493-96)  offer the first description of a mangrove coast on the southern shores of Cuba;  it  was replete with cienegas and swamps for two leagues inland, with almost impenetrable thickets of plants and trees (F. Col6n 1984, 189).  'According  to  Columbus  this  region  is completely submerged and covered with water and  its  coasts  are  marshy and  full  of  trees' (Martyr 1964,139).

Finally,  there  are  Columbus's  instructive,  if debatable,  climatological  ideas.  He explained the  great  heat  of  the  Bahamas  by  their  low elevation  and  the  prevailing  easterly  winds (Oct.  29).  On the  daily  tropical  showers,  he noted  that  late  in  every  day  a  cloud  bank formed on the western part of Jamaica, resulting  in  rain  for an hour or less; this he  attributed to the great forests of the island,  with reference to  his  previous  experience on  the  Canaries, Madeiras, and Azores (July  1494, F. Colon 1984, 193-94).  He appended a remarkable ecological note. On those Atlantic islands, 'they have cut so  much forest and trees that  hindered them [from expanding cultivation] that  such clouds and rains no longer form as they once used to.' The observation is telling because it shows that Columbus was aware of and concerned about environmental degradation on the recently-settled Madeira islands.

Much in the  manner of  more  recent field observers,  Columbus  repeatedly drew  analogies  between the  Old World and the New:  a similar tree but with larger leaves than a counterpart on an Aegean Island (Nov. 12); live oaks and arbutus (rnadroilos) as  in Castile (Dec.  7 1 , healthy river waters a s   compared  with pestilential ones of Guinea (Nov. 27), finely cultivated lands recalling the plains of Cordoba (Dec. 14), weather like  April in  Castile (Dec. 13), or mountains like those of Sicily (Oct. 28).

Some of the comparisons  were motivated by natural  curiosity,  others  by  economics,  and others still by sheer aesthetics. They give point to his verbal paintings of an exuberant tropical vegetation,  nourished  by  an  eternally springlike  climate,  and  inhabited  by  peaceful and naked innocents.  Columbus  thus  created an image of an Edenic land that was at once primitive yet familiar, and in  so doing his rhetorical analogies delineated a powerful theme in European humanistic thought. He demonstrated an ability to observe,  compare, and describe, and

there  are  suggestions of  partial  comprehension.'  It was  his articulation and dissemination of his ideas, his way of putting  words together, and his rhetoric that provoked scientific interest in a New World that he himself refused to believe was new. Columbus, though at times a medieval  visionary and mystic  and given to Biblical metaphors and prophecies, demonstrated tenacity a s   an explorer and a longing for greatness and discovery that mark him a s   typically modern and,  in thought,  action,  and  results, unlike other  of  the  great  personages  of  the

Middle Ages (Gerbi 1985, 13).

## landscape Taxonomy: Fernando

## Colon

Fernando, born out of wedlock  in Cordoba in 1488,  was  the  son of  Columbus who  had intellectual  ambitions,  and  who  had  a  profound, if little-known, impact on Spanish geography for a century. At the age of five he saw his father off at the docks of Sevilla, and aboard the Fourth Voyage he served as  chronicler in 1502-04  (F.  Colon 1984,  162,  288). In between, he was  a page at the royal court and privately tutored,  in part by a  key historian of the voyages, the Italian  humanist  Peter  Martyr  (c. 1458-1526).  At least some of the natural history observations on the  Central American coasts were  probably  made  by  Fernando, including the  first  description  of  pineapples (F.  Colon 1984,  317). He was on Hispaniola in 1509, after which he  was sent to Castile  to study, 'because he was  inclined to the sciences and had many books'  (Las  Casas  1965, I I , 370).  Indeed,  he spent much of 1512-16  studying at the Spanish Franciscan monastery in Rome,  under the humanist Pedro de Salamanca (De la Rosa 1906; Ponsot and Drain 1966).

Fernando was  precocious by any standards. He was captain-general  of the fleet sailing back from Hispaniola in 1509;  a year later he began the complex lawsuits against the crown, in regard to the titles and New  World revenues  due to  the  heirs  of  Columbus,  who  had  died wealthy but frustrated in 1506;  he proposed a circumnavigation of the globe a decade before and  in  1517  he  began  what  was probably the most ambitious national project yet  conceived for  Spain,  a countrywide  geo-

Magellan; graphical survey.

Although this project was  designed for and executed in Spain,  it later had great impact on physical observation in  the Americas. As  reconstructed from the surviving materials (F.  Colon

1908-15),  its purpose was to:

- (a) Inventory all settlements,  their  dependencies or abandoned sites, any castles or monasteries, the distance to  the municipal boundaries in different  quadrants, and the jurisdiction (royal, aristocratic, monastic) to which they belonged.
- (b) Determine the  number of resident households  (vecinos),  presumably  a s based  on local  tax  rolls  and  provided  by  the  town councils .
- (c) Record the quality of land in each territory (casco); this included location with respect to rivers and mountains, types of  land use, and over 15 more-or-less  standardized categories of topography and natural or spontaneous vegetations (Table 1). These  characteristics were recorded along all roads in all directions,  specifying  rough  distances  to each  change  of  land  use  or  landscape, hence the designation of the project as an kin erario (I ti  n e  ra ry  )  .

This  effort was  funded  by the  crown,  with salaries  paid to a team of  assistants who traveled around the country, following explicit but lost  guidelines,  presumably  issued  by  Fer- nando.

Close to 10,000  settlements (perhaps 80 percent of those in Spain at the time) were inventoried  before the  project  was  terminated  by royal decree in 1523,  possibly in retaliation for a renewed round of litigation against the government initiated by Fernando in that year (De la Rosa 1906;  Ponsot and Drain 1966; Arranz, in F. Colon  1984,  17).  Incomplete  and  lacking official  sanction,  the  results were  never  collated into the  planned, alphabetical gazetteer (Vocabulario),  from which a land use and physical  map  of  Spain  apparently was  to  be constructed. The notebooks of raw data were left to gather dust in the remarkable private library of  15,300  volumes  and  manuscripts that  Fernando left behind at  his death in 1539. When that library was rescued, at the end of the nineteenth century, only4,400 of the town inventories and 5,000  of  Fernando's  books  had  survived.

Nothing like  the Itinerary had ever been conceived before. However abortive or premature it may have been, this sophisticated geograph-

ical survey  represents the first  attempt to develop  and  implement  a comprehensive field approach to  the  cultural  and  physical  landscape.

Without questioning the pivotal role o f Fernando in conceptualizing his geographical survey,  the concepts and terminology used (Table 1) do not seem to have been his own.  In his biography of Columbus, Fernando  Col6n (1984) employed a fairly sophisticated  geomorphologic vocabulary,  including terms such as montaiia, collado  (hill),  peAa  (hilltop,  cliff ), llanura (plain), planicie (plane), cienega (marsh), fango (swamp), arroyo,  espalda (high slope, mountain  crest),  peAascosa  (cliffed), pedregosa (rocky) and quebrada (broken topography), none of which are used in the Itinerary (Table 1).  Only llano,  cerro,  and aspera are  common  to  both,  while  sierra, loma, cuesta, derribadero, and  doblado  are  exclusively found  in the  Itinerary. Most important, monte in  the Itinerary is  exclusively  used in  the traditional Spanish sense of scrub or  woodland vegetation, whereas for Fernando it was a hill or low mountain, equivalent to cerro. This suggests that the vocabulary and possibly also the systematic  approach  should  be  credited  to unidentified  Spanish  collaborators.  Certainly the vegetation categories are those of Spaniards with rural backgrounds  and, not surprisingly,  none  of  these  terms  are  used  by Colon (1984) in his Caribbean accounts.

The  only potential consultants of  Fernando that can be identified are Pedro de Salamanca, whom he met in Madrid in  June  1517, or Antonio de Nebrija, whom he consulted at the University  of  Aka15  at  about the  same time,  six weeks  before  he  began  the  Itinerary  (De  la Rosa  1906).' Nebrija  (died  1522), i s   better known  for first attempting  to  standardize Castilian Spanish a s   a written language (Green 1968, I l l , 11-18),  but he also had geographical interests:  he wrote  on atmospheric pressure, worked on navigational instrumentation,  and assembled  an  ambitious  chart  for  the  longitudes  of  Spanish  cities,  based  on  true  time differences  between  them  (Becker  1917,  96, 122;  Lopez PiAero 1979, 213-14).  He may have stimulated or encouraged Fernando  to attempt a national project, but he had no evident background  in  geomorphology  or  botany.  One must assume that pragmatic Spanish rural experience was  critical  in developing  the  bio-

## Table 1 .   Land Use and Landscape Classes Utilized for the Geographical Survey of Spain (1517) by Fernando Colon'

Arable land

Wheat cultivation (tierra de pan or labores, labranza)

Olive groves (olivares)

Vineyards (vihas)

Irrigated tracts (huertas)

Minor categories, including almond, fig, citrus, apple, etc. orchards or groves

Grazing land and degraded woodland (monte bajo) Designated pastures (dehesa)

Rough grass and shrub (espartinas, monte de atocha)

Sclerophyllous scrub (lentiscales, romerales, rnatorrales)

Thorny scrub (montes jarales)

Scrub oak (chaparrales, marariales, carrascojas) Palmetto scrub, possibly abandoned farm land (palmares)

Rocky surfaces with shrubs (berrocales)

Deciduous oak (robledal) Live oak (encinal, carrascal) Cork oak (alcornocal) Pine (pinal,  pinar) Primary or secondary forest (monte alto)

Topography and landforms Floodplain (llano de ribera del rio,  vega) Level plain (llano, tierra Ilana,  campiria) Irregular plain (tierra doblada) Rough, dissected topography (tierra aspera or Flat-topped hill (loma) Hill or peak (cerro) valles) derribadera)

Mountain and valley country (sierras y Escarpment (cuesta)

'Derived from F. Colon (1908-15); see also De la Rosa (1906);  Ponsot and Drain (1966); Butzer (1988).

physical criteria central to Fernando's conception.

Fernando's project, probably conceived within a broader Spanish interest in the basic geography  of  the  New  World  colonies  (see Jimenez  1965, I , 11-37,267-77), was closely replicated in New Spain in 1547-51  when emissaries were sent out from Mexico City to assemble detailed information on each Indian settlement for taxation purposes. Some 940 such reports, consisting of  a paragraph or two  of  compact data, are preserved and known a s   the Suma de Visifas (Paso y Troncoso 1905a; also Borah and Cook 1960). No dated decree or official explanation is known.

Most of the Suma accounts gave the number of taxable households, the dimensions of the

lands belonging to the town, and the nature of Indian agriculture and handicrafts (as liable for taxes  in kind),  together with a description  of the topographic setting--llano, espa-lda, sierra, and fragosa (rugged) are common terms. Vegetation  was  characterized by  such  words  as sabana (open parkland) or monte (woodland); when trees were suitable for timber or firewood, the accounts may specify oak,  pine, or  key tropical  forms.  Other  features  noted include  potential  pastures for  livestock,  the presence  of  wet lowlands  (ciknegas),  and springs  or  rivers  suitable  for  irrigation.  The similarities  with  Fernando's  project  are  too close to  be  coincidental,  demonstrating that the idea of the geographical survey was by no means forgotten  in the  deliberations  of  government  at the  highest level. Surprising, too, i s   the  implication  that  lower-placed officials had the competence to make reliable observations  of  great value for  the  landscape  reconstruction of  sixteenth-century  Mexico (see Butzer and Butzer forthcoming).

## Biotic

## Taxonomy: Oviedo

Scientific  research only  began  in the  New World thirty years after Columbus's fateful voyage,  and it  was initiated by an unlikely source. Conzalo Fernandez de Oviedo (1478-1557)  was a royal official with humanistic credentials  who once translated a novel of chivalrous love into Spanish. Raised at the Spanish court, he spent three years a s   a soldier  in Italy, where he became an aficionado of the arts before settling in as  a retainer and notary. But at age thirtyfive,  he was sent to Panama a s   royal inspector for the  gold foundries,  and from 1513-47, he spent twenty years in  the New World, working in Central America, Hispaniola, and Colombia (PCrez,  in Fernandez de  Oviedo 1959,  I, xviccxxxvi).  From  1522  onward  he  devoted  a dozen years preoccupied with natural history,' for which he lacked any formal training. While in Madrid in 1525, without his records in hand, he wrote a 'summary' volume on the natural history  of  the  lndies  (Fernandez de  Oviedo 1950), and in 1535 this was  republished in expanded form as the cornerstone of his massive study (410  of  1,900  printed pages,  Fernandez de Oviedo 1959). Oviedo completed the whole work at age 71. But he clashed repeatedly  with

Bishop Las Casas over the character of the New World Indians, whom he had refused to idealize, and Las Casas intervened to  effectively stop publication  of  the  remaining  volumes  (see Hanke,  in Las  Casas  1965,  I, xxii-xxiii),  which were not printed until the 1850s.

The bulk of Oviedo's work is devoted to the history  of  Spanish exploration and  conquest, but even his derivative accounts single out important geographic and biotic data, such as the comparison  of  the  cold-temperate  biota  of Patagonia and  Newfoundland  (Alvarez 1957). For areas Oviedo knew first hand,  his accounts are substantive a s  well as evocative; they teem with  nostalgic,  comparative  images  of  townscapes and landscapes in Spain or Italy (Cerbi 1985,188-94). In  an era when academics  wrote in  restrained  Latin,  Oviedo  deliberately  presented his materials in Spanish,  salting his text with vignettes of Spanish abuse of the Indians, quips about greedy clerics or armchair historians, and candid personal  anecdotes. His enthusiasm for the natural world is illustrated by an incident from his travels between Panama and Nicaragua  (August  1527).  Spotting  what  he thought were live oaks,  in  the mountains above the Gulf of Nicoya, he noted that the trees had no acorns. S o   he stopped his party and had his companions  search  the  ground  around  the trees until they found a dozen acorns:

And I ate them, though they were somewhat dry; and they were no more nor less than in Spain-live oaks  in terms of the tree and the  leaf, as  well  as the fruit (FernBndez de Oviedo 1959, I , 298).

It is  probably  fair  to  say  that  Oviedo possessed modest abilities for synthetic interpretation, and that his primary contribution in natural history was analytical  and systematic. Several broad themes preoccupied him:

- (a)  Domesticated indigenous  plants and their
- utilization by the Indians (book 7);
- (b) Wild food or fiber plants, manipulated and exploited by the Indians (book 8);
- (c)  Taxonomic comparison of neotropical trees and plants with those of the Mediterranean realm,  according to  physiognomy, leaf  arand  fruits
- rangements,  leaf  morphology, (books 9 and 11);
- (d) Recognition  of those genera or families with European counterparts, e.g., cherries, grapes, nut trees, pines, oaks,  palms;
- (e) Inventories of the neotropical fauna, organ-

ized  under  the  categories of  quadrupeds (book 12), fishes (book 13), birds (book 14), and insects (book 15), with the recognition that most,  but not all,  of these diverse animals  belonged to  families  represented in the Old World.

Oviedo was the first to confront the dazzling profusion of unfamiliar plants and animals that made New World biogeography so daunting a subject. Excited but unperturbed, he imposed order through a  taxonomywhich organized life forms  into morphological classes and delineated commonalities and differences with Old World forms. For unfamiliar genera or families, he applied indigenous names that, at the time, were rapidly acquiring an almost universal currency in the tropical  colonies of Spain ( J . D. Sauer  1976)-the 'folk  taxonomy'  that  was generally practiced before the binomial Linnaean classification. His natural history was published promptly, translated into several European languages, and had a profound scientific impact.

Oviedo  modeled  his  taxonomy  on  Pliny (1940-56), with whom  he was  familiar,  rather than  on  Theophrastus's more  sophisticated conception of plant morphology and ecology, which  he  did  not  know.  But  unlike  Pliny, Oviedo's  descriptions and  organization were based  on  years of empirical observation, guided  by two firm  principles:  accuracy  and inductive  approach.'  By  virtue  of  his  lack of formal training, Oviedo broke the mold of Medieval  herbalists, who  organized their  plants alphabetically, not comparatively (Alvarez 1957).'  In  consequence, he offered a bold, biological macro-framework for the New World as  well a s   the first  systematic  study of  natural history  since  the  time  of  Pliny  (first  century A.D.).

Although Oviedo seems not to have understood  the  principles  of  ecology,  his  work  is filled with  suggestions  of  ecological association that elevate it from taxonomy to biogeography. His is the only document we have that describes  the circum-Caribbean  region in a rel- atively unmodified biotic state (Alvarez  1957).

Equally important, Oviedo offered a detailed and focused account of economic botany that remains unique, and that retains its importance for  the  cultural  geography of  peoples in the region who  have become extinct.  In reading these sections, one repeatedly has the impres- sion that Oviedo relied heavily  on Native  American informants, although he did not admit it. Oviedo's general contributions to understanding  the aboriginal inhabitants  and  their customs also  have  value. He  had  no  illusions  about human nature, and was  impartial in his criticisms of Spaniards and Indians  and their foibles (see also Gerbi 1985, chap. 19). He heaped sarcastic abuse on Pedrarias, De Soto, and certain other  conquistadors  noted  for  their  brutality (see also Salas 1954), and he blamed the Indian demographic collapse on Hispaniola squarely on the Spaniards: forced labor and other gross abuses, the resulting suicides, and on smallpox (Fernandez  de Oviedo 1959,  I, 67). His comparative  analysis  of  Spanish  exploration  or  conquest  of  different  parts  of  the  Americas  not only convinced him of the common nature of humanity in both world hemispheres, but he was the first to recognize that indigenous peoples of southeastern North  America, the Caribbean,  and  South America  had varying  forms and levels of human culture (i.e.,  cultural complexity,  a  concept  later  explicated  by Acosta [1962,  6.191).  Ballesteros (1957) further  detects an implicit recognition of an historical progression of culture.

Like  Columbus,  Oviedo  came  to the  New World  as  an  amateur and was  promptly filled with wonder  by what  he saw.  But unlike Columbus,  Oviedo  became a dedicated scholar who produced the first great scientific work on the New World. No less an authority than Hum298) believed that the foundations  of  modern  physical geography were laid in the studies of  Oviedo and Acosta  (see boldt (184547, 11, below).

## Cultural landscapes: Sahagun

The biggest challenge for the first European observers in  the New World was the encounter with  new peoples possessed of unfamiliar and puzzling languages,  lifeways,  beliefs,  and values. The problem, then, has been to grasp the indigenous vision  of  an  indigenous world,  to move from description to understanding. That vision  was  elusive  because  Native  American reading of the landscape was set in a different cosmological  perspective (see Licate 1980), one which cast the supernatural, the individual, and the community in unaccustomed interrelationships,  and  lent different  meaning to concepts

property, or material  phenomena  such  a s labor, dwelling,  food,  or technology.

In the unhappy tradition of European ethnocentrism, while some enlightened  individuals sought to understand, many others recklessly destroyed the cultural  diversity that  they encountered  in the  'New'  World.  Not surprisingly,  perhaps,  some  of the  most explicit acknowledgments  of  Native American  creative capacity and achievement come from some of the men who knew them best-the conquistadors. Hernan CortCs, in his letter of 1520 to the emperor,  expressed wonder  at the splendors of  Tenochtitlan  (later,  Mexico  City),  its  markets, and the great temple in a classic description, expanded  in  1552  by  his  biographer, Lopez  de  Gomara  (1966, I I 147-58; see  the prose of Simpson 1964,156-67). Indeed, most of the  ethnographic  materials synthesized by Fernandez  de  Oviedo  (1959)  came  from  the chronicles  of  minor  conquistadors  or  their more articulate rank-and-file. Among the latter i s   Cieza  de  Leon  (1985), who  assembled  the first  history  of  the  Inca from  oral  testimony given by Indian informants.

The most successful  students  of cultural phenomena are found among the ranks of the missionaries. The first of these came to the Americas  with  Columbus  on  the  Second  Voyage. Although working with little Christianizing success on Hispaniola  1493-96, the obscure Jeronymite  friar  Ramon Pan6 (Panet) evidently listened  with  great  care.  He was  able  to  recount the origin myth, beliefs in  the hereafter, and ritual medical practices, as well a s   observations on ethnic and linguistic distributions of the Taino people (as in F. Colon 1984, 205-29; see  Wilson  1990  on  their  culture).  Even  by modern  anthropological  standards, this account is remarkably objective, and qualifies as a  first  effort to  record the  self-perspective of another  people.  PanC's  account  is  complemented by the descriptive ethnography of the Sevillano physician for the  expedition,  Diego Alvarez  Chanca  (Jane 1988, I , 20-73; Gerbi 1985, 23-26).  Although Las Casas (1967,  II,  178) maliciously described  Pane  a s   a Catalan who spoke Castilian poorly and was  a bit simpleminded, Las Casas himself fares poorly bycomparison.

Las Casas (1967) assembled a massive corpus of information during the 1540s-50s  on the rituals and customs of various New World peoples in order  'to demonstrate the rational ca- pacity of the  Indians.'  The  seemingly strange behaviors can be explained, he argued, by different beliefs and world views, and in this relativist context, the New World peoples did not merit the pejorative connotation of 'barbaric.' But  his  ethnographic  materials are  so  highly selected  and  sanitized  that  they  retain  little value.13 His dogmatic conclusions that  human sacrifice and cannibalism once were universal traits and that this demonstrated 'a higher concept of God' among 'the most religious peoples'  (Las  Casas 1967,  II, chaps.  157,  185) are particularly disturbing.

More solid  contributions  to  understanding New World  cultures  were  advanced  by  the early Franciscans in Mexico.  Diego  de  Landa controlled missionary activities in the Yucatan 1549-79,  and although he was  responsible for burning countless Mayan documents (see Lovell  1991), he also assembled an  invaluable account  of  ancient  Maya ethnography,  history, and religion. Based on his own experiences a s well  as  oral  and written  information,  this  account  included 'the first accurate knowledge of the  hieroglyphic writing'  (Tozzer,  in Landa 1941, vii). Toribio  de Benavente  Motolinia (1969, 1971), one of the 'first twelve'  missionaries to arrive in Mexico in 1524, also authored works which include a wealth of ethnographic description  on  the  pre-Contact  Aztecs  and some of  their  archaeological sites.  Yet  unlike Pane, who slips at times into an 'insider'  presentation, Motolinia's mode remains that of an 'outsider.'

The main  Dominican  contribution, completed in 1581 by Diego Duran (19671,  reconstructed Aztec historical annals and their  ritual calendar,  based on indigenous informants and manuscript  sources.  His  writings  are interlinked with those of his Jesuit  relative, Juan  de Tovar. A specialist  in  three  indigenous  languages, Tovar was commissioned in  1576  by  the Viceroy of New Spain to write the history of the indigenous people he was to govern, 'with the assistance  of  the  native  historians  and  their books'  (Warren 1973,  80). Although this work was  lost,  it was  used  extensively  in  another Jesuit study  (Acosta 1962)  of  the  indigenous civilizations of the New World.  These  investigations, encouraged by the government, signal a period of genuine and sensitive scholarly activity devoted to  Aztec social history, one  which presupposes the existence of indigenous documentation which, like many of the missionary

I

l

writings,  has  been destroyed or  "lost"  in pri- vate collections.

The finest cultural research of the sixteenth century, the  great  Florentine Codex,  was  accomplished by the Franciscan friar  Bernadino de Sahagun (1499-1590). Born in a small town of  Leon,  Sahagun  came  in 1529 to  Mexico, where  he occupied his  next forty  years  with Aztec  linguistic and cultural studies, materials that have attracted the attention of a century of international scholarship.  Completed  in final  form  in 1579, the  thirteen-volume  work (Sahagun 1950-69) constitutes an encyclopedia of Aztec culture, recorded in their Nahuatl language  with  abbreviated Spanish translations. Ranging across cosmology,  philosophy,  society,  natural history, economic botany, and the artifactual realm,  the materials stem from decades  of  in-depth interviewing of  indigenous informants in several towns,  whose responses to a structured questionnaire were transcribed in Nahuatl and in  the cultural style of the informants. Of particular interest to geography are parts 10-12, dealing primarily with crafts and trades, markets  and economy, architecture and construction  methods,  medicinal  plants,  and the Aztec perception and classification of the environment.  These  sections  contain  almost two-thirds of the 1846 indigenous illustrations (see  Quitiones 1988) found in the work,  but which  so  far  have  only  been  published  as simplified sketches (Glass and Robertson 1975, 190-92).

An example best illustrates  the complexity of cultural  information encoded in  what to European perception is merely a material  object. In explaining the term tecpancalli,  a pre-Contact palace,  Aztec  respondents unraveled multiple levels of meaning as they connected function with physical description:

It means the house of the ruler, or the government house, where the ruler is, where he lives, or where the  rulers  of  the  townsmen,  the  householders, assemble. It is a good place, a fine place, a palace; a place of  honor, a place of  dignity. . . . It is  a fearful place, a place of fear, of  glory .  .  . . There i s   bragging, there is boasting; there are haughtiness, presumption, pride, arrogance. There is selfpraise, there  is  a  state  of  gaudiness . . . , it is  a center of knowledge, of wisdom .  .  .  . It is  something embellished, a product of care,  made with caution,  a product of caution, a deliberated thing made with deliberation; well made, the product of carved stone, of sculptured stone, plastered . .  . , It is  a red house, an obsidian serpent house .  .  .  , It has a deep footing, a deep foundation . .  .  . It has an entrance, vaulted, with cross beams, with a

covering. .  . (SahagGn 1969, XII,  270-71).

Klor (1988) regards Sahagun as  "the father of modern  ethnography,"  and  he  offers  an  insightful discussion of  Sahagun's  methodology and the problems of relating indigenous conceptions to European categories. Entering Aztec  culture as   a participant observer,  Sahagun saw  the  native cultures  a s   equal  and,  in some ways,  superior to imported European cultures.  He grasped what  is now called cultural relativism,  that  each  culture  is rich in human information,  and that the values embraced by the people who share that culture have merit. He "remained convinced that the conquest of the  New  World  brought  only  one  arguable gain:  religion"  (Nicolau and  Cline 1973, 207; Nicolau 1987).

The Florentine Codex marks the close of sensitive research into Native  American cultures in Hispanic America.  In 1577 the  Inquisition and the Council of the lndies barred or suppressed works in native languages by the missionaries. They  ordered  Sahagun's  manuscripts  to  be turned over, but fortunately they were saved by the  Inquisition's  censor  in Mexico who  held different views (Nicolau and Cline 1973). This reversal  of  policy,  directed  from  Rome,  entailed fundamental changes in missionary strategies which the Archbishop of Mexico and the mendicant  orders  in  New  Spain  strenuously but vainly resisted. From Motolinia in the 1520s to  Sahagun  in the 1580s, the  goal  had been conversion, not  assimilation.  When, i n  the 1590s, that  benevolent  Indian  policy  was  set aside,  particularly by the Franciscans, a steady erosion of cultural integrity ensued.

The Spanish observers of the sixteenth century had great difficulty in  finding a model  with which to view and understand the diversity of Native American cultures. Through the widely disseminated  elaborations  of Martyr (1964), Columbus's account of the Taino of Hispaniola as   generous, guileless, and backward fostered the stereotype of the American Noble Savage. In Mexico,  Cort6s and  his soldiers stumbled upon a great civilization and created a different stereotype, a Clever and Discreet Indian gifted in art and industry  (Keen 1971, 60). Las  Casas blindly  idealized  the Indians.  Motolinia  accented the social inequalities and the poverty of Aztec Mexico, while Durin praised the hierarchical,  class-conscious spirit of Aztec society (Keen 1971,119-20). It remained  for Sahagun to

recognize the  linkages between the world of appearances and the cognitive structures beneath  it that  influence  individual  and  group actions, a discovery made possible by his linguistic analyses. But Sahagun himself was only and  his  semiotic conceptualization  of  culture  and  landscape should  attract  postmodern  cultural  geogra- rediscovered  in  the 1880s, phers today (see Rowntree, et al. 1989,213-14).

## Regional and Synthetic

## Geography: Cieza de Leon

The  talent  to  integrate  environmental  and cultural information in  spatial and logical  terms may be inborn rather than  learned, at least if Pedro Cieza de Le6n is taken a s   an  example. Cieza  (1984)  was raised  in  Llerena,  an Extremaduran town of 5000 inhabitants when he and his parents  embarked at Seville  for Colombia in 1535. At the time he was either thirteen or  seventeen  years  old  (his  books  give  two versions), but within a year  he was campaigning up and down the Andes as a common soldier. In  describing  the  hardships,  he  complained of  the  exorbitant  price of  a piece of paper, implying that he was  taking notes. His terse,  informative,  and  evocative prose  indicates  an  educated  man; but  that  education must have been largely informal,  acquired on his own and on-the-go. He died young, in  1554, just a s   his introductory volume to a  four-tomed history of Peru was  published. This first book, which relates a district-by-district geography of the  Andean  world  from  Panama  to  Bolivia (Cieza 1984), is of particular interest here.

Again  and again  he describes the dramatic physical environment, its diversity, and the cultural  landscapes and subsistence forms of  its various ecozones. In  one paragraph he sweeps the reader from the mangrove coasts and rain forests  of  the  Pacific  slope  into  the  snowtopped  high  ranges,  describing  the  semiarid intermontane  valleys  in between.  He directs attention  to  variations in rainfall  and vegetation,  windward and lee slopes,  habitable and uninhabited  regions,  and the  tortuous  roads that bind  them together. His superb account of the  environs of  Quito (Cieza 1984,  chap. 40), with  its  descriptions of planted crops,  Indian populations,  livestock economy, and the  surrounding network of towns,  is too long to excerpt.  The  cogent  report  on  Lake Titicaca  is also exemplary  and can be reproduced in  translation:

The region  of  Collao  has  many  snow-capped wastes  and mountains, as  well  a s   plains covered with good pastures that  serve the domestic  livestock wandering across them.  In the middle  is a lake,  possibly  the  largest  and  widest  in  [South America], and most of the towns of Collao lie next to it. The cultivated land [and anything of value] is found  on large  islands within the  lake,  because these are deemed safer than the towns, which lie along the roads.

This region is so cold that not only does it lack fruit orchards, but maize is not grown because it will not ripen, for the same reason.  There are great numbers  of  birds  of  many  kinds  in  the  reed marshes of  this  lake,  including  large ducks  and other fowl, and two or three kinds of tasty fish .  .  .  .

The lake is so large that its circumference is 330 km  and  its  depth [according  to  Captain  Juan Ladrillero, going out with his brigs] 25 fathoms or so, more in some parts,  less in others. This size, and the waves raised when the wind blows, suggests an embayment of the ocean. It is not known why so much water is held in this  lake or where that water comes from:  although there are many streams  and  arroyos  flowing  into  it,  this  seems inadequate, mainly because the lake is also drained [by a deep river that flows strongly]  . .  .  Possibly the Deluge left this water behind because, a s I see it, it should be salty rather than fresh if it had been part of the ocean,  and furthermore the sea is 300 krn away.  .  .  .

The great lake of Collao is called Titicaca, after the temple built on it .  .  .  (Cieza  1984,  chap. 103).

Cieza's account rivals the regional geographies of the nineteenth century, which is all the more remarkable because Cieza was  untrained and had no mentors or role models. Although Classical  geographers  like  Strabo  provided  good regional descriptions, they lacked the ability to shift the scale of vision, to gather so much hard to  analyze  interrelationships,  or to systematically treat a large region observational  data, according to a particular set of criteria.

A very different type of  regional geography, embracing most  of  the  New World,  was  attempted 1571-74  by  L6pez de Velasco  (1971), whose similar lack of formal education  is discussed below in relation to government geography.  The Geografia y descripcion universal  de las lndias  was  assembled  from  reports  and maps on the New World and East  lndies in the office of the Council of the  Indies. Dedicated to the king, and evidently  intended to inform the government, Velasco tallied a total of 200 Spanish  settlements  in  the  Americas,  with 32,000  Spanish households and 4000 other settlers and miners;  there also were 8000  Indian

towns and 1.7 million  Indian 'tributaries'  liable to tax or work demands as well a s   40,000  African slaves, not counting people of partial black ancestry.

Velasco's  is a classic  regional geography,  a coherent work of synthesis. First the coastlines of a region are described, much in  the manner of a navigational chart, followed by an outline of  the  topography,  a description of the environment, a summary of the main cultural phenomena,  and  a systematic  account of  towns and agricultural activities. Miscellaneous points cover topics such as climatic constraints to settlement or agriculture. Historical digressions  or  travelers' 'tales' are few. Unlike Cieza, who wrote spontaneously on the basis of  direct  observation,  Velasco  presented  a more 'academic' synthesis.

The work's  rigor and systematics make it a volume of  lasting historical scientific interest, as is shown by Menendez Pidal's  (1944) reconstruction of a New World geography for about 1570, based primarily on Velasco. The modernity of his secular and empirical synthesis, conceived at a global level through its inclusion of oceanic  navigation and  East  Asia  (Lopez  de Velasco  1971,  2949,  273-309), contrasts with the continuing use of an obsolete Ptolemaean framework and a theological paradigm to the end  of  the  century  for  presenting new  geographic information in Central Europe (MenCndez Pidal  1944,  4; see  also  Ptolemy 1966;  Munster  1968,  Buttner  and  Burmeister 1979).  Unfortunately,  Velasco's  prototype for synthetic  geography  remained  unpublished until the fourth centenary of Columbus's voyage.  Although  Velasco's  work  had no impact on geographical scholarship, it deserves to be considered as  a  precursor to Carl  Ritter and Elis6 Reclus.

This first epoch of Spanish geographical inquiry  aptly  concludes with  another  compendium of a New World regional geography, that falls a little beyond our period of examination. The  Carmelite friar  Antonio  VAzquez  de  Espinosa (c. 1570-1630)  traveled through most of Hispanic America for fourteen years (1608-22), perhaps to evaluate possibilities for his order to  engage  in  missionary  work. Doubtless Vhzquez (1969) had important backers because he had full freedom  of  movement, access to privileged information (such as  the salaries of high  church  officials),  and  disposition  over reams  of  municipal  and  economic  statistics, which he put to good use. In the course of his travel  and sojourns,  he compiled a wealth of papers, maps,  reports, and first-hand observa-

tions.

V&amp;zquez came from a poor, rural background in  the olive-growing  country just  west of Sevilla.  Equipped  with a primarily religious education,  and  lacking the  conceptual  rigor  or analytical skills o f Velasco,  Vhquez  compensated for  his shortcomings by a ready appreciation for complex landscapes and a lively interest  in  the  rural  economy.  He  provides,  for example, unique quantitative data on wine and olive oil production in Peru;  he also remains a key  source for  demographic data.  The  Compendium spans  the  Hispanic dominions,  and his regional descriptions brim  with quality, systematic information.  He was  unsparingly critical  of  what  he  regarded a s   short-sighted and abusive administration of the indigenous peoples,  by  both church  and  state;  yet  his own attitude  was  paternalistic,  and  unrelieved  by sophistication  for other cultures. At the time of his sudden death, his manuscript was  in press, and like so many others,  it remained unpublished.

To the works of Cieza, Velasco, and Vhquez can  be added a variety of other travel reports or  regional  histories,  with  enlightening  geographical introductions. Collectively they show that  synthetic a s   well  a s   analytical geography was  an  integral  part  of  what  would  now  be described  as  scientific  thinking  in  sixteenthcentury Spain. That  normative geography was espoused in government circles should there- fore come a s   no surprise.

## Government Geography and Town Planning: Lopez de Velasco

The  role  of  Spanish  government  policy  in urban  planning  is  relatively well  known  (see Stanislawski 1947), but disagreement continues on the relation of theory and practice and the origin of the Spanish gridiron plan.

The first unambiguous  government decree in regard to town location and morphology dates to November 1513 (CDI 1883, vol. 39,  284-85, 295-97); it instructed Pedrarias, the governor of Panama, to choose a town site on the coast or along a river to facilitate transport, making certain that the location was  healthy, near woodland (for fuel) and good soil (to cultivate), and

not liable  to flooding;  once the  site was  selected,  the  streets,  plaza,  church,  and  house lots were to be laid out in an explicitly 'regular''  (ordenado) manner, from the very beginning. A geometric grid is evidently meant,  but no  particular  arrangements are  specified for 1523, that  added the caveat to avoid locations that the various components. Cortes (1963, 589-90) received almost identical instructions in were excessively windy, foggy,  or steep.

But the details for the gridiron  format were only  specified  in the  'laws  for  settlement,' proclaimed in 1573 (Ordenanzas 1973,112-25). These ordinances called for towns to be organized along four  main streets running at  right angles to a central plaza and opening to four external gates;  eight additional streets should diverge from the cardinal directions at the corners of the  plaza.  Diagonal alignment of  the square and axial streets was  thought  to avoid direct exposure  to unpleasant  winds. The town square was  to  be  rectangular, with a ratio of 1 :I .5, varying from 60 by 90 m to 240 by 460 m, depending on the initial and expected size of the  town.  One ordinance  specified that,  according to Mediterranean custom, the church should be on the highest point and not necessarily on the plaza,  with the  public buildings located  between  the two  (Ordenanzas 1973, 124). Where  possible,  location  on a  river  or coast was  recommended, with sanitation dictating  that  craft  centers  be  located  near  the water.

These ordinances  are remarkable  in  that they dictate  norms for  urban  planning  more than two  centuries  before  the  rectangular  survey began to create checkerboard town plans in the US. The approximate grid plan for  Santo Doming0 (1502) was  laid out without  instructions to that effect (see CDI 1879, vol. 31, 17). The 1522 foundation document for Nata, Panama specified a traza ('trace'),  implying a regular  layout,  and  informs us  that the  principal streets of  Nata converged on the church and public buildings 'according to and because of the order and manner  that the traza i s identified  [on the ground]'  (Dominguez 1977, 36). Mexico City-Tenochtitlan was  first  rebuilt in 1523-in a location  notorious for  flooding and  an  unhealthy  environment; it  was  then drastically remodeled according to a strict grid plan after 1538, not in response to special instructions, but  according  to  the plan of Viceroy Mendoza (Tovar 1985). The new city of Puebla, also conforms to the ideal type and  many other examples in various parts of Hispanic America

begun in 1531, of  grid  layout  (YaAez 1991), predate 1573.

The ordinances merely articulated and legalized a system already well established and in common use (Hardoy 1978). But the prescribed model  was not always  followed. Most such grid towns are more or less axially oriented to the cardinal points,  not at 45' t o  them,  while the church and public buildings  were always on the plaza (or on one of two plazas). Hardoy (1975) examined 292 maps for 134 Spanish  Colonial towns, only 22 of which were founded before 1600; he found that only 42 percent had been planned from the outset,  another 32 percent were gradually modified to conform to a regular  plan,  and 26 percent  evolved  spontaneously.  In short,  the ordinances were  not very effective after 1600.

Some authors argue that the Hispanic American  grid  plan  was  influenced  by  (or  even grounded in) the Roman architect Vitruvius or Classical town models, and Mendoza's remodeling of Mexico City was  indeed influenced by the Italian architect and planner, Leon Battista Alberti (1404-72), who drew many ideas from Vitruvius (Tovar 1985). But most new towns in Europe founded after about 1200 already had some form of  regular layout  long before the delayed publication of Alberti's  book in 1485 (e.g., Hardoy 1975; Kubler 1978; Benevolo 1980).14 Considering the inordinate role of leading conquistadors or  administrators  in determining the  actual forms  of  the  first  planned towns  in the  New World,  it seems  more reasonable to attribute urban evolution to adaptation of already familiar Spanish  prototypes to new opportunities and requirements: the availability of abundant space;  the need to quickly establish a few dozen initial settlers; the priority of  economic over  defensive strategies,  favoring  level  terrain  and  the  conjunction of kitchen gardens with dwellings on a single lot; and proximity to vital Colonial institutions:  the government buildings, the church, and various shops  (see  also  Hardoy 1978). Instead of  an endless and inconclusive search for specific intellectualized antecedents, it seems more productive to explicate particular urban histories (e.g.,  Butzer 1989), and to explore the function of  the  city  as  an  instrument  of  colonization (Hardoy 1978; Morse 1987).

The driving force behind the formulation  of

the 1573 ordinances and the  role of  government in marshalling geographical information was  Juan Lopez  de  Velasco  (c. 1530-99). He came  from  the  remote  village  of  Vinuesa (Soria), where his family owned some houses and irrigated fields;  checks of student enrollments at various institutions of  higher education confirm that he lacked a formal education (Perez-Rioja 1958). According to his lastwill, his sister in Vinuesa lived in poverty;  some of his money went to her sons that they might go to America-something that he had been unable to  do.  Despite  such  impediments,  Velasco wrote respectable  works on astronomy,  a navigation guide to the Atlantic Ocean, and a regional  geography  of the New  World  (see above); he also became a national  authority on the spelling and pronunciation of the Castilian language.  Velasco  probably  received a  rudimentary education from the  parish  priest  in Vinuesa,  and then began to work as  a young government clerk in  Madrid. By 1565 it  appears that he was  an  assistant,  possibly responsible for legal  work at the Council of the Indies. The proverbial self-made man, Velasco had no  rank in his status-conscious  society nor the opportun  ity to travel.

His  profound  influence  on  Spanish  geographical planning and policy was  exerted indirectly,  through  the  authority  of  his  patron, Juan de  Ovando y Godoy,  the  distinguished jurist and statesman. Appointed to revamp the Council of the lndies in 1569-71, Ovando focused his reforms on improving geographical understanding  and developing  a  coherent body of  legislation (Cline 1972; Conzilez,  in Lopez de Velasco 1971, v-xxxvi). Velasco  implemented this effort and was  appointed cosmographer and chronicler  to the  Council  to that  end.  After  Ovando's  death,  Velasco was removed from a position of  influence in 1577 as   the policies of church and state shifted.

Ovando apparently served  as  a "front"  for Velasco's precocious  initiatives,  which included:  (1) reorganization and codification  of the  legislation applicable to the Americas  (by 1571);  (2) formulation  of  the  comprehensive "laws of settlement"  (in 1573);  (3) solicitation of local  reports  from  parishes  in  the  New World, through the various bishops, to provide data  on  the Indian  population, frequently amplified  by  geographical information (1571) (see Paso y Troncoso 1905b, c,  for the Mexican series);  (4)  compilation  of  a  New  World  regional geography,  based in part on the parish reports; (5) development of a geographic and ethnographic  questionnaire  dispatched to  all district  magistrates in the New World (in final form 1577) (Edwards 1969; Cline 1972); (6) the questionnaire produced relaciones geograficas for  some 500 communities  (mainly 1577-86), now available in fourteen published volumes, covering parts of Mexico, the Antilles, and the wider Andean region (Acufia 1984-88; Latorre 1920; Jimhez 1965; Edwards 1980); and (7) a parallel set  of  questions directed to towns  in Spain, which generated  relaciones topograficas for  another 636 communities (Nader 1990). In addition to these diversified and substantial initiatives  in government geography and  policy, Ovando and Velasco  seem  to have provided indirect support for the ethnographic research of Duran, Tovar,  and Sahagun in Mexico.

The  degree to which the  Renaissance spirit of  rationalization  pervaded this  effort  can  be judged by Velasco's thirty-eight questions (with twelve  more for  coastal  locations) (see Cline 1972,  234-37). Question 4, for  example, requested  information  a s   to whether  land  was plain or rough, open or forested;  with many or few  streams or springs,  and  abundant  or deficient waters;  fertile or lacking in pastures; abundant or  sterile  in crops and  sustenance. Site  and  location  of  each  town  was  to  be specified;  was  the  site  high or  low,  level  or sloping (question lo)? Other questions asked about distance to the nearest mountains;  the nature of  adjacent  rivers  and  their  sources; lakes or  springs serving the town;  volcanoes, caves,  or other notable natural phenomena in the vicinity;  native  trees common to the district and their potential economic use; wild animals and birds;  information on mineral  resources, mines,  or quarries; and,  for coastal locations, data on  shore  topography,  offshore  reefs, tides, and storms. These biophysical questions were complemented by requests for  information on crops,  soils, livestock, town plans, and the  like.  Ethnographic questions  covered  Indian  languages,  pre-Contact government and religion,  native dress,  manner of warfare,  and past and present means of subsistence.

The  relaciones therefore  solicited  a  broad corpus of  information  appropriate  to the  administrative needs of  government  policy. The reports submitted by the magistrates  or clergy

were generally quite good since their accounts were  based  on  interviews  of  long-term residents  in Spanish  towns  and  native elders  in Indian towns. In  addition, many  of the relaciones included local pictorial maps, many drawn by Native Americans,  that illustrate sixteenth-century cultural or symbolic landscapes, and sometimes include exquisite detail on vegetation. Collectively the relaciones provide an inestimable resource  of analytical information on  landscape change and indigenous cultural geography (see Edwards 1975;  Bustos 1988; E. K. Butzer 1989). But that should not let us  lose sight of the fundamental fact that the relaciones,  like other efforts of Velasco a s   the first government geographer, were designed  to facilitate  imperial administration and policy at both the meso-  and macroscales. In  Madrid, by the 1570s, more complex modes of geographical  understanding  had  begun  to  supersede maps as a tool of government.

Velasco's influence on  sixteenth-century scientific observation thus was enormous. Not only did he play  a catalytic role in  government, but he also challenged others to follow similar norms. Indeed, Antonio de Ciudad Real (1976), a Franciscan friar traveling through Mexico in 1584-89 as secretary  to  a  visiting  inspector, seems to have modeled his account on parts of this questionnaire, noting  the environments he traversed, land use around each town, and crops grown in the various monasteries. Similarly,  requests for  land  deeds  in Mexico  increasingly  incorporated  environmental  information, so much  so that the land-grant documents can be used to reconstruct the vegetation  of  the  sixteenth  century  (Butzer and Butzer forthcoming). Yet Velasco was indebted to  the  earlier  efforts  of  Fernando Colon:  in many ways  he merely implemented the initiatives of Colon's kinerario, a concept that finally bore rich fruit sixty years later.15

## A Scientific Framework: Acosta

As  the  intellectual ferment  of the  sixteenth century began to diminish with growing religious orthodoxy and censorship (Kamen 1985, chap. 5),  it remained for the Jesuit  scholar Joseph de Acosta (c. 1540-1600) to place  the New World into  a new scientific framework. The son of a merchant family in Medina del Campo, a once-prosperous town of  Old Castile,  Acosta studied philosophy at the university of Alcala de Henares 1559-67.  The fifteen years 1572-87 were spent in the Americas,  almost exclusively in Peru,  but he had close contacts with Tovar and Duran in Mexico from whom he derived most of his ethnographic information.

In his Historia natural, Acosta made significant  original  observations  on  physical phenomena,  e.g.,  the  latitudinal  organization of world climates in which he recognized that the rainy seasons of the tropics were linked to the zenith of the sun (high-sun rains) (Acosta 1962,  2.7),  contrary to the opposite argument of Aristotle.  He not only reaffirmed Columbus and Gomara to the effect that the torrid zone was quite habitable, but explained that equatorial climates  were moderated by relatively short days  and  abundant  rainfall,  especially  where complemented  by  coastal  breezes  (Acosta 1962, 2.10-11). He conceptualized the systematic decrease of temperature with elevation in tropical mountains (Acosta  1962,2.12)  and thus anticipated the montane ecozonation of Humboldt.

But his major contribution rests in his exposition of a scientific and ontological framework for  the  New World.  The first half of his book focuses  on  the  natural  world,  and  there  he makes two basic points (O'Gorman, in Acosta 1962, xliii-xlvii): (1)  How the Americas form an integral part of the universe, in relation to the global distribution of seas and continents, and the habitable realm;  (2) How the Americas are formed  of  the  same  four  physical  elements (earth,  water,  air,  fire)  and  the  same  natural orders  (mineral, vegetal,  animal) as  the other continents. The second half of his work, on the human world,  is similarly structured according to two arguments (O'Gorman, in Acosta 1962): (1)  That the New World peoples are an integral part  of  the  supernatural world  a s   well  a s of humankind, that is,  spiritual, physical, feeling, and rational creatures; (2) That the New World peoples have their own history (in part oral), making them part of a universal history.

This  all  may  seem  self-evident  today,  but Acosta was the first European to explicitly recognize that New World phenomena existed in their  own right.  Building on ideas already expressed by Lopez de Velasco (1971,  2),  he attributed the  divergence of the Old and New World peoples to migration, surmising that the

continents  were  connected  or  almost  connected in unexplored Arctic latitudes:

the one (world) and the other are joined and are continuous or at least approach each other and are very close .  . . because the Arctic or North Pole has not been discovered and the full extent of the land is unknown. .  . .

the first settlers travelled  to the lndies . .  .  without reflection, progressively  shifting locations  and territories, some occupying  those already found, others looking for  new ones, so that in the course of time they came to fill the lands of the lndies with so  many groups, peoples, and languages (Acosta 1962, 1.20).

Other,  popular fables such a 5   the Lost Tribes or Atlantis were  rejected. As  a creationist  he was  puzzled by the different degrees of divergence between the Old and New World faunas, and the absence of large mammals on the Caribbean islands, suggesting  that through natural instinct and divine providence different kinds (of  animals) went to different regions, well  in  some that they  remained, or  if they moved on,  they did not survive or died out

doing so in  time (Acosta 1962, 4.36).

It can be argued that this concept of diverging migration  anticipates biogeography and even geographical speciation, but without its evolu- tionary implications.

A more satisfactory  solution to the dilemmas of  natural  history  noted  by  Acosta  was  not forthcoming until Darwin, while the origin of New World peoples has only been unraveled during the twentieth century. Although Acosta remained entrenched in Aristotelian thinking, his  synthetic,  ontological  framework  stands midway  between  Medieval  attempts to  construct a cosmological order and more modern efforts to lay out a new, scientific counterpart. Published in 1590, his ideas were disseminated by twenty-five foreign editions during the next two centuries (Lopez Pitiero 1979, 295).

## Retrospect

It i s   evident that Columbus's encounter with what came to be called the New World had an immense  intellectual  impact  on  thoughtful Spaniards in many walks of life, with and without formal  education. These  included sailors and soldiers, clerks and clergymen, and a few men of letters. They were connected less by academic links or traditions than by a spontaneous  capacity to  observe  and  describe,  to compare and classify. The authors and works singled out here,  together with  many others, represent a wealth  of  original  and  empirical observation and analysis of new environments and  unfamiliar  peoples,  all  within  a  span of three  generations.  Separately  or  in  tentative forms of synthetic integration, they laid out the components of  a scientific,  geographical understanding of that  'New'  World.  This was  a veritable Renaissance or rebirth, that easily surpassed any Classical prototypes, and the challenge to deal with all that  was  novel  put people  with  rural  backgrounds  on  an  equal footing with those steeped in academic curricula.

Given the exuberant environmental descriptions of a Columbus, an Oviedo, or a Cieza, or the  love of  nature exhibited  by Acosta (1962, 1.3),  it  is difficult  to  understand how  John  Elliott can claim that:

It  i s   a s   if  the  American landscape i s   seen a s  no  more than  a back  cloth  against which  the  strange  and perennially fascinating people of  the  New World are dutifully  grouped. This apparent deficiency in naturalistic observation may reflect a lack of interest among sixteenth-century Europeans, and especially those of the Mediterranean world,  in land- scape and in nature (1970, 20).

For an influential historian of Spain, the ethnocentric dismissal of South European interest in the natural world is inexcusable. More important,  the  inability  of  such  a fine  humanist to grasp the intellectual excitement of geographical  observation  and  perception  of  that  new world is deeply disturbing.

Unfortunately, the  Spanish contributions of the sixteenth century to geography and related scientific research had minimal impact on the German revival of  the  field  during the  early nineteenth century. Humboldt  (7845-47, 11,  298) readily acknowledged the importance of Oviedo and Acosta,  but did not know Cieza. Furthermore, Fernando  Colon, Sahagun, Lopez de Velasco, Vkquez, and the relaciones geograficas  remained  unpublished  and  inaccessible,  primarily  a s   a result of official xenophobia or religious censorship.  The curtain that began to close in 1577 stifled free inquiry,  and the quality of Spanish research declined  long before the precipitous fall in Spanish scholarly publication about 1640 (see Lopez Pitiero 1979, 377-86). The  geography  that  reemerged  in Spain during  the mid-1700s stood in  the shadow  of the French  Enlightenment  (see

Capel 1982), and it did not regain its original vitality until well into the present century.

## Acknowledgments

Development of the ideas discussed here was facilitated by free access to the library of Juan  F. Mateu (Valencia),  discussion  with Jose  M. L6pez Pihero (Valencia), and Manual Gonzhlez  Jim6nez  and Fernando Diaz del Olmo (Sevilla),  and participation in  the symposium 'El  Nuevo Mundo y 10s procesos de difusion de la ciencia  y la  tkcnica durante el period0 colonial' at  the  Universidad lnternacional Menhdez Pelayo (Valencia), September 1991. James T.  Abbott  provided major assistance with the library search. Carville  Earle (Baton Rouge), W.  George Lovell (Kingston), Geoffrey J. Martin (New Haven), and Carla Rahn Phillips (Minneapolis) offered valuable,  constructive criticism. Periodic Saturday breakfasts with Los Amigos de la Frontera in San Antonio and Austin offered a  lively  forum  of  discussion,  especially with  Adan Benavides, Robert Benavides, and Elizabeth  John.

## Notes

1. Marco Polo (1958) can be cited for descriptions of  'Tartar'  transhumance and the  spring snow melt in Armenia (chap. 22), the  landscapes he passed in the Pamir Mountains (chap. 47); moving sands covering tracks in the Lop Nor (chap. 56), the bustle of life and urban layouts of Peking and Hangchow (chaps. 85 and 153), and a series of well-tended Chinese landscapes (chaps. 10758). Even data he obtained by hearsay for Zanzibar and Madagascar (chaps. 192-93) are remarkably accurate,  such a s   a description  of giraffes. The 'chapters'  refer to the Bennedetto subdivisions,  used by  some  but  not  all  of  the  many available editions. On the expanding geographical horizons of Medieval Europe, see J. Phillips (1  988).
2. For example, the German cartographer Munzer (1952) gave a valuable and remarkably objective eyewitness account  in 1494-95 of  the  Muslim towns  and  people  of  recently conquered  Granada, without quoting a single Classical author or historical source. By comparison, a more erudite  Portuguese traveler,  Barreiros (1952), traveled  through  Spain  in 1542, to. fashion  a selfstyled chorography that was  little more than a pretext  to  display  his  familiarity  with  Classical literature;  observations become little more than incidental.
3. The  Ptolemy (1932) edition,  in English translation,  has been criticized, but it is one of the very few that is accessible and not written in Latin or Greek. The fifteenth-century maps it reproduces presumably  go back indirectly to third-century or earlier prototypes, to illustrate the regional  information available in Antiquity.  By  contrast,  Ptolemy (1966), in Latin with commentary and maps by Sebastian Munster, is a good example of how these principles were used to redraw the same maps during the early ISOOs, using  contemporary
4. information.  Munster (1968), Waters (1958), Harvey (1987), Campbell (1987), Harley (1990), and Nebenzahl (1990) are  recommended  for  those readers interested in the cartography of the period. The unexpected death of  Brian Harley will undoubtedly delay preparation of volume 3 of his and David Woodward's  monumental  History of Cartography,  which will treat the Age of Discovery.
4. Questions persist whether the diary of the First Voyage is heavily edited,  incomplete, or even a selective  summary  of  Columbus's  original  by Bishop Las Casas (see Fuson 1983; Henige 1991). These issues do not affect the materials selected here, which clearly do not stem from Las Casas, who later paraphrased  the same biophysical data in a singularly lifeless and inept manner (see Las Casas 1965, I).
5. Columbus's background, prior to his appearance at  the Spanish court in the late 148Os, has been in hot dispute since 1517. The idealized biographical data for before 1488 all derive from Fernando C o b (1984) and Las Casas (19651, who used the same documentation, almost all of which has disappeared and thus  cannot  be authenticated.  If the lost correspondence with the Florentine cartographer Paolo Toscanelli (1397-1482), as claimed by  Col6n (1984, 66-71) and  Las  Casas (1965, I, 62-66), were  verifiable,  it would  date Columbus's  interest  in  circumnavigation  and, more important,  his scholarly activities,  back to before 1481. Las  Casas (1965, I) refers to these letters  on  seven  different  occasions,  implying that he had them in hand. For a lucid but critical analysis  of  Columbus's  career,  see  Phillips and Phillips 1992; the authoritative  biography  is by Taviani (1985).
6. Letters  securely attributed to Columbus are written  in the  script  known  a s   hurnanistica cursiva (see Arribas 1965, I, 166-67 and plate IOI), characteristic of the royal court in about 1500.
7. No maps by Columbus have been authenticated, but his younger brother Bartolome is reputed to have been the author of several  nautical charts (F.  Colon 1984, 85-86; Las  Casas 1965, I, 153-54). 'Because Columbus dominates the documentary record, we know less about the other men on the voyage,  but his observations . . .  can stand a s   a general description of their experience' (Phillips and Phillips 1992, 157). The geographical competence  of  contemporary  cartographers becomes apparent in the case of Andres de Morales (died 1517), a ship pilot on Columbus's Third Voyage. Morales was  commissioned to make a  map of Hispaniola  in 1508 (see  color copy in  Milanich and Milbrath 1989, 68), and information from his report is preserved in Martyr (1964,349-55), subsequently  evaluated  by  Carl  Sauer (1966, 41-48). The  map  is  remarkably detailed  and  accurate, showing the  key  mountain chains  in fifteenthcentury, North Italian  technique (see Harvey 1987 for examples). Sauer rates highly the information on  indigenous territorial  organization  and  land use,  but  the  abbreviated topographic  descriptions preserved in Martyr are also intriguing. Morales appears to have had accurate views on the

pattern of ocean currents in the North Atlantic, and  later served  as  Chief  Pilot  in the  Casa  de Contratacion of Sevilla (Becker 1917, 81, 90-91). That institution in Sevilla was the key European center of navigational  science from 1508 onwards (Broc 1980, 194-96). For insights into its curriculum for ship pilots, see Lamb (in Medina 1972).

8.  An  early  appreciation of  Columbus's  observations  is given by Humboldt (1845-47, 1, 296-97, 335; II, 55-57,277,299-304,325; IV, 233,250,253, 261), who  lauds his poetic descriptions,  and interprets  his  observations on  botany, wind  patterns,  and magnetic declination;  but at times,  I suspect,  he reads too much into the statements of  Columbus.  For  a humanistic evaluation, see Gerbi (1985, chap. 2), who also emphasizes the Genoan navigator's feeling for nature, a s  well a s his focus on differences  or affinities between  the biota of the lndies and the Old World.  It is surprising  to read  in  Sale (1990,102) that Columbus's language  is  'opaque  and  lifeless'; I can  only infer that Sale did not sample the evocative  original language, in favor of a 'flat'  English translation.  Sale (1990, 101) laments the absence of an exultant description o f 'old-growth tropical forest'  from  the  Bahamas,  a  curious  gaffe  for  a professed ecologist, both in view of the subclimax woodlands of these low,  hurricane-lashed islands  and  of  their  considerable  indigenous population in 1492. When Sale (1990,101) further faults Columbus for not writing about melodious bird songs with due excitement, I  can only conclude that Sale did not read the journal carefully after the entry for October 28 (a scant ten of his forty  references are  subsequent to  that  date). Only a superficial reader or an ideologue could conclude that Columbus 'cares  little about the features of nature' (Sale 1990,102).
9. There  is  some  ambiguity  in  Fernando Colon (1908-15,l) about the initial entry that the Itinerary was  'begun'  August 3,  1517, as   to whether this  meant the project or the writing  (see De la Rosa 1906 vs.  Ponsot and Drain 1966). Since Fernando had only returned from Rome in October 1516 and was  in Spain without interruption until late in 1519 (when he began his peregrinations throughout western Europe in search of books [see Arranz,  in F. Col6n 1984, 31-37]), his major role in this effort appears to date from 1517-19.
10. O'Gorman (1946) believes that Oviedo's conversion to science began with  his trip to the court of Charles V in Brussels (1516-17), where he delivered a formal complaint against the injustices of  Pedrarias Davila, Panama's  notorious  governor. In Belgium, Oviedo was exposed to Erasmian thought,  if not seminars by Erasmus (c. 14661536) himself, who  taught  at Louvain  from 1517-21. This  Renaissance philosopher, a close friend of Thomas More, emphasized a humanistic rather than a dogmatic Christianity, based on the New rather than Old Testament. According to  O'Corman (1946), Oviedo began to see the European  enterprise in  the New World a s  a providential mission that  it was  his vocation to describe. I  have trouble discerning  a  utopian thread in Oviedo's history, and the only obvious trait he

~

~

- shares with Erasmus is his frequent use of satire to criticize Spaniards in general and churchmen in  particular. The  Spanish Erasmian movement, especially  a s represented  by  Juan  Luis  Vives (1492-1540), may, however, be pertinent, with its emphasis on inductive argument.
- 11 Ideal  scientific  procedure,  according to  Humboldt (1845-47, I, 65-70) proceeds from accurate observation and  description  to  understanding, via analogy and induction,  a view worth remembering in a time when  empirical and  inductive research are denigrated  by some social scientists. In  praising  Oviedo's 'incredible  virtuosity in botany,'  J. D. Sauer (1976, n. 16) states that  he 'was far ahead of his only model, Pliny, in accuracy and originality.'  Also in regard to accuracy, Ferrando (1957) emphasizes  that Oviedo's data  on the Pacific Ocean were extracted with great care from  trustworthy  sources,  providing  a  realistic picture of exactly what was  known to Europeans about  its coastlines and  islands c. 1550. There were  no imaginary islands on  Oviedo's  mental map.
- 12 That Oviedo did not know the work of Aristotle, Theophrastus, or Dioscorides on plants (Butzer forthcoming  [b]),  nor  the  late  Medieval herbal literature,  is  readily explained  by the  fact  that these were only used in the medical curriculum of the time (Alvarez 1957). He was also unaware of the agricultural treatise of Gabriel Alonso de Herrera (1970), published in 1513. Far more orthodox as  a  botanist  was Francisco Hernindez, Philip 11's personal physician, who was sent to the New World  to  collect  medicinal  plants  (Goodman 1988,234-37). He spent six years (1571-77) collecting,  drawing,  and describing thousands of species on Hispaniola and Cuba,  and especially in Mexico  (Somolinos 1960-84), but  died  shortly after his return.  L6pez  PiAero (1991) shows that Fernandez's illustrations were probably drawn by indigenous artists.
- 13 To  make his case,  Las  Casas (1967) gleaned an endless litany of bestial customs from the Classical authors and early church fathers, to show that Old World  peoples were  more depraved than those of the New World.  But all too many of his Old World comparative 'data' are no more than ethnocentric  hearsay  about  foreign  peoples or practitioners of other  religions. For a more sympathetic presentation of this complex personality, see  Friede and Keen (1971). In regard to  ritual cannibalism in the New World,  it is appropriate to cite Phillips and Phillips (1992,  295, n. 22): 'To deny that cannibalism existed, one needs to assume that a wide range of European commentators simply made up  the stories, an interpretation that  defies  reason, logic,  and the available evidence.'
14. There is an extensive  literature on urban planning in  Colonial  Latin  America,  and  several  of  the above references help identify larger collections of  papers, mostly in English. A wealth of  translated documents related to the Spanish colonial enterprise, including many of the ordinances or decrees cited  here,  can  be found  in Parry and Keith (1984), a treasure trove for students inter-

- ested in exploring the possibilities of  historical geographical research in the region.
15.  The link between Velasco and Colon appears to be the noted cartographer  Alonso de Santa Cruz (1505-67),  who was appointed cosmographer to the  Casa  de  Contratacion  in  Sevilla  1536  (see Carriazo 1951).  He worked in Sevilla until 1564, when he moved to Madrid at the king's request. Although there is no documentation to prove  the point,  Ovando's  reliance on Velasco after 1569 offers a plausible scenario that Velasco had already  acquired astronomic  and geographic experience while working for Santa Cruz in Madrid. In 1572,  Santa Cruz's  great map collection  was transferred from his old residence in Sevilla into the possession  of Velasco,  a s   the new royal  cosmographer. In his Libro de /as longitudes (completed ca. 1557),  Santa  Cruz  notes  that  he planned to write a geography, while in his lslario general (completed ca. 1560), he implies that he was  working  on  a  General geografia e historia (Carriazo 1951,  clxv). Velasco would have been aware  of  these  plans and  have  had  access  to whatever  notes  that  had  been  compiled,  although no such materials  are separately inventoried for  Santa Cruz's  estate (see Carriazo 1951). Although  Velasco's  geography would  not  have been possible without  Santa Cruz's maps,  there i s   no  reason  to doubt that his scientific organization  was  his  own.  In 1556 or  1557 Santa  Cruz prepared a set of instructions for explorers in the New  World, consisting  of seventeen  points (Jimenez  1965,  272-77; Carriazo  1951, clxixclxxiii), evidently a  direct antecedent to the questionnaire  of  Ovando and Velasco, in terms  of inventorying environmental features and ethnographic data. Item  three instructs  the responsible officials to clarify the situation of new lands,  'if they  are  mountainous  or  level,  or  if  they  are swampy or full of lakes, or if they are unhealthy for the natives or for foreigners' (Jimenez  1965, 274).  Items twelve and sixteen inquire whether the native peoples have learned men and books, suggesting  that indigenous histories be obtained in order to translate them into Spanish (Jimenez 1965, 276)-a remarkable perspective not found in Velasco's  questionnaire. These instructions of Santa Cruz,  much like the ordenanzas for town planning, form part of a chain of ideas, as can be seen from the instruction of Viceroy Mendoza, given in Mexico City in 1538 to Fray Marcos for his exploration  of  Cibola;  he was  instructed to make observations on the people as  well a s   of 'the climate of the land; the trees  and plants and domesticated and wild animals they  have;  the nature of the land,  if it is rough (aspera) or flat (llana); the rivers, if they are large  or small .  .  . ' ( JimCnez  1965,ZO). Perhaps Mendoza even influenced the scope of the Suma de Visitas in 1547 (see above). It  is interesting that Santa Cruz uses monte and montuosa not for woodland/wooded, as in prevailing Spanish usage, but like F.  Colon, for mountain/mountainous-a tantalizing hint for a  possible connection  with  Colon,  who would have  known  Santa  Cruz,  a s   a fellow  Sevillano with shared interests.

## References

- Square brackets give dates of original publication or manuscript termination.
- Acosta,  Joseph de. 1962 [1590]. Historia natural y moral de  las  fndias.  Ed.,  with  commentary by Edmundo O'Corman.  Mexico  City:  Fondo de Cultura  Economics.  Facsimile ed.  with  English commentary  and anthology by Barbara C. Beddal.  Valencia: Hispaniae Scientia, Albatros Ediciones, 1977.
- AcuAa, Rene de, ed. 1984-88. Relaciones geogrAficas del Siglo XVl, 10 vol.  Mexico City: lnstituto de lnvestigaciones  Antropol6gicas, Universidad Nacional Aut6noma de Mexico.
- Ailly,  Pierre d'. 1948 [14101. Imago Mundi by  Petrus Ailliacus.  Trans.  Edwin F.  Keever.  Wilmington, NC: Linprint.
- Alvarez Lopez, Enrique. 1957. La historia  natural  en Fernindez de Oviedo. Revista de lndias 17:541601.
- Arija Rivards, Ernilio. 1972. Geografia de €sparia I / : Historia de  la geografia  espaiiola.  Madrid: Espasa-Calpe.
- Arribas  Arranz,  Filemon. 1965. Paleografla documental hispdnica.  2 vol. Valladolid:  Universidad de Valladolid.
- Baker, 1. N. 1 . 1963. The history of  geography. Oxford:  Oxford University Press.
- Ballesteros Gaibrois, Manuel. 1957. Fernindez de Oviedo, etnologo. Revista de lndias 17:445-67.
- Barreiros, Gaspar. 1952 [1542]. Corografia de algunos lugares. In Viajes de extranjeros por fspatia y  Portugal,  ed. J. Garcia Mercadal,  vol. 1, pp. 945-1046.
- Beazley, Charles R . , and Prestage, Edgar. 1896-98. The chronicle of the discovery and conquesf of Guinea. London: Hakluyt Society, reprinted New York: B. Franklin, n.d.
- Beck,  Hanno. 1973. Geographie:  Europaische Entwicklung  in  Texten  und  Erlauterungen.  Freiburg:  Karl Alber.
- Becker,  Jeronirno. 1917. Los estudios geogrAficos en Espaiia. Madrid: Real Sociedad de Geografia.
- Benevolo, Leonardo. 1980. The history of the city. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Borah,  Woodrow,  and Cook,  Sherburne  F . 1960. The  population of  Central Mexico in '1548:  An analysis of  the Suma de Visitas de Pueblos. IberoAmericana  43.  Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Broc, Nurna. 1980. La gkographie de la Renaissance (1420-7620). Paris: Bibliotheque Nationale, ComitC des  travaux historiques et scientifiques (Section  CBographie, 9).
- Buisseret, David. 1992. Spain  maps  her  'New World.'  Encounters: A Quincentenary Review 8: 14-19.
- Bustos, Gerardo. 1988. Libro de /as descripciones:

Sobre  la  vision  geografica  de la peninsula  de Yucatan en textos espaholes del  siglo XVl. Mexico  City:  Universidad  Nacional  Autonoma  de Mexico, lnstituto de lnvestigaciones Filol6gicas.

Sebastian  Mijnster 1488-1552.  In Geographers: Bibliographical studies,  ed.  T.  W.  Freeman and P. Pinchemel,  vol.  3, pp.  99-106. New  York: Mansell. Buttner,  Manfred,  and  Burmeister, Karl  H. 1979.

Butzer,  Elisabeth  K. 1989. Changing  patterns of domestic architecture in early Colonial Mexico, 1520-1620.  Abstracts, 7989  Conference o f  Latin Americanist  Geographers, Queretaro,  Mexico, p. 40.

Butzer,  Karl W. 1962. Coastal geomorphology of Majorca. Annals,  Association o f   American Geographers 52 :  191-21 2.

- .

- .

1988. Cattle and sheep from Old to New Spain :  Historical antecedents.  Annals,  Association o f   American  Geographers 78:29-56. 一

- .

- .

1989. Historical Querdtaro:  Interpretation of a Colonial city.  In Field  Trip Guide,  7989 Conference of  Latin Americanist Geographers, QuerCtaro, Mexico,  pp. 3-27.  Austin:  University of Texas,  Department o f Geography.

- Forthcoming  (a). Ethno-agriculture  and cultural ecology in Mexico: Historical vistas and modern implications.  In Geographers' research on Latin America 7990, ed. Tom L.  Martinson.

Forthcoming (b). The Classical  and Islamic agronomic traditions. In  Science during  the early Middle  Ages,  ed. P .   L.  Butzer and D. Lohrmann. Basel  :  Bi  rkhaeuser.

-and Butzer,  Elisabeth K. Forthcoming. The sixteenth-century  environment  of  the  Central Mexican  Bajio: Archival  reconstruction  from Spanish land grants. In Culture,  form, andplace, ed. Kent Matthewson. Baton Rouge, LA: Geoscience and Man.

- Campbell,  Tony. 1987. Portolan charts  from the late thirteenth century to 1500. In The history of cartography, ed. J. Brian  Harley  and  David Woodward,  vol.  1 ,   pp. 371-463.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press.
- Capel, Horacio. 1982. Geografia y matematicas en la fsparia del siglo XVlIl. Barcelona: Oikos-Tau.
- Carriazo, Juan  de Mata, ed. 1951. Alonso de Santa Cruz: Cr6nica de 10s reyes catolicos.  Sevilla:  Escuela de Estudios Hispano-Americanos,  49.
- Casas,  Bartolome de las. 1965 [1566]. Historia de las Indias. 3 vol. Transcribed by Agustin Millares, commentary  by  Lewis  Hanke.  Mexico  City: Fondo de Cultura Economica. - .
- 1967 [15561. Historia apologetica sumaria, 2 vol. Transcribed, with commentary by Edmundo O'Gorman.  Mexico City:  lnstituto de lnvestigaciones  Historicas, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de MCxico.
- Cieza  de  Lehn,  Pedro. 1984  [1553]. Cronica  del

- .

- Peru,  vol. 1. Ed.,  with  introduction by Franklin Pease.  Lima: Academia Nacional de la Historia.

1985  [1550]. Cr6nica  del Peru,  vol.  2.: El seriorio  de los Incas.  Ed.,  with'commentary  by Francesca Cant6. Lima: Academia Nacional de la Historia.

Ciudad  Real,  Antonio  de. 1976  [15901. Tratado curioso y  docto  de /as  grandezas  de la  Nueva fspaiia. 2 vol.  Ed.,  with Commentary by Josefina Garcia  Quintana  and  Victor  Castillo  Farreras. Mexico  City: Universidad Nacional  Autonoma de Mexico, lnstituto de lnvestigaciones  Historicas.

Cline,  Howard F. 1972. The relaciones geograficas of the  Spanish  Indies,  157-1648. In  Guide  to ethnohistorical sources,  ed.  H.  F. Cline, vol.  1, pp. 183-242.  Handbook of Middle American Indians 12. Austin:  University of Texas  Press.

- Colecci6n de documentos ineditos relativos a1 descubrimiento, conguista y organizacion de /as antiguas  posesiones  espaiiolas  de Amkrica y Oceania. (CDI) 1864-84. 42vol. Madrid: M. G. Hernandez.
- Colon,  Fernando. 1908-15 [1523]. Descripcidn  y cosmografia  de  Espaha por Fernando  Colon,  3 vol.  E d .   by Antonio Blazquez. Madrid: Patronato de Huerfanos de Administracion Militar. - .

1984 [15381. Historia del  Almirante. Retrans. into Spanish from the Italian publication of 1571, with Commentary by Luis Arranz.  Madrid: Historia 16. English ed.:  The life of the Admiral Christopher  Columbus by his son,  Ferdinand. Trans. Benjamin  Keen.  New  Brunswick, NJ:  Rutgers University Press, 1959.

- Cortes,  Hernin. 1963. Cartas y  documentos.  E d . , with  Commentary  by  M.  Hernandez  SanchezBarba. Mexico City:  Porrua.
- Dominguez  Compaiiy,  Francisco. 1977. Actas  de fundacion de ciudades hispanoamericanas. Revista de Historia de America 83:19-51.

Dunn, Oliver,  and Kelley, It., James E. 1988. The Diario o f   Christopher Columbus's  first voyage to America, 7492-7493. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

Durin, Diego. 1967 [1581]. Historia de  /as lndias de Nueva Espaha e islas de la Tierra Firma. Ed. Angel M. Garibay. Mexico  City: lnstituto  de Investigaciones Antropologicas, Universidad Nacional  Autonoma  de  Mexico. English  ed.: Book of the gods and rites and the ancient calendar.  Trans.  and ed.  Fernando  Horcasitas and Doris Heyden. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1971.

- Edwards,  Clinton R. 1969. Mapping by questionnaire:  An  early  Spanish  attempt  to  determine New  World geographical positions. lmago Mundi 23:17-28. - .
- 1975 The relaciones de Yucatsin as  sources for historical geography. Journal of Historical  Geography 1  :245-58.

- . 1980 Geographical  coverage o f the  sixteenth-century relaciones de lndias from South America.  Geoscience and  Man 21 :75-82.
- Elliott, John  H. 1970. The Old World and the New 1492-1650. Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press.
- Fernandez Armesto,  Felipe. 1987. Before Columbus: Exploration and  colonization from the Mediterranean to  the Atlantic, 7229-1492. Philadelphia:  Macmillan.
- Sumario de la natural historia de /as  Indias.  Ed., with Commentary by lose Miranda. Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Econbmica. English ed.:  Natural  History o f   the West Indies. Trans. Sterling  A. Stoudemire. Studies in the Romance Languages and  Literatures  32.  Chapel  Hill:  University  of North Carolina. 1959. - . Ferniindez  de  Oviedo,  Gonzalo. 1950  [1526].
- 1959 [1535-571. Historia general y  natural de las  Indias,  5 vol.  Ed.,  with  commentary  by Juan Perez de Tudela. Madrid: Bibliotecade Autores Esparioles.
- Ferrando, Roberto. 1957. Fernindez de Oviedo y el conocimiento del Mar del Sur.  Revista de Indias 17:469-82.
- Bartolome  de  /as  Casas  in history:  Toward an understanding  o f   the man and  his  work. DeKalb, IL:  Northern Illinois University Press. Friede,  Juan,  and  Keen,  Benjamin,  eds. 1971.
- Fuson,  Robert H. 1983. The Diario de Colon: A legacy of poor transcription,  translation, and interpretation.  Terrae lncognitae 1559-75.
- Gerbi, Antonello. 1985. Nature in the New World: From Christopher Columbus to Gonzalo Fernandez de Oviedo.  Pittsburgh:  University of Pittsburgh Press.
- Glass,  John B . , and Robertson, Donald. 1975. A census  of Native  Middle  American  pictorial manuscripts. In Guide to ethnohistorical sources,  ed. Howard F.  Cline, vol. 3,  pp. 81-252. Handbook of Middle American Indians 14. Austin:  University of Texas Press.
- Goodman, David C. 1988. Power and  penury:  Government,  technology  and science in Philip 11' s Spain.  Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
- Green, Otis H. 1968 Spain and the western tradition.  4  vol.  Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
- Greenblatt,  Stephen. 1991. Marvellous  possessions:  The wonder o f   the New World.  Chicago: University o f Chicago Press.
- Hardoy, Jorge E. 1975. La forma de las  ciudades coloniales en la America espatiola.  In €studios sobre la ciudad  iberoamericana, ed. Francisco  de Solano, pp. 315-344.  Madrid: Consejo Superior de lnvestigaciones Cientificas.
- . 1978. European urban forms in  the fifteenth  to seventeenth centuries and their utilization in Latin America.  In Urbanization in the
- Americas from its beginnings to the present,  ed. Richard  P. Schaedel,  Jorge E.  Hardoy,  Nora S. Kinzer,  pp. 215-48. The Hague: Mouton.
- Harley,  J. Brian. 1990. Maps and the  Columbian encounter. Milwaukee:  University of Wisconsin, Colda Meir Library.
- Harvey, P. D. A. 1987. Local and regional cartography in medieval Europe. In The history o f   cartography,  ed. J. Brian Harley and David Woodward, vol.  1 ,   pp. 464501.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press.
- Henige, David. 1991. In search o f   Columbus:  The sources for the First Voyage.  Tucson:  University of Arizona Press.
- Herrera, Gabriel Alonso de. 1970 [15131. Obra de agricultura. Ed., with commentary by Jose Urbano  Martinez  Carreras.  Madrid:  Biblioteca de Autores Espanoles.
- Humboldt, Alexander von. 1845-47. Kosrnos: Entwurf einer physichen  Weltbeschreibung. 2 vol. Stuttgart: Cotta.
- James, Preston E.,  and Martin, Geoffrey  J. 1981. All possible worlds: A history o f   geographical ideas, 2nd ed.  New York:  Wiley.
- Jane, Cecil. 1988  [1930-331. The  four  voyages  o f Columbus. New York:  Dover Publications.
- Jimenez  de la Espada,  Marcos, ed. 1965 [1881-971. Relaciones geogrrificas  de  Indias:  Peru.  3 vol. Commentary by JosC Martinez Carreras. Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores Espatioles.
- Kamen,  Henry. 1985. Inquisition and society  in Spain in the sixteen and seventeenth centuries. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
- Keen, Benjamin. 1971. The Aztec image in  Western thought.  New Brunswick,  NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Kimble, George H. T. 1938. Geography  in the Middle Ages.  London: Methuen.
- Klor de Alva,  J,  Jorge. 1988. SahagCln and the birth of modern ethnography:  Representing,  confessing, and inscribing  the native other. In The work of Bernadino de Sahagh:  Pioneer ethnographer of  sixteenth-century Aztec Mexico,  ed. J. J. Klor de  Alva, H. B. Nicholson,  and  E. Quinones Keber,  pp.  31-52. Austin: University  of  Texas Press.
- Kubler,  George. 1978. Open-grid town  plans  in Europe  and  America. In  Urbanization  in  the Americas from its beginnings to the present,  ed. Richard  P .   Schaedel,  Jorge E. Hardoy,  Nora S. Kinzer, pp. 327-342.  The Hague:  Mouton.
- Landa, Diego de. 1941 [15661. Relacion  de  las Cosas de YucatAn.  Trans.,  with commentary by Alfred M.  Tozzer.  Peabody  Museum  Paper  18.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
- Latorre, German, ed. 1920. Relaciones geograficas de Indias. Sevilla: Biblioteca Colonial  Americana, 4.

- Licate, jack A. 1980. The forms of Aztec territorial organization. Geoscience and  Man 21 :2b-45.
- Lopez de Gbmara, Francisco. 1966 [15521. Historia general de los Indias, ed.  Pilar Cuibelalde.  Barcelona:  Obras Maestras.
- Lopez de Velasco,  Juan. 1971  [15741. Geografia y descripcidn universal de las  Indias,  ed.  Marcos JimCnez de Espada, commentary by M. Carmen Gonzdlez Muiioz. Madrid: Biblioteca  de Autores Espaiioles,  248.
- Lopez Pitiero, Jose M. 1979. Ciencia y tCcnica en la sociedad espairola  de 10s siglos XVI y XVII. Barcelona:  Labor Universitaria.

. 1991. El cddice Pomar (ca. 1590): El inter&amp; de Felipe / I por la historia natural  y la  Expedicidn Hernandez  a Ambrica, vol. A37. Valencia: Cuadernos Valencianos de Historia de la Medicina y de la Ciencia.

- Lovell, W.  George. 1991. Meddling  with the Maya. Queen's  Quarterly 97(4):566-79.
- Martinez Val, Jose M. 1945. El paisaje geografico en 10s historiadores de Indias. Revista de lndias 6 : 289-322.
- Martyr d'Anghiera, Peter. 1964 [15241. Decadas del Nuevo Mundo. Trans. from Latin into Spanish, with commentary by Edmundo O'Corman. Mexico City:  Porrua.
- Medina, Pedro de. 1972 [15381. A navigator's  universe:  The  libro de cosmographia  o f 1538. Facsimile,  with  trans.  and  Commentary  by  Ursula Lamb. Chicago:  University of Chicago Press.
- Menendez  Pidal, Gonzalo. 1944. lmagen  del mundo hacia 1570: Segun noticias del Consejo de lndias y de 10s tratadistas espairoles. Madrid: Consejo de La Hispanidad.
- Milanich, jerald T.,  and Milbrath, Susan, eds. 1989. First encounters: Spanish  explorations  in  the Caribbean  and the  United States, 1492-1570. Cainesville:  University of Florida Press.
- Morse, Richard M. 1987. Urban development.  In Colonial Spanish America, Leslie  Bethell,  ed., pp. 165-202. Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
- Motolinia, Toribio de. 1969 [15411. Historia de los indios de la Nueva Espaira.  Ed.,  with commentary  by  Edmundo  O'Gorman. Mexico  City: Porrua. Motolinia's History o f   the Indians  o f   New Spain,  trans., with  notes  by  Francis B.  Steck. Washington:  Academy  of  American  Franciscan History, 1951. .
- 1971 [c. 15411. Memoriales o libro de /as cosas de Nueva Espaira  y de 10s naturales de ella. Ed.,  with commentary by Edmundo O'Corman. Mexico City: lnstituto de lnvestigaciones Historicas,  Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico.
- Monster,  Sebastian. 1968  [15501. Cosmographia: Beschreibung  aller Lander,  Herrschafftenn und furnemesten  Stetten  des  gantzen  Erdbodens.
- Facsimile,  with commentary by Ruthardt Oehme. Amsterdam: Theatrum Orbis Terrarum,  2nd, expanded ed.,  amplified in successive  posthumous editions to 1599.
- Miinzer, Hieronymus. 1952 [14951. Jeronimo Munzer:  Relacidn  del  viaje. In Viajes  de  extranjeros por  Esparia y Portugal, J. Garcia Mercadal, ed.,  vol. 1, pp. 327-418. Madrid: Aguilar.
- Nader, Helen. 1990. Libertyin  absolutist Spain: The Habsburg sale  of towns 1516-1700. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Nebenzahl, Kenneth. 1990. Atlas o f   Columbus and 'The Great  Discoveries.'  Chicago:  Rand  McNally.
- Nicolau d'Olwer,  Luis. 1987 [19521. Fray Bernadino de  Sahagun (1499-1590). Trans. Mauricio J. Mixco, introduction by Miguel Ledn-Portilla. Salt Lake City:  University of Utah Press.
- -and Cline, Howard F. 1973. Sahagun and his works.  In Guide to ethnohistoricalsources,  H. F. Cline and J. B.  Class,  eds.,  vol. 2, pp. 186-207. Handbook of Middle American Indians 13. Austin:  University of Texas Press.
- O'Gorman, Edmundo, ed. 1946. Sucesos y dialog0 de la Nueva Espaira. Mexico City:  Biblioteca del Estudiante Universitario.
- Ordenanzas. 1973 [15731. Ordenanzas de descubrimiento,  nueva poblacidn y pacificacidn de las Indias, dadaspor Felipe I 1 en 1573. Madrid: Ministerio de la Vivienda (facsimile).
- Parry,  john  H. 1981. The  discovery  o f  the  sea. Berkeley:  University of California Press.
- , and Keith, Robert G., eds. 1984. New Iberian World:  A documentary history o f   the discovery and settlement o f  Latin America to the early seventeenth  century. 5 vols.  New York:  Times Books, Hector &amp; Rose.
- Paso y Troncoso,  Francisco del,  ed. 1905a. Suma de visitas de pueblos por orden alfabCtico,  Madrid:  Papeles de Nueva Espaiia,  serie ll,  vol. 1. - .
- 1905c. Relaciones geograficas de la Didcesis de Thcala, serie I I , vol. 5, pp. 183-286. Madrid: Papeles de Nueva Espaiia.
- 1905b. Descripcibn  del Arzobispado  de Mexico, serie I I , vol. 3. Madrid:  Papeles  de Nueva Espatia. - .
- Perez-Rioja, Jose A. 1958. Un insigne visontino del siglo  XVI:  Juan Lopez  de  Velasco.  Celtiberia: Centro de Estudios Sorianos 8:7-38.
- Phillips,  j.  R.  S. 1988. The Medieval expansion  of Europe. New York:  Oxford University Press.
- Phillips, William  D.,  jr.,  and  Phillips,  Carla Rahn. 1992. The  worlds  o f  Christopher  Columbus. New York:  Cambridge University Press.
- Pliny. 1940-56 [c. 75 A.D.I. Natural history.  Trans. H. Rackham and W. H. S. Jones. 1Ovol. London: Heinemann.
- Polo,  Marco. 1958  [12991. The  travels  of Marco

- Polo. Trans., with commentary  by Ronald Latham. Harmondsworth, U.K.:  Penguin.
- Ponsot, Pierre, and Drain, Michel. 1966. Hernando  Coldn  et  son 'Itinerario': Commentaire geographique. Melanges  de la Casa de VelAzquez 273-95.
- Ptolemy. 1932 [c. 150 A.D.I. Geography of Claudius  Ptotemy (with maps from Ebner MS of c. 1460). Trans.  Edward L.  Stevenson,  with  introduction by Joseph  Fischer. New York: New York Public Library.
- . 1966 [c. 150 A.D.I. Claudius Ptolomaeus geographia. Ed. and maps redrawn by Sebastian Mijnster  1540,  introduction  by  R.  A.  Skelton. Amsterdam: Theatrum Orbis Terrarum. 一
- Quinones  Keber,  Eloise. 1988. Reading images: The  making  and  meaning of  the  Sahaguntine illustrations. In The work o f Bernadino Sahagdn, ed. J. J. Klor de Alva,  H.  6.  Nicholson, and  E. Quiitones Keber, pp. 199-210. Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Rosa y L6pez, Simon de la. 1906. El ltinerario de Don Hernando Colon y su vocabulario topogrhfico de  Espana.  Revista  de  Archivos, Bibliotecas y Museos 15:106-18,260-74.
- Rowntree, 1 .   6.;  Foote,  Kenneth E.; and Domosh, Mona. 1989. Cultural  geography. In Geography in America,  ed.  Gary  L.  Gaile and  Cort J. Willmott,  pp. 209-17. Columbus, OH: Merrill.
- Sahagun, Bernadino  de. 1950-69 [15791. Florentine Codex:  General history o f the  things  of New Spain.  Ed.,  and trans. from the Nahuatl, Arthur J. 0. Anderson and Charles  E.  Dibble.  Monographs of the School of American Research and the Museum of New Mexico, 13 vol.  (revised  or reprinted 1974-82). Santa Fe,  NM.
- Salas, Alberto. 1954. Fernhndez de Oviedo, critic0 de la  Conquista  y de 10s conquistadores. Cuadernos  Americanos (Mexico City) 74:16&amp;70.
- Sale,  Kirkpatrick. 1990. The conquest o f Paradise: Christopher Columbus and the Columbian legacy.  New York: Knopf.
- Sauer,  Carl  0. 1966. The  early  Spanish  Main. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Sauer, Jonathan  D. 1976. Changing  perception and exploitation  of  New  World  plants  in  Europe, 1492-1800. In  first  images  of America, ed. F. Chiappelli, vol. 2,  pp. 813-32. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Simpson, Lesley Byrd. 1964. Cortes: The life of  the conqueror by his secretary Francisco Lopez de Gdmara. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Somolinos  de Ardois, German, ed. 19 6 1 2 - 8 4 . Obras completas de Francisco Hernhdez. 7 vol.  Mexico City:  Porrua.
- Stanislawski, Dan. 1947. Early Spanish town planning  in the  New World.  Geographical Review 37:  9 4 1 05.
- Taviani,  Pablo Emilio. 1985. Christopher  Columbus:  The grand design. London:  Orbis.
- Thacher, John  B., ed. 1967 [1903-04]. Christopher Columbus: His life,  his work,  his remains. 3 vol. New York:  Kraus Reprint.
- Tovar  de  Teresa, Guillermo. 1985. Antonio  de Mendoza y el urbanism0 en Mexico. Cuadernos de Arquitectura Virreinal2:2-19.
- Varela, Consuelo,  ed. 1983. Cristobal  Colbn: Textos  y  documentos  completos.  Madrid:  Alianza Universidad.
- Vhzquez de Espinosa, Antonio. 1969 [1629]. Compendio y descripcidn de /as Indias occidentales. Ed.,   with commentary by B. Velasco Baydn. Madrid: Biblioteca  de  Autores EspaAoles, 231. (Compendium and description  of the  West  lndies. Trans. Charles  U. Clark.  Washington: Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collection 102, 1942)
- Waldseemiiller, Martin. 1966 [1507]. Cosmographiae  introductio (with  the four voyages of Amerigo Vespucci). English  trans. Joseph  Fischer and Franz  von Wieser. Ann Arbor, MI: University Microfilms.
- Warren, J. Benedict. 1973. An introductory survey of secular writings  in the European tradition on Colonial Middle  America, 1503-1818. In Guide to ethnohistorical  sources, ed.  Howard  F. Cline, vol.  2,  pp. 42-137. Handbook of Middle American Indians 13. Austin:  University of Texas Press.
- Waters,  David W. 1958. The art o f navigation in England in Elizabethan and early Stuart times. New Haven: Yale University Press.
- Wilson,  Samuel  M. 1990. Hispaniola:  Caribbean chiefdoms in the Age o f Columbus. University, AL:  University of Alabama Press.
- Y6Aes  Dias,  Gonzalo. 1991. Espacios urbanos del la siglo XVl en regidn Puebla-Tlaxcala.  Puebla: Universidad  Autbnoma de Puebla.