- Atkinson College, York University, Geographical Monograph No. 14.
- Simmons, T. 1981. The challenge of rural  perspectives on the  rural-urban  fringe. In The Rural-Urban Fringe: Canadian Perrpectives, ed. K. B.  Beesley and  L. H. Russwurm, 71-86.  Toronto: Atkinson College,  York  University,  Geographical  Monograph No.  10.
- Troughton, M. J.  1981. The rural-urban  fringe: A challenge to resource management. In The RuralUrban  Fringe: Canadian  Perspectives, ed.  K. B. Beesley and  L.  H. Russwurm, 21843. Toronto: Atkinson College, York University, Geographical Monograph No.  10.
- Wilkinson,  P.  F.,  and A. L.  Murray.  1991. Centre and periphery: The impacts of the leisure industry on  a  small  town  (Collingwood,  Ontario). Society and Leimre 14:235-60.
- Wolfe,  R.  I.  1951.  Summer  cottages  in  Ontario. Economic Geography 27:lO-32.
- . 1965. About  cottages  and  cottagers. Landscape 15:6-8.

Wyckoff, W.  K.  1990. Landscapes of private power and wealth. In The Making o f the American Landscape, ed. M. P. Conzen, 335-54.  London: Harper Collins Academic.

GREG  HALSETH  (Ph.D.,  Queen's  University, Kingston, Ontario) is Assistant Professor in the Geography Program, Faculty of Natural Resources and Environmental Studies, University of Northern British  Columbia,  Prince  George,  B.C.,  Canada V2N 429. His research  interests  include  issues  of community change, specifically public participation and debate, in rural and suburban settings.

MARK ROSENBERG  (Ph.D.,  London  School  of Economics  and  Political Science) is Associate Professor  in  the  Department  of  Geography,  Queen's University,  Kngston,  Ontario,  Canada  K7L  3N6. His current interests  are population  aging, medical geography,  housing,  and  transportation,  and  their implications for public policy.

## Forest -La  n  d  sca  pe Structure a  Ion  g an U  r  ba  n  -To-  R  u  ra  I Gradient *

Kimberly E. Medley Miami University

## Steward T .  A.  Pickett

Institute o f EcoTstem Studies

Human activities and forest-landscape structure are examined along a belt transect that extends 140 km  from New York City  to  northwestern  Connecticut. The  study  quantifies urban  structures (population density,  land  use, transportation)  and processes (population  growth,  urban land development)  in the transect,  and tests for relationships with the distribution,  sizes, and shapes of forests. Our results identify distinct characteristics  of urban and suburban environments based  on the  landscape structure of  native  forest vegetation. These  findings are  applicable to  the management of  natural  areas  along  a  gradient  of  urbanization. Key  Words:  conservation,  forest  ecology, landscape analyses, New York City, urbanization.

e altered environments of cities, coupled that  occur  when  urban areas  expand,  profoundly influence the native vegetative cover of a  landscape. Within most urbanized areas, human activities have resulted in a landscape that Th with  the  dynamic changes in  land  cover is  characterized  by  a  highly  developed urban pogenic  influences at the  periphery.  It  is  evident that urban effects extend beyond city political boundaries or built-up areas of high human  population  density  (Berry  1991). While core  and  a  trend  toward  diminishing anthro-

'Research  support was provided to K. Medley through an AAG  Research Grant and a postdoctoral appointment at the Institute of Ecosystem  Studies. We thank T. Klak, E. McCann, R. V. Pouyat, C. Young, D.  Lord, D. Hodge, and two anonymous renewers for comments on earlier drafts T h i s paper IS a contribution  to the program for the Institute of Ecosystem Studies.

Mark J. McDonnell University o f Connecticut

landscapes are  commonly classified  as  urban, suburban,  or  rural  on  the  basis  of  socioeconomic  data and  the  presence of  urban  structures  (e.g.,  Clawson  1971), their  delineation with  distance  from  an  urban  center  (Fugitt et al.  1979) and the ecological implications of human activities  within these regions (McDonnell and Pickett  1990) remain unclear.

Theoretical  models of  urban  structure  and analyses of socioeconomic  parameters with distance from an urban core suggest a gradient of human influences. Along  the  gradient,  urban structures  and  the  urbanization  process  are principal factors  disrupting the preexisting mosaic of land uses, and particularly the apportionment  and  spatial  configuration  of  native vegetation (Godron and Forman  1983). Landscape  patterns,  therefore,  provide  an  alternative measure of urban-rural  change. The ecological  implications  of  urban developments may  be  monitored  by  compositional,  smctural, or functional responses in the preexisting vegetative  cover  (Stearns  and  Montag  1974; Sukopp and Werner  1983; Rowntree  1988).

In  this  paper,  we  report  findings from  an integrative study of urban effects on landscape structure  and  forest  ecology along  a  transect between New York City's urban core and rural northwestern Connecticut. Distance along the urban-rural transect provides a sampling framework to compare landscape structure and human  activity, and  thereby  to  identify  the gradient of urbanization. Three principal questions are investigated: (1) how do the urban  indicators,  including  human  population, transportation, and land use, vary with distance from the urban  core? (2) what are the  trends in landscape structure, as measured by the distribution, sizes,  and  shapes  of  native  forest patches? and (3) do statistically significant relationships exist between  the urban  indicators described above and forest-landscape structure along the  transect? The study quantifies how humans change the environment with distance from an urban center and identifies ecological impacts of these  human  influences on native forest vegetation.

## Study Area

A 20-km wide and  140-km long belt transect was  established  that  extends from  New  York City to Litchfield County, Connecticut (Fig. 1). In order to control for environmental variability, the  transect  was  positioned to follow  a  single  geomorphic  unit,  the  glaciated Appalachian highlands, and remain within the oak-hickory vegetation association. Landscape analyses focused on patterns  of  change along the  transect  and local differences among nine permanent,  upland-oak  forest sites that  were used in a concurrent study of ecosystem properties (Fig. 1;  see  Pouyat  and  McDonnell 1991).

Our study transect extends from the core of one of the oldest, most densely populated cities in  the  United  States  and  extends  towards  a forested  landscape.  New York  City  had a population  of  350,000  by  1835 (Berry  1973) and now the metropolitan  area has a  population  of  about  7.32  million  in  780 km2. The

Figure 1: Location  of  the  urban-rural  belt  transect in  the Northeastern  United States.  The nine permanent  forest  study  areas  are  shown  with black circles.

<!-- image -->

physical environment  is characterized by high relative relief, and its low agricultural productivity reduces non-urban pressure on the growth  of  forest.  Danbury,  Connecticut,  a much smaller city located east of  the transect at about 70 km, is the only other urban center that  may  possibly  influence  urban  developments in the study area.

Spatial patterns  measured along this urbanrural transect would probably differ from those at similar distances to cities of different ages or central population densities (Adams 1970),  and in different environmental  or cultural settings (Bourne et al.  1984). The construction  of  the highway network, the early history of elite developments in Westchester County,  New York, and a topographic setting that restricted large  single-housing  projects  set  the  frame-

~

~

We  measured  urban  and  landscape  characteristics at coarse (1:250,000) and fine (1 :24,000)  resolutions  within  the  urban-rural transect  (Table  1). At  a coarse resolution, the 140-km transect was  divided  into 5-km  transect  sections  (n=28),  and  circular  landscape

Table 1 Data and Landscape Parameters used to Quantify the Urban-Rural liansect

| Source                                                                                                                | Data                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Landscape Parameters'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| U S Bureau of Census (1980. 19901 (1 250.000)                                                                         | Number of individuals bv countv subdivisions                                                                                                                                                                                           | Populationdensity-means extracted from county subdivisions in sample (weighted by areal Log 10transformation of population density (LOGPOP) Annual population growth rate (1960-1990) (GROWTH                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| USGS Planimetric Maps (1:250.000and 1.100.0001                                                                        | State and interstate highways                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Distance (kml along the transect (DIST)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| New York Department of Transportation (19901and Connecticut Department of Transportation (1990)Traffic Volume Reports | Annual average # vehiclestday on state and interstate highway sections                                                                                                                                                                 | Traffic volume-mean of average annual # vehicles/day for road sections in sample Log 10 transformation of traffic volume (LOGTRAF)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| U S Geological Survey Land Use-Land Cover Digital Data (USGS 1986) (1 250.0001                                        | Land-use categories adapted from the Level II classification residential. urban-mixed (commercial, industrial and residential), uplandforest (deciduous, coniferous, mixed. and urban).agriculture. water, wetland, and abandoned land | Land-use proportions-compiled with the exclusion of surface water coverage residential-urban YO ILOGRESURB) Log 10 transformation of Mean forest patch size (ha) Log 10 transformation of mean forest-patch size (LOGAREA) Number of forest patches per 100 km2 (PATCH Forest patch shape (P_A FRACTAL) Percent of total forest edges adlacent to urban-residential land uses IUREDGES) |
| USGS 7 5' Topographic Quadrangles (1 24.000)                                                                          | Malor and minor roads                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Road length/l6 km2 Log 10 transformation of road length 1 LOGROADS)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Aerial Photos 1987-1991 New York State Land Use and Natural Resource Inventory (1967-19701                            | Classification of urban land residential, urban-mixed (commercial, residential) heavy and light industry. public institutions, outdoor developed land, urban construction                                                              | Urban-landpercentage Percent change in urban land (DEVELOP)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Connecticut 1970 Land Use Maps (1 24.000)                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

work for a pattern  of urban  development that was  quite  different from that  characteristic of the  coastal  plain  in  New Jersey,  for  example (Jackson  1985).  Landscape  changes  from  an urban to a forest matrix along the study transect are profound,  attributable  to the  characteristics  of  the  urban  core,  the  physical  geographic setting, and the history of urban development.

## Data and Methods

units  of  about  75  kmz were  centered  on  the forest  study sites (n=9). Data  for  the  transect sections  and circular  landscape  units  were compiled  from  planimetric maps of  state  and interstate highways,  population census  and traffic  volume  reports,  and  USGS  land  useland cover  data.  Population  densities  were mapped  by  county  subdivisions,  and  mean densities, weighted by area, were extracted for the  sampling areas using  a  geographic information  system. Traffic  volumes,  recorded  as the average annual number of vehicles per day, were  averaged for  all  highway  segments that crossed a sampling  unit. The USGS data, compiled from  1:80,000 air photos  taken between 1983-1984,  were  grouped  into seven  categories  from  the  original  Level  I1  classification scheme: residential (low-high density), urbanmixed  (commercial, industrial,  residential-urban), upland forest (deciduous,  evergreen, mixed,  other  urban),  agriculture,  abandoned land, water, and  wetland (USGS  1986). Field checks verified that,  in  most  cases,  forests in the city were classed in the 'other urban' category. At a fine resolution, for 16 km2  land units that  were  centered  on  the  forest  study  sites (n=9),  we  used  USGS  7.5  minute topographic quadrangles,  recent  air  photos  (1985-1990), and  1970 land-use inventories to measure the total  length  of  roads  and  urban-land  proportions.

Land-use data were input into raster-based geographic information  systems (IDRISI  and MAP) and  a  spatial  analysis program  developed at the Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment  Station  (see  Flather  et  al.  1992). Grid-cell resolution equaled  4  ha for the USGS land-use data, which is  comparable to that used in the original mapping of urban land uses  (USGS  1986), and  I  ha  for  the  data on urban  developments  compiled  from  the  air photos and  1970 resource-inventory maps. At these grid-cell sizes, we  assumed that  planted street and yard trees were not included in the forest class. Structural differences in the landscape pattern  of  native  forest vegetation were determined from measures of  forest area, the number  and mean size  of  forest patches, forest-patch shapes, and edge adjacencies between forest patches and urban-residential  land uses (Table 1).  W e calculated  these  parameters from the USGS land use-land cover data using GIs, a spreadsheet program  (for mean  patch areas),  and  the  spatial  analysis  program.  The perimeter-area fractal was used to measure the complexity of  forest-patch  shapes. The index (D), which can vary between 1 (simple geometric  shape) and  2.0  (extremely complex shape), is equal to the slope of regressing polygon area against perimeter  (Krummel et al.  1987). We could  only  calculate  the  index  for  sampling units  that  had  at least three  patches not contiguous with  the  sample boundary.  Together these  parameters  identified  landscape  disturbances  along  the  urban-rural  transect  as  related to forest-land apportionment, the degree and nature of forest fragmentation, and forestpatch shape and position.

Data analyses were twofold. First, we  documented  trends of  human  (urban) activity with distance from the urban core. We hypothesize that  population  density,  state  and  interstate traffic  volumes,  density  of  major  and  minor roads, and urban-residential land apportionment,  as  structural  features  of  the  urban environment, should decline  with distance from the urban  core. Population growth rates and  change  in  urban-land  proportions  (i.e., urban  development) should be  greatest where the  processes of  urbanization  are  greatest. In order to identify the nature and significance of linear  or  logarithmic  urban-rural  trends,  urbanand forest-landscape  parameters  were plotted  against  distance  and  regression  coefficients (r2)  were calculated. Second, we examined the degree to which urban structures and processes  explained  variation  in  forest-landscape structure within the urban-rural transect. Our central hypothesis is that urban structures and  processes are  positively related,  through landscape fragmentation and modification, with  the number of  forest patches and forestedges adjacent to urban  land uses, and negatively  related  with  the  mean  area  of  forest patches  and  their  fractal  dimensions.  Forest cover  should  decline  and  vary  from  large patches of  complex shapes in  an  undisturbed landscape to small patches of simple geometric shapes  with  increasing  urban  influences  (cf. Krummel  et  al.  1987).  Correlations  and  regressions were  computed  between  the  set  of urban and forest-landscape indicators. We examined partial correlations in  order to determine  the  degree  to  which  highly  significant relationships  were  independent of distance along the transect.

Quantifying the Urban-Rural  Transect

Human  population  density,  highway  traffic volume, density of the road system, and urbanresidential  land  uses  decrease  with  distance from the urban  core (Fig. 2). At 35-55 km, a sharp change from  a landscape dominated by urban-residential land uses to a forest matrix is evident. The urban environment, as measured by these indicators, declines directly with distance  from  the  urban  core.  Only at 80 km  is the  trend  noticeably disrupted,  with  increases in  all structural  features probably attributable to  the  city  of  Danbury,  Connecticut,  located east  of  the  transect.  In  contrast,  urban  processes reflected in the annual rate of population growth and  urban-land development  show

140

Figure 2: Change in  urban structures  along  the urban-rural transect:  (A) human population  densities  compiled  for  5 x 20-km  transect  sections from county-subdivision census reports  (U.  S. Bureau  of  Census data  1980,  1990); and  (B) land use-land  cover percentages  (water excluded) for the 5 x 20-km transect sections.

<!-- image -->

nonmonotonic trends (Fig. 3). Greatest population  growth  rates  occur  at  about 6G95 km from  the  urban  core. Changes  in  urban  land development are greatest  at about 25-65 km. These contrasting patterns between indicators of urban  structure and urbanization  processes are also suggested by  the  correlation  coefficients (Table 2).  Declines in  population,  traffic volume,  road  density,  and  urban-residential land apportionment with distance are logarithmic  and  correlations  are  large (r c -0 . 8 8 ) . The  correlation  of  distance  with  population growth  rate  is  comparatively lower (r = 0.57) and the correlation of distance with urban land development is not statistically significant.

Forest-landscape structural characteristics are  also  statistically related  to  distance  from the urban core (Fig. 4). Mean forest-patch size (Fig. 4A)  and the percent of forest edges adjacent to urban land uses (Fig. 4D) are positively and negatively related to distance, respectively. The decline in mean patch size at 80 km  may be related to the higher proportion of agriculture in this area and/or  the increase in urbanresidential land, possibly associated with development from Danbury, Connecticut. The relatively  lower percentages of forest-urban edges near  the  urban  core  may  be  related  to  the position of forests along the coastline (Fig. 4D;

Figure 3: Change in  urban processes along the urban-rural transect. Population  growth rates were  compiled  from  county-subdivision  census reports U S . Bureau of  Census data  1980,  1990) for 5 x 20-km transect sections. Urban-land development  was  measured  as  the  change in urbanresidential  land  compiled  for l S-krd  land  units from  1970 resource  inventories  and  1985-1990 air  photos.

<!-- image -->

Table 2 Pearson Correlations (rl and Coefficients of Determination  (r2)  based on Relationships between  Urban- and Forest-Landscape Parameters, and Distance along the Transect

| Landscape Parameted (dependent variable)   | Sampleb   | r     | r2    |
|--------------------------------------------|-----------|-------|-------|
| Urban                                      |           |       |       |
| LOGPOP                                     | n=28      | -0 97 | 0 93c |
| L0GTRAF                                    | n=28      | -0 90 | 0 80' |
| LOGROADS                                   | n=9       | -0 88 | 0 77c |
| LOGRESURB                                  | n=28      | -0 91 | 0.83' |
| GROWTH                                     | n=28      | 0 57  | 0.33' |
| DEVELOP                                    | n=9       | 0 03  | 4 0 1 |
| Forest                                     |           |       |       |
| LOGAREA                                    | n=28      | 0.83  | 0.68' |
| PATCH                                      | n=28      | -0 53 | 0 28' |
| P-A FRACTAL                                | ~ 2       | 0.30  | 0.09  |
| UREDGES                                    | n=28      | -0 92 | 0.84' |

aLandscape  parameters are defined in Table 1.

bStutinics are based on data compiled,for the F x  20-km transect sections (n=28) or   the 16-km2 landscape units centered on the forest Snuy areas.

cStatistically significant at 0.01 level.

dThe P-a fiaaal was only calnrlated in those transect sections that had at leust three.firestpatche.s not contiguous  with the boundaty.

Figure 4: Forest-landscape characteristics  along  the  urban-rural gradient: (A) mean  area  of  forest patches; (6) number  of  forest patches per  100 km'; (C) forest-patch  shape; and (D) percent of  total forest edges adjacent to urban-residential land uses. Data were compiled from the USGS land use-land cover data and plotted  for 5 x 20-km transect sections and 75-km2 land units centered on the forest study sites.

<!-- image -->

Fig.  1).  Still,  much  of  the  variation  in  these two  parameters  can  be  accounted  for  by  distance  from  the  urban  core.  Statistically significant relations are observed for urban-rural distance and the log of the mean area of forest patches (r = 0.83), and for urban-rural distance and  the  percent  of  forest  edges  adjacent  to urban land uses (r = -0.92; Table-  2).

In  contrast,  the  correlation is low between urban-rural  distance and the number of forest patches  (r = -0.53) and  not  statistically significant  for  forest-patch  shapes. Forest-patch numbers vary greatly (from 12-7 1 patched1  00 km ' ) over short distances up to  100 km along the transect,  but they  are  consistently  low (&lt;14) at the rural end of the transect (Fig. 4B). While a negative trend  toward fewer patches is  documented,  the  explanatory power  of  the linear  model  is  not  great.  T o   some  extent, differences in patch numbers may be obscured by the sampling design, 100-km2  transect sections  and 75-km2 forest-study  units,  which presents a problem for distinguishing different patches  from  a  single patch  that  overlaps the sample  boundary  at more  than  one  location (inflating total numbers). P-a fractals (Fig. 4C) increase up to 40 km  and are highest between 40-80 km. Forest-patch shapes at the rural end are  difficult to  interpret  because  P-a fractals are  based  only  on  patches  that  occur  in  the sampling units  and  therefore  do not measure the complexity of background forest cover that is contiguous with the respective sample boundaries. For  our  samples, a  linear  relationship between distance and the complexity of forestpatch shapes is not observable from the plot or supported by statistical analysis.

Urban-to-forest  landscape Relationships

Correlations  between  the  urban  and  forestlandscape parameters  differ  according to  the nature  of  the  urban  effect (Table  3).  Correlations  with  urban  structural  features  such  as population densities, traffic volumes, and road density  are  high  for  the  mean  area  of  forest patches,  the  adjacencies  between  forests  and urban-residential land, and, to a lesser degree, the number of  forest patches. In contrast, forest-patch shape is best correlated with the urban process of  population growth.

In support  of  our  central  hypothesis, mean forest-patch areas decrease and the number of forest patches and forest edges adjacent to urban  land  increase  with population  density, traffic  volume,  and  road  density  (Table 3 ) . Population growth rate, however, shows statistically  significant  positive  relationships  with mean forest-patch areas and shapes, and negative relationships with the percentage of forest edges adjacent to urban  land. The population growth  rate between  1960-1990 is negatively related to the level of  forest-landscape disturbance,  a  result  at  least  partially explained  by the  low-to-negative population  growth  of the urban core.

The  explanatory power  of  statistical  relationships between forest and urban parameters is  in  some instances greater  than  those measured  with  distance from  the  urban  core  (see Table 2). Population  density  explains  nearly 80% of the variation in mean forest-patch area (r2 = 0.79, p &lt; O.Ol),  in  contrast  to  the 68% explained by distance to the urban core. Population  growth  rate  explains 34% of  the  vari-

Table 3 Pearson  Correlations Between  Urban and Forest-Landscape Parameter9

|                             | Urban Parameters   | Urban Parameters   | Urban Parameters   | Urban Parameters   | Urban Parameters   |
|-----------------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| Forest-Landscape Parameters | LOGPOP             | LOGTRAF            | ROADS              | GROWTH             | DEVELOP            |
| LOGAREA ~. ~                | -0 89' (n=28)      | 4 86b in=28)       | -0 59 in=91        | 0 41' ln=281       | -0 16 in=9)        |
| UREDGES                     | 0.88' in=281       | 0.83' (n=28)       | 0 80b (n=9)        | -0.60' in=281      | 0.25 (n=91         |
| PATCH                       | 0.57' (n=281       | 0 53' b 2 8 )      | 0 72' (n=91        | 0.03 in=78)        | -0.09 ln=91        |
| P-A FRACTAL^                | -0 41' in=25)      | -0 32 (n=251       | 0.65 (n=51         | 0.59' in=751       | -0 19 h=5)         |

ation  in patch  shapes (r2 = 0.34; p &lt; 0.01), in contrast to the 9% explained by distance. After controlling for distance effects, the partial correlations between  these urban  and  forest  parameters  are  -0.63 (p &lt; 0.01)  and  0.54  (p &lt; 0.01),  respectively. Urban-to-forest  landscape relationships, while related, are not  solely dependent  on  distance  from  the  urban  core. These  urban structures and processes are ecologically-relevant  measures  of  the  urban environment  that  are  likely  to  better  predict the areal extent, degree of fragmentation, and patch characteristics  of native forest vegetation in different geographic settings.

## Urban-Suburban-Rural Environments

In addition to documenting a measurable gradient of  human influences along the urban-mral  transect, certain patterns  emerge from the study that  may be used  to characterize urban, suburban, and rural  environments. The environmental  conditions  of  urban centers  are greatly influenced by  structural  features (high population  densities,  urban  land  cover,  and transportation)  and  less  influenced  by  landscape changes attributable  to rapid  growth in populations and urban land  developments. Forest patches at the urban end of the transect are small, of typically simple geometric shapes, and adjacent to urban land uses. In contrast, a suburban zone, identified broadly at about 25100 km along this transect, is both temporally and  spatially  more  dynamic.  We  measured high rates of urban change, steep distance gradients  in  urban  structures,  high  variability  in forest-patch  sizes, and  greater  complexity  in forest shapes. The rural end of  the transect is a  forest  matrix,  with  a  low  number  of  large (more than 500 ha) forest patches that account for well  over 50%  of  the land area. The gradient of  change in landscape structural attributes is greatest within the suburban zone.

## Conclusions

We conclude from this study that  the  nature of  the urban  environment and its relationship with  native  forest-landscape  structure  show quantifiable differences within an urban-rural transect  between New  York  City  and  northwestern  Connecticut. A decline in  forest area is  only  one  aspect  of  change  that  shows  an association with urban structures and processes in this region. The structural configuration of forest patches (number and mean size), relative exposure to  the  urban  environment,  and  potential  for  further  fragmentation  are  also important characteristics  that influence their ecology.

The structure of the urban environment, as measured  by  population  density,  traffic  volume,  road  density, and urban-residential land use, declines logarithmically  with distance from the urban core. Between 35-55  km, land use changes abruptly from an urban-residential matrix at greater  than  80%  cover to  a forest matrix at greater than 70% cover. Accordingly, the  mean  sizes  of  forest  patches increase and the  percent  of forest-urban edges  decrease with  distance from  the  core. The number  of forest patches is much  lower at the rural  end of  the  transect.  In  contrast,  urban  processes such as population growth rate and urban land development show  nonlinear trends, with maximum rates between 60-95 km and 25-65 km, respectively. Patch shapes, calculated only for patches within and not contiguous with the sample boundaries, are most complex at 40-80 km. Distance, as an  independent variable, clearly documents the idiosyncrasies of this urban-rural  transect,  but  only partially explains forest-landscape structure.

We  accept  our  central  hypothesis  that,  in most cases, urban  structures are positively related  with  the  number  of  forest  patches  and edges adjacent to urban  land  uses, and negatively  related  with  the  mean  area  of  forest patches  and  their  fractal  dimensions.  Maximum population growth rates, however, occur in  less-disturbed areas; consequently, we  predict  greater  fragmentation  at  those  locations with time. Statistical  relationships between urban parameters and forest-landscape structure are comparable (for forest-urban edges) or better  than  those identified with  distance. These urban  structures  and  processes  are  likely  to better predict forest-landscape structure in different geographic settings.

Based  on landscape patterns  along the  distance gradient and urban-forest  landscape relationships, we  are able to distinguish between the environmental conditions of  forests in urban and suburban landscapes. Forests near the urban  core are small  in  size, simple in shape, and  greatly exposed to the structural features of  the  urban  environment  (e.g.,  high  popula-

tions,  traffic  volumes,  developed  land).  The land  apportionment  and  spatial configuration of forests near the urban core are not likely to change,  but  protection  and  restoration  from stresses  imposed  by  pollutants,  high  human activity,  and  an  altered  climatic  regime  are critical  for  their  longterm  sustainability (e.g., Pouyat and McDonnell 1991; Oke 1988; Driestadt et al.  1990). In the suburban zone, high rates  of  urban  change  and  steep  gradients  of change in urban structures influence landscape pattern.  Forest  vegetation  in  this  region  increases greatly in mean-patch size and adjacencies to urban land use, shows great variation in patch  numbers,  and has relatively more  complex  patch  shapes.  Suburban  landscapes  are much  more  susceptible to  structural  changes over space and through  time. Nature conservation  in  this  region,  therefore,  depends  on managing forest-land apportionment, fragmentation  effects,  and  spatial  configuration across the urbanizing landscape (Hansson and Angelstam  1991; Saunders  et al.  1991; Matlock 1993).  These differences support management strategies that are directed, in urban  areas,  at the restoration of small forest areas that show decline or stress attributable to the urban environment,  and,  in  suburban  areas,  at  the acquisition of a sustainable  forest-landscape structure. Thus, our study contributes toward a landscape classification of urban-rural  gradients that is applicable to the design of  ecologically sensitive land management strategies.

## Literature Cited

- Adams, J. S. 1970. Residential structure of midwestern cities. Annals o f the Association of American Geographers 60:37-62.
- Berry, B.  J.  L.  1973. The  Human  Consequences o f Urbanization. New York: St. Martin's  Press.
- Berry, B. J.  L.  1991. Urbanization. In The Earth as Transfomed by Human Action, ed. B.  L. Turner 11, W.  C.  Clark,  R.  W.  Kates, J.  F .   Richards, J.  T. Mathews, and W.  B.  Meyer,  103-19.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press with  Clark University.
- Bourne,  L.,  R.  Sinclair,  and  K.  Dziewonski,  eds. 1984. Urbanization  and Settlement Syst e m s : International  Perspectives. New  York:  Oxford  University Press.
- Clawson,  M.  1971. Suburban  Land Conversion  in the  United States: A n  Econmic  and  Governmental
- Process. Baltimore:  Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Driestadt, S. H., D. L. Dahlsten, and G. W .   Frankie. 1990. Urban forests and insect ecology. BioScience 40:192-98.
- Flather, C. H., S. J.  Brady, and  D. B.  Inkley.  1992. Regional habitat appraisals of  wildlife communities: A landscape-level  evaluation of resource planning  models using avian distribution  data. Landscape  Ecology 7 ; 13  7 4 7 .
- Fugitt,  G. V.,  P.  R.  Voss, and J.  C.  Doherty.  1979. Growth and Change i n Rural America. Washington, DC: Urban Land Institute.
- Godron, M., and R. T. T. Forman. 1983. Landscape modification and changing  ecological  characteristics. In Disturbance and  Ecosystems, ed. H. A. Mooney  and  M.  Godron, 12-28. New  York: Springer-Verlag.
- Hansson,  L.,  and  P.  Angelstam.  1991.  Landscape ecology as a theoretical basis for nature conservation. Landscape Ecology 5:191-201.
- Jackson, K.  1985. Crabgrass Frontier. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Krummel, J. R.,  R.  H. Gardner, G. Sugihara, R. V. ONeill,  and  P. R.  Coleman.  1987.  Landscape pattern in a disturbed environment. Oikos 48:32124.
- Matlock, G. R. 1993. Sociological edge effects: Spatial distribution of human impact in suburban forest fragments. Environmental Management 17:82935.
- McDonnell, M. J., and S. T. A.  Pickett. 1990. Ecosystem structure  and  function along urban-rural gradients: An  unexploited  opportunity  for  ecolOD. Ecology 7 I ; 1232-37.
- Oke, T. R.  1988.  The urban energy balance. Progress in Physical  Geography 12:471-508.
- Pouyat, R. V.,  and M. J.  McDonnell.  1991. Heavy metal  accumulations in  forest soils along an  urban-rural  gradient  in  southeastern  New  York, USA. Water,  Air, and Soil Pollution 57/58:797-807.
- Rowntree, R. A.  1988. Ecology of the urban forest: Introduction to part 111. Landscape Design and Urban Planning 15:l-10.
- Saunders, D.  A.,  R. J. Hobbs,  and  C. R. Margules. 1991. Biological consequences of  ecosystem fragmentation: A review. Consemation Biology 5:18-27.
- Stearns, F., and  T. Montag,  eds.  1974. The  Urban Ecosystem:  A  Holistic  Approach. Stroudsburg,  PA: Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross, Inc.
- Sukopp, H., and  P.  Werner.  1983. Urban  environments and vegetation. In Mank Impact on Vegetation, ed.  W.' Holzner,  M. J.  A.  Werger,  and  I. Ikusima, 247-60.  The Hague: Dr. W. Junk Publishers.
- US.  Geological  Survey.  1986. Land  Use  and  Land Cover Digital Datafi-om 1:250,000and  I:100,000Scale Maps. Data Users Guide 4. Reston, VA:  U.S. Geological Survey.

KIMBERLY E. MEDLEY (Ph.D., Michigan  State University) is Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography,  Miami University, 2 17 Shideler  Hall, Oxford,  OH 45056. Her research focuses on human and environmental factors influencing the distribution, ecology, and conservation of  forests in temperate and tropical localities.

MARK J. MCDONNELL (Ph.D., Rutgers University) is Associate Professor and Director of the Bartlett  Arboretum, University  of  Connecticut, Stam- ford, CT  06903, His research is on plant community dynamics, plant-animal interactions, and ecosystem response to urban-rural gradients.

STEWARD T. A. PICKETT (Ph.D., University of Illinois)  is  Scientist at  the  Institute  of  Ecosystem Studies,  B o x  AB, Millbrook, NY 12545.  His research is on vegetation dynamics, plant community  organization, and ecosystem response  to  urban-rural gradients.

## Approaches to River Channel Sensitivity"

## P . W.  Downs

University of Nottingbam

## K. J.  Gregory

Goldsmiths' College, University of London

Much research in the physical and human sciences has addressed the concept of sensitivity  to adjustment, including the  analysis  of  geomorphological  adjustment in  fluvial  systems. However, geomorphological sensitivity  has  been defined in numerous ways, partly because current conceptual understanding of  the fluvial system exceeds modeling capabilities.  Using published literature and analogies from materials behavior as a  background, previous definitions are standardized  and four hierarchically  based interpretations are developed. The four interpretations,  which relate to ratios, thresholds, recovery times, and sensitivity  analysis, are explained  and illustrated using a  table that could be modified to apply to other environmental systems. Such standardized definitions of  sensitivity  should facilitate more precise communication between  geomorphologists and guarantee effective use  of  the concept in  analyses of the fluvial system. Key Words: sensitivity, river channel change, thresholds, sensitivity  analysis.

eomorphological  contributions  to  enviG ronmental  management  require  an  improved understanding of the dynamics of landscape  change.  Achieving  this  understanding depends on the integration  of  knowledge obtained from reductionist studies of geomorphic processes. Geomorphological investigations  of river  channels  have  demonstrated  that  channels can adjust in response both to a variety of natural  environment stimuli  and to influences associated with human activity (Gregory 1987a). Numerous texts exist documenting the natural behavior  of rivers (e.g. Richards 1982); for  human  activities,  the  effects  of  river  impoundment  (Petts  1984)  and  channelization (Brookes  1988) have received particular attention  (see  Downs 1994).  For  environmental management purposes, geomorphologists must determine the combined impact on individual river  reaches  of  the effects of  separate natural and human influences throughout the drainage network. Such  analysis should include  the ability  to  explain  why river  channels that appear  similar  react  in  different ways to similar stresses-that is,  why individual  river  reaches display  temporally and spatially  differentiated nonlinear dynamical responses  (Phillips  1992).

The integration  of  impacts  accruing  from separate  natural  and  human  controls  on  the drainage basin requires a method by which the relative impact of each control can be assessed and then combined. In this regard, the concept of  sensitivity can potentially provide  the basis for a powerful  analytical  tool for relating geo-

T h e   comments of two anonymous referees are gratefully acknowledged in the revision of this paper. This work developed from research undertaken while Downs was i n receipt of NERC studentship GT4/88/AAPS/43, CASE w i t h the Nanonal Rivers Authority Thames Region.