## Interpreting What is Rural and Urban for Western U.S. Counties*

## Kate A. Berry, Nancy L. Markee, Nanci Fowler, and Gary R. Giewat

University of Nevada, Reno

The paper examines how rural and urban are interpreted and applied to counties in eleven states in the western United States. After reviewing various conceptual approaches, we turn to a three-part analysis of county commissioners' perceptions and census data to identify characteristics associated with urban-ness and rurality. The analysis involves comparing qualitative and quantitative survey and interview data, using a multiple regression analysis to correlate census variables with commissioners' perceptions of their home counties, and using cluster analysis techniques on census variables to identify patterns and unevenness in rurality and urbanness. Three characteristics mentioned by the widest range of commissioners and found to be statistically significant in the regression analysis were population concentration, total population, and the agricultural land base. Population concentration, in particular, was identified most frequently by interviewees as the single most important variable in characterizing an urban county and had the most meaningful contribution to predicting commissioners' perceptions of their home counties in the regression analysis. The cluster analysis identified five county types: largest urban centers, growing regional hubs, high growth rural, dispersed rural, and stable rural agriculture. These county types were widely distributed, reflecting the spatial unevenness of macroscale processes operating across eleven western states. Key Words: western United States, county government, rural, urban.

rban  and  rural  are  important  yet  contested  geographic  constructs  routinely used by the public, policymakers, and academics. The designations 'urban' or 'rural' can, for example, influence school district policies, law enforcement decisions, implementation of land U

zoning, and public health services (Daniels and Reed  1988;  Appalachia  Educational  Laboratory  1997;  Criminal  Justice  Institute  1997; Rural Public Health Information System 1997). While it is common knowledge that rural areas have  fewer  people  than  urban  areas,  exactly

* The assistance of Carolyn Callahan and Michael Stewart has been invaluable in this study. This study was funded in part by a faculty grant from the University of Nevada, Reno and the NSF's Nevada Women in Science EPSCoR grant.

Professional Geographer, 52(1) 2000, pages 93-105 © Copyright 2000 by Association of American Geographers. Initial submission, September 1997, revised submissions, May, September, December 1998; final acceptance, December 1998. Published by Blackwell Publishers, 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, and 108 Cowley Road, Oxford, OX4 1JF, UK.

what  urban  and  rural  mean  often  remains vague and unspecified (Slack 1990; Flora et al. 1992;  Andranovich  and  Riposa  1993).  In  the current study we examine how the concepts of rural  and  urban  are  interpreted  and  applied within the western U.S. by analyzing both the perceptions  of  county  commissioners  in  the western U.S. and county-level census data to identify characteristics associated with urbanness and rurality. 1

## Meanings of Rural and Urban

While  rural  and  urban  are  frequently  used loosely  without  reference  to  their  context  or meaning (c.f. Brown 1980; Bellamy et al. 1990; Gamradt  and  Avery  1992;  Bradshaw  1993; Wojan and Pulver 1995), this practice should not  be  mistaken  for  conceptual  simplicity  or the widespread acceptance of standardized definitions.  Many  scholars  in  this  country  and abroad reject simple definitions and debate the conceptual significance and everyday meanings of  these  terms.  Discussions  by  British,  U.S., and  Mexican  academics,  for  example,  underscore the complexity of social attachment to rurality  and  the  character  of  change  in  places considered to be rural or urban. 2  One way to approach the meaning and significance of rurality and urbanness is to chart changes in academic discussions about these issues. Cloke and Thrift (1994) identify four phases in academic approaches to interpreting rurality. 3

Researchers in Cloke and Thrift's first phase equate rurality with particular spaces and functions. Areas are labeled as rural if they are dominated by large, open tracts of land, have smallscale settlements, and  foster lifestyles that reflect living on extensive landscapes. Bealer et al. (1965), for example, describe rural areas as having three interrelated attributes: ecological, based on low population; occupational, based on  the  abundance  of  agricultural  and  natural resource occupations in these areas; and sociocultural, based on rural values, behavioral norms, and  systems  of  action.  Bealer's  approach  has been  widely  influential  among  rural  sociologists, such as Flora et al. (1992), who identify population size, economic and social character, and isolation  as  key  determinants  in  defining rurality in the United States.

Rural areas, of course, are not all the same. Their  heterogeneity  presents  a  challenge  to traditional descriptions and provided the impetus for a second phase that seeks to understand macroscale economic, political, and social processes  that  characterize  and  transform  rural areas. Noting that patterns of spatially uneven development are often mistakenly labeled either urban  or  rural,  Newby  (1986)  and  Hoggart (1990) interpret rurality by looking for causes of rural change outside places traditionally labeled  as  rural.  Murray  and  Dunn  (1995)  explain patterns of rural development in the U.S. by  looking  at  macroscale  shifts  in  the  spatial distribution  of  population  and  the  changing political economy of agriculture.

A third phase in academic thinking emphasizes the significance of rurality as a social construct, rather than attempting to describe particular areas as being rural. Murdoch and Pratt (1993)  argue  that  rurality  can  be  best  understood by examining the ways it is constructed, negotiated,  and  experienced  by  agents  and structures. The contextual nature of rurality is emphasized in this phase through the examination  of  the  multiple  geographies  of  rurality within their particular social, moral, and cultural milieu and their place within the political economy (Cloke 1994). In light of a shift away from  attaching  rurality  to  particular  spaces, some scholars of the western U.S. emphasize Bealer's third attribute through evaluating the perceptions, images, and myths that give meaning to the term rural (c.f., Willits and Bealer 1967;  Browne  and  Reid  1990;  Willits  et  al. 1990; Jacob and Luloff 1995).

In the fourth and most current phase, the importance of drawing on the expressions and communication of ordinary people is recognized as critical in understanding what is rural. This perspective stresses that '. . . lay discourses are a key part of and force within the social world-they are sites of power manifestation. . . . They have to be  amongst  the  central  objects  of  academic studies  of  the  rural'  ( Jones  1995,  39).  Bryant (1995) provides another example in arguing that individual voices and local agency need to be explicitly  integrated  into  studies  about  the  processes that create rural or urban places.

While academic approaches to understanding  rurality  continue  to  evolve,  many  policymakers  and  researchers  remain  interested  in measures that can be readily applied to distinguish  urban  from  rural  areas  (c.f.  Downing 1991; Ormrod and Cole 1996). Such applica-

tions typically rely upon quantitative measures of population size to delineate boundaries between urban and rural places, and tend to be oriented toward urbanness or, by contrast, its absence. Perhaps the most widely used example of  an  applied  approach is the U.S. Bureau of Census measure that identifies an urban population as individuals living in a place with 2,500 or more residents and relegates the residual to the rural population. Another census measure, urbanized  areas,  includes  incorporated  places and adjacent densely-settled areas that together support a minimum population of 50,000, with no  corresponding  definition  of  rural  areas. Definitions  based  on  population  size  are  also used in models that draw upon a set of attributes or  variables  to  aggregate  areas  into  quantitatively similar groups. Such models create a taxonomy based on an analysis  of  selected  variables which, in effect, create a ranking for each area relative to others. The best known example of this type of approach is a project of the Economic  Research  Service  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  the  Agriculture  (ERS)  that  has been used by researchers and policymakers for rural education projects and land use policy at the county level (Elder 1992; LaGro 1994). The ERS method identifies nine county types based on differing population sizes and proximity to metropolitan areas (ERS 1989; Butler 1990). 4

Overall, the literature reveals little about the complex nature of the relationship between rurality and urbanness. Considered simultaneously,  urban  and  rural  are  frequently  employed to form a conceptual dualism, in which the distinction between the two provides meaning to both ( Jones 1995). In other words, urban is understood to be the opposite of rural. As  a  dualism,  urban  and  rural  are  commonly conceived as a continuum of places, processes or people, the most urban situated at one end of a scale and the most rural at the other end with relative degrees of rurality and urbanness between the two ends of the scale.

## Studying Western U.S. Counties and County Commissioners

As  sites  where  tensions  between  local  autonomy  and  state  control  are  manifest,  counties are places where the rural can be interpreted with respect to the urban. Counties subdivide states into separate areas of local government;

thus,  each  location  within  a  state  is  situated within  the  jurisdiction  of  only  one  county. Counties  contain  the  imprint  of  grassroots governance and community yet also extend the control of state governance (Grant and Nixon 1968; Murphy 1970).

There is no single county archetype. While common to all states, the county is not a standardized  unit.  Nationwide,  counties  range  in area  from  24  square  miles  to  over  20,000 square miles, and in population size from less than 250 to over nine million. In the western U.S. counties are particularly disparate, including  tightly-bounded,  high  population  density city-counties,  such  as  Denver,  Colorado,  as well  as  expansive  counties  with  unevenly  distributed populations, such as San Bernardino, California.

In the western United States there are, and always have been, many more counties without major  cities  than  counties  with  major  cities. Butler (1990) provides an indication of this by identifying  four  and  one-half  times  as  many nonmetropolitan counties as metropolitan counties in the western United States. Nevertheless, in recent decades the human population of the region  has  increased  exponentially,  becoming more concentrated in large and medium-sized cities with few residents in the expanses outside cities.

County commissioners, who in some states are referred to as county supervisors, act both as politically elected representatives of county government and as local residents. Commissioners possess  a  conscious  sense  of  the  attributes  of their counties relative to other places and integrate information about urban and rural conditions based upon their experiences.

In our study, we chose to use an urban-rural continuum as one tool to examine county commissioners'  perceptions  about  urbanness  and rurality.  We  recognize  legitimate  concerns about the validity and value of using a continuum, questions about the notion that urban is the  opposite  of  rural,  the  implied  continuity between  rural  and  urban,  and  the  failure  to identify causal mechanisms to distinguish between types of rural areas (Pahl 1966; Newby 1986; Hoggart 1990). It is clear, however, that much of the public, as well as many academics studying the western U.S., continue to identify particular places as either rural or urban, or as some variant in between, based on their own

interpretations (e.g., Spilton et al. 1981; ERS 1989; Butler 1990; Harris et al. 1993). Throughout most of the 20th century, the notion that rural and urban are dichotomous descriptors of place has remained popular (Bryan 1986).

Our  use  of  a  continuum  involved  asking those county commissioners who responded to a mail survey to rate the county they are elected to represent (their 'home county') on a scale from one (most rural) to ten (most urban). We use each respondent's rating along the continuum to represent his/her perception about the relative rurality or urbanness of his/her home county.

To further flesh out interpretations of rurality and urbanness, we included an open-ended question on the survey asking about the basis for  each  respondent's  assessment  of  his/her home county. These responses allow us to examine the criteria (or combination of criteria) different  individuals  use  in  identifying  rural and urban. Since individual perceptions about urban-ness  and  rurality  may  vary,  we  expect that  responses  from  different  commissioners, even those within the same county, may differ.

Additionally, we asked about the characteristics of urban counties in interviews with commissioners.  Interviewees  assessed  the  relative importance of five attributes in distinguishing urban  counties:  the  total  population  of  the county; the concentration of population within the  county;  increasing  growth  and  development; the presence of industry; and changes in the agricultural land base. 5  We also asked each interviewee to select the single most important attribute associated with urban counties and to identify additional attributes of urban counties.

We used a modified stratified random design to  sample  counties  for  our  mail  survey.  This method  provides  a  relatively  representative sample of adequate size and insures that highly populated  counties  are  not  inadvertently  excluded from the study. Within each state, counties  were  listed  alphabetically  and  a  random number generator identified counties to be included  in  our  sample.  The  sample  selection continued  until  the  cumulative  population  of selected  counties  reached  35%  of  the  overall state's population or until 14 counties were selected. If 14 counties were randomly selected, but  the  cumulative  population  of  counties in the  sample  remained  less  than  35%  of the state's  total,  we  included  the  county  with the largest remaining population in the state to the  sample.  Through  this  procedure,  we  selected a total of 139 counties for inclusion in the  study.  The  number  of  counties  per  state ranged from a low of six counties (Wyoming) to  a  high  of  15  counties  (Colorado,  Idaho, Montana,  New  Mexico,  Oregon,  Utah,  and Washington).  Thus,  our  overall sample  is slightly  biased  towards  counties  with  larger populations in an effort to include a full spectrum of county types.

Each commissioner within a county in the sample  was  mailed  a  self-administered  questionnaire.  T o  insure  a  high  response  rate  we used  Dillman's  (1978)  total  design  method which  calls  for  multiple  mailings.  The  total number  of  commissioners  in  the  sample  was 512, ranging from a high of 65 commissioners in New Mexico to a low of 29 commissioners in Arizona. Fifty-two percent (264) of the commissioners in the sample responded to our continuum  question,  an  above-average  response rate  for  mail  surveys,  with  response  rates  by state ranging from 41 to 63 percent. As shown in Figure 1, respondents were broadly distributed throughout the study area, with 120 of the 139  sample  counties  having  one  or  more  respondents. Of the 264 commissioners responding  to  the  survey,  229  provided  one  or  more

Figure  1: Counties  within  the  study  with  and without respondents.

<!-- image -->

comments to the open-ended question which requested  details  about  their  continuum  response.  We  also  gave  each  commissioner  in the study  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  a follow-up personal or phone interview. As a result, 51 of the survey respondents (or 19.3% of the  respondents  to  the  continuum  question) voluntarily agreed to be interviewed.

In the mail survey, 77% of the respondents are male and 85% are of European American descent. Both the mean and the median ages of respondents are 54 years. Eighty-five percent report having taken college courses, and many have  completed  college  degrees  or  graduate programs. About half (51%) characterize themselves as conservative in their political orientation, 41% as moderate, and only 6% as liberal.

We analyze our data in three phases. First, we examine attributes that commissioners use in  the  surveys  and  interviews  to  characterize their home counties as well as their perceptions about which factors make a county urban. Second, we compare commissioners' perceptions with census variables using regression analysis. And third, we apply cluster analysis techniques to  census  variables  to  examine  county-level patterns, followed by commissioners' interpretations of county patterns.

## Commissioners' Perceptions of  What is Urban and Rural

Throughout the interviews and surveys, commissioners use measures of population and the agricultural land base most frequently to distinguish  rural  from  urban  counties.  Threequarters  of  the  interviewees  identify  population concentration as a very important variable in characterizing urban  counties.  Approximately one-half of the interviewees rate total population, population growth, and recent decreases in agriculture as very important. Onethird of the interviewees rate the presence of industry as very important.

Other characteristics of urban counties mentioned in the interviews include: infrastructure development  (such  as  transportation,  water, and sewerage); type and scale of business activity (such as shopping centers and fast food restaurants); access to and/or dependence on urban amenities  and  services  (such  as  paramedics, sporting teams, cultural events, and entertain- ment); diversity and characteristics of the populace (such as the abundance of tourists or commuters);  the  quality  of  lifestyle  (less  personal contact and more hectic schedules); amount of federal involvement (such as the presence of a military base); type of social service problems; and the presence of air pollution.

When asked about the single most important variable, interviewed commissioners cite population concentration most frequently, whereas population growth and recent decreases in agriculture are least frequently cited (Fig. 2).

Table 1 compares the qualitative factors that characterize  commissioners'  home  counties with  their  quantitative  ratings.  Overall,  there are many more responses from those who assess their  home  counties  as  relatively  more  rural (closer to 1) than urban (closer to 10). 6 T otal population, population concentration, and the agricultural land base are frequent responses from respondents across a wide range of county types. Commissioners from counties self-identified as rural  mention  population  density  more  frequently, whereas commissioners in the middle of the scale cite population growth more frequently. Only a few respondents mention recent decreases in agriculture in explaining how they  rated  their  home  counties.  Commissioners rating their home counties as 2, 3, and 4 mention the widest variety of attributes about their  home  counties,  including  additional  attributes not related to measures of population or agriculture.

Figure 2: Commissioners'  perceptions of the single-most  important  factor  in  identifying  urban counties.

<!-- image -->

Table 1 Characteristics Associated with Urban/Rural Ratings of Home County (expressed as a proportion of the number of respondents)*

|   Urban/ Rural Rating |   No. † |   Total/ Overall Pop. (%) |   Pop. Concen- tration (%) |   Pop. Density (%) |   Pop. Growth (%) |   Ag. Land Base (%) |   Change in Ag. Land Base (%) | OtherWritten Comments (summarized in parentheses)                                                                                                                                    |
|-----------------------|---------|---------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|-------------------|---------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                     1 |      37 |                      40.5 |                       24.3 |               37.8 |               0   |                29.7 |                           0   | 8.1% (public lands)                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                     2 |      33 |                      24.2 |                       27.3 |               24.2 |               0   |                27.3 |                           0   | 36.4% (lifestyle, location, open space, public lands)                                                                                                                                |
|                     3 |      51 |                      25.5 |                       29.4 |               23.5 |               3.9 |                27.5 |                           2   | 37.3% (economy, education system, forests, isolation, values, lifestyle, location, land use, population diversity, public lands, retirees, social activities, tourism, water system) |
|                     4 |      27 |                      25.9 |                       59.3 |               14.8 |              11.1 |                14.8 |                           0   | 29.6% (infrastructure condition, developed downtown, education system location, transportation system)                                                                               |
|                     5 |      27 |                      22.2 |                       48.1 |                7.4 |              11.1 |                11.1 |                           7.4 | 22.2% (economic base, public lands, service availability, suburbanized)                                                                                                              |
|                     6 |      14 |                      21.4 |                       57.1 |                0   |              42.9 |                14.3 |                           7.1 | 21.4% (location, planning)                                                                                                                                                           |
|                     7 |      16 |                      18.8 |                       50   |               18.8 |              18.8 |                37.5 |                           0   | 25.0% (commuters, forests, transportation & communication links)                                                                                                                     |
|                     8 |       7 |                      28.6 |                       42.9 |                0   |              14.3 |                14.3 |                          14.3 | 28.6% (forests, municipal issues)                                                                                                                                                    |
|                     9 |       3 |                       0   |                       66.7 |               33.3 |               0   |                33.3 |                           0   | 0%                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|                    10 |      13 |                      46.2 |                        7.7 |               15.4 |               0   |                 7.7 |                           7.7 | 30.8% (metropolitanization)                                                                                                                                                          |

*Percentages may not add to 100% due to multiple responses from some respondents.

† Number of respondents with 1 or more comments.

## Relating Commissioners' Perceptions with Census Variables

We compared ratings of commissioners' home counties with census data using a standard multiple regression analysis (in SPSS 7.5). Our goal was to identify relationships between the commissioners' perceptions and more conventionally  used  quantitative  measures  of  urbanness and  rurality.  Each  commissioner's  rating  for his/her home county is the dependent variable and six variables derived from the U.S. Census and U.S. Census of Agriculture are independent variables. The variables were selected because quantitative measures of population and agricultural  land  base  are  generally  used  to characterize urbanness and rurality and, more particularly, these measures are frequently cited by commissioners in both survey and interview responses:

- total estimated population (1995);
- population density (total estimated population in 1995 divided by the county area);
- population  concentration  (a  computed variable that represents the relative amount of population dispersal or clustering within a county; population concentration for a

county  such  as  San  Francisco,  CA,  in which the entire population of the county was  in  a  large  city,  is  100,  whereas  a county with no Census Designated Places [CDPs]  with  populations  greater  than 2,499, such as Granite, MT with no small, medium, or large cities, has a value of 1); 7

- population  growth  or  decline  (1990  to 1995);
- proportion of land in farms or the agricultural land base (1992);
- change in agricultural land base (1987 to 1992).

Table  2  displays  correlations  between  variables, standardized regression coefficients ( 𝛃 ), significance of each variable, partial correlation coeffiecients, sample size (N), sample correlation  coefficient  (R),  its  square  (R 2 ),  and  adjusted  square.  The  regression  is  significant, F(6,249) = 32.47, p &lt; 0.001. The correlation matrix shown in T able 2 identifies no inflated relationships as all correlations between independent variables are less than 0.45. An evaluation of the independent variables does not suggest problems with multicollinearity. 8

These results indicate that 42.5% of the variance  in  commissioners'  assessments  of  their

Table 2 Multiple Regression of Census Variables and Commissioners' Perceptions of their Home Counties

| Variable     | Percep. Rating   | Pop. Conc.   | Total Pop.   | Pop. Density   | Ag. Change   | Ag. Land   |   Pop. Growth | 𝛃       |   P (Sign. level) | Partial Corr. Coeff.   |
|--------------|------------------|--------------|--------------|----------------|--------------|------------|---------------|---------|-------------------|------------------------|
| Pop. conc.   | 0.63             |              |              |                |              |            |               | 0.54    |             0     | 0.50                   |
| Total pop.   | 0.39             | 0.45         |              |                |              |            |               | 0.11    |             0.045 | 0.13                   |
| Pop. density | 0.34             | 0.43         | 0.20         |                |              |            |               | 0.065   |             0.23  | 0.076                  |
| Ag. change   | - 0.18           | - 0.22       | - 0.12       | 0.012          |              |            |               | - 0.027 |             0.58  | - 0.035                |
| Ag. land     | - 0.22           | - 0.067      | - 0.16       | - 0.15         | 0.16         |            |               | - 0.15  |             0.003 | - 0.19                 |
| Pop. growth  | 0.002            | - 0.013      | - 0.045      | - 0.14         | - 0.058      | - 0.20     |               | - 0.009 |             0.86  | - 0.011                |
| Mean         | 4.1              | 25.9         | 190,616      | 307            | - 1.3        | 38         |          12.2 |         |                   |                        |
| Stand. dev.  | 2.5              | 26.2         | 633,347      | 1639           | 4.7          | 31         |          10.2 |         |                   |                        |

N = 256; R = 0.66; R 2 = 0.44; Adjusted R 2 = 0.43.

home counties can be explained by the six variables.  Given  variability  in  human  judgement and limitations of the census variables, this is a relatively  high  correlation  coefficient.  Other attributes that were not gauged, such as those additional attributes listed in the previous section, may explain the remaining variance.

The regression analysis identifies population concentration and agricultural land base as statistically significant variables. T otal population is also significant, although at a slightly lower level  than  the  other  two  variables.  The  two other population variables, population density and population growth, as well as changes in agricultural land base, are not statistically significant predictors at the 0.05 level.

Population concentration is the variable that provides the most meaningful contribution to the prediction of commissioners' perceptions. The significance of this variable in explaining commissioners' ratings for their home counties is consistent with the previous analyses of their open-ended  responses  from  the  mail  survey. Taken together, the comments and regression analysis suggest that many commissioners consciously  identify  population  concentration  as the most important attribute in characterizing urbanness in the western states and that a large percentage of them apply this as a criteria in rating their home counties.

The agricultural land base, the proportion of county  lands  that  support  agriculture,  is  frequently cited by commissioners from a wide variety of county types as an explanation for the continuum  rating  of their  home  counties. While rurality and agriculture have a traditionally close yet contested association, the results of the regression analysis suggest that a number of commissioners in this study believe that ag- riculture remains a relevant factor in interpreting  what  is  rural  and  urban  in  the  western United States.

## Patterns from a Cluster Analysis of Census Variables

The forces shaping the western U.S. are neither isolated nor specific to the region. Mediating the effects of larger events and structures, however, are interactions between the region's peoples and geographies that establish the contexts within which counties in the western U.S. operate. Shapira and Leigh-Preston (1984) describe these contexts in this manner:

In a physical sense, the sheer geographical size of the region, the scarcity of water, the ranges of climate and topography, and the possibilities for agricultural  and  mineral  development  have  always influenced the character of development in the West. . . . The physical and natural resource characteristics of the West continue to provide the specific terrain within which contemporary changes  interact,  just  as  earlier  historical  and economic structures provide a context for current  economic  development.  However,  as  the West has become fully integrated into the national  and  international  economy,  the  leading factors  now  influencing  patterns  of  economic change and development in the region are less intraregional or regional-specific and more related  to  a  series  of  broader  developments  currently affecting the U.S. economy. (38-9)

The  resulting  unevenness  creates  patterns that are connected to how rurality and urbanness are interpreted. By using cluster analysis we attempt to identify groups of counties with similar attributes. Our goal is to explore how conventional quantitative indicators of urbanness and rurality can be used to interpret the

unevenness  of  counties  across  the  western United States. Cluster analysis has been used in a wide variety of applications, including other research  involving  county  classifications  and perceptual analyses (Miller 1976; Spilton et al. 1981; Harris et al. 1993; Dagel 1997). In this analysis, we use the same six census measures as in the regression analysis. 9

In order to standardize data for the cluster analysis, we use a 'z' transformation to establish the same scale of measurement among the variables. We use Ward's hierarchical clustering technique for combining clusters due to its smaller increase in the overall sum of squared within cluster distance (Aldenderfer and Blashfield 1984; Norusis 1990).

In the preliminary cluster analysis, extreme differences  are  apparent  between  the  bulk  of the  counties  and  three  specific  counties,  Los Angeles, CA, because of its exceptionally high total  population,  as  well  as  San  Francisco, CA and Denver, CO, both coterminous citycounties  with  extreme  values  for  population concentration and population density. As a result of these findings, the cluster analysis was rerun without these three counties and, similar to the initial analysis, two very small clusters, comprised of only two and four counties each, appear. Given these results, we chose to aggregate these six counties (Multnomah, OR; Salt Lake,  UT;  Maricopa,  AZ;  Clark,  NV;  King, WA; and Riverside, CA) along with the original three  urban  counties  (Los  Angeles,  CA;  San Francisco, CA; and Denver, CO) into a single group. Note that this initial group is not a distinct  cluster  determined  by  the  analysis  but rather an aggregate of different clusters that together  represent  the  largest  urban  centers  in the  study  area.  The  results  from  the  cluster analysis  point  to  extreme  differences  in  total populations, population densities, and population  concentrations  between  these  extremely urbanized  counties  and  other  counties  in  the study. This initial group is identified on Figure 3 as Largest Urban Centers.

A second group of counties from the cluster analysis, Growing Regional Hubs, includes 19 counties  in ten different states (all  except Washington).  Each  county  in  this  group  includes urban areas surrounded by extensive agricultural  lands.  Highly  concentrated  populations  and  moderate  growth  rates  (averaging about 12% for the five year period 1990-1995)

Figure 3: Results of the cluster analysis of census variables.

<!-- image -->

are characteristic of counties within this cluster. Because urban areas within these counties often serve as the focus of service, retail, and other  activities  for  surrounding  rural  areas, both within and outside the counties, we have labeled  them  Growing  Regional  Hubs  (e.g., Ada,  ID;  Missoula,  MT;  Washoe,  NV;  Lane, OR; and Laramie, WY).

High Growth Rural counties are identified as a third group in Figure 3. This cluster includes 15 counties in eight states that have relatively small populations (mean of 46,868 individuals) but are experiencing exceptionally high  rates  of  population  growth,  averaging 29% over the five  year  period  between  1990 and 1995. The rapid expansion of recreationbased industries and increasing population mobility have resulted in rapid population growth and  development  of  many  of  the  counties  in this cluster. Counties in this cluster are much more likely to have a major recreation destination than other clusters, for example national parks (e.g., Jefferson, WA and T eton, WY), ski areas (e.g.,  San  Miguel, CO and Eagle, CO), and water-based recreation (e.g., Mohave, AZ and Kootenai, ID). For other counties in this cluster, population growth seems to be linked

to activities of an increasingly mobile population, including: recent mining operations (e.g., Humboldt,  NV),  popularity  as  a  retirement destination  (e.g.,  Churchill,  NV),  and  longdistance suburban commuting (e.g., Sandoval, NM; Washington, UT; and Mason, WA).

With 75 counties scattered throughout the study area, the fourth cluster, Dispersed Rural, is the largest group and consequently includes a wide range of counties. In general, Dispersed Rural  counties  have  relatively  small  populations (an average of just under 30,000) and support a relatively large agricultural land base (on average nearly one-third of the land base is in farmland) which is slowly diminishing (on average a loss of 1.6% during the five year period from 1987 to 1992). Many of the counties in this cluster are located away from their state's major  urban  growth  areas.  This  cluster  includes counties in areas such as: eastern Washington, eastern Oregon, western Colorado, the Lower  Snake  River  Valley  of  Idaho,  eastern Nevada, southern New Mexico, and other less heavily populated areas.

We identify Stable Rural Agriculture as the smallest  population  group.  This  cluster  contains  21  counties  in  eight  states  with  small populations  (averaging  just  over  20,000)  and abundant  farmland  (averaging  88%).  Unique among the clusters are the small increases in the agricultural land base (averaging 2.9% during the five year period from 1987 to 1992) for this group. Counties in this cluster most closely fit the traditional image of rurality with a dispersed population supported by an agricultural land base and related endeavors.

## Commissioners' Interpretation of Patterns of Rurality and Urbanness

Patterns of rurality and urbanness are also reflected in the ways that commissioners define their  places.  Just  as  with  the  county  patterns identified in the cluster analysis, commissioners' interpretations of rural and urban provide insights into the meaning of rurality and urbanness.  Comments  are  drawn  from  survey  responses to the open-ended question that asked for an explanation for rating their home county along the continuum.

Numerous  commissioners  emphasize  that places within a county are heterogeneous, since they often include highly concentrated popula- tion center(s) along with agricultural, forested, or  other  open  spaces  containing  few  people. Comments  from  commissioners  in  counties identified  by  the  cluster  analysis  as  Largest Urban Centers and Growing Regional Hubs (in the states of Washington, Arizona, New Mexico, and Oregon, respectively) testify to the perception of unevenness within their home counties: 10

The western 1/3 of our county is an urban metropolitan  area  containing  85%  of  the  county's 1.6  million  people.  The  eastern  2/3  of  our county  is  rural  and  resource  land  (agriculture and timber).

Large  county  with  one  major  city  (approx. 60,000); rest is agriculture and government held land.

Although  the  major  population  base  is  urban, the  other  communities  and  preponderance  of the land mass are rural.

One large metropolitan center in the middle of a county  the  size  of  Connecticut,  mostly  rural otherwise.

Other  commissioners  commented  on  the presence of agriculture, or by contrast its absence,  in  their  interpretation  of  their  home counties as rural or urban. These responses are from commissioners from Nevada, California, Colorado, and Montana respectively:

Very little  agriculture  and  without  agriculture, can't be rural. Most are nonirrigable lands and can't support agricultural base.

Approximately  90%  of  county  is  unincorporated. Agriculture is still major to our economy.

We  have  lost  most  of  our  agriculture  on  the western end of the county and are beginning to lose agricultural land and lifestyle elsewhere in county.

We have a small  county,  with  farm  and  ranch families.

Increasing population growth is a key factor in distinguishing  urban  from  rural  counties  for many  of  the  study's  respondents.  These  responses are from commissioners in Growing Regional Hubs and High Growth Rural counties in California, Colorado, and Utah respectively:

Since population is increasing, we are close to being an urban county, though we have extensive rural areas.

100% rural in 1980, growing currently at 10% per year. [We are] rural residential.

Part rural, part urban, but heading toward more urban. Fastest growing county in state.

Several respondents, particularly from counties identified in the cluster analysis as  High Growth Rural, noted the significance of recreational opportunities and public lands, such as this respondent from Wyoming: 'Our county is 97% federally held, 3% private, however, we have almost 3 million visitors per year.'

Infrastructure  development  and  access  to services,  or  by  contrast  their  absence,  was noted  by  several  of  the  commissioners  from counties  identified  in  the  cluster  analysis  as Dispersed Rural and Stable Rural Agriculture, as  in  these  comments from commissioners in Colorado, Nevada, and Montana:

Although rural, this county provides a major urban transportation corridor.

[We are] located on a major highway; have developed downtown area, paved streets but limited sidewalk, curb and gutter. K-12 school with community college availability. [We have] developed  but  decaying  infrastructure.  Resources available for growth.

[We are] 50 miles from the nearest hospital, no bus, no train passenger service.

## Conclusions

It is our hope that this study will stimulate debate about the nature of what is urban and what is  rural  in  the  western  U.S.  and  how  these meanings are attached to the identities of counties. Understandings about rurality and urbanness seem to be incorporated into the life experiences of some commissioners. Constructs of rural and urban create axes along which they make decisions, as noted in the interviews of commissioners from Oregon and Nevada:

Important in my decision to run for office was to create  a  balance  between  agricultural  and  municipal land base.

I see a real schism being created between rural and urban. . . .

Our  study  explores  county  commissioners' interpretations about the character of rurality and urbanness and, as such, it is similar to the focus  in  Cloke  and  Thrift's  (1994)  fourth  research phase. While our mail survey is extensive, with 264 commissioners from 11 western states and interviews with 51 commissioners, it by no means exhaustively taps the wide range of interpretations about what urban and rural mean  in  the  western  U.S.  today.  Rather,  we chose  to  address  individual  variation  among elected local politicians with the understanding that county commissioners have no monopoly on characterizing urbanness and rurality.

We also incorporate into this study quantitative  census  measures  because  they  are  often perceived to be legitimate indicators of urbanness and rurality. At one level, measures of population and agriculture serve to delineate concrete  boundaries  between  rural  and  urban places.  At  another  level,  these  measures  may represent and reproduce notions of rurality and urbanness  as  these  social  constructs  change with time, place, and circumstance. In this study we found that the attribute most consistently identified  by  commissioners with the distinction  between  urban  and  rural  is  population concentration. Population concentration is identified  most  frequently  by  interviewees  as the single most important variable in characterizing  an  urban  county  and  has  the  most meaningful  contribution  to  predicting  commissioners' perceptions of their home counties in the regression analysis. 11

Both our cluster analysis and commissioners' interpretations of county patterns point to patterns  of  unevenness  both  between  and  within counties that defy a simple dichotomous interpretation  of  urbanness  and  rurality.  While  a county with a stable agricultural base may seem the rural opposite of a rapidly growing megatropolis,  our  cluster  analysis  reveals  that  many western U.S. counties contain a mix of elements that  compose  at  least  three  other  distinctive groups. Furthermore, commissioners' comments about their home counties underscore not only the  significance  of  population  concentration, population growth, and agriculture, in interpreting what is urban and rural but also the significance  of  other  attributes,  such  as  recreational  opportunities,  public  land  base,  infrastructure development, and access to services. /H17039

## Notes

1 We identify the western United States as eleven Pacific and Mountain area states: Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming, following Shapira and Leigh-Preston (1984) and  Archer and Lonsdale (1997).

2 While most of the geographers and other social scientists mentioned in this section are from England or the United States, it is notable that theoretical

- and empirical discussions about the meaning of rurality extended to sociologists and anthropologists in Mexico (see Peréz Prado 1993).
- 3 Cloke and Thrift (1994) suggest that these phases are progressively ordered, although not in a strictly linear  fashion  because  earlier  phases  continue  to have some currency.
- 4 Other examples of quantitative models include Spilton et al. (1981), who use 131 variables to come up with  eight  socioeconomic  factors  and  24  county clusters in their analysis of counties in five western U.S. states, and Harris et al. (1993) who use various census variables to identify clusters of rural counties within Nevada.
- 5 These five attributes came from frequent responses to the open-ended survey question.
- 6 Fifty-three percent of the comments on the openended  survey  question  are  from  those  who  rated their  home  counties  as  relatively  rural  in  the  1-3 range; 30% from those who rated their home counties  as  moderate in the 4-6 range; and 17% from those who rated their home counties as relatively urban.
- 7 The computation of population concentration relies upon 1994 U.S. Census estimates of population for  Census  Designated  Places  (CDPs)  within  the sample  counties.  The  computations  are  made  by separately  aggregating  all  CDPs  from  small  cities with populations of 2,500 to 24,999 ( 𝚺 S), aggregating all CDPs from medium cities with populations of  25,000  to  49,999  ( 𝚺 M),  and  aggregating  all CDPs from large cities with populations of 50,000 or greater ( 𝚺 L). The aggregate of small city populations is weighted by a factor of one-third to represent  their  relatively  lower  level  of  concentration; the  aggregate  of  all  medium  city  populations  is weighted  by  a  factor  of  two-thirds  to  represent  a medium level of population concentration; and the aggregate of all large city populations is weighted by a  factor  of  one  to  represent  their  greater  level  of concentration.  The  three  weighted  variables  are then summed and divided by the total population of the county (Cp) and multiplied by 100 to arrive at the  population  concentration  for  the  county,  as shown:

PC = [(0.333 𝚺 S + 0.667 𝚺 M + 𝚺 L) / Cp] × 100

We use two alternative weightings to test the sensitivity of this variable. In alternative A, the weightings are changed to 0.25 for small cities, 0.5 for medium cities, and 1.0 for large cities. In alternative B, the weightings are changed to 0.13 for small cities, 0.38 for medium cities, and 1.0 for large cities. After re-running the regression analysis under the alternative scenarios for each county and finding similar results to the original, we conclude that this variable is  not  extremely  sensitive  to  a  modification  of weighting and chose to use the original weighting as shown in the formula above.

- 8 The tolerance ( &gt; 0.64) and variable inflation factor ( &lt; 1.6) are well within acceptable levels. Several independent variables are found to be non-normally
- distributed (total population, population concentration, population density, and agricultural land base). Standardized residuals for the dependent variable, however, are normally distributed.
- 9 Given different analytical objectives, it is not necessary to eliminate census variables based upon their relative significance in the regression analysis. The correspondence  between  commissioners'  perceptions and census variables is sought in the regression analysis.  By  contrast,  the  objective  in  the  cluster analysis  is  to  explore  spatial  patterns  of  similarity and dissimilarity using census variables.
- 10 Note  that  the  actual  names  of  counties  in  these quotes  has  been  changed  to  'our  county'  or  'my county' to protect the anonymity of the respondents. 11 The  computation  and  formulation  of  population concentration  in  this  study  should  be  considered preliminary and we recommend further research on this variable as well as on the relationship between agricultural land base and other land uses, such as public open spaces, forests, and range lands, in characterizing  urbanness  and  rurality.  There  are  a number  of  possibilities  for  measuring  population concentration or its opposite, population dispersal, including: the relative amount of incorporated areas within a county; the number of cities and their respective  size  relative  to  the  county's  total  population; the population within cities proportionate to those outside of cities; the absolute number of people  living  in  cities;  the  distribution,  number,  and size of cities; the percentage of a county's area that is within urban growth boundaries; or the clustering or  distribution  pattern  of  households  throughout a county.

## Literature Cited

Aldenderfer, Mark S., and Roger K. Blashfield. 1984. Cluster Analysis. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.

Andranovich,  Gregory  D.,  and  Gerry  Riposa.  1993. Doing  Urban  Research. Applied  Social  Research Methods Series, vol. 33. London: Sage Publications.

- Appalachia Educational Laboratory Inc. 1997. Rural Educational Policy. http://aelliot.ael.org:80/~eric/ pulling/nature.html.
- Archer,  J.  Clark,  and  Richard  E.  Lonsdale.  1997. Geographical aspects of U.S. farmland values and changes during the 1978-1992 period. Journal of Rural Studies 13(4):399-413.
- Bealer, Robert C., Fern K. Willits, and William P . Kuvlesky.  1965.  The  meaning  of  'rurality'  in American society:  Some  implications  of  alternative definitions. Rural Sociology 30(3):255-66.
- Bellamy,  Liz,  K.D.M.  Snell,  and  T om  Williamson. 1990.  Defining  the  rural. Rural  History 1(2): 143-5.
- Bradshaw, T ed K. 1993. Multicommunity networks: A rural transition. Annals of the AAPSS 529:164-75.

- Brown, Anthony. 1980. T echnical assistance to rural communities: Stopgap or capacity building? Public Administration Review 40:18-23.
- Browne, William P., and J. Norman Reid. 1990. Misconceptions,  institutional  impediments,  and  the problems of rural governments. Public Administration Quarterly 14:265-84.
- Bryan, Frank. 1986. Defining rural: Returning to our roots. In Rural Public Administration: Problems and Prospects ,  ed.  Jim  Seroka,  9-20.  Westport,  CO: Greenwood Press.
- Bryant, Christopher R. 1995. The role of local actors in transforming the urban fringe. Journal of Rural Studies 11(3):255-67.
- Butler,  Margaret  A.  1990. Rural-Urban  Continuum Codes for Metro and Non-metro Counties. Staff Report No. 9028, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department  of  Agriculture,  Washington  DC: Government Printing Office.
- Cloke, Paul. 1994. (En)culturing political economy: A life in the day of a 'rural geographer.' In Writing the Rural: Five Cultural Geographies , eds. P . Cloke, M. Doel, D. Matless, D. Phillips, and N. Thrift, 149-90. London: Paul Chapman Publishing.
- Cloke, Paul, and Nigel Thrift. 1994. Introduction: Refiguring the 'rural.' In Writing the Rural: Five Cultural  Geographies eds.  P .  Cloke,  M.  Doel,  D. Matless, D. Phillips, and N. Thrift, 1-5. London: Paul Chapman Publishing.
- Criminal  Justice  Institute.  1997.  Defining  Small Non-Urban and Rural Law Enforcement Agencies. http://www.cji.net/80/DEFSM.htm.
- Dagel, Kenneth C. 1997. Defining drought in marginal  areas:  The  role  of  perception. Professional Geographer 49(2):192-202.
- Daniels, Thomas L., and David E. Reed. 1988. Agricultural zoning in a metropolitan county: An evaluation of the Black Hawk County, Iowa program. Landscape and Urban Planning 16:303-10.
- Dillman, D.A. 1978. Mail and Telephone Surveys: The Total Design Method. New York: John Wiley.
- Downing, R.G. 1991. Urban County Fiscal Stress: A Survey of Public Officials Perceptions and Government  Experiences. Urban  Affairs Quarterly 27(2):314-25.
- Elder, William L. 1992. The use of census geography and county typologies in the construction of classification  systems  for  rural  schools  and  districts. Journal of Research in Rural Education 8(3):47-68.
- ERS  (U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  Economic Research Service). 1989. Revised County Typology.  http://www.econ.ag.gov/epubs/other.typolog/ TYP89.TXT.
- Flora, Cornelia B., Jan L. Flora, Jacqueline D. Spears, and Louis E. Swanson. 1992. Rural Communities: Legacy and Change. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Gamradt,  Jan  A.,  and  Patricia  G.  Avery.  1992. County  kids,  city  kids:  Community  context  and
- geopolitical  identity. Journal  of  Research  in  Rural Education 8(1):61-74.
- Grant, Daniel R., and H.C. Nixon. 1968. State and Local  Government  in  America. Boston:  Allyn  and Bacon Inc.
- Harris, Thomas W., Shawn W. Stoddard, and James C. Bezdek. 1993. Application of fuzzy-set clustering for regional typologies. Growth and Change 24(2): 155-65.
- Hoggart, Keith. 1990. Let's do away with rural. Journal of Rural Studies 6(3):245-57.
- Jacob, Steve, and A.E. Luloff. 1995. Exploring the meaning of rural through cognitive maps. Rural Sociology 60(2):260-73.
- Jones, Owain. 1995. Lay discourses of the rural: Developments  and  implications  for  rural  studies. Journal of Rural Studies 11(1):35-49.
- LaGro, James A.,  Jr.  1994.  Population  growth  beyond the urban fringe: Implications for rural land use policy. Landscape and Urban Planning 28:14358.
- Miller,  Arnold  R.  1976.  A  taxonomy  of  Nebraska economies: An application of the optimization approach to identifying a system of regions. Journal of Regional Science 16:225-36.
- Murdoch, Jonathan, and Andy C. Pratt. 1993. Rural studies: Modernism, postmodernism and the 'post-rural.' Journal of Rural Studies 9(4):411-27.
- Murphy, Thomas P. 1970. Metropolitics and the Urban County. Washington  DC:  Washington  National Press Inc.
- Murray, Michael, and Larry Dunn. 1995. Capacity building  for  rural  development  in  the  United States. Journal of Rural Studies 11(1):89-97.
- Newby,  Howard.  1986.  Locality  and  rurality:  Restructuring of rural social relations. Regional Studies 20:209-15.
- Norusis, Marija J. 1990. SPSS/PC + Advanced Statistics 4.0: Cluster Analysis. Chicago: SPSS.
- Ormrod, Richard K., and David B. Cole. 1996. T olerance and rejection: The vote on Colorado's amendment two. Professional Geographer 48(1):14-27.
- Pahl, R.E. 1966. The rural-urban continuum. Sociologia Ruralis 6:299-328.
- Peréz Prado, Luz N. 1993. Introducción. Lo rural y la ruralidad: Algunas reflexiones teórico-metodólogicas. Relaciones:  Estudios  de  Historia  y  Sociedad 54:5-20.
- Rural Public Health Information System. 1997. Integrated  Management  Lab  at  the  Blackland  Research Center. http://brcsun15.tamu.edu:8000/ html/definitions.html.
- Shapira,  Philip,  and  Nancy  Leigh-Preston.  1984. Urban  and  rural  development  in  the  western United  States:  Emerging  conflicts  and  planning issues. Journal of Architecture and Planning Research 1:37-55.
- Slack, James D. 1990. Information, training, and as-

- sistance  needs  of  municipal  governments. Public Administration Review 50(4):450-55.
- Spilton,  Doreen,  Daniel  Solomon,  and  Arthur  J. Kendall. 1981. Developing an empirical socioeconomic typology of counties in five western states. Socio-Economic Planning and Science 15:175-90.
- Willits,  Fern  K.,  and  Robert  C.  Bealer.  1967.  An evaluation of a composite definition of 'rurality.' Rural Sociology 32(2):165-77.
- Willits, Fern K., Robert C. Bealer, and Vincent L. Timbers. 1990. Popular images of 'rurality': Data from a Pennsylvania survey. Rural Sociology 55(4): 559-78.
- Wojan, Timothy R., and Glen C. Pulver. 1995. Location  patterns  of  high  growth  industries  in  rural counties. Growth and Change 26(1):3.

KATE A. BERRY is an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557. E-mail: kberry@scs.unr.edu. Her research interests include geographic studies of water, American Indians, and lawmaking in the western United States and throughout the western Pacific Rim.

NANCY L. MARKEE is an Associate Professor in the Department of Environmental and Resource Sciences at the University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557. E-mail:  nlmarkee@unr.edu.  Her  research  interests include human dimensions of environmental issues, particularly as they impact policy.

NANCI FOWLER is a graduate student in the Department of Environmental and Resource Sciences at the University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557. E-mail: JFOWLER-RENO@scs.unr.edu.  Her  research  interests  include  environmental  impacts  of  intense agricultural practices and  alternative agricultural methods in the western United States.

GARY  R.  GIEWAT  is  a  research  assistant  at  the Grant Sawyer Center for Justice Studies and a Ph.D. candidate in the Program for Social Psychology at the University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557. E-mail: ggiewat@scs.unr.edu. His research interests include social pyschology and the law, content analysis, and research methodology.