<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Happy to Be Home: Place-Based Attachments, Family Ties, and Mobility among Rural Stayers

Cheryl E. Morse &amp; Jill Mudgett

To cite this article: Cheryl E. Morse &amp; Jill Mudgett (2017): Happy to Be Home: Place-Based Attachments, Family Ties, and Mobility among Rural Stayers, The Professional Geographer, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2017.1365309

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2017.1365309

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 09 Oct 2017.

Submit your article to this journal C

Article views: 17

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

Full Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rtpg20

<!-- image -->

## Happy to Be Home: Place-Based Attachments, Family Ties, and Mobility among Rural Stayers

Cheryl E. Morse

University of Vermont

Jill Mudgett

Community College of Vermont

Migration research has traditionally centered on tracing movement; however, the experience of staying in place has begun to capture scholarly attention. Drawing on data from an online residential decision-making survey, this article focuses speci fi cally on the reasons that contented Vermonters cite for remaining in their home state. A statistical analysis of responses reveals the dominance of place-based factors and family ties in stayers ' residential decision making. Contented stayers highly value landscape and community, as well as living near family. Biographical sketches of individual respondents show the emotional dimensions of choosing to stay, as well as the diverse forms of mobility that contented stayers exercise to remain happy at home. In its focus on stayers, this research situates itself within new geographic inquiries into place attachment and studies of ' immobile ' populations. Key Words: emotion, migration, mobility, place attachment, stayers.

迁 徙 研 究 传 统 上 聚 焦 于 追 溯 移 动 ; 但 滞 留 一 地 的 经 验 亦 逐 渐 受 到 学 术 关 注 。 本 文 运 用 互 联 网 上 有 关 居 住 决 策 的 调 查 , 特 别 聚 焦 对 于 居 住 在 佛 蒙 特 州 感 到 满 意 的 居 民 举 出决 定 留 在 该 州 的 原 因 。 对 于 调 查 回 应 进 行 的 统 计 分 析 显 示 , 地 方 因 素 与 家 庭 连 带 , 主 宰 了 滞 留 者 的 居 住 决 定 。 满 意 的 滞 留 者 , 高 度 重 视 地 景 与 社 区 , 以 及 邻 近 亲人 而 居 。 受 调 者 的 个人 特 徵 描 绘 , 显 示 出 选 择 留 下 的 情 绪 面 向 , 以 及 满 意 的 滞 留 者 为 使 自 身 在 家 感 到 满 足 所 从事 的 多 样 移 动 形式 。 本 研 究 透 过 聚 焦 滞 留 者 , 将 自 身 安 置 于 有 关 地 方 依 附 以 及 ' 不 移 动 的 ' 人 口 的 研 究 之 崭 新 地 理 探 问 之中 。 关 键 词 : 情 绪 , 迁 徙 , 移 动 , 地 方 依 附 , 滞 留 者 。

La investigaci  on de migraciones tradicionalmente se ha concentrado en trazar el movimiento; sin embargo, la experiencia de permanecer en el lugar ha empezado a atraer la atenci  on de los eruditos. Con base en datos de un estudio en red sobre toma de decisiones relacionadas con residencia, este artículo se enfoca especí fi camente en las razones que citan moradores satisfechos de Vermont para permanecer en su estado de residencia. Un an  alisis estadístico de las respuestas revela el predominio de factores basados en lugar y lazos familiares como determinantes de la decisi  on residencial de quienes permanecen. Los residentes satisfechos valoran altamente el paisaje y la comunidad, lo mismo que el vivir cerca de la familia. Los esquemas biogr  a fi cos de los participantes individuales muestran las dimensiones emocionales asociadas a la decisi  on de permanecer, lo mismo que las diversas formas de movilidad que residentes satisfechos efect  uan para mantenerse felices en casa. Con su atenci  on focalizada en quienes reh  usan moverse, esta investigaci  on se coloca a sí misma dentro de las nuevas pesquisas geogr  a fi cas relacionadas con el apego al lugar y el estudio de poblaciones ' inm  oviles. ' Palabras clave: emoci  on, migraci  on, movilidad, apego al lugar, residentes resistentes a migrar.

' U nambitious loser with happy, ful fi lling life still lives in hometown, ' the satirical newspaper The Onion announced in a headline a few years ago ( ' Unambitious Loser ' 2013). The fi ctional story is about Mike, a married-with-kids insurance agent who stayed in rural Maine rather than pursuing ' a more prestigious and soul-crushing career path in a real city. ' Mike enjoys a healthy work -life balance and maintains a close relationship with his parents. Mike ' s classmate, a woman who moved away, pities Mike ' s contentment in staying. We found this piece both humorous and intriguing, as our research on residential decision making with people from nearby Vermont revealed a group of stayers who, similar to the fi ctional Mike, were happy at home. This article focuses on contented stayers to learn what they value about their home place, why they decided to remain, and what they wish for in their futures.

This inquiry into contented stayers joins a statistical analysis of responses to an online survey on residential decision making with biographical sketches of individual respondents. The method drew out the entanglement of multiple factors in any individual ' s decision to remain as well as the emotional dimensions of staying. The fi ndings challenge the notion that economic factors dominate residential decision making and the migration literature ' s characterization of stayers as ' immobile. ' The contented stayers in this study identi fi ed three dominant place-based reasons for remaining in Vermont and exercised diverse forms of mobility. In keeping with much of the research on the importance of family ties on migration, the stayers in this study highly

<!-- image -->

value living near family, but the nature of family ties is complex. In its focus on rural stayers, this exploratory research situates itself within new inquiries into place attachment and studies of mobility.

## Residential Decision Making in Migration Studies

Migration research has primarily focused on understanding why people move. The broad assumption held by migration experts in previous decades had been that people move for mainly economic reasons (Halfacree and Boyle 1993; Cooke 2003). Much of the early work debated whether migration fl ows were best understood as the cumulative decisions of rational individuals weighing the costs and bene fi ts of moving (as in the cost -bene fi t model and the human capital theory) or as the outcome of socioeconomic structures exerting in fl uences on populations (Massey 1990). More recently, understandings of reasons for moves have diversi fi ed to include noneconomic factors and attend to differences according to ethnicity, place attachment, age, gender, family ties, and a host of other factors (e.g., see Foulkes and Newbold 2000; Gustafson 2001; Nelson and Sewall 2003; Bjarnason and Thorlindsson 2006; Silvey 2006; Cooke et al. 2009; Clark and Maas 2015). Migration research has also diversi fi ed with a focus on the emotional dimensions of moving (McCollum 1990; Conradson and McKay 2007; Baldassar 2015; Boccagni and Baldassar 2015; Halfacree and Merriman 2015).

By contrast, there has been little research on the experiences and motivations associated with the decision to stay home (Barcus and Werner 2017; Chatterji 2017). Some of the insights on staying come from family migration research, especially research on the gender role theory, which posits that men and women make moving decisions from different social, familial, and career positions (McCollum 1990; Cooke 2003, 2008). The concept of the ' tied stayer, ' de fi ned as ' someone who would migrate if it were not for a partner who prevents the move, ' has informed research on the relational aspects of staying (Mulder and Malmberg 2014, 2195). This work has reinforced the argument that few people are detached from ties such that they make migration decisions solely based on career or economic factors. For example, Mulder and Malmberg ' s (2014) research in Sweden showed that local ties such as work, the presence of family and social connections, and lower educational attainment make people less mobile. A study conducted in a metropolitan area of Spain found that family ties, community connections, and satisfaction with the neighborhood were associated with immobility (Clark, Duque-Calvache, and Palomares-Linares 2017). Elderly stayers in Sweden described the importance of their homes as one of many reasons for staying (Hjalm 2014). These studies suggest that home places might have features that entice people to stay; in other words, the decision to remain could rest on the positive attributes of one ' s home place.

Place attachment, especially attachment to outdoor environments, is underexamined in the migration literature (Barcus and Brunn 2009; Morse and Mudgett 2017). Research has shown, however, that some rural residents feel a strong sense of belonging to outdoor places, property, and landscapes, which suggests that place attachment could in fl uence residential decision making (Rowles 1983; Twigger-Ross and Uzzell 1996; Wiborg 2004; Cross et al. 2011; Morse et al. 2014; R  oin 2015). Scholarship speci fi cally on decisions to stay in rural settings is sparse; rural migration researchers have tended to focus on outmigration, return migration, and inmigration (e.g., Stockdale 2004; Halfacree 2012; von Reichert, Cromartie, and Arthun 2014). There is a clear need for more work on residential decision making among rural stayers, especially inquiries that open up previously unexamined reasons for remaining.

## Mobility, Rurality, and Staying

Stayers have been variously de fi ned as people who have remained in their original neighborhood, city, county, state, and country (Barcus and Brunn 2009; Klimt 2014; Fiore et al. 2015; Barcus and Werner 2017; Clark, Duque-Calvache, and Palomares-Linares 2017). Such scalar diversity not only complicates comparisons between case studies but also suggests that staying is not the same as immobility. In migration studies, the words mobility and moving are often used interchangeably, and not moving has been de fi ned as immobility (Barcus and Brunn 2009). Mobility studies, which consider movement and lack of movement (as in immobility, stillness, or mooring), however, suggest that mobility is a de fi ning element of the modern condition, implying that regardless of their geographic location, many people exercise mobility (Sheller and Urry 2006; Adey 2010; Cresswell and Merriman 2011; Cresswell 2012). Con fl ating immobility with staying might hide stayers ' movements and their purposeful residential decision-making processes. Drawing on Hanson (2005), Coulter, van Ham, and Findlay (2016) observed that the decision to stay in place can be regarded ' as an active process rather than an absence of movement ' (359). Cooke (2011) added another reason for U.S. migration scholars to turn their attention to immobility: Rates of internal migration have slowed. He advised that research questions framed around immobility as a choice might be more relevant to contemporary conditions.

Rural places have long been imagined as spaces of immobility, characterized by slowness and tradition (Williams 1973). As Creed and Ching (1997) pointed out, people who remain in rural areas are imagined as rustics, whereas urban dwellers are sophisticates. Nowhere are these ideas more pronounced than in the narratives of rural youth who feel compelled to

migrate to achieve economic, personal, or educational goals (Jamieson 2000; Ní Laoire 2000; Corbett 2007; Geller 2015; Farrugia 2016). Research has begun to upend associations of rural places with sociospatial fi xity. Increasingly, rural areas are recognized as globalized places (Woods 2007) with spaces that are shaped by various mobile practices (Milbourne and Kitchen 2014). In research conducted in places as diverse as Appalachia and Mongolia, Barcus and her colleagues have identi fi ed typologies of rural residents de fi ned by different forms of mobility (Barcus and Brunn 2009; Barcus and Werner 2017). In other words, some versions of rural staying involved moving.

## Joining Structural and Biographical Approaches

Migration scholars have been calling for the inclusion of multiple methods and the joining of structural analyses of large data sets with the in-depth insights offered by qualitative research for some time (Halfacree and Boyle 1993; Findlay and Li 1999; Graham 1999; McKendrick 1999). Although the methods to study migration have proliferated in creative ways, studies that gather and analyze quantitative and qualitative information within a single data set are rare. The research we describe in this article attempts to move from an analysis of patterns visible through statistical analysis of a population to individual life experiences analyzed using the biographical approach.

Halfacree and Boyle (1993) introduced the ' biographical approach ' in 1993, in part to challenge the behaviorist and economic-oriented understandings of migration that dominated at the time. They acknowledged that the decision to move might be entangled with multiple factors and called for ' in-depth investigation of the biographies of migrants ' (343). At the same time, they underscored the importance of macrolevel approaches, suggesting that both qualitative case studies and statistical analyses of large data sets have key roles to play in migration research. By joining a statistical analysis of survey data with biographical sketches, this article aims to uncover the broad reasons that contented stayers offer for staying and to investigate their interconnections and workings by considering individuals ' experiences as delivered in their own words.

## Vermont's Outmigration Problem

The state of Vermont is small as de fi ned by areal size, overall population, and the number of towns with low populations. Vermont ' s population of approximately 625,000 is older, whiter, and more highly educated than the national averages (U.S. Census Bureau 2017b, 2017c). 1 Chittenden County is home to one in four Vermonters and includes Burlington, Vermont ' s largest city with 42,417 residents (U.S. Census Bureau 2017c). It is a growing urban center that houses several higher education institutions, the state ' s hospital, as well as employers in the technology, service, and manufacturing fi elds. Chittenden County residents enjoy higher income levels and have higher educational attainment than those in other parts of the state. There are rural -urban distinctions within the county, though, as the towns located on the periphery have populations with fewer than 2,500 residents. These communities in many ways are more representative of the state ' s general population. The majority of Vermont ' s population is distributed in nonmetropolitan, or rural communities, making Vermont the second most rural state, behind Maine (U.S. Census 2017d).

Vermont history has been characterized by multiple periods of outmigration, and Vermont appears to be experiencing one now (Stilwell 1937; Flaherty 2006). It is estimated that Vermont lost roughly 1,000 residents between 2010 and 2016 (U.S. Census Bureau 2017a). Contemporary outmigration has caused alarm among state leaders, who have blamed it on economic and employment conditions in the state (Geller, Marineau, and Watts 2015). The Vermont Roots Migration Project was developed to address the need for contemporary empirical research on reasons for leaving, as well as the factors that cause people to stay and return.

## Methods and Limitations

The Vermont Roots Migration Survey was designed to capture the residential narratives of people who had spent at least a portion of their growing-up years in Vermont. Intended to serve as an exploration of residential decision-making factors, the online anonymous survey gathered personal information such as gender, educational attainment, and occupation and asked different questions of stayer, leaver, and returnee respondents. For example, stayers were presented with a list of reasons for staying in Vermont from which they could select all that applied. An ' other ' category with an adjacent text box was included. Each respondent was asked to explain his or her residential choice in narrative form. The aim in offering multiple unranked factors and open text responses was to maintain an openness to reasons for staying that the researchers could not anticipate, to consider the relationships among factors, and to hear respondents ' stories told in their own voices. The survey had approval from the University of Vermont Institutional Review Board.

Five researchers participated in the original phase of the study. Four had terminal degrees and were teaching in higher education institutions in Vermont. One was an undergraduate research assistant. Each had graduated from a different public high school in Vermont between the years 1985 and 2008. 2 Our collective social media networks included people who remained in Vermont or moved elsewhere, as well as those who went on to higher education and fellow

alumni who went directly into the workforce following high school. Each researcher maintained ties with former high school classmates through Facebook. The group decided to distribute the survey by posting to their Facebook accounts to access a wide cross section of Vermonters and former Vermonters. Respondents were invited to pass the link on to others.

The only criterion for fi lling out the survey was that respondents had to have attended a Vermont secondary school for at least a portion of their high school years. 3 It was not necessary to have graduated. The survey was available for three weeks in March and April 2014. Seventy- fi ve responses were anticipated. A total of 3,692 fully completed responses were collected. We have no explanation for the high response rate, but it was clear that the survey ' went viral ' through networks of connections between Vermonters and former Vermonters. With the high rate of responses, a primarily qualitative study yielded a quantitative data set that could be statistically analyzed (see Morse 2015).

Respondents to the survey came from every county in Vermont, as well as from all regions of the United States, Canada, and other countries. A very high percentage of the respondents to this survey self-identifi ed as white (95.8 percent), closely matching the percentage of Vermonters who identi fi ed as white in the most recent U.S. Census (95.3 percent; U.S. Census 2017c). Respondents ranged in age from fi fteen to ninety-one years, with a mean age of forty-one. As this research sought to understand the reasons people gave for their residential decisions over time, responses from people under the age of twenty- fi ve were removed. The resulting data set included 3,360 responses: 28.9 percent (980) from stayers, 52.5 percent (1,780) from leavers, and 18.6 percent (630) from returnees. Stayers were de fi ned as people who, apart from schooling or military service, have not lived outside of Vermont for more than one year.

Data analysis proceeded in two steps, beginning with a statistical analysis of personal information and residential decision factors. The SPSS Statistics 23 program was used to conduct crosstab analyses of migration factors between groups; chi-square test results with a p value of less than or equal to 0.05 were considered signi fi cant (SPSS 2015). The second step involved identifying individuals who fi t within speci fi c pro fi les, analyzing their open text narratives, and building out a biographical sketch from the data they provided.

Women and people with high levels of education (individuals with at least one graduate or professional degree) were overrepresented in the survey responses; however, the high number of cases allowed for statistical analysis between groups. 4 This article presents results by gender and educational attainment, thereby eliminating the problem of overrepresentation of women and highly educated respondents found in the overall results. A large majority of the stayer respondents reported that they enjoy living in Vermont. These respondents are referred to as ' contented stayers. ' To gain insight into how general contentment with residential circumstances might in fl uence responses, responses of contented and noncontented respondents were compared.

Generalization of the research fi ndings is limited by several factors. Although the survey collected respondents ' occupations, it did not gather income data; therefore, no relationships between earnings and any other factor could be investigated. Respondents self-selected into the research; results cannot be considered representative of the total population of people who grew up in Vermont. Finally, those without Internet access were prevented from participating in the study as it was accessible exclusively online. This might have excluded people from speci fi c income or other groups.

## Contented Stayers

Just over three quarters of stayer respondents (75.8 percent) to the Vermont Roots Migration Survey selected ' I enjoy living in Vermont ' as one of the factors that led them to stay in Vermont. As the survey was not a controlled study, we cannot know whether general contentment with living in Vermont characterizes most stayers, but the data provided an opportunity to identify those factors for staying that contented stayers share in common and to compare them to factors reported by noncontented stayers. Table 1 lists stayers ' reasons for remaining in Vermont and their residential aspirations. Results are presented according to contentment, gender, and educational attainment. A set of four noneconomic reasons for staying dominate the fi ndings. Those who enjoy living in Vermont are far more likely to say that they appreciate Vermont ' s landscape, culture, and small size and to say that they plan to remain permanently in Vermont. 5 It was somewhat surprising to learn that most noncontented stayers do not seek to leave the state permanently but instead have complex aspirations for their future residences. The sections that follow focus on the noneconomic constellation of reasons for staying in Vermont, the complex relationships between family ties and gender among stayers, and the diverse forms of mobility practiced by Vermont ' s contented stayers. These complex attitudes toward mobility and migration point to a gap in the literature that this article begins to address.

The Noneconomic Constellation of Reasons for Staying: Landscape, Family, Culture, and Community

The majority of stayers cited fondness for the landscape, wanting to live near family, and appreciation for the state ' s culture and community, as well as its small size, as reasons for remaining. Appreciation for Vermont ' s landscapes was the most frequently given reason for staying in Vermont, other than the more general ' I enjoy living in Vermont ' factor. The contented stayers were far more likely to name appreciation for landscape as a reason for staying than the noncontented stayers (83.4 percent and 32.1 percent, respectively, p &lt; 0.001). The entanglement of attachment to natural environments with family and

Table 1 Stayers' reasons for remaining in Vermont and their residential aspirations, by contentment, gender, and educational attainment

|                                                                                        | By contentment percentage (%) of respondents   | By contentment percentage (%) of respondents    | By gender percentage (%) of respondents   | By gender percentage (%) of respondents   | By educational attainment percentage (%) of respondents   | By educational attainment percentage (%) of respondents   | By educational attainment percentage (%) of respondents   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| Reasons for staying in Vermont                                                         | Those who selected 'I enjoy living in VT'      | Those who did not select 'I enjoy living in VT' | Men                                       | Women                                     | Associate's degree or less                                | Bachelor's degree                                         | Graduate degree                                           |
| I enjoy living in VT zz                                                                |                                                |                                                 | 78.4                                      | 74.9                                      | 68.7                                                      | 78.8                                                      | 84.3                                                      |
| I like VT's landscape (natural environments) yyzz                                      | 83.4                                           | 32.1                                            | 73.2                                      | 70.1                                      | 63.9                                                      | 74.6                                                      | 78.3                                                      |
| I stayed to live near family z                                                         | 66.1                                           | 60.8                                            | 52.3                                      | 70.1                                      | 63.4                                                      | 66.3                                                      | 64.6                                                      |
| I appreciate VT's culture/ community yy ** zz                                          | 69.6                                           | 15.6                                            | 61.7                                      | 54.4                                      | 48.0                                                      | 62.2                                                      | 62.6                                                      |
| I like VT's small size yyzz                                                            | 65.8                                           | 20.3                                            | 55.7                                      | 54.4                                      | 46.7                                                      | 61.7                                                      | 57.6                                                      |
| I wanted to raise my children in VT yy **                                              | 57.6                                           | 27.4                                            | 45.3                                      | 52.3                                      | 48.5                                                      | 50.0                                                      | 54.5                                                      |
| My work is in VT z                                                                     | 38.5                                           | 26.6                                            | 48.1                                      | 30.2                                      | 32.8                                                      | 35.8                                                      | 40.9                                                      |
| I never wanted to live outside VT yy **                                                | 39.7                                           | 11.8                                            | 38.0                                      | 30.9                                      | 33.1                                                      | 33.7                                                      | 31.3                                                      |
| I visited other places outside the state and decided VT is the best place for me yyzzz | 34.7                                           | 5.5                                             | 35.5                                      | 24.3                                      | 24.2                                                      | 28.2                                                      | 33.3                                                      |
| VT has activities and opportunities that don't exist elsewhere yy ** y                 | 18.2                                           | 1.3                                             | 18.5                                      | 12.2                                      | 9.6                                                       | 15.8                                                      | 19.7                                                      |
| I needed to care for a family member y                                                 | 10.2                                           | 14.3                                            | 9.1                                       | 12.1                                      | 14.1                                                      | 8.0                                                       | 11.6                                                      |
| My partner did not want to leave                                                       | 14.4                                           | 17.7                                            | 12.9                                      | 15.9                                      | 13.1                                                      | 17.1                                                      | 15.7                                                      |
| I want to leave but have not had the opportunity to do so yyy                          | 7.3                                            | 29.5                                            | 12.5                                      | 12.8                                      | 15.9                                                      | 11.7                                                      | 8.1                                                       |
| Stayers' residential aspirations                                                       |                                                |                                                 |                                           |                                           |                                                           |                                                           |                                                           |
| I plan to remain in VT                                                                 | 61.2                                           | 20.7                                            | 50.2                                      | 52.0                                      | 46.7                                                      | 54.7                                                      | 54.5                                                      |
| yy I would like to live part-time in VT and part-time elsewhere yy                     | 26.9                                           | 41.4                                            | 26.8                                      | 31.6                                      | 34.6                                                      | 25.9                                                      | 30.8                                                      |
| I will likely move outside VT but return y                                             | 7.0                                            | 6.3                                             | 7.7                                       | 6.6                                       | 4.8                                                       | 9.6                                                       | 5.6                                                       |
| I plan to move permanently away from VT at some point yy **                            | 5.0                                            | 24.5                                            | 13.6                                      | 8.2                                       | 11.4                                                      | 9.3                                                       | 7.1                                                       |
| I would like to retire outside of VT yy                                                | 7.9                                            | 24.9                                            | 13.6                                      | 11.2                                      | 13.1                                                      | 11.7                                                      | 10.6                                                      |

Note : VT = Vermont.

** p &lt; 0.001 for enjoy VT.

yy p &lt; 0.001 for gender .

y p  0.05 for gender.

z p  0.05 for educational attainment.

zz p &lt; 0.001 for educational attainment.

community factors suggests that these elements of home might reinforce or build on one another. Many of the written accounts offered by stayers illustrate this constellation of environment, culture, size, and family, as well as general satisfaction with living in Vermont. Earl, a retired social worker, offered this explanation for staying:

I have had the opportunity to live in places around the world, and live here by choice and not circumstance. The state is beautiful and I love the small town communities. You have a real voice in the social and political issues -this is good! You ' re never more than a person or two away from someone you know.

Cathy, a fi fty-one-year-old administrative assistant, wrote:

Seriously wouldn ' t want to live anywhere else. I am a seventh generation Vermonter. My roots run deep here. I love the variety in seasons, the people, the opportunities to convene with nature right outside my back door.

In these contented stayer narratives, environmental and social reasons for staying are braided together. This research aligns with other studies suggesting that place-based attachments, particularly those related to physical landscapes, deserve more attention from migration scholars (Wiborg 2004; Morse and Mudgett 2017). The noneconomic reasons for staying indicate the need for additional studies that broaden the potential factors for residential decision making beyond fi nancial concerns alone.

## Staying for Family

Analysis of the full data set generated by the Vermont Roots Migration Project showed that leavers were signi fi cantly less likely to have family members living in Vermont than were stayers (88.1 percent and 98.4 percent, respectively, p &lt; 0.001). This result prompted a closer look at stayers ' connections to family members. The analysis revealed the complexity of family ties and their entanglement with other factors for staying. Jennifer, for example, is a married retail store manager who wrote:

I chose to stay in VT [Vermont] because I love the community I grew up in and wanted my son to have similar experiences. My family is also here in VT and I wanted to stay close to family.

Jennifer ' s narrative fi ts with several of the fi ndings related to stayers and family. ' I stayed to live near family ' was the only one of the four key noneconomic reasons for staying that showed no statistical difference between contented and noncontented stayers. Instead, respondents were divided on this factor by gender, with women much more likely than men to name living near family as a reason for staying (70.1 percent and 52.3 percent, respectively, p &lt; 0.001). Jennifer did not select ' I enjoy living in Vermont ' as a reason for staying, but she did select ' I wanted to raise my children in Vermont, ' a desire that women expressed more often than men (52.3 percent and 45.3 percent, respectively, p  0.05). The greatest division on the raising children in Vermont factor was between contented and noncontented stayers (57.6 percent and 27.4 percent, respectively, p &lt; 0.001). Jennifer indicated that she wanted to live near family but she did not say that she remained to care for a family member. In fact, few respondents said they stayed to care for family; people with lower educational attainment were most likely to have selected this reason for staying (Table 1). Jennifer, who is married, did not select ' My partner did not want to leave ' as a reason for staying. Few respondents cited this as a factor, and there were no differences among respondents according to gender, educational attainment, or contentment.

Jennifer was not prevented from leaving due to a partner ' s wish to stay or because she had to take care of a family member; instead, she seemed to be choosing to raise her child in her rural home region because she had a positive experience growing up and because she prefers to be near family. This analysis of family-related factors for staying complicates the tied stayer theory because gender, educational attainment, and residential contentment seem to play different roles in different types of family ties (Cooke 2003; Mulder and Malmberg 2014). Family ties deserve a more critical and nuanced questioning of the emotional dimensions of ' tied-ness, ' as there are many indications in this data set that people are happy with their connections to place, community, and people.

## The Multiple Mobilities of Rural Stayers

Barcus and Brunn (2009) turned attention to the connections between residential decisions and mobility with their research on attendees of family reunions in Kentucky. They identi fi ed three types of research participants: immobile residents with strong place attachment, immobile residents with low place attachment who would prefer to leave, and leavers who remain strongly attached to their home place. Different residential aspirations characterized each of three categories of research participants. Taking their lead, we investigated mobility, immobility, and aspirational mobility among contented and noncontented stayers. Our analysis revealed multiple forms of mobility: traveling, within-state migration, recreational and work mobility, and seasonal migration. Consideration of residential aspirations drew out barriers to mobility and the emotions related to immobility.

## Visiting Other Places, Choosing Home

Speci fi c groups of stayers -contented stayers, men, and those with a graduate degree -said that they had visited other places and decided that Vermont was the best place for them (each statistically signi fi cant, p &lt; 0.001). Like Earl, these respondents chose to remain in Vermont based on a comparison to other places. Their mobility informed their decision to stay.

## Internal Migration

Stacey ' s biographical sketch illustrates the story of someone who had not had the opportunity to visit other places. Stacey is a thirty-something government worker and mother who grew up in Vermont ' s most remote county. She does not have a college degree. Stacey and her husband moved two hours away, to the city of Burlington, which has a population fi ve times greater than that of their entire home county. Her explanation for staying in Vermont was this:

My husband and I both grew up here. We found good jobs and decided to stay here. Our families are here and it was hard to think of leaving. We also didn ' t have the fi nances available to relocate.

As Stacey pointed out, many forms of mobility require fi nancial resources. Instead of making a costly move outside the state, she and her husband performed internal migration, which allowed them to remain relatively close to family and gained them secure work. They are part of an urbanizing trend among stayers in our research. Nearly 35 percent of stayer survey respondents (34.6 percent) presently reside in Chittenden County. Of these, 43.4 percent moved into the county sometime after graduating from high school in another county. Stacey ' s story also highlights the complexity of feelings associated with deciding to stay. Although Stacey said she could not afford to move,

she also said that she enjoys living in Vermont and never wanted to leave. An acknowledgment of not feeling able to leave does not necessarily mean that people feel limited by staying.

## Work Mobility

Some stayers use mobile work situations to create a residential anchor for themselves in Vermont. These include people who telecommute to jobs headquartered out of state and those who spend a portion of the year working outside Vermont. Billy, a twenty-something poet, was in the latter group. Despite being away for several months each year, Billy maintains a visceral sense of belonging to Vermont ' s landscape: ' When I say that Vermont is in my blood, I mean that for hundreds of years, this landscape has created the bodies of my family: corn &amp; apples &amp; milk became our bones, our minds, our blood. ' Billy ' s story provides further evidence for the theory that communication technologies and cheaper travel options make it possible for people to maintain place-based identities while living elsewhere (Gustafson 2001; Barcus and Brunn 2010). His story also illustrates how work mobility enables some Vermonters to perform a version of staying.

## Recreational Mobility

Lucy ' s story highlights a different form of mobility. She is a social media analyst in her thirties. She decided to stay in Vermont because

I feel nurtured and loved by my community and lucky to know what it is to be a Vermonter. I have everything I need here and if I need big city excitement it isn ' t far to get to it. It ' s kind of impossible to explain . . . why wouldn ' t I choose to live here?

Vermont is located within several hours ' drive of Montreal, Boston, and New York City; urban amenities are therefore in reach of rural Vermonters. Recreational rural-to-urban travel within the state is another version of this mobility. Elsa, a resident of a rural hill town, wrote, ' Being outdoors is essential to me ' but admitted that she takes advantage of urban amenities by making trips to Burlington. Vermonters with ample time and fi nancial means use their mobility to make the best of multiple worlds.

## Seasonal Mobility

Billy, Lucy, and Elsa aspire to live part time outside of Vermont. They seek a permanent extension of their present ability to access the best of multiple places. Over one quarter of those who enjoy living in Vermont hope to become seasonal residents (Table 1). Noncontented stayers are much more likely than contented stayers to wish to move outside of Vermont but, surprisingly, more of them would choose to be part-time rather than permanent leavers. This suggests that they desire to keep a foothold in the state and that the desire to leave might be emotionally complex.

## Bittersweet Immobility

Helen is a disabled woman in her sixties who wrote, ' I choose to remain in Vermont mainly to be near my family. I can ' t afford to live here, but it is a beautiful state. ' Like Stacey, Helen said she never wished to leave, but it is clear that her commitment to family kept her in Vermont, as she also indicated that she stayed to care for family members and to raise her children in Vermont. She appears to be a tied stayer whose caring for and being cared for by family have kept her home. She expresses bittersweet rather than bitter emotions about her inability to move. This ambiguity was pervasive in the narratives of those who said they would like to leave Vermont. Holly, a cashier and single parent, said that she wanted to leave, but her explanation for staying showed affection for aspects of the state: ' Love the serenity of Vermont. Summers here are the BEST! ' Appreciation for one ' s home place can sit alongside a desire to leave that place. Immobility appears to be as complex as mobility.

## Conclusions

This exploratory research found that fondness for rural place-based attributes and family ties were the key drivers in contented stayers ' residential decision making. We argue that there is a need for detailed examinations of place attachment in migration studies across the urban -rural gradient. We suggest that future migration research plans draw on methods that make room for unexpected factors, while still attending to the economic factors and family ties that have been documented in the literature. As this research has shown, the biographical approach can draw out unanticipated reasons for moving and staying, reveal the relationships between factors, and illuminate the emotional dimensions of choosing to stay or go (Halfacree and Boyle 1993; Ní Laoire 2000; Halfacree and Merriman 2015).

Among the contented stayers in our study, we found many who are happy with their choice to stay but who do not necessarily stay still. We encourage researchers working in rural contexts to work with mobility and migration as related but distinct processes. Examining immobility as a choice lends multidimensionality and agency to stayers and helps to unpack the varied reasons why people stay and how they incorporate both the practice and the idea of mobility into their daily lives.

The Onion ' s satire of an unambitious New England stayer is funny because it turns the joke on the reader; we are meant to see that staying can be ful fi lling. As we sifted through our survey results, we found a

respondent who closely resembled fi ctional Mike. Brent is a married-with-children insurance agent who lives in a town of 3,000 people. Like many of his fellow stayers, he is happy to have stayed in rural Vermont and his biography is shot through with mobility. As he looked into his future, he forecasted: ' I want to travel some but know I ' ll end up back here. ' What The Onion ' s story missed was how much the happy stayers move. &amp;

## Acknowledgments

We are grateful to our original research team members -Wendy Geller, Seth Marineau, and Sohier Perry -as well as research assistants Newton Rose, Lila Hewett, Margaret Pitkin, and Lynn Knight for their insight, enthusiasm, and hard work. We appreciate Alan Howard ' s assistance with statistical analysis. We also thank the many Vermonters who generously shared their stories with us.

## Notes

- 1 The educational attainment fi gures referred to here are the percentage of people ages twenty- fi ve and older who have a graduate or professional degree, according to the 2015 American Community Survey (U.S. Census Bureau 2017c).
- 3 Some Vermont towns send their students to public high schools in adjoining New Hampshire or New York. Vermonters who attended these schools were also eligible to fi ll out the survey.
- 2 One researcher attended a public high school in New Hampshire that serves students from several Vermont towns.
- 4 Gender is a socially constructed category of difference. The gender selections offered in the survey were man, woman, other, and prefer not to say. Very few people -a total of twenty-four respondents (twelve of whom were stayers) -selected ' other ' or ' prefer not to say. ' To simplify statistical analysis, these cases were removed from the statistical analysis of responses by gender. They remained in the statistical analysis of educational attainment and the qualitative analysis, however.
- 5 ' I appreciate Vermont ' s culture/community ' and ' I like Vermont ' s small size ' were offered as possible reasons for staying. Neither ' culture/community ' nor ' small size ' were de fi ned for the respondents. These were intentionally left open to the respondents ' interpretation, giving the respondents the opportunity to impose their own understandings of Vermont culture, for example, on the response.

## Literature Cited

- Adey, P. 2010. Mobility . London and New York: Routledge. Baldassar, L. 2015. Guilty feelings and the guilt trip: Emotions and motivation in migration and transnational caregiving. Emotion Space and Society 16:81 -89.
- Barcus, H. R., and S. D. Brunn. 2009. Towards a typology of mobility and place attachment in rural America. Journal of Appalachian Studies 15 (1 -2):26 -48.
- ---. 2010. Place elasticity: Exploring a new conceptualization of mobility and place attachment in rural
- America. Geografiska Annaler Series B: Human Geography 92B (4):281 -95.
- Barcus, H., and C. Werner. 2017. Choosing to stay: (Im)mobility decisions amongst Mongolia ' s ethnic Kazakhs. Globalizations 14 (1):32 -50.
- Bjarnason, T., and T. Thorlindsson. 2006. Should I stay or should I go? Migration expectations among youth in Icelandic fi shing and farming communities. Journal of Rural Studies 22 (3):290 -300.
- Boccagni, P., and L. Baldassar. 2015. Emotions on the move: Mapping the emergent fi eld of emotion and migration. Emotion, Space and Society 16:73 -80.
- Chatterji, J. 2017. On being stuck in Bengal: Immobility in the ' age of migration. ' Modern Asian Studies 51:511 -41.
- Clark, W. A. V., R. Duque-Calvache, and I. PalomaresLinares. 2017. Place attachment and the decision to stay in the neighbourhood. Population Space and Place 23:1 -16.
- Clark, W. A. V., and R. Maas. 2015. Interpreting migration through the prism of reasons for moves. Population, Space and Place 21 (1):54 -67.
- Conradson, D., and D. McKay. 2007. Translocal subjectivities: Mobility, connection, emotion. Mobilities 2 (2):167 -74.
- Cooke, T. J. 2003. Family migration and the relative earnings of husbands and wives. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 93:338 -49.
- ---. 2008. Migration in a family way. Population Space and Place 14:255 -65.
- ---. 2011. It is not just the economy: Declining migration and the rise of secular rootedness. Population, Space and Place 17 (3):193 -203.
- Cooke, T. J., P. Boyle, K. Couch, and P. Feijten. 2009. A longitudinal analysis of family migration and the gender gap in earnings in the United States and Great Britain. Demography 46:147 -67.
- Corbett, M. J. 2007. Learning to leave: The irony of schooling in a coastal community . Black Point, NS, Canada: Fernwood.
- Coulter, R., M. van Ham, and A. M. Findlay. 2016. Rethinking residential mobility: Linking lives through time and space. Progress in Human Geography 40 (3):352 -74.
- Creed, G. W., and B. Ching. 1997. Recognizing rusticity: Identity and the power of place. In Knowing your place: Rural identity and cultural hierarchy , ed. B. Ching and G. W. Creed, 1 -38. London and New York: Routledge.
- Cresswell, T. 2012. Mobilities II: Still. Progress in Human Geography 36 (5):645 -53.
- Cresswell, T., and P. Merriman. 2011. Introduction. In Geographies of mobilities: Practices, spaces, subjects , ed. T. Cresswell and P. Merriman, 1 -15. Farnham, UK: Ashgate.
- Cross, J. E., C. M. Keske, M. G. Lacy, D. L. K. Hoag, and C. T. Bastian. 2011. Adoption of conservation easements among agricultural landowners in Colorado and Wyoming: The role of economic dependence and sense of place. Landscape and Urban Planning 101:75 -83.
- Farrugia, D. 2016. The mobility imperative for rural youth: The structural, symbolic and non-representational dimensions rural youth mobilities. Journal of Youth Studies 19 (6):836 -51.
- Findlay, A. M., and F. L. N. Li. 1999. Methodological issues in researching migration. The Professional Geographer 51 (1):50 -59.
- Fiore, A. M., L. S. Niehm, J. L. Hurst, J. Son, A. Sadachar, D. W. Russell, D. Swenson, and C. Seeger. 2015. Will they stay or will they go? Community features important in migration decisions of recent university graduates. Economic Development Quarterly 29:23 -37.

- Flaherty, J. 2006. A multivariate look at migration from Vermont. Vermont History 74 (Summer/Fall):127 -55.
- Foulkes, M., and K. B. Newbold. 2000. Migration propensities, patterns, and the role of human capital: Comparing Mexican, Cuban, and Puerto Rican interstate migration, 1985 -1990. The Professional Geographer 52 (1): 133 -45.
- Geller, W. 2015. Rural young women, education, and the sociospatial mobility: Landscape of success . Lanham, MD: Lexington.
- Geller, W., S. Marineau, and R. Watts. 2015. Discourses of departure?: Examining the ' rural as de fi cit ' and ' no jobs ' narratives in Vermont. The Northeastern Geographer 7:53 -71.
- Graham, E. 1999. Breaking out: The opportunities and challenges of multi-method research in population geography. The Professional Geographer 51 (1):76 -89.
- Gustafson, P. 2001. Roots and routes -Exploring the relationship between place attachment and mobility. Environment and Behavior 33 (5):667 -86.
- Halfacree, K. 2012. Heterolocal identities? Counterurbanisation, second homes, and rural consumption in the era of mobilities. Population Space and Place 18:209 -24.
- Halfacree, K. H., and P. J. Boyle. 1993. The challenge facing migration research: The case for a biographical approach. Progress in Human Geography 17 (3):333 -48.
- Halfacree, K. H., and P. Merriman. 2015. Performing internal migration. In Internal migration: Geographical perspectives and processes , ed. D. P. Smith, N. Finney, K. Halfacree, and N. Walford, 149 -64. Surrey, UK: Ashgate.
- Hanson, S. 2005. Perspectives on the geographic stability and mobility of people in cities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102:15301 -6.
- Hjalm, A. 2014. The ' stayers ' : Dynamics of lifelong sedentary behaviour in an urban context. Population Space and Place 20:569 -80.
- Jamieson, L. 2000. Migration, place and class: Youth in a rural area. Sociological Review 48 (2):203 -23.
- Klimt, A. 2014. Searching for continuity and connections: Narratives of belonging from a post-industrial city. City, Culture and Society 5:31 -44.
- Massey, D. S. 1990. Social structure, household strategies, and the cumulative causation of migration. Population Index 56:3 -26.
- McCollum, A. 1990. The trauma of moving: Psychological issues for women . Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
- McKendrick, J. H. 1999. Multi-method research: An introduction to its application in population geography. The Professional Geographer 51 (1):40 -50.
- Milbourne, P., and L. Kitchen. 2014. Rural mobilities: Connecting movement and fi xity in rural places. Journal of Rural Studies 34:326 -36.
- Morse, C. E. 2015. The risks and rewards of using social media in rural migration research: Findings from the Vermont Roots Project. The Northeastern Geographer 7:72 -88.
- Morse, C. E., and J. Mudgett. 2017. Longing for landscape: Homesickness and place attachment among rural outmigrants in the 19th and 21st centuries. Journal of Rural Studies 50:95 -103.
- Morse, C. E., A. M. Strong, V. E. Mendez, S. T. Lovell, A. R. Troy, and W. B. Morris. 2014. Performing a New England landscape: Viewing, engaging, and belonging. Journal of Rural Studies 36:226 -36.
- Mulder, C. H., and G. Malmberg. 2014. Local ties and family migration. Environment and Planning A 46 (9):2195 -2211.
- Nelson, P. B., and A. Sewall. 2003. Regional comparisons of metropolitan and nonmetropolitan migration in the 1970s
- and 1980s: Age and place implications. The Professional Geographer 55:83 -99.
- Ní Laoire, C. 2000. Conceptualising Irish rural youth migration: A biographical approach. International Journal of Population Geography 6 (3):229 -43.
- R  oin,  A. 2015. The multifaceted notion of home: Exploring the meaning of home among elderly people living in the Faroe Islands. Journal of Rural Studies 39:22 -31.
- Rowles, G. 1983. Place and personal identity in old age: Observations from Appalachia. Journal of Environmental Psychology 3:299 -313.
- Sheller, M., and J. Urry. 2006. The new mobilities paradigm. Environment and Planning A 38 (2):207 -26.
- Silvey, R. 2006. Geographies of gender and migration: Spatializing social difference. International Migration Review 40 (1):64 -81.
- SPSS Statistics for Windows. Version 23.0. 2015. Armonk, NY: IBM.
- Stilwell, L. D. 1937. Emigration from Vermont, 1760 -1860. Proceedings of the Vermont Historical Society 5:2.
- Stockdale, A. 2004. Rural out-migration: Community consequences and individual migrant experiences. Sociologia Ruralis 44:167 -94.
- Twigger-Ross, C., and Uzzell, D. 1996. Place and identity processes. Journal of Environmental Psychology 16:205 -20.
- Unambitious loser with happy, ful fi lling life still lives in hometown. 2013. The Onion 23 July. Accessed February 10, 2017. http://www.theonion.com/.
- U.S. Census Bureau. 2017a. 2011 -2015 American Community Survey 5-year estimates: American Fact fi nder. Accessed February 6, 2017. http://fact fi nder.census.gov/.
- ---. 2017b. Annual estimates of resident population April 1 2010 to July 1 2016: American Fact fi nder. Accessed February 6, 2017. http://fact fi nder.census.gov/.
- ---. 2017c. 2010 Census: American Fact fi nder. Accessed February 6, 2017. https://fact fi nder.census.gov/.
- ---. 2017d. 2010 Census urban and rural classi fi cation and urban area criteria. Accessed February 6, 2017. http://www.census.gov/geo/reference/ua/urban-rural-2010. html.
- von Reichert, C., J. B. Cromartie, and R. O. Arthun. 2014. Reasons for returning and not returning to rural U.S. communities. The Professional Geographer 66:58 -72.
- Wiborg, A. 2004. Place, nature and migration: Students ' attachment to their rural home places. Sociologia Ruralis 44:147 -68.
- Williams, R. 1973. The country and the city . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Woods, M. 2007. Engaging the global countryside: Globalization, hybridity and the reconstitution of rural place. Progress in Human Geography 31:485 -507.

CHERYL E. MORSE is Assistant Professor of Geography at the University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405. E-mail: cheryl.morse@uvm.edu. Her research focuses on how people perceive, perform, and experience rural places.

- JILL MUDGETT is a history and humanities instructor at the Community College of Vermont, Montpelier, VT 05602. E-mail: jill.mudgett@ccv.edu. Her research interests include cultural landscapes, rural communities, and the history of human connections to place.