Received Date : 10-Aug-2016

Revised Date   : 06-Jan-2017

Accepted Date : 01-Feb-2017

Article type      : Original Article

## AQUACULTURE AND THE POST PRODUCTIVE TRANSITION ON THE MAINE COAST

## Author information

Samuel P. Hanes Assistant Professor of Geography Department of Anthropology University of Maine, Orono 5773 South Stevens Hall Orono, ME 04469-5773 samuel.hanes@maine.edu (207)-581-1885

## Acknowledgements

The author would like to thank Teresa Johnson, Sara Lowden, Christina Robichaud, and three anonymous reviewers. This research is funded in part by the Sustainable Ecological Aquaculture Network, Maine EPSCoR Track 1 award #1355457.

This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 10.1111/gere.12247 This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

## AQUACULTURE AND THE POSTPRODUCTIVE TRANSITION ON THE MAINE COAST*

## SAMUEL P. HANES

ABSTRACT. Aquaculture is the global food system's fastest growing sector. The postproductive transition---the shift away from commodity production toward more consumption-oriented land uses---is common in many coastal areas as well. This paper examines the intersection of these trends in a U.S. state, Maine, with expanding aquaculture and extensive coastal, rural economic and demographic change. It examines interactions between coastal landowners and aquaculture farmers at aquaculture lease hearings in the state's three main aquaculture regions. Landowners are often uncertain about aquaculture because it is new and unfamiliar. Farmers use lease hearings to educate coastal landowners about farm operations, and farmers respond to concerns by altering their operations to fit landowners' priorities. However, comparative analysis of the three regions reveals divergent histories and geographies leading to different levels of conflict. This study shows the value of applying rural postproductive transition theory to coastal regions and aquaculture development. Keywords: amenity migration, aquaculture, postproductive transition.

A packed crowd filled Bar Harbor's town hall. Maine's Department of Marine Resources was holding a public hearing on a young couple's proposal for a shellfish farm. Despite their farm's environment-friendly design, coastal residents hired an attorney who proceeded to question every aspect of the application. A neighboring aquaculture farmer interrupted frequently, with expletives, until the hearing officer expelled him. The atmosphere remained tense even after he departed. At another hearing a few days earlier in Damariscotta, the tenor was quite different. Only a few people came. A couple with land

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

next to the proposed farm expressed concern about sailing access. A summer resident from California worried noise from the farm would interfere with her 'think trips.' The farmer and the landowners negotiated a bit and not everything was finalized. Everyone seemed a little frustrated with the slow pace, but the hearing's atmosphere was more bureaucratic than combative.

These two events are a microcosm of Maine's aquaculture public hearings. This paper explains what is happening at these hearings, and why they differ so greatly, by conceptualizing them as part of the 'postproductive transition,' which is a term for myriad changes taking place in many rural parts of the global North. These include the decline in resource extraction and commodity production, the growth of amenity migration, and the rise in multifunctionality---for example, remaining commodity production that needs to also meet conservation or other goals. Opposition to aquaculture is widespread and heavily impacts development (Gibbs 2009), and, while there are abundant studies of conflict over aquaculture, none directly apply literature on postproductivism.

Studying the postproductive transition in coastal regions requires engaging the literature on the 'Blue Revolution.' This term refers to the rapid expansion of aquaculture since 1970, a transformation of the world's food system reverberating in coastal communities around the world. Aquaculture now produces nearly half of all seafood and continues to be the world's most rapidly expanding food production sector (FAO 2014). It is a fast-growing source of scarce jobs for fishing communities, and 'ecological aquaculture' offers an alternative to more industrial practices and to overexploitation of wild fisheries (Costa-Pierce 2014). The global geographic distribution of aquaculture is uneven, however. In the United States, approximately 50  percent of U.S. seafood sales come from aquaculture, but only 5 percent of aquaculture sales are produced domestically, despite excellent resources, and seafood imports create an $11 billion trade deficit (NSTC 2014). The United States produces only 0.8 percent of the world's aquaculture by weight

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

but is the 2nd largest consumer (FAO 2014). In 2012, the United States spent $82.6 billion on seafood, importing over 80 percent, while only producing $1.3 billion of aquaculture products (NSTC 2014). To address this imbalance, the U.S. government is now promoting domestic aquaculture production.

This study examines these issues through a comparative analysis of three aquaculture regions in a state with both extensive aquaculture and a coastal postproductive transition, with varying levels of conflict between the coastal landowners and aquaculture farmers. It asks why these regions have different levels of conflict. Contextualizing these cases by seeing them as part of a coastal postproductive transition yields a nuanced explanation of aquaculture conflicts by illuminating the interaction between divergent viewpoints. This study reveals conflicting priorities between coastal residents and aquaculture farmers; the two groups negotiate over individual farms, and farmers find ways to fit aquaculture into coastal residents' scenic and recreational priorities. However, in some places this breaks down due to the historical and geographic differences between the sites.

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; AQUACULTURE CONFLICTS AND THE POSTPRODUCTIVE TRANSITION

Literature on aquaculture conflicts stresses tradeoffs coastal residents see between economic opportunities and environmental quality (Freeman and others 2012). Many places feature these jobs-versus-environment debates, especially locations with finfish---as opposed to shellfish and marine vegetable---aquaculture, which is seen as more environmentally damaging because of disease transmittal to wild fish, water-quality impacts, and the quantity of food needed to produce farmed fish. There are also conflicts between fishermen and aquaculture farmers because of concern over privatization and enclosure by large firms limiting access to fishing grounds (Walters 2007; Wiber and

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

others 2010). However, the jobs-versus-environment dichotomy can oversimplify (Suryanata and Umemoto 2005; Murray and D'Anna 2015). Perceptions of viewshed or community character, while linked to environmental impacts, are in and of themselves important drivers of aquaculture conflicts (D'Anna and Murray 2015). To build on these studies, this paper turns to literature on the rural postproductive transition.

The postproductive transition refers to the decline in raw-material extraction and commodity production in rural areas, which is often accompanied by amenityconsumption land uses, such as tourism and second homes. It is a contested concept for several reasons (Evans, Morris, and Winter 2002; Almstedt 2013), and has fallen out of favor in agricultural studies, with scholars turning to the more encompassing concept of multifunctionality (Holmes 2006; Roche and Argent 2015). However, postproductivism does capture a real trend in places like coastal Maine, where fisheries have collapsed and timber ports have closed, and indeed, it is still profitably applied to coastal communities (Salmi 2015).

Amenity migration, or people moving to rural areas for environmental and other amenities, occurs in many postproductive rural areas, often reversing past population decline (Stockdale 2010). Studies have explored many aspects of this process, including how newcomers change community culture (Guimond and Simard 2010), exacerbate class conflict (Nelson 2001; Philips 2007), and displace prior residents by raising property values (Solana-Solana 2010). Studies have also shown prior residents' positive or mixed perceptions towards gentrification caused by amenity migrants (Thompson, Johnson, and Hanes 2016). Many studies look at representation of place, including how and why amenity migrants come to see themselves as environmental stewards (Abrams and Gosnell 2012). Amenity migrants who take on a stewardship role have converging goals with prior residents on the need for economic prosperity, local control, and protecting 'traditional land uses and a cultural and natural resource heritage' (Jackson and Kulhken 2006, 197).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

What constitutes tradition and heritage in a postproductive landscape for amenity migrants is a key issue, and many studies have explored competing visions of rural place held by amenity migrants and long-term residents, finding that newcomers tend to favor conservation over commodity production (Walker and Fortman 2003; Hurly and Walker 2004). These differences can create struggles over the environment's meaning that play out in land-use planning (Hurley and Walker 2004). However, not all amenity migrants reject commodity production or clash with rural producers. Some allow commodity production on their property, produce on a hobby scale themselves, or see production and conservation as compatible (Strutevant and Lange 2003; Holmes 2006; Gill, Kelpeis, and Chisolm 2010). Landscape idealization in Western culture is inherently nostalgic, and the most valorized landscapes are those that either protect seemingly pristine wilderness or preserve 'traditional,' romanticized rural livelihoods (Cosgrove 2006). Rural people whose practices match nostalgic notions of land use may have better relations with amenity migrants. Amenity migrants can, with sufficient political power, vet rural producers, often by controlling access to land and resources (Grabbatin, Hurley, and Halfacre 2011). Abrams finds that 'defining the working landscape in specific places is frequently a contentious process, characterized by competing claims of authenticity, understanding of nature, and interests in promoting or revising historic land uses' (2013, 5). Commodity producers benefitting most are those 'whose material practices and cultural performances best reconciled urban migrants' contradictory stance towards production, protection, and consumption' (Abrams 2013, 22). Rural producers who come closest to resolving these contradictions for amenity migrants are those who balance land use with nature preservation in a way that seems to preserve traditional livelihoods.

Scholars rarely apply postproductive transition theory to coastal regions, and yet, in Maine, the concept encompasses the major processes at work and is an ideal way to contextualize the interactions between aquaculture farmers and coastal residents. Robbins

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

and others recommend studying 'why differences emerge or erode' in rural restructuring (2009, 367), and the aim here is to better understand the emergence of differences in how coastal residents and aquaculture farmers interact to accommodate aquaculture development into coastal residents' priorities for marine spaces.

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; STUDY SITE

Maine is an ideal study site because it consistently ranks in the top five U.S. states in saltwater aquaculture production (USDA 2014), and it is the most rural U.S. state (USCB 2016). Maine also has a long history of postproductive change. Agricultural land use peaked in the mid-1800s, and as the natural resource economy declined, Maine experienced gradual population loss from 1910--1960, but population rebounded after 1960. Explanations for the rebound include cheap land, proximity to the northeastern U.S. metropolitan region, the interstate highways, the back-to-the-land movement, and environmental amenities (Reilly and Renski 2008). Between 1960--2000, 95 percent of Maine's population growth took place in rural areas, and the state went from 50 percent to 60 percent rural. Rural growth was not due to agricultural revival; Maine's farm population dropped 75 percent (Sherwood and Mageean 2004). Out-migration continues from Maine four northern and eastern counties today. Lack of jobs drives youth outmigration all across the state; in-migrants are older and coming for environmental amenities. In 1960, Maine's average age was twenty-nine, which ranked slightly below the U.S. average, whereas in 2015 Maine was the oldest state with an average age of slightly more than forty-four years (USCB 2016). In-migration to rural areas is slowing, though, as most of coastal and rural Maine is projected to begin shrinking soon, and urban areas are now growing faster (Rector 2015).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Maine has an even longer history of coastal tourism and amenity migration. The first 'rusticators' began arriving after the Civil War, via railroads and schooners. Tourism was centralized, with a major coastal hub in the Blue Hill Bay region. This area has the only mountain on the U.S. Atlantic coast, Mt. Desert, and wealthy tourists and amenity migrants founded Acadia National Park here in 1916 (Woodward 2004). The shift to carbased transportation led to a diffusion of tourism and helped enable the much more widespread wave of amenity migration after 1960. Tourism and amenity migration have driven up coastal real estate prices, and Maine leads the United States with 16 percent of all coastal homes being seasonal residences (Vail 2004; NOAA 2013).

This study focuses on Maine's three main aquaculture regions: the Damariscotta River, Cobscook Bay, and the region around Blue Hill Bay (Figure 1). Maine aquaculture began in the Damariscotta River, which is actually a saltwater inlet, in 1975. All farms there grow shellfish. The industry expanded slowly to seventeen farms covering 129 acres out of Maine's 608 acres of shellfish. Cobscook Bay farming began in the 1980s and the area has fourteen finfish farms covering 333 acres of Maine's 665 of finfish farms. Disease outbreaks and water-quality laws drove most farmers out of business in the 1990s, leaving one Canadian company, Cooke Aquaculture, with all Cobscook Bay leases. A few finfish farms started on the outskirts of the Blue Hill Bay region in the 1990s, just as fears over their impact on water quality was at their height, and there are two finfish farms on fifty-six acres there today. Shellfish farming in the region began in 1999 and expanded rapidly. There are now thirteen shellfish farms covering 356 acres (DMR 2016).

Shellfish (mostly oysters and mussels) and finfish (mostly Atlantic salmon) farms are the two main types of farms in Maine. They look quite different. Finfish are kept in large cages with nets on the top (Figure 2). There are floating work barges left next to the cages and workboats that go to and from the farms. Daily tasks include feeding fish, checking for and treating disease, cage and mooring maintenance, from boats or with

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

divers. These farms are larger than shellfish farms, and they are usually considered more unsightly. Waste can accumulate below these farms too, leading to concerns about water quality. In contrast, shellfish are filter feeders that can improve water quality. Shellfish in Maine are raised with varied technology, including surface or bottom cages, surface rafts, and submerged lines. Sometimes all that is visible are buoys marking lines to bottom cages. Figure 3 shows a farm using surface cages. Workers tend to the farms from small boats, and a typical farm will have someone working on it most days, flipping or washing cages to prevent algae accumulation, checking for and treating disease, dealing with predators, and repairing equipment after storms. Shellfish farmers generally lease one or a few sites, they tend to have backgrounds in a natural resource-based profession, they are generally from Maine, and they are almost all full-time farmers. Many farmers are exfishermen who lost jobs when the cod fishery collapsed in the early 1990s.

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; DATA AND METHODS

The main sources for this analysis are aquaculture lease hearing transcripts. Maine's Department of Marine Resources (DMR) notifies the public of all lease applications, except 400-square-foot Limited Purpose leases, by posting notices in local newspapers, alerting harbormasters, and sending notices to parties they deem interested. If more than five persons express concern, DMR holds a public hearing. Of the 263 lease hearings transcripts DMR possesses, 90 had public hearings. DMR writes detailed hearing transcripts, ranging from 15--75 pages and often including verbatim dialogue. DMR keeps these for all active leases and for all leases terminated in the past three years. Existing transcripts cover lease hearings between 1981 and 2015. All hearing documents were scanned into pdf files, and analyzed using NVivo11. The author and two assistants coded transcripts for types of concerns expressed. Using inductive coding, we quantified the

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

number of times each specific type of concern was raised in a hearing, which could happen multiple times at a hearing if multiple persons expressed the same concern. One person expressing the same concern multiple times was counted as one concern. Most members of the public testifying at lease hearings were coastal landowners, and transcripts provide an extensive record of their concerns with aquaculture.

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; CONCERNS AT 'UNCERTAINTY' HEARINGS

The hearings were divided into two groups based on the level of conflict; they are referred to as 'uncertainty' and 'NIMBY' hearings. In NIMBY (Not In My Back Yard) hearings, the public expressed more concerns, coastal landowners generally attempted to block the lease, and the tone of their objections was more strident. Uncertainty hearings had fewer concerns, and these mainly revolved around coastal landowners' unfamiliarity with aquaculture. The fourteen NIMBY hearings averaged twenty-four concerns per hearing and contained 59 percent of the total concerns in all the hearings, whereas the seventy-six uncertainty hearings averaged three concerns each and contained 41 percent of the total concerns. There were an additional forty-eight hearings for new leases with no concerns.

The most common concern that emerged from uncertainty hearings related to farms as boating obstacles, mostly to recreational vessels (Table 1). Concerns about navigation were common. Individuals were uncertain about sailing over submerged gear and having sufficient room to sail around farms in Maine's narrow bays. Kayaking also occasionally came up. The second set of concerns in this category was from coastal landowners worried about launching vessels from, or building docks on, their property. Coastal landowners who planned to place recreational vessel moorings in public waters wanted assurance they could still do this after farm operations began. The quote below is a typical example:

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Two persons had concerns… about losing property value by being unable to launch boats from the property. The farmer agreed to amend his application before the hearing. At the hearing one of the persons, 'questioned Mr. Campbell about whether his lease activities would conflict with a possible dock and float on the … shore or with boating in kayak or skiffs; he stated that there would be no conflict.' The person had no further concerns at the hearing.

Boating concerns illustrate how important recreational use of Maine's bays was to coastal residents, and how uncertain they were about aquaculture farms' impact.

Although shellfish farming has few negative environmental impacts, coastal residents are unfamiliar with shellfish-farm ecology, and environmental impacts are the next most common type of concern. DMR recognizes two types of potential environmental impacts that must be assessed for all farms: impact on flora/fauna and water quality. Coastal residents were concerned that farms could damage eelgrass or disturb bald eagle nests. There were also numerous concerns about farms causing pollution and damaging bay ecology. Coastal residents rarely brought scientific evidence. Instead, they tended to express a general unease over aquaculture's environmental impact, as in this example: ''One riparian asked whether the proposed project could harm the environment of the pond.' This was the only question she asked.'

The next set of concerns involves aesthetics. 'Public use and enjoyment' is a legal term in Maine's aquaculture law, referring to any existing use of the waters within 1,000 feet of one's property, or existing common uses of a farm site by the public. This is the state's most subjective criterion. In our sample, DMR never ruled that farms diminish recreational users' enjoyment, because these bays already have other resource management activities, including hunting, recreational fishing, and commercial fishing, which DMR considers to have similar impacts. Coastal residents have had one success

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

incorporating aesthetic considerations. They lobbied for inclusion of noise and visual impacts, and since 2004, DMR has recognized these as criteria. DMR never rejected a lease in this dataset based on these criteria, but farmers often had to stipulate how they would minimize noise, as in the example below:

Three riparian landowners came and were generally supportive. Their main concerns were access to their property and noise. Concerning noise, their larger concern, one stated, 'the more gear, the more activity to process the oysters which means… more boat traffic, more noise.' The same landowner 'clarified his description of the sound from the tumbler, which he has heard from his property. When outside on his land he may hear a faint noise, he said, but the Route 1 road noise is louder.' Another asked that the tumbler not be used on Sundays and for workers to not play music at the farm. The farmer agreed to only work weekdays and to try to keep noise to a minimum .

The visual-impact criterion seemed to have had little effect. In a few hearings people described how a farm would erode the 'intangible qualities' or 'spirit' of a bay. Impacts on property value came up, but, as this is not one of DMR's criteria, the hearing officer could not consider it. This category shows coastal landowners' uncertainty toward aquaculture, as well as the importance they place on active and passive recreational water uses.

Occasionally, members of the public protested the leasing process itself. They felt there were conflicts of interest because the person who inspects the site for suitability is a DMR employ who then, if satisfied, offers testimony that inevitably helps the farmer. Others protested the state's right to lease bay property. The state requires farmers prove they can successfully manage their farm, and coastal landowners occasionally voiced concerns over farmers' ability to operate their farm, citing situations such as lacking a

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

launch site, lacking a workers' bathroom, or having insufficient farming experience. Lastly, fishermen often expressed concern over farms blocking fishing sites, which is outside this paper's scope.

Renewals are another line of evidence that strongly suggests these concerns are a product of uncertainty. Almost no lease renewals have public hearings, because so few people object. Part of the reason is that it is difficult to block the renewal of a law-abiding lease; however, a major factor explaining the lack of objection is that coastal landowners come to accept farms once they see them in operation.

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; FARMER RESPONSES AT UNCERTAINTY HEARINGS

Lease-hearing transcripts also revealed farmer responses to coastal residents' concerns. Farmers responded in two ways. First, they reduced coastal residents' uncertainty by clarifying what farm operations would entail. Many hearings functioned as a question-andanswer session for apprehensive coastal residents. For concerns about navigation, what seemed to have the most impact on coastal residents were maps. Farmers prepared detailed maps showing where they would deploy equipment within leases, which is less than the full lease space. Lengthy discussions involved how different equipment arrangements would affect navigation. Local harbormaster testimony also swayed landowners, when it was supportive. For concerns over environmental impacts, farmers described their farm operations and their organisms' biology.

The DMR site inspector's testimony and report seemed to have a biggest impact. The site inspector was present at all hearings and often interjected to explain why specific farm operations were benign or how certain natural processes worked. Having a third party to explain environmental impact was clearly helpful in allaying coastal residents' fears at uncertainty hearings.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

For concerns over aesthetics, it was more difficult to judge if perceptions changed at hearings. Farmers described existing farms and showed pictures of them, other coastal residents sometimes testified in support and described noise levels and appearance, but it was hard to see what changes this may have created.

Seeing the actual farms once they were in operation was probably the main way coastal residents' perceptions changed. The quote below from a coastal landowner illustrates this process of familiarization:

'All the questions that you brought up… I went over eight years ago. I've known Mr. Briggs for eight years, and I've been here fourteen. I was adamantly against it - I had all the same questions... And believe me, I retired up here just like everybody else. I love Maine, I want to be here. I thought this was going to be awful. I sit out on my deck. The traffic speed? He creeps around the bay; sometime I wonder if he's got his boat in gear. You hardly hear it. It's no disturbance whatsoever. It wasn't the boat traffic that originally bothered me. It was the aquaculture stuff and how it was going to affect my view. I'm used to it and it's actually interesting when they have a diver down there.'

All of these farmer responses reduced uncertainty for coastal residents by helping them picture farm operations.

Getting to know farmers also appeared to help coastal residents fit farming into their maritime aesthetic. Supporters talked about getting to know farmers and testified about their trustworthiness. Supportive coastal landowners frequently used phrases like, 'he is the best neighbor you could have' and 'he's done everything he said he was going to do and lived by his word.' The Maine Aquaculture Association advises farmers to try to meet coastal landowners before hearings and to talk about themselves as family farmers with roots in the area. The Conservation Law Foundation has also facilitated meetings between

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

farmers and coastal residents. Since 2008, DMR has held scoping sessions because they believe face-to-face meetings ahead of hearings diffuses tensions.

In the late 1990s, Sea Grant Extension (the University organization at Sea Grant Colleges founded by the Hatch Act to serve the fishing industry) organized aquaculture information sessions where farmers interested in leasing an area would meet with coastal landowners and other community members. The idea was to have them get to know one another in a non-confrontational setting. Another one-time, but major, effort at relationship building was Governor Baldacci's Blue Ribbon Aquaculture Panel in 2004, tasked with improving relationships between communities and farmers.

These examples demonstrate the widespread belief that meeting farmers in person helps coastal landowners fit the farmers into their maritime aesthetic because they come to be seen as small producers and trustworthy neighbors. The way supportive coastal residents talk about farmers implies that they see them fitting this Jeffersonian ideal of virtuous small farmers.

The second farmer response was to make concessions or alterations to their farm. In many hearings, farmers agreed to let DMR place conditions on leases to better fit coastal residents' maritime aesthetics and recreational priorities. For example, one farmer limited himself to a forty-horsepower motor and agreed to only use time-consuming, handwashing methods instead of running a generator for power washing. In many cases, these conditions were not necessary for DMR to grant the lease. Rather, they were a central way farmers tried to build goodwill.

Some negotiations on conditions took place outside the lease hearings. Testimony at hearings often referred to these negotiations and they involved the same conditions farmers agreed to in the transcripts. As one supporter put it at a hearing, 'these conditions are designed to make the farm more artisanal and a better fit with riparian owners' sense

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

of place.' He was speaking about a single farm, but aptly described the conditions' purpose.

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; NIMBY HEARINGS

NIMBY-hearing concerns covered the same topics as in the uncertainty hearings; what differentiated them was the increased number of concerns, the more hostile tone, and the intent to block the lease. In all NIMBY hearings, opponents hired lawyers and their objections covered all DMR's criteria.

For illustration, this paper summarizes two NIMBY hearings in the Blue Hill Bay region from 1999 and 2012. The 1999 hearing was in consideration of the region's first shellfish farm. Twenty-four individuals testified in opposition and hired a lawyer. Six individuals testified in support. The farmer was a former fisherman with permits for multiple species and a small terrestrial farm. His family had lived in Maine for several generations. He had taken a federal retraining program to help him get started in aquaculture. His initial application was for thirty-six acres, which would have been the state's largest shellfish farm at the time, but he reduced it to five acres before the hearing due to objections. The size of the initial proposed lease was one reason for intense opposition.

The lawyer questioned the farmer on every criterion DMR recognized and some they did not. He began by challenging the farmer's ability to successfully manage the lease, questioning his education and competence. The lawyer then moved to disease transmittal and effects on local shellfish and wildlife. The next complaint was about diminishing property owners' views and property values. After that, opponents objected that the farm would impede future building of docks. Then opponents brought up noise at the farm, and the boat traffic to and from the farm. The lawyer objected to the way the

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

farmer described the site, saying recreational boaters used it a great deal but would be unable to sail with a farm in the way, depicting the farm as a navigational hazard.

DMR's hearing officer noted that opponents claimed this was a tranquil area where a farm would harm views but that this contradicted their depiction of it as an area with heavy recreational use. In the end, the farmer agreed to limit the lease to four acres, to allow recreational fishing and boating on the open portion of the lease---which was most of the property---and to adjust markers to improve navigation. DMR granted the lease, and there was no opposition to the lease's renewal in 2009.

The second NIMBY hearing example represents the lowest level of conflict at this type of hearing. The farmer applied for an experimental lease for a four-acre mussel farm. The farmer had an existing lease nearby. Thirteen people testified in opposition, including representatives of a community group, Friends of Blue Hill Bay, and the town of Sedgwick. Only one coastal landowner had property within one thousand feet of the proposed lease. He testified that the farm would detract from his views and harm his property value. In questioning, he said he could not see it from his house, but he could if the farm expanded. He went on to point out that people like him pay high property taxes to enjoy the bay's aesthetics.

Several people testified about sailing and kayaking in the area, as well as fishing, swimming, picnicking, motor boating, and camping. Disturbance of these recreational uses was the major concern and theme of the hearing. These residents said it was 'a safe place for kids for fifty years.' Many noted enjoying the 'solitude' and 'remoteness' of the site. Opponents also expressed worries about noise, lights, and even the smell from cormorants that might be attracted to the farm. The town's representative echoed these themes, saying recreational uses would be impeded with no gain for the town. Friends of Blue Hill Bay's lawyer said the farm would 'affect how people feel' about the bay, saying it would 'forever change the nature of High Head---it wouldn't be the same place for kids.' Most

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

of the concerns were about changes to the character of the bay, aesthetics, and property values.

DMR noted that it could not consider impacts on a bay's character and property values. The hearing officer also noted again that it was hard to reconcile reports of heavy recreational use with descriptions of the bay's solitude and remoteness. The hearing officer did accept as valid an environmental complaint that the farmer's current farm had accumulated shells below it. The farmer said he would address this and the new site would be less prone to having that problem.

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; COMPARING CONFLICT ACROSS THREE STUDY REGIONS

Conflict is spatially concentrated. The Blue Hill Bay region has far more conflict than any other region in Maine. Twelve of the fourteen NIMBY hearings were in the Blue Hill Bay region, compared to one in the Damariscotta, and none in Cobscook Bay (see table 2). The Blue Hill Bay region averaged 11.7 concerns per hearing, compared to 3.7 in the Damariscotta River, and 1.9 in Cobscook Bay. The main reason there are few concerns in Cobscook Bay is that it is an economically depressed region with a declining population and little amenity migration. Both Damariscotta and Blue Hill have incomes well above the state average, both are older, and both have high rates of seasonal home ownership. All three are indicators of amenity migration in Maine.

To understand why the Damariscotta River and Blue Hill Bay had such different levels of conflict, it is important to first consider physical geography. The Damariscotta River's narrowness warms its waters and creates ideal growing conditions for shellfish but also makes it harder for recreational sailors to navigate around farms. An intriguing possibility is that the Blue Hill Bay region's many small inlets, combined with a rocky,

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

forested shore with many distinct viewsheds, means that each new farm is a first in that particular inlet or viewshed, even though farms are common in the region. This is indicated, for example, in coastal landowner complaints at a hearing in 2015 that the farm 'would forever change the character' of Morgan Bay, a small inlet without any farms in the middle of the Blue Hill Bay region. Blue Hill Bay also has long been seen as a special place due to its coastal mountain and Acadia National Park, which likely made it harder for coastal landowners to accept marine resource use.

The speed and scale of aquaculture expansion are important too. Aquaculture began in the lower portion of the Damariscotta and the first farms were relatively small and worked closely with a nearby University's research station. Farming grew as the river's amenity migrant and coastal landowner population expanded. The Damariscotta had fewer of both in 1975 than the Blue Hill Bay region did in 1999. The first farms in the Damariscotta were relatively small too. Farming there expanded more slowly than in the Blue Hill Bay region. This gave coastal landowners a chance to see small-scale farming, and it gave farmers time to learn how to interact with coastal landowners before farming scaled up. New farmers were aware of past patterns of positive interaction with coastal landowners and tried to emulate them. In contrast, farming in the Blue Hill Bay region expanded much faster, and farms were larger on average; the first one would have been the state's largest when first proposed. Larger farms, faster growth, and more amenity migrants at farming's onset combined to generate conflict.

Another factor is demographics. Blue Hill is more populous than Damariscotta, but it is also a much larger region. Cobscook Bay does have fewer people, which may account for greater acceptance there. More significantly, many early farmers in the Damariscotta had advanced degrees. In contrast, in the Blue Hill Bay region, several of the largest farmers were former fishermen. Education levels meant farmers and coastal landowners were closer culturally in Damariscotta than in Blue Hill, which likely made positive

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

communication easier to initiate. Also, well-organized NGOs were present at the start of shellfish farming in Blue Hill Bay and have led efforts to block leases.

The first hearing in the Blue Hill Bay region generated animosity on both sides. Distrust has proved hard to undo, creating path dependency. Intense opposition in the Blue Hill Bay region discourages farmers from applying for leases because they know how much evidence they will have to muster. This may be why lawyers there object to all possible criteria. Doing so forces farmers to prepare more detailed applications and farmers see preparation for lease hearings as a formidable obstacle. It is harder to build consensus between farmers and coastal residents given the animosity that emerges from contentious hearings.

In Cobscook Bay, hearings feature little conflict, but for different reasons than in the

Damariscotta. Cobscook Bay is an ideal site for finfish aquaculture because it has extreme tides that average twenty-four feet. This high-volume water movement helps keep waste from accumulating below farms. Once dispersed, it can be absorbed back into the ecosystem. The bay's low level of amenity migration is unusual for coastal Maine. Washington County, which surrounds the bay, has the lowest per capita income in the state (USCB 2016). The county has a declining population, exemplified by its largest town, Eastport, which has declined from a high point of 5,300 people in 1900 to 1,250 today (USCB 2016). Eastport was formerly an important Maine port due to its deep-water harbor. It began declining along with Maine's timber industry. It was also a major fishcanning center, but canning declined with the collapse of the groundfish and sardine fisheries. The town has seen a small group of amenity migrants arrive recently, but overall it remains an industrial waterfront. The bay's other significant town, Lubec, has seen its population drop from a high of 3,370 in 1920 to 1,485 in 2015 for similar reasons (USCB 2016). Farms are seen as bringing much-needed jobs to an economically distressed area,

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

and those jobs fit the area's sociocultural and historical preferences for a marine-based economy.

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; CONCLUSION

At the broadest level, this study shows the value of applying the concept of postproductive transitions to coastal resources and communities. The main aim is to understand how coastal residents and aquaculture farmers reconcile their diverging priorities for marine space, and why some were unable to do so. When it came to concerns about boating around farms, charts and maps helped coastal landowners visualize farm layout and seemed to be decisive in reducing uncertainty. Coastal landowner concerns about environmental impact tended to be more general and less based on science. Testimony from DMR's site inspector appeared to be the biggest factor reducing coastal landowners' concerns, which points to the value of a respected third party to lessen conflict. For concerns about aesthetic impact of farms, it was harder to discern change at lease hearings. Evidence suggests it was seeing farms in the water that made the most difference. Undoubtedly this was easier for shellfish farms than finfish farms; Maine's finfish farms would generate more controversy were they in areas with high amenity migration.

Other maritime uses are romanticized too in Maine, especially lobster fishing. Lobster fishing is done from small boats, much like aquaculture. Farmers used hearings to show coastal landowners how aquaculture could fit their scenic preference, and they frequently modified their farms to make them better match coastal landowners' aesthetics. Meeting farmers, at hearings or elsewhere, helped coastal landowners to see them as good neighbors who fit an artisanal ideal. The way face-to-face contact plays out, and the

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

conditions under which it happens, is an important determinant of rural development in areas undergoing postproductive transitions.

In the Blue Hill Bay region, the lease process's strength, bringing together the two sides for face-to-face discussion, turned into a weakness because it made disagreements personal. Acceptance broke down for several reasons. The first contributing factor was scale. Large farms seemed more industrial and were harder to reconcile with coastal landowners' preferences and priorities. Aquaculture here also grew much faster, creating fears that the bay would become industrialized. Farmers here were less likely to have a college degree and the area had more amenity migrants when farming started, creating a larger cultural divide. Farmers now perceive class conflict in the region. Class divisions were likely already apparent to residents, and exist in Damariscotta too, but seeing it this way intensified the sense of cultural difference that has impeded finding common ground in the Blue Hill Bay region.

Despite conflicts, Maine's leasing-hearing process has helped aquaculture develop in ways that fit coastal residents' priorities. It has brought individual farmers and coastal landowners together to discuss how to do this. It allowed aquaculture to expand without driving off future amenity migrants, who bring benefits to rural areas. Hurley and Walker show that in the context of rural restructuring, land-use planning becomes 'an area where the meaning of the environment and communities' relation to it are negotiated' (2004, 1532). Absent any regional planning, contests over the meaning of Maine aquaculture and ocean space played out on an individual basis. Arguably, this face-to-face, site-by-site deliberation was more effective than top-down, regional-planning rules would have been. It was slow, but it may account for acceptance being more widespread than conflict. Conversely, when the process deteriorated, face-to-face deliberations made disagreement personal, entrenching distrust. Finding the right balance between competing uses of public

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

water is a delicate process; farmers' livelihoods are at stake and coastal landowners are passionate about the sea.

One final and unexpected finding from this study was the complex interaction between physical and cultural geography. Cobscook Bay's confluence of high tides and remoteness make acceptance of finfish aquaculture more likely than in other areas. The Damariscotta has the best shellfish growing conditions in the state, which meant aquaculture would start there when amenity migration was beginning. The Blue Hill Bay region's many small inlets meant a plethora of separate viewsheds, leading to a greater sense of loss for coastal residents. This region's mountain also attracted much earlier amenity migrants, and led to a national park, creating a perception that this area was special, making it harder to reconcile coastal residents' priorities with maritime development. Physical and cultural geography are intertwined, leading to novel outcomes that complicate abstract explanations, necessitating comparative regional analysis.

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; REFERENCES

- Abrams, J. 2013. Amenity Landownership, Land Use Change and the Re-creation of 'Working Landscapes.' Society and Natural Resources 26 (7): 845--859. Journal of
- Abrams, J., and H. Gosnell. 2012. The Politics of Marginality in Wallowa County, Oregon: Contesting the Production of Landscapes of Consumption. Rural Studies 28: 30--37.
- Almstedt, A. 2013. Post-productivism in Rural Areas: A Contested Concept. In Natural Resources and Regional Development Theory , edited by L. Lundmark and C. Sandström, 8--22. Umeå, Sweden: Umeå Universitet.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

- Cosgrove, D. 2006. Modernity, Community and the Landscape Ideal. Journal of Material Culture 11 (1/2): 49--66.
- Costa-Peirce, B. 2014. Ecological Aquaculture: The Evolution of the Blue Revolution . New York: Wiley Blackwell.
- D'Anna, L., and G. Murray. 2015. Perceptions of Shellfish Aquaculture in British Columbia and Implications for Well-Being in Marine Social-Ecological Systems. Ecology and Society 20 (1): 57--67.
- DMR [Department of Marine Resources]. 2016. Aquaculture Lease Inventory. Augusta, Maine: Maine Department of Marine Resources. [http://www.maine.gov/dmr/aquaculture/leaseinventory/index.htm].
- Evans, N., C. Morris, and M. Winter. 2002. Conceptualizing Agriculture: A Critique of Post-Productivism as the New Orthodoxy. Progress in Human Geography 26 (3): 313--332.
- FAO [Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations]. 2014. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture . Rome: Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations.
- Freeman, S., E. Vigoda-Gadot, H. Sterr, M. Schultz, I. Korchenkov, P. Krost, and D. Angel. 2012. Public Attitudes Towards Marine Aquaculture: A Comparative Analysis of Germany and Israel. Environmental Science and Policy 22: 60--72.
- Gibbs, M. 2009. Implementation Barriers to Establishing a Sustainable Aquaculture Sector. Marine Policy 33: 83--89.
- Gill, N., P. Klepeis, and L. Chisolm. 2010. Stewardship among Lifestyle Oriented Landowners. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management 53 (3): 317-334.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

- Grabbatin, B., P. Hurley, and A. Halfacre. 2011. 'I Still Have the Old Tradition': The CoProduction of Sweetgrass Basketry and Coastal Development. Geoforum 42: 638-649.
- Guimond, L., and M. Simard. 2010. Gentrification and Neo-rural Populations in the Quebec Countryside: Representations of Various Actors. Journal of Rural Studies 26: 449--464.
- Holmes, J. 2006. Impulses toward a Multifunctional Transition in Rural Australia: Gaps in the Research Agenda. Journal of Rural Studies 22 (2): 142--160.
- Hurley, P., and P. Walker. 2004. Whose Vision? Conspiracy Theory and Land-Use Planning in Nevada County, California. Environment and Planning A 36 (9): 1529--1547.
- Jackson, P., and R. Kuhlken. 2006. A Rediscovered Frontier: Land Use and Resource Issues in the New West . Lanham, Md.: Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers.
- Murray, G., and L. D'Anna. 2015. Seeing Shellfish from the Seashore: The Importance of Values and Place in Perceptions of Aquaculture and Marine Social-Ecological System Interactions. Marine Policy 62: 125--133.
- Nelson, P. 2001. Rural Restructuring in the American West: Land Use, Family and Class Discourse. Journal of Rural Studies 17: 395--407.
- NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration]. 2013. National Coastal Population Report: Population Trends from 1970--2020 . Washington, D.C.: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
- NSTC [National Science and Technology Council]. 2014. National Strategic Plan for Federal Aquaculture Research . Washington, D.C.: National Science and Technology Council, Interagency Working Group on Aquaculture, Executive Office of the President.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

- Philips, M. 2007. Changing Class Complexions on and in the British Countryside. Journal of Rural Studies 23 (3): 283--304.
- Rector, A. 2015. Maine Population Outlook to 2030 . Augusta, Maine: Governor's Office of Policy and Management.
- Reilly, C., and H. Renski. 2008. Place and Prosperity: Quality of Place as an Economic Driver. Maine Policy Review 17 (1): 12--25.
- Robbins, P., K. Meehan, H. Gosnell, and S. Gilbertz. 2009. Writing the New West: A Critical Review. Rural Sociology 74 (3): 356--382.
- Roche, M., and N. Argent. 2015. The Rise and Fall of Agricultural Productivism? An Antipodean Viewpoint. Progress in Human Geography 39 (5): 621--635.
- Salmi, P. 2015. Constraints and Opportunities for Small-Scale Fishing Livelihoods in a Post-Productivist Coastal Setting. Sociologica Ruralis 55 (3): 258--274.
- Sherwood, R., and D. Megeean. 2004. Demography and Maine's Destiny. In Changing Maine, 1960--2010, edited by R. Barringer, 3--28. Portland: University of Southern Maine Press.
- Solana-Solana, M. 2010. Rural Gentrification in Catalonia, Spain: A Case Study of Migration, Social Change and Conflicts in the Empordanet Area. Geoforum 41: 508--517.
- Stockdale, A. 2010. The Diverse Geographies of Rural Gentrification in Scotland. Journal of Rural Studies 26: 31--40.
- Sturtevant, V., and J. Lange. 2003. Getting from 'Them' to 'Us': The Applegate Partnership. In Forest Communities, Community Forests , edited by J. Kusel and E. Adler, 117--134. New York: Rowman &amp; Littlefield.
- Suryanata, K., and K. Umemoto. 2005. Beyond Environmental Impact: Articulating the 'Intangibles' in a Resource Conflict. Geoforum 36: 750--760.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

- Thompson, C., T. Johnson, and S. Hanes. 2016. Vulnerability of Fishing Communities Undergoing Gentrification. Journal of Rural Studies 45: 165--174.
- USCB [United States Census Bureau]. 2016. American Fact Finder.
- USDA [United States Department of Agriculture]. 2014. 2013 Census of Aquaculture. Washington, D.C.: USDA, National Agricultural Statistical Services.
- Vail, D. 2004. Prospects for a Rim Population Rebound. In Changing Maine, 1960--2010, edited by R. Barringer, 429--449. Portland: University of Southern Maine Press.
- Walker, P., and L. Fortman. 2003. Whose Landscape? A Political Ecology of the 'Exurban' Sierra. Cultural Geographies 19: 469--491.
- Walters, B. 2007. Competing Use of Marine Space in a Modernizing Fishery: Salmon Farming Meets Lobster Fishing on the Bay of Fundy. The Canadian Geographer 51 (2): 139--159.
- Wiber, M., M. Rudd, E. Pinkerton, A. Charles, and A. Bull. 2010. Coastal Management Challenges from a Community Perspective: The Problem of 'Stealth Privatization' in a Canadian Fishery. Marine Policy 34: 598--605.
- Woodward, C. 2004. The Lobster Coast: Rebels, Rusticators, and the Struggle for a Forgotten Frontier . New York: Viking Penguin.

## Captions here

## Acknowledgements:

The author would like to thank Teresa Johnson, Sara Lowden, Christina Robichaud, and three anonymous reviewers. This research is funded in part by the Sustainable Ecological Aquaculture Network, Maine EPSCoR Track 1 Award #1355457.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Accepted Article

## Affiliation:

Dr. Hanes is an assistant professor of geography at the University of Maine, Orono,

Orono, Maine 04469; [samuel.hanes@maine.edu].

Suggested right running head: Maine's Postproductive Transition

TABLE 1-Type and number of concerns in dataset from members of the public at aquaculture lease hearings.

| Boating: 169 (30%) Navigation: 118 Riparian access: 51   | Environment: 132 (23%) Flora and fauna: 93 Water quality: 39   |
|----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Aesthetics: 131 (23%)                                    | Fishing: 101 (17%)                                             |
| Visual impact: 46                                        |                                                                |
| Noise: 30                                                | Other: 41 (7%)                                                 |
| Public enjoyment: 29                                     | Leasing process: 18                                            |
| Property value: 16                                       | Practical operations: 18                                       |
| Spirit, intangible qualities: 8                          | Saturation: 6                                                  |
| Smell: 2                                                 |                                                                |

TABLE 2-Amenity migration measures and hearing data in three study regions and state.

|                                         | Damariscotta River   | Blue Hill Bay   | Cobscook Bay   | Maine    |
|-----------------------------------------|----------------------|-----------------|----------------|----------|
| Population change over preceding decade | +4.7%                | +6.9%           | -5.6%          | +4.3%    |
| Total population of coastal towns       | 11,433               | 21,564          | 4,779          |          |
| Median age                              | 55                   | 49              | 48.8           | 43.5     |
| Median income                           | $54,144              | $44,969         | $33,989        | $48,80 4 |
| Seasonal housing                        | 39.6%                | 31.0%           | 21.0%          | 16.0%    |
| Total number of hearings in dataset     | 58                   | 46              | 60             | 263      |
| Number of NIMBY hearings                | 1                    | 12              | 0              | 14       |

Demographic data from U.S. Census Bureau (2015).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.