Accepted Article

Article type      : Original Article

## Youth  mobility  and  territorial  disparities:  an  analysis  of  urban  and  rural Barcelona

## Abstract

Travel  behavior  of  the  present  generation  of  youths  is  being  increasingly  explored  due  to  their relevance  in  shaping  future  accessibility  needs  and  mobility  habits.  The  present  study  offers  an original perspective on this topic by identifying territorial disparities that emerge in youth mobility patterns in rural and urban areas. Unlike most previous research, we propose taking a global view on mobility by analyzing all trip purposes and transportation modes. This is conducted by analyzing a comprehensive  mobility  survey  in  the  Barcelona  Metropolitan  Region,  which  provides  data  on mobility engagement, trip purposes, modal split, travel times and territorial differences. In general, youngsters account for larger daily travel times than older adults, present a higher attachment to public  transportation  and  walk  less  on  a  daily  basis.  These  differences  are  enhanced  in  rural territories,  where  while  older  adults  overcome  accessibility  issues  with  higher  use  of  the  private vehicle, youngsters are more likely to invest larger travel times on transit.

## Keywords

Everyday mobility; rural; urban; youth; Barcelona.

## Authors and affiliation

Xavier Delclòs-Alió a,* - xavier.delclos@uab.cat

Carme Miralles-Guasch a,b - carme.miralles@uab.cat

* Corresponding author

a Grup d'Estudis en Mobilitat, Transport i Territori (GEMOTT), Departament de Geografia, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona - Edifici B, Campus de Bellaterra (08193), Cerdanyola del Vallès (Barcelona), SPAIN

This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 10.1111/gere.12321

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

<!-- image -->

b Institut  de  Ciència  i  Tecnologia  Ambientals  (ICTA),  Universitat  Autònoma  de  Barcelona  -  Edifici ICTA-ICP, Campus de Bellaterra (08193), Cerdanyola del Vallès (Barcelona), SPAIN

## Acknowledgments

The research presented in this paper has been possible thanks to financial support received from a FPU grant ( Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deporte, Gobierno de España )  and from the Project CSO2016-74904-R  ( Ministerio  de  Economía  y  Competitividad,  Gobierno  de  España ).  The  authors would like to thank Dr. Matt Copley for his professional proofreading services and for his editing suggestions.

A significant part of day-to-day habits is acquired at the early stage of adulthood. This is a moment when decisions with lifelong impact are taken and considerable changes are experienced (Bailey 2009; Molgat 2007). Everyday mobility (that is,  trips conducted on a daily basis) is no exception, and youth is recognized as a key phase in which some of the basic elements defining the everyday travel preferences and practices of an individual are shaped (Lanzendorf 2010; Rau and Manton 2016).

In the past few years the travel behavior of young people has received an increasing level attention from both research and planning perspectives. This has been mainly fueled by evidence suggesting that people between the ages of eighteen and thirty years (labelled as Millennials because they were born in the last two decades of the twentieth century) seem to present significant differences compared to previous generations. This is the case both in terms of their expectations regarding transportation (Simons and others 2014; Blumenberg and others 2016) and also in regard to their day-to-day decisions and behavior (Kuhnimhof and others 2012). This generational change can be regarded in the same way that has been discussed by scholars in other spheres of life, such as their consumer preferences (Bucic, Harris, and Arli 2012), their housing strategies (Xu and others 2015), the manner in which they face the labor market (Levenson 2010) or their close relationship with new information and communication technologies (Vilhelmson and Thulin 2008)

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

While general everyday mobility patterns of young adults are being thoroughly studied, the effect of territorial location (for example, rural or urban) on travel behavior is still to be properly addressed. Considering that the degree of accessibility to everyday locations and the use of different transportation modes are highly dependent on how a given territory is configured (Bramley and others 2009), an analysis that explores territorial differences in youth mobility is called for. Certain spatial configurations can imply particular limitations for people at specific ages mainly through unequal levels of transport accessibility (Ahern and Hine 2012; Marquet and Miralles-Guasch 2016), and different degrees of overall satisfaction (De Vos, Van Acker, and Witlox 2016). More specifically, space and place play a large role in constructing youth identity and therefore potentially shape the future habits of this demographic (Farrugia 2016).

In this context, the present paper contributes to the growing research field that is focused on youth mobility by analyzing differences among rural and urban youths in the Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Spain). For this purpose, we focus on young adults (aged eighteen to twenty-nine years) and compare everyday mobility patterns of those who reside in rural municipalities (with under 10,000 inhabitants) to those living in large urban areas (with more than 50,000 inhabitants). The analysis presented in this paper is approached from a comprehensive perspective: all trip purposes and transportation modes are considered. The study is based both on trip engagement and also the daily temporal implications of such trips, since travel time may be a more adequate object through which social and territorial relationships can be identified (Banister 2011).

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; BACKGROUND

The main aspect that defines everyday mobility patterns of young people is that they invest more time on their daily trips than the rest of the population (Kitamura and others 1992; Mokhtarian and Chen 2004). Youth is a period in which individuals are still not necessarily able to choose where to work, live, or study; these decisions structure daily travel patterns in a profound way (Skelton 2013). Moreover, larger daily travel time expenditures are closely related to what could be considered as the second characteristic of youth mobility, which is an above average use of public transportation (Rosenbloom 1998; Garcia-Sierra 2014). This is related to the lower purchasing capacity of young adults, which translates into

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

them becoming part of a captive market for public transit (Miralles-Guasch and Domene 2010). Furthermore, and in addition to economic factors, the possibility of using that time to socialize or to work (Brown and others 2016), together with a higher environmental consciousness when compared with older adults (Davis, Dutzik, and Baxandall 2012), can also be regarded as causes of a higher public transportation usage among youngsters.

These trends seem to be on the rise among the present generation of youths (Hjorthol 2016; Garikapati and others 2016), as evidenced by a decline both in the possession of a drivers' license and a car (Oakil 2016), and also by a decline in trips and the number of miles travelled per person in private vehicles (van der Waard, Jorritsma, and Immers 2013). Notwithstanding the disjunction between car and transit use, travel behavior studies also have to consider active modes of transportation (Saelens and Handy 2010). In this sense, there are still only a few studies that have addressed this issue among youths in particular, which points to the fact that young people seem to be walking for transport less than other segments of the population (Marquet and Miralles-Guasch 2014; Gordon-Larsen, Nelson, and Beam 2005).

Furthermore, daily trips should be understood as the way to access certain activities that are distributed across the space (Neutens, Schwanen, and Witlox 2011). In order to evaluate youth-related mobility patterns in greater depth, it is necessary to go beyond exploring only the characteristics of their trips and, instead, to also understand why youths need to move on a daily basis. Travel behavior changes between age groups as travel purposes change during the course of life. Different activities linked to each life stage, implying that every social group presents different mobility needs, as well as specific limitations in space and time (Cerin and others 2007; Neutens and others 2007). To the best of our knowledge, there are very few studies in the literature with a focus on trip purposes and specifically among young people. However, there is some initial evidence that these few reports in the body of literature suggest higher degrees of mobility for purposes other than commuting, such as educational or recreational motives, when compared to older adults (McDonald 2015).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Lastly, and in line with the main aim of this paper, it is noteworthy that the territorial dimension has been repeatedly proven to play a key role in shaping people's travel behavior, in general (Ewing and Cervero 2010). Central urban environments are characterized by presenting closer distances between activities, higher diversity of land uses, and higher quality built environment designs, characteristics that are associated with significantly higher shares of walking activity (Marquet and Miralles-Guasch 2015; DelclòsAlió, Gutiérrez, and Miralles-Guasch 2018). At the same time, these features also allow more public transit engagement and an overall increase in accessibility (Banister 2008; Ewing and Cervero 2001). On the other hand, rural and low-density areas are usually associated with higher car dependence (Gray and others 2001), mainly due to the difficulty of providing quality public transportation options (Miralles-Guasch and Cebollada 2003).

In this sense, there is some initial evidence that differences in car use between urban and rural environments are specifically acute among young individuals, a phenomenon that is on the increase due to a higher degree of urbanization among the present generation of youths (Oakil, Manting, and Nijland 2016). Moreover, in the arena of active transportation, it has also been found that walking is often seen as more convenient in urban areas and specifically for young people and children (Lorenc and others 2008), which explains why this specific mode of transportation is receiving increasing attention from an urban perspective (Sung and Lee 2015).

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH

This study was undertaken in the Barcelona Metropolitan Region (hereafter, referred to as BMR), which is located in northeast Spain, and is the capital of the Autonomous Region of Catalonia. This metropolis constitutes one of the major urban areas in Southern Europe, and in 2014 it was populated by approximately 5.2 million inhabitants, who were scattered over an area of around 3,200 km 2 . The core of this metropolitan area is considered as one of the densest and most compact of populated areas in Spain, with still a significant polycentric nature (Marmolejo and Stallbohm 2008), but also including rural and low density environments (Font 2007). In terms of daily mobility, a total of 17.3 million trips are conducted every work day in the BMR; 46.8 percent of which are carried out using active

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

transportation modes 1 ;  35.3 percent are carried out using private transportation modes; and 17.9 percent are carried out using public transit (Autoritat del Transport Metropolità 2014), which is a similar figure to comparable metropolitan areas in Spain (Gutiérrez Puebla and García Palomares 2006).

The analysis of this paper is based on data that were extracted from a traditional travel survey. The Workday Mobility Survey 2014 or EMEF'14 (Autoritat del Transport Metropolità 2014) focuses on the mobility-related patterns and opinions of those who reside in this metropolitan region. Based on Computer Assisted Telephone Interviews (CATI), a total of 9,461 individuals older than sixteen years were asked in 2014 to report on their trips that they conducted on a daily basis. A relative error of ±1.0 percent is assumed, that is estimated with a confidence level of 95 percent.

In order to explore travel behavior of young people in this metropolitan region, the analysis focuses on respondents between eighteen and twenty-nine years of age (a subsample consisting of 1,063 individuals, who conducted a total of 3,747 trips). People under driving age (which is eighteen years in Spain) have been discarded for this analysis, as it would generate nuanced results, especially in terms of transportation mode. Secondly, the age of twenty-nine years of age has been considered as the upper threshold, as recent reports have found this to be the average emancipation age in Catalonia (Consejo de la Juventud de España 2015), which in related research is considered as the age at which adult life is fully engaged (Molgat 2007). Also, in Catalonia the average age of the mother at the time of having the first child in 2014 was set at thirty years (IDESCAT 2014), which implies that before that threshold young people are more likely to be free of caring ties and family responsibilities. On the other hand, respondents aged between thirty and sixty-four years are considered as older adults in this study and are used as the reference population in the analysis.

In order to understand differences in terms of territorial configuration, municipalities in the BMR have been categorized into different groups. In Spain, the threshold between rural and urban municipalities is set at 10,000 inhabitants (Instituto Nacional de Estadística 2001; Capel 1975). On the other hand, the Catalan Municipal Act of Mobility (Generalitat de

1 Active transportation includes walking trips and also trips made by cycling, yet the latter only constitute a total 1.2 percent of the total modal split in the BMR.

Catalunya 2003) establishes urban transport to be mandatory only in municipalities having over 50,000 inhabitants. This consideration of these two thresholds has resulted in three different categories, while the interest of this study is in exploring the difference between rural and urban environments and, hence, these two categories have been finally included in the analysis, which are shown in Figure 1.

Regarding the data source, the EMEF'14 provides information regarding trips conducted on a daily basis on workdays. Besides trip engagement and travel durations, this valuable source offers information on transportation modes 2 , trip purposes (occupational trips: considering work and study-related trips, and personal trips: referring to the remaining trips), and several socio-demographic characteristics. Therefore, there are two data types, one related to the characteristics of the individuals who took part in the survey, and another that is related to the main features of the trips that these individuals undertook on the previous workday.

Lastly, the mobility habits of young adults in rural and urban territories have been compared using either an analysis of cross tabulation through a Chi-squared test, or t-tests in order to depict significant differences in average behavior. All statistical analyses have been performed using IBM SPSS v21 for Windows.

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; RESULTS

The analysis presented below is organized into three main subsections. First, a general overview is given about the everyday mobility patterns of young adults in the BMR, noting differences between rural and urban areas. Second, these mobility patterns are further characterized by considering transportation modes and trip purposes, and the two combined. Given the results in these first two sections, the third part of the analysis presents a relevant note on the temporal implications for the mobility of young adults in the BMR.

&lt;&lt;B-HEAD&gt;&gt; GENERAL EVERYDAY MOBILITY PATTERNS OF YOUNG ADULTS IN RURAL AND URBAN AREAS OF THE BMR

2 Transportation modes are assigned in the survey as the main mode used for each trip, prioritising motorised means over non-motorised means.

The everyday mobility patterns of young people are remarkably different from those of older adults across the Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Table 1). This different behavior is mainly reflected in the fact that young people conduct less daily trips per capita than older adults, while they appear to spend more time on the move on a daily basis.

Moreover, the travel behavior of youths also presents significant differences in territorial terms. Young people living in rural environments conduct more trips per capita than their urban counterparts (3.74 vs. 3.66) and also present greater daily travel time expenditures (98.18 vs. 94.47). This is interesting, since the behavior of older adults is exactly the opposite: those residing in rural areas present lower trip frequencies than in the city, and they also invest less time in travelling on a daily basis. These data indicate that territorial-driven effects exist in travel behavior, but territorial configuration does seem to have a specific effect on the daily travel patterns of young adults. We delve deeper into this idea by analyzing the two main attributes of daily mobility: modal choice and trip purposes.

## &lt;&lt;B-HEAD&gt;&gt; CHARACTERISTICS OF DAILY MOBILITY OF YOUNG ADULTS IN RURAL AND URBAN AREAS OF THE BMR

Active transportation, which mainly consists of walking, is in general the most common way to conduct daily trips in the Barcelona Metropolitan Region ( active transportation = 46.8 percent), followed by 35.3 percent that is carried out using private vehicles and a 17.9 percent is carried out using public transportation in its different forms (Table 2). These large percentages vary significantly depending on territorial configuration, with variation attributable to limited availability of public transportation and a greater difficulty of driving and parking private cars in larger cities. This helps in explaining how rural areas are characterized by a high dependency on private vehicles (63.7 percent), while mobility in urban areas is defined by a higher share of trips using active modes (51.1 percent) and also those trips conducted using public transportation (22.4 percent).

Regardless of these territorial disparities, young individuals present a behavior of their own that is different compared to older adults, which implies that differences in the use of each of these modes in the BMR are not related to transport availability. In general,

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

young people present significantly higher shares of transit use, while on the other hand they appear to walk less on a daily basis. This closer relationship with public transit is made evident even in rural areas where its relative use is extremely high, compared to the behavior of rural older adults as the reference group, and even higher than the modes of transport used by older adults in urban areas. While living in rural areas implies a significant drop in the use of public transit among older adults, a significant part of the youth population still rely on public transit for their day-to-day activities. Moreover, transit use among young people living in urban areas is higher than for their rural counterparts (39.2 percent and 22.5 percent, respectively). A priori, this can be related to the fact that public transportation provision in major Catalan cities is mandatory and, therefore, it is simply available at a higher level. Nevertheless, considering that older adults living in the city use this option half as much (18.9 percent), these figures serve as evidence of how a stronger attachment with public transit is specifically related to the condition of being young.

In terms of trip purposes (Table 3), young people in the BMR present significantly higher shares of work/study-related mobility (28.2 percent) and also more recreational trips (13.6 percent) than older adults in their active years. While reasons to move are quite similar across territorial categories, it is noteworthy that in urban environments the share of occupational purposes among youths is significantly higher (29.7 percent), and those occupational purposes related to personal care and relational mobility (visiting or travelling with others) are somewhat lower (7.0 percent and 5.0 percent, respectively).

The difference between public transportation use between youths and older adults is confirmed when we observe transportation modes according to trip purposes (Table 4). Firstly, for occupational purposes, while in urban environments transit is much more accessible (both young and older adults rely on public transportation for a considerable share of their trips, 51.3 percent and 30.9 percent, respectively), in rural environments young people still use it regardless of its accessibility (36.6 percent vs. 5.3 percent). Secondly, in the arena of personal purposes, in which people are thought to have more flexibility, individual means of transportation dominate everyday mobility. In rural environments, driving is the main option for conducting personal trips regardless of age, while in urban settings active modes are much more common. Nevertheless, there is a significant difference regarding the behavior of young people: they walk or cycle less than

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

older adults for personal purposes, both in rural and urban environments, and in contrast, they rely more on public transit.

## &lt;&lt;B-HEAD&gt;&gt; ONE LAST NOTE ON YOUTH MOBILITY AND TRAVEL TIME IN THE BMR

Considering the previous figures, it might be hypothesized that the higher temporal investment of young people in the BMR is explained by a significantly greater use of public transportation. However, a specific look at travel times in relation to transportation modes might nuance these results (Table 5).

Young adults present significantly higher average trip times in the metropolitan region as a whole (Diff. = +7.16 min), and also in urban and rural territories, which explains their longer daily travel times. Yet, when transportation mode is considered and, therefore, the effect of speed is controlled for, trip durations are still larger for young people when compared to older adults. This seems to be especially the case in urban areas where this difference is also statistically significant. Therefore, young adults not only invest a larger part of their days in travelling because they use public transportation more, but these data suggest that they appear to be travelling farther away on a daily basis (distances travelled were not measured in the survey).

If larger daily travel times are not related exclusively to transportation mode, can this phenomenon be related to trip purpose? Are they travelling farther because their mobility is less flexible? This could be an explanation, according to the results in Table 6. Young people conduct longer trips almost in every sphere of their lives, except for recreational purposes, in which this relation does not appear to be statistically significant. On a territorial note, this difference is even higher in rural environments and it is especially due to occupational purposes.

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

The present study has examined how daily mobility patterns of young people in the Barcelona Metropolitan Region are affected by different territorial configurations. Youth mobility is increasingly identified as a key issue in travel behavior research, since habits and

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

patterns are mostly shaped in this life stage. By using a comprehensive data source such as the EMEF'14, and not an ad hoc survey, everyday mobility patterns in rural and urban territories of the BMR emerge as being much more complex than driving license ownership, car availability, or vehicle miles travelled per person (van der Waard, Jorritsma, and Immers 2013; Kuhnimhof, Buehler, and Dargay 2011; Garikapati and others 2016) and, therefore, this paper contributes to existing research by considering trip engagement, travel times, transportation modes, and trip purposes.

The most substantial asymmetries found when analyzing the travel patterns of youths from a territorial perspective are related to the intensive nature of their everyday mobility, and also with specific characteristics regarding trip purposes and modal choice. Our findings show that even though specific territorial scenarios can explain everyday mobility patterns to a large extent, these structural and morphological features have specific effects for the daily trips of young adults. This proves that, besides the territorialdriven differences, there is an evident age gap in travel behavior that needs to be addressed. The data in this study confirm that young people generally invest more time than older adults in undertaking their everyday trips.

This first defining feature of the age gap in travel behavior clearly differs in rural and urban territories. While rurality implies more travel time for youngsters, the relationship appears to be the opposite among older adults, who invest more time for moving in the city. Therefore, young rural inhabitants are targeted as the group in this given population that presents greater daily travel time expenditures. The effect of greater distances between activities is even more characteristic of rural environments (Dempsey, Brown, and Bramley 2012), which appears to be multiplied for young people. This suggests that this group can be facing considerable accessibility limitations that older adults are able to avoid by using the private vehicle to a greater extent (Kaufmann, Bergman, and Joye 2004).

A second key feature explaining these disparities can be related to the transportation mode used in daily trips. We have found that young people are significantly more attached to public transit than older adults, both in rural and urban territories. This is an interesting result, since the lower availability and frequency of public transportation in rural areas, together with considerable limitations for driving in urban environments (such as congestion

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

or parking fees), explains the difference in modal choice, and especially for older adults (Sheller and Urry 2000), while among young people these factors seem to be playing a minor role. This suggests that the higher use of public transportation among young people could be related to factors other than transport supply. One plausible hypothesis could be related to this group's lower purchasing capacity, which would result in them being the captive demand of public transit because they cannot access a private vehicle (Alemi, Berliner, and Tiedeman 2016).

It is noteworthy that, in parallel to the dichotomy between public and private transportation, young people use active modes less than older adults in the BMR. This can be seen as a function of their higher degree of motorized mobility, which could imply less available time, considering that people are subject to a certain degree of travel time budget (Gimenez-Nadal and Sevilla-Sanz 2011). This is found both in rural and urban territories, even though the difference between youths and older adults is more acute in urban environments. While in large cities the intense urbanization and the compact and dense nature of these traditional urban fabrics allow for more active travel behavior, young people still rely more on motorized means for their everyday trips. This again serves as evidence of how territorial configuration is shaping mobility practices for different sections of the population in relation to their life stage. Furthermore, trips related to occupational purposes, either for work or study, are the main drivers of young people's daily mobility, and they imply a significantly higher share of daily trips when compared to the behavior of older adults. On the other hand, trips related to taking care of oneself or others are significantly lower for youngsters. These two differences are especially relevant in urban areas.

These considerations lead us to reflect on why young people seem to be spending more time travelling on a daily basis. One of the main and evident reasons explaining larger daily travel times is their close relationship with public transportation, which is generally a slower means than private vehicles. Secondly, their higher share of occupational trips, which are in turn conducted to a greater extent by using motorized means, again highlights their need to invest more time in mobility. This idea is further strengthened when territorial categories are included in the analyses. While the fact that urban adults present higher travel times than their rural counterparts may very well be due to their greater usage of

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

public transit in these areas, the case for young adults is more complicated. While they also use public transit in urban areas, their above-average dependency on this slower mode in rural environments may in turn result in higher daily travel times (Andersson, Lavesson, and Niedomysl 2018). Given the results of trip durations, young people seem to be travelling not only slower, but also farther than older adults in order to reach their everyday locations. One possible explanation for this would be that in the early stages of one's life, everyday locations are not as eligible as compared to the stage when people become spatially settled. This could mean that, due to the rigid nature of the first jobs that people can access at these ages, and the fact that the number of jobs has increased in the past decade (de Lange, Gesthuizen, and Wolbers 2014), young people would be forced to travel greater distances in order to access their basic everyday locations and, therefore, they become flexible in terms of time. Also in the same sense, this might also be the case for a part of university students, considering that part of the universities in the area are not located in central areas of the main urban continuum (Miralles-Guasch and Domene 2010). While this is only a hypothesis, it would be interesting to develop this further in future research. Moreover, it would be particularly adequate to focus rural environments, aiming to explore how young people find themselves having to cope with longer distances and, also, with slower means of transportation, which can reinforce feelings of marginalization or exclusion that have been identified in other studies (Shergold and Parkhurst 2012).

The main strengths of the present study rely on the novelty of approaching youth mobility from a territorial perspective. At the same time, the large dataset allows a deep level of disaggregation by adding nuances to the results. However, there are also some limitations, such as other socioeconomic factors that should be included in order to have a more complete vision of youth mobility habits. We suggest that having an income-related approach would be an adequate complement to this analysis. Also, a study exploring the individual perceptions of youths in regard to their daily mobility patterns, mainly related to modal choice motivation, should be undertaken in the near future.

In our opinion, this paper represents a step forward towards an increasing knowledge of youth mobility in general, but particularly in Mediterranean contexts, within which public transportation and active means, such as walking, play a significantly higher role than in other urban contexts (Marquet and Miralles-Guasch 2015).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Overall, we have seen that while territory plays a major role in the shaping of everyday mobility, young people present a behavior of their own. The consequences of these findings go beyond the characterization of the mobility patterns of a population group. Creating and promoting urban environments that allow young people to avoid spending long periods of time on the move should be considered from a planning perspective. Moreover, specific collectives such as rural youngsters should be targeted as key groups among which active living policies should be strengthened.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

## &lt;&lt;A-HEAD&gt;&gt; REFERENCES

- Ahern, A., and J. Hine. 2012. Rural Transport - Valuing the Mobility of Older People. Research in Transportation Economics 34 (1): 27-34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.retrec.2011.12.004.
- Alemi, F., R. M. Berliner, and K. Tiedeman. 2016. What Affects Millennials' Mobility ? PART I : Investigating the Environmental Concerns, Lifestyles, Mobility-Related Attitudes and Adoption of Technology of Young Adults in California. City, publisher.
- Andersson, M., N. Lavesson, and T. Niedomysl. 2018. Rural to Urban Long-Distance Commuting in Sweden: Trends, Characteristics and Pathways. Journal of Rural Studies 59 (December 2017): 67-77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2018.01.010.
- Autoritat del Transport Metropolità. 2014. EMEF 2014. Enquesta de Mobilitat En Dia Feiner. La Mobilitat a l'àmbit Del Sistema Tarifari Integrat de l'àrea de Barcelona. Barcelona. https://iermb.uab.cat/ca/enquestes/enquestes-de-mobilitat.
- Bailey, A. J. 2009. Population Geography: Lifecourse Matters. Progress in Human Geography 33 (3): 407-418. http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0309132508096355.
- Banister, D. 2008. The Sustainable Mobility Paradigm. Transport Policy 15 (2): 73-80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2007.10.005%255Cnhttp://linkinghub.elsevier.com /retrieve/pii/S0967070X07000820.
- ---. 2011. The Trilogy of Distance, Speed and Time. Journal of Transport Geography 19 (4): 950-959. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2010.12.004.
- Blumenberg, E., K. Ralph, M. Smart, and B. D. Taylor. 2016. Who Knows about Kids These Days? Analyzing the Determinants of Youth and Adult Mobility in the U.S. between 1990 and 2009. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 93: 39-54. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2016.08.010.
- Bramley, G., N. Dempdey, S. Power, C. Brown, and D. Watkins. 2009. Social Sustainability and Urban Form: Evidence from Five British Cities. Environment and Planning A 41 (9): 2125-2142.
- Brown, A., E. Blumenberg, B. Taylor, K. Ralph, and C. Voulgaris. 2016. A Taste for Transit? Analyzing Public Transit Use Trends among Youth. Journal of Public Transportation 19 (1): 49-67. http://scholarcommons.usf.edu/jpt/vol19/iss1/4/.
- Bucic, T., J. Harris, and D. Arli. 2012. Ethical Consumers Among the Millennials. Journal of Business Ethics 110 (1): 113-131.
- Capel, H. 1975. La Definición de Lo Urbano. Scripta Vetera. Edición Electronica de Trebajos Publicados Sobre Geografia y Ciencias Sociales : 1-23.
- Cerin, E., E. Leslie, L. du Toit, N. Owen, and L.D. Frank. 2007. Destinations That Matter: Associations with Walking for Transport. Health and Place 13 (3): 713-724.
- Consejo de la Juventud de España. 2015. Observatorio de Emancipación (Cataluña). 2 o

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Accepted Article

Semestre - 2015 .City, publisher.

- Davis, B., T. Dutzik, and P. Baxandall. 2012. Transportation and the New Generation. Frontier Group U.S. PIRG Education Fund : 1-34. http://www.ospirg.org/sites/pirg/files/reports/Transportation &amp; the New Generation.pdf.
- Delclòs-Alió, X., A. Gutiérrez, and C. Miralles-Guasch. 2018. The Urban Vitality Conditions of Jane Jacobs in Barcelona: Residential and Smartphone-Based Tracking Measurements of the Built Environment in a Mediterranean Metropolis. Cities In press.
- Dempsey, N., C. Brown, and G. Bramley. 2012. The Key to Sustainable Urban Development in UK Cities? The Influence of Density on Social Sustainability. Progress in Planning 77 (3): 89-141.
- Ewing, R., and R. Cervero. 2001. Travel and the Built Environmental: A Synthesis. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 1780 (1): 87-114.
- ---. 2010. Travel and the Built Environment: A Meta-Analysis. Journal of the American Planning Association 76 (3): 265-294. http://mrc.cap.utah.edu/wpcontent/uploads/sites/8/2015/04/fulltext.pdf.
- Farrugia, D. 2016. The Mobility Imperative for Rural Youth: The Structural, Symbolic and Non-Representational Dimensions Rural Youth Mobilities. Journal of Youth Studies 19 (6): 836-851.
- Font, A. 2007. Morfologías Metropolitanas Contemporáneas de Baja Densidad. In La Ciudad de Baja Densidad: Lógicas, Gestión y Contención , 97-108. Diputació Provincial de Barcelona.
- Garcia-Sierra, M. 2014. Travel Behaviour and Environmental-Transport Policy: Theory and Empirical Studies.City, publisher.
- Garikapati, V. M., N. Mcdonald, V. M. Garikapati, R. M. Pendyala, E. A. Morris, and P. L. Mokhtarian. 2016. Activity Patterns, Time Use, and Travel of Millennials: A Generation in Transition? Transport Reviews 36 (5): 558-584.
- Generalitat de Catalunya. 2003. Llei 9/2003, de 13 de Juny, de La Mobilitat. Diari Oficial de La Generalitat de Catalunya, Núm. 2913, de 27 de Juny de 2003, Pp. 12980-12985. http://portaldogc.gencat.cat/utilsEADOP/PDF/3913/347686.pdf.
- Gimenez-Nadal, J. I., and A. Sevilla-Sanz. 2011. The Time-Crunch Paradox. Social Indicators Research 102 (2): 181-196.
- Gordon-Larsen, P., M. C. Nelson, and K. Beam. 2005. Associations among Active Transportation, Physical Activity, and Weight Status in Young Adults. Obesity Research 13 (5): 868-875. http://doi.wiley.com/10.1038/oby.2005.100.
- Gray, D., J. Farrington, J. Shaw, S. Martin, and D. Roberts. 2001. Car Dependence in Rural Scotland: Transport Policy, Devolution and the Impact of the Fuel Duty Escalator.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Accepted Article

Journal of Rural Studies 17 (1): 113-125.

- Gutiérrez Puebla, J., and J. C. García Palomares. 2006. Cambios En La Movilidad En El Área Metropolitana de Madrid: El Creciente Uso Del Transporte Privado. Anales de Geografía de La Universidad Complutense 25: 331-351. http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/AGUC/article/view/AGUC0505110331A/31014.
- Hjorthol, R. 2016. Decreasing Popularity of the Car? Changes in Driving Licence and Access to a Car among Young Adults over a 25-Year Period in Norway. Journal of Transport Geography 51: 140-146. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2015.12.006.
- IDESCAT. 2014. Indicadors Demogràfics. Statistical Institute of Catalonia . http://www.idescat.cat/pub/?id=inddt&amp;n=917.
- Instituto Nacional de Estadística. 2001. Glosario General. City, publisher. http://www.ine.es/censo/es/glosario.html.
- Kaufmann, V., M. M. Bergman, and D. Joye. 2004. Motility: Mobility as Capital. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 28 (4): 745-756. http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.0309-1317.2004.00549.x.
- Kitamura, R., J. Robinson, T. Golob, M. Bradley, J. Leonard, and T. van der Hoorn. 1992. A Comparative Analysis of Time Use Data in the Netherlands and California. Institute of Transportation Studies . Volume, number, pages
- Kuhnimhof, T., R. Buehler, and J. Dargay. 2011. A New Generation. Travel Trends for Young Germans and Britons. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2230: 58-67. http://trb.metapress.com/openurl.asp?genre=article&amp;id=doi:10.3141/2230-07.
- Kuhnimhof, T., R. Buehler, M. Wirtz, and D. Kalinowska. 2012. Travel Trends among Young Adults in Germany: Increasing Multimodality and Declining Car Use for Men. Journal of Transport Geography 24 (2012): 443-450. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2012.04.018.
- de Lange, M., M. Gesthuizen, and M. H. J. Wolbers. 2014. Youth Labour Market Integration Across Europe. European Societies 16 (2): 194-212. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/14616696.2013.821621.
- Lanzendorf, M. 2010. Key Events and Their Effect on Mobility Biographies: The Case of Childbirth. International Journal of Sustainable Transportation 4 (5): 272-292. http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ujst20%5Cnhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1080/155683109031 45188%5Cnhttp://www.tandfonline.com/% 5Cnhttp://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ujst20% 5Cnhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15568310903145188% 5Cnhttp://www.tandfonline.com/.
- Levenson, A. R. 2010. Millennials and the World of Work: An Economist's Perspective. Journal of Business and Psychology 25 (2): 257-264.
- Lorenc, T., G. Brunton, S. Oliver, K. Oliver, and A. Oakley. 2008. Attitudes to Walking and

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Accepted Article

Cycling among Children, Young People and Parents: A Systematic Review. J Epidemiol Community Health 62 (10): 852-857. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18791040.

- Marmolejo, C., and M. Stallbohm. 2008. En Contra de La Ciudad Fragmentada: ¿Hacía Un Cambio de Paradigma Urbanístico En La Región Metropolitana de Barcelona? Scripta Nova. Revista Electrónica de Geografía y Ciencias Sociales 12 (270): 1-16.
- Marquet, O., and C. Miralles-Guasch. 2014. Walking Short Distances. The Socioeconomic Drivers for the Use of Proximity in Everyday Mobility in Barcelona. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 70: 210-222. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2014.10.007.
- ---. 2015. The Walkable City and the Importance of the Proximity Environments for Barcelona's Everyday Mobility. Cities no. 42: 258-266. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2014.10.012.
- ---. 2016. Introducing Urban Vitality as a Determinant of Children's Healthy Mobility Habits: A Focus on Activity Engagement and Physical Activity. Children's Geographies 3285 (April 2016): 1-14. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/14733285.2016.1157572.
- McDonald, N. C. 2015. Are Millennials Really the 'Go-Nowhere' Generation? Journal of the American Planning Association 4363 (August): 1-14. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/01944363.2015.1057196.
- Miralles-Guasch, C., and À. Cebollada. 2003. Movilidad y Transporte. Opciones Políticas Para La Ciudad . City, Fundación Alternativas.
- Miralles-Guasch, C., and E. Domene. 2010. Sustainable Transport Challenges in a Suburban University: The Case of the Autonomous University of Barcelona. Transport Policy 17 (6) (November): 454-463.

http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0967070X10000612.

- Mokhtarian, P. L., and C. Chen. 2004. TTB or Not TTB, That Is the Question: A Review and Analysis of the Empirical Literature on Travel Time (and Money) Budgets. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 38 (9-10): 643-675. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0965856404000680.
- Molgat, M. 2007. Do Transitions and Social Structures Matter? How 'Emerging Adults' Define Themselves as Adults. Journal of Youth Studies 10 (5): 495-516.
- Neutens, T., T. Schwanen, and F. Witlox. 2011. The Prism of Everyday Life: Towards a New Research Agenda for Time Geography. Transport Reviews 31 (1): 25-47. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01441647.2010.484153.
- Neutens, T., F. Witlox, N. Van De Weghe, and P. De Maeyer. 2007. Space-Time Opportunities for Multiple Agents: A Constraint-Based Approach. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 21 (10): 1061-1076. http://search.ebscohost.com.proxy.bnl.lu/login.aspx?direct=true&amp;db=aph&amp;AN=274424 71&amp;site=ehost-live percent5CnU: percent5CDocumentation percent5CBiblio percent5CNEU03\_Space?time opportunities for multiple agents - a constraint-based

Accepted Article approach\_2007.pdf.

- Oakil, A. T. M. 2016. Securing or Sacrificing Access to a Car: Gender Difference in the Effects of Life Events. Travel Behaviour and Society 3: 1-7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tbs.2015.03.004.
- Oakil, A. T. M., D. Manting, and H. Nijland. 2016. Determinants of Car Ownership among Young Households in the Netherlands: The Role of Urbanisation and Demographic and Economic Characteristics. Journal of Transport Geography 51: 229-235. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0966692316000119.
- Rau, H., and R. Manton. 2016. Life Events and Mobility Milestones: Advances in Mobility Biography Theory and Research. Journal of Transport Geography 52: 51-60. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2016.02.010.
- Rosenbloom, S. 1998. Transit Markets of the Future: The Challenge of Change . Vol. 28. City, Transportation Research Board.
- Saelens, B. E., and S. L. Handy. 2010. Built Environment Correlates of Walking: A Review 40, no. 206.
- Sheller, M. B., and J. Urry. 2000. The City and the Car. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 24 (December 2000): 737-757. http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/119042568/abstract.
- Shergold, I., and G. Parkhurst. 2012. Transport-Related Social Exclusion amongst Older People in Rural Southwest England and Wales. Journal of Rural Studies 28 (4): 412-421. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2012.01.010.
- Simons, D., P. Clarys, I. De Bourdeaudhuij, B. de Geus, C. Vandelanotte, and B. Deforche. 2014. Why Do Young Adults Choose Different Transport Modes? A Focus Group Study. Transport Policy 36: 151-159. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2014.08.009.
- Skelton, T. 2013. Young People's Urban Im/Mobilities: Relationality and Identity Formation. Urban Studies 50 (February): 467-483.
- Sung, H.-G., and S. Lee. 2015. Residential Built Environment and Walking Activity: Empirical Evidence of Jane Jacobs' Urban Vitality. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 41: 318-329. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2015.09.009.
- Vilhelmson, B., and E. Thulin. 2008. Virtual Mobility, Time Use and the Place of the Home. Tijdschrift Voor Economische En Sociale Geografie 99 (5): 602-618.
- De Vos, J., V. Van Acker, and F. Witlox. 2016. Urban Sprawl: Neighbourhood Dissatisfaction and Urban Preferences. Some Evidence from Flanders. Urban Geography 3638 (January): 1-24.
- van der Waard, J., P. Jorritsma, and B. Immers. 2013. New Drivers in Mobility; What Moves the Dutch in 2012? Transport Reviews 33 (3): 343-359. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01441647.2013.801046.
- Xu, Y., C. Johnson, S. Bartholomae, B. O'Neill, and M.S. Gutter. 2015. Homeownership

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Among Millennials: The Deferred American Dream? Family and Consumer Sciences Research Journal 44 (2): 201-212.

Table 1. General indicators of everyday mobility among young and older adults in rural and urban areas in the BMR (2014).

|                                       |                          | Young adults (18-   | Older adults (30-   | 18-29 vs 30-64   | 18-29 vs 30-64   | 18-29 vs 30-64   |
|---------------------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Municipality type                     | Indicators               | 29)                 | 64)                 | Diff.            | t                | p-value          |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Mobile population        | 95,7%               | 93,0%               | 2,71             | -                | -                |
|                                       | Daily trips per capita   | 3.74                | 4.23                | -0.49            | -2.18            | 0.029            |
|                                       | Daily travel time (min.) | 98.18               | 73.99               | 24.19            | 4.10             | 0.000            |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Mobile population        | 96,1%               | 93,3%               | 2,81             | -                | -                |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Daily trips per capita   | 3.66                | 4.28                | -0.62            | -7.63            | 0.000            |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Daily travel time (min.) | 94.47               | 84.86               | 9.60             | 4.42             | 0.000            |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Mobile population        | 95,5%               | 93,4%               | 2,16             | -                | -                |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Daily trips per capita   | 3.69                | 4.28                | -0.59            | -8.87            | 0.000            |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Daily travel time (min.) | 96.64               | 81.49               | 15.15            | 8.45             | 0.000            |

Table 2. Modal choice among young and older adults in rural and urban areas in the BMR (2014).

| Municipality type                     | Transportation mode    | Young adults (18- 29)   | Older adults (30- 64)   | Total   |
|---------------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|---------|
|                                       | Active transportation  | 17.7%*                  | 27.1%*                  | 29.7%   |
| Rural                                 | Public transportation  | 22.5%**                 | 3.9%*                   | 6.6%    |
| (< 10,000 population)                 | Private transportation | 59.9%                   | 69.1%**                 | 63.7%   |
|                                       | Total                  | 100.0%                  | 100.0%                  | 100.0%  |
| Urban                                 | Active transportation  | 33.2%*                  | 49.5%*                  | 51.1%   |
|                                       | Public transportation  | 39.2%**                 | 18.9%*                  | 22.4%   |
| (> 50,000 population)                 | Private transportation | 27.6%                   | 31.6%**                 | 26.5%   |
|                                       | Total                  | 100.0%                  | 100.0%                  | 100.0%  |
|                                       | Active transportation  | 30.3%*                  | 44.9%*                  | 46.8%   |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Public transportation  | 34.5%**                 | 14.3%*                  | 17.9%   |
|                                       | Private transportation | 35.2%                   | 40.8%                   | 35.3%   |
|                                       | Total                  | 100.0%                  | 100.0%                  | 100.0%  |

Test: Chi-square, sig = 000 all categories. Adjusted residuals test, corrected.

* Significantly lower values within age group and territorial category.

** Significantly higher values within age group and territorial category.

Table 3. Trip purposes among young and older adults in rural and urban areas in the BMR (2014).

| Municipality type                     | Trip purposes                    | Young adults (18-29)   | Older adults (30-64)   | Total       |
|---------------------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|-------------|
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Work / study                     | 25.7%**                | 20.0%                  | 20.8% 11.5% |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Personal care                    | 8.7%*                  | 11.9%**                |             |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Visiting / traveling with others | 6.7%*                  | 16.3%**                | 15.0%       |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Recreation                       | 13.8%**                | 7.2%*                  | 8.1%        |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Return home                      | 45.1%                  | 44.6%                  | 44.6%       |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Total                            | 100.0%                 | 100.0%                 | 100.0%      |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Work / study                     | 29.7%**                | 18.9%                  | 20.8%       |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Personal care                    | 7.0%*                  | 14.2%**                | 12.9%       |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Visiting / traveling with others | 5.0%*                  | 13.6%**                | 12.1%       |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Recreation                       | 13.2%**                | 9.5%*                  | 10.2%       |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Return home                      | 45.0%                  | 43.8%                  | 44.0%       |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Total                            | 100.0%                 | 100.0%                 | 100.0%      |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Work / study                     | 28.2%**                | 18.9%*                 | 20.6%       |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Personal care                    | 7.5%*                  | 13.8%**                | 12.7%       |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Visiting / traveling with others | 5.6%*                  | 14.4%**                | 12.8%       |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Recreation                       | 13.6%**                | 8.9%*                  | 9.8%        |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Return home                      | 45.0%                  | 44.0%                  | 44.1%       |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Total                            | 100.0%                 | 100.0%                 | 100.0%      |

Test: Chi-square, sig = 000 all categories. Adjusted residuals test, corrected.

* Significantly lower values within age group and territorial category.

** Significantly higher values within age group and territorial category.

Table 4. Modal choice according to trip purpose among young and older adults in rural and urban areas in the BMR (2014).

| Municipality type                     | Trip purpose          | Transportation mode   | Young adults (18- 29)   | Older adults (30-64)   | Total   |
|---------------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------|------------------------|---------|
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Occupational a (100%) | Active                | 10.7%*                  | 12.7%*                 | 13.6%*  |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           |                       | Public                | 36.6%**                 | 5.3%**                 | 11.3%** |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           |                       | Private               | 52.7%                   | 82.0%**                | 75.2%** |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Personal b (100%)     | Active                | 25.8%**                 | 34.7%**                | 37.4%** |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           |                       | Public                | 10.2%*                  | 2.8%*                  | 4.0%*   |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           |                       | Private               | 64.1%                   | 62.5%*                 | 58.6%*  |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Occupational a (100%) | Active                | 21.2%*                  | 22.7%*                 | 24.1%*  |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           |                       | Public                | 51.3%**                 | 30.9%**                | 35.8%** |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           |                       | Private               | 27.6%                   | 46.4%**                | 40.1%** |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           |                       | Active                | 46.2%**                 | 62.3%**                | 62.5%** |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Personal b (100%)     | Public                | 25.0%*                  | 13.4%*                 | 17.0%*  |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           |                       | Private               | 28.8%                   | 24.3%*                 | 20.6%*  |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) |                       | Active                | 19.2%*                  | 20.2%*                 | 21.5%*  |
|                                       | Occupational a (100%) | Public                | 48.3%**                 | 23.5%**                | 29.4%** |
|                                       |                       | Private               | 32.5%                   | 56.3%**                | 49.0%** |
|                                       |                       | Active                | 42.0%**                 | 56.9%**                | 57.8%** |
|                                       | Personal b (100%)     | Public                | 19.5%*                  | 9.8%*                  | 13.0%*  |
|                                       |                       | Private               | 38.4%                   | 33.3%*                 | 29.2%*  |

Test: Chi-square, sig = 000 all categories. Adjusted residuals test, corrected.

* Significantly lower values within age group, territorial category and trip purpose.

** Significantly higher values within age group, territorial category and trip purpose.

Table 5 . Average trip time (minutes) according to transportation mode among young adults and older adults in rural and urban areas in the RMB (2014).

| Municipality type             | Transportation mode    | Young adults (18-   |   Older adults (30- 64) | 18-29 vs 30-64   | 18-29 vs 30-64   | 18-29 vs 30-64   |
|-------------------------------|------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
|                               |                        | 29)                 |                         | Diff.            | t                | p-value          |
|                               | All trips              | 26.26               |                   17.51 | 8.76             | 8.13             | 0.000            |
| Rural                         | Active transportation  | 12.13               |                   12.5  | -0.37            | -0.22            | 0.827            |
| (< 10,000 population)         | Public transportation  | 62.78               |                   59.64 | 3.15             | 0.59             | 0.558            |
|                               | Private transportation | 16.66               |                   17.13 | -0.47            | -0.44            | 0.658            |
|                               | All trips              | 25.84               |                   19.85 | 5.99             | 16.01            | 0.000            |
| Urban                         | Active transportation  | 15.21               |                   14.33 | 0.88             | 1.88             | 0.060            |
| (> 50,000 population)         | Public transportation  | 39.02               |                   34.55 | 4.48             | 5.85             | 0.000            |
|                               | Private transportation | 19.89               |                   19.68 | 0.21             | 0.32             | 0.748            |
|                               | All trips              | 26.20               |                   19.05 | 7.16             | 22.67            | 0.00             |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region | Active transportation  | 14.55               |                   14.01 | 0.54             | 1.34             | 0.180            |
| (Total)                       | Public transportation  | 43.85               |                   37.05 | 6.80             | 8.93             | 0.000            |
|                               | Private transportation | 18.97               |                   18.31 | 0.66             | 1.42             | 0.155            |

Table 6. Average trip time (minutes) according to trip purpose among young and older adults in rural and urban areas in the RMB (2014)

| Municipality type                     | Trip purposes                    | Young adults (18-29)   | Older adults (30-64)   | 18-29 vs 30-64   | 18-29 vs 30-64   | 18-29 vs 30-64   |
|---------------------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
|                                       |                                  | Young adults (18-29)   | Older adults (30-64)   | Diff.            | t                | p-value          |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | All trips                        | 26.26                  | 17.51                  | 8.76             | 8.13             | 0.000            |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Work / study                     | 34.76                  | 21.97                  | 12.80            | 5.28             | 0.000            |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Personal care                    | 14.65                  | 15.00                  | -0.35            | -0.12            | 0.907            |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Visiting / traveling with others | 17.03                  | 11.89                  | 5.13             | 2.17             | 0.030            |
| Rural (< 10,000 population)           | Recreation                       | 17.84                  | 20.57                  | -2.73            | -1.05            | 0.295            |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | All trips                        | 25.84                  | 19.85                  | 5.99             | 16.01            | 0.000            |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Work / study                     | 29.79                  | 24.33                  | 5.46             | 7.63             | 0.000            |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Personal care                    | 18.29                  | 14.93                  | 3.37             | 3.38             | 0.001            |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Visiting / traveling with others | 18.12                  | 14.43                  | 3.69             | 3.73             | 0.000            |
| Urban (> 50,000 population)           | Recreation                       | 22.54                  | 22.63                  | -0.09            | -0.08            | 0.940            |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | All trips                        | 26.20                  | 19.05                  | 7.16             | 22.67            | 0.000            |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Work / study                     | 31.68                  | 23.56                  | 8.12             | 11.96            | 0.000            |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Personal care                    | 17.29                  | 14.52                  | 2.77             | 3.49             | 0.000            |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Visiting / traveling with others | 17.50                  | 13.42                  | 4.09             | 5.31             | 0.000            |
| Barcelona Metropolitan Region (Total) | Recreation                       | 21.19                  | 22.56                  | -1.37            | -1.49            | 0.136            |

<!-- image -->