## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## HIV Citizenship in Uneven Landscapes

Brian King, Marina Burka &amp; Margaret S. Winchester

To cite this article: Brian King, Marina Burka &amp; Margaret S. Winchester (2018): HIV Citizenship in Uneven Landscapes, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2018.1457428

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2018.1457428

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 17 May 2018.

- [x] Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 3

- [x] View related articles

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

## HIV Citizenship in Uneven Landscapes

Brian King,* Marina Burka,* and Margaret S. Winchester y

* Department of Geography, The Pennsylvania State University y Department of Health Policy and Administration, The Pennsylvania State University

The HIV/AIDS epidemic has taken on a new course in recent years with expanded access to antiretroviral therapy in the Global South. Although this transition is extending the lives of individuals for years or even decades, it is also creating new relationships between citizens and the state that are driven by resource needs specific to HIV management. This article details findings from an ongoing research project in northeast South Africa that is examining the social and ecological impacts of HIV/AIDS. Qualitative interviews are combined with ethnographic observations of a rural primary care clinic to document the ways in which residents and health care institutions are managing HIV. While initiating care for HIV-positive patients on antiretroviral therapy, clinics and other health care agencies advocate behavioral practices that challenge existing cultural norms and spatial economies, particularly in the realm of nutrition and food access. The importance of accessing certain foods is advocated as necessary for maintaining bodily health, yet this therapeutic citizenship confronts historical systems of inequality produced through spatial segregation. The consequence is that the coupling of drug provision with public health interventions produces uneven opportunities for health management that are mediated by cultural, ecological, and political systems in the era of managed HIV. Key Words: health, health and environment, HIV/AIDS, political ecology of health, South Africa, therapeutic citizenship .

近 年 来 , 随 着 取 得 抗 反 转 录 病 毒 疗 法 管 道 的 增 加 , HIV/AIDS 传 染 病 在 全 球 南 方 走 向 新 的 道 路 。 仅 管 此 般 变 迁 延 伸 了个人 的 生 命 数 年 至 数 十 年 , 但 却 同 时 创 造 了 公 民 与 国 家 之 间 的 崭 新 关 系 , 而 该 关 系 是 由 管 理 HIV 的 特 定 资 源 需 求 所 驱 动 。 本 文 详 细 记 录 南 非 东 北 部 一个 检 视 HIV/AIDS 的 社 会 与 生 态 冲击 的 持 续 进 行 的 研 究 计 画 之 发 现 。 该 研 究 结 合 质 性 访 谈 与 对 乡 村 第 一 层 级 照 护 诊 所 进 行 的 民 族 志 观 察 , 以 记 录 居 民 与 健 康 照 护 机构 管 理 HIV 的 方 式 。 这 些 诊 所 与 健 康 照 护 机构 对 HIV 阳 性患 者 提 供 反 转 录 病 毒 疗 法 的 照 护 之 际 , 同 时 倡 议 挑 战 既 有 文 化 常 规 和 空 间 经 济 的 行 为 实 践 , 特 别 是 在 营 养 和 粮 食 取 得 的 领 域 。 该 倡 议 将 取 得 若 干 食 物 的 重 要 性 视 为 维 持 身 体 健 康 之 必 要 , 但 此 一 治 疗 的 公 民 权 , 与 通 过 空 间 隔 离 生 产 的 不 均 历史 系 统 相 互 冲 突 , 并 导 致 以下 结 果 : 在 HIV 获 得 管 理 的 年 代 , 药 品 提 供 与 公共 健 康 介 入 的 配 对 , 生 产 了 健 康 管 理 的 不 均 机 会 , 并 由 文 化 、 生 态 和 政 治 系 统 所 中介 。 关 键 词 ： 健 康 , 健 康 与 环 境 , HIV/AIDS, 健 康 的 政 治 生 态 学 , 南 非 , 治 疗 的 公 民 权 。

La epidemia del VIH/SIDA ha seguido un curso nuevo en a ~ nos recientes gracias al mayor acceso de los pacientes a terapia antirretroviral en el Sur Global. Aunque esta transici  on est  a alargando la vida de individuos por a ~ nos e incluso d  ecadas, tambi  en est  a creando nuevas relaciones entre los ciudadanos y el estado las cuales son controladas por las necesidades espec  ıficas de recursos para el manejo del VIH. Este art  ıculo presenta en detalle los hallazgos de un proyecto de investigaci  on en desarrollo en el nordeste de Sud  africa en el cual se est  an examinando los impactos sociales y ecol  ogicos del VIH/SIDA. Entrevistas cualitativas se combinan con observaciones etnogr  aficas en una cl  ınica rural de atenci  on primaria para documentar las maneras como los residentes y las instituciones de salubridad est  an manejando el VIH. Mientras se inicia el cuidado de pacientes que registran VIH positivo con terapia antirretroviral, las cl  ınicas y otras agencias de salubridad propugnan por pr  acticas de conducta que retan las normas culturales existentes y las econom  ıas espaciales, en particular en el campo del acceso a la nutrici  on y los alimentos. La importancia de poder disponer de ciertos alimentos es promovida como necesaria para mantener la salud corporal, aunque esta ciudadan  ıa terap  eutica debe confrontar sistemas hist  oricos de desigualdad producidos por segregaci  on espacial. La consecuencia es que el acoplar la provisi  on de medicamentos con las intervenciones de la salud p  ublica produce oportunidades desiguales en el manejo de la salud, mediadas por sistemas culturales, ecol  ogicos y pol  ıticos en la era del VIH de manejo controlado. Palabras clave: ciudadan  ıa terap  eutica, ecolog  ıa pol  ıtica de la salud, salud, salud y medio ambiente, Sud  africa, VIH/SIDA.

T he HIV/AIDS epidemic has had substantial impacts on societies and environments in the Global South. An estimated 36.7 million people worldwide were living with HIV/AIDS at the end of 2015, and roughly 2.1 million people became newly infected with HIV in that same year (AIDS.gov

<!-- image -->

2017). As evidenced by differential prevalence rates and historically varying rates of access to antiretroviral therapy (ART), the HIV/AIDS epidemic has had disproportionate and uneven effects for societies in the Global South. This has generated significant research that has documented the consequences of the disease for demographic patterns, national economies, and gender dynamics (de Waal and Whiteside 2003; Drimie 2003; Love 2004; Masanjala 2007; Joint United Nations Programme on HIV and AIDS [UNAIDS] 2008). Scholarship has predicted an uncertain future for agricultural production, suggesting that increasing food insecurity will make human populations even more vulnerable to infection and reduce the life span of infected individuals (Negin 2005; Talman, Bolton, and Walson 2013). Other studies have documented the gendered dimensions of HIV, emphasizing that in some settings women become infected earlier than men in the same age cohort and also face additional burdens due to insecure land tenure and unequal access to economic resources (Masanjala 2007; Schatz and Ogunmefun 2007; Jewkes and Morrell 2010; Harrison, Short, and Tuoane-Nkhasi 2014; Moyer 2015).

An important development is that the HIV/AIDS epidemic has taken on a new course in recent years with expanded access to ART that has the potential to extend the lives of HIV-positive individuals for years or even decades. This is primarily the result of advancements in the drugs used to treat the disease combined with efforts by state and nonstate institutions to provide universal access to them (World Health Organization [WHO] 2010). UNAIDS (2016) reports that an estimated 17 million people were accessing ART at the end of 2015. Global coverage of ART was believed to reach 46 percent (a range of 43-50 percent) at the end of 2015, with the greatest expansion occurring in parts of the Global South, including countries in eastern and southern Africa where the epidemic has been particularly severe. In these regions, coverage increased from 24 percent (a range of 22-25 percent) in 2010 to 54 percent (a range of 50-58 percent) in 2015. These improvements can be seen in South Africa, as the 2012 UNAIDS country-level progress report indicated that the incidence of HIV had reached a 'plateau,' even though the absolute number of people living with HIV was 'on a steep increase' of approximately 100,000 additional people each year. The report noted a 'substantial downturn in AIDS related mortality in recent years,' with the annual number of AIDSrelated deaths reduced from roughly 257,000 in 2005

to 194,000 in 2010. The effect of the government's commitment to expanding ART is that the national life expectancy has increased by eight years since the mid-2000s (Republic of South Africa 2012).

Expanded access to ART has shifted the discourse for many public health institutions, whereby HIV is more commonly referred to as a 'chronic condition.' This likens HIV to diabetes or heart disease in that it is believed to be manageable assuming that there are behavioral changes as well as the provision of drugs and routine monitoring. Regardless of work that shows the limitations of presenting HIV in the Global South as a chronic disease (cf. McGrath et al. 2014), the shifts in the availability of ART have meant that individuals now living with HIV have markedly different opportunities for managing their health. Yet regardless of these developments, there remains limited research within geography on the experiences of HIV-positive individuals, particularly in resource-scarce settings in sub-Saharan Africa. Additionally, research is needed that integrates the social and ecological dimensions of HIV to uncover the complicated entanglements shaping the possibilities for disease management. This has the potential to inform geographic scholarship on political ecologies of health (King 2010, 2015, 2017; Jackson and Neely 2015), health and environment interactions (Winchester and King 2017), and bodies (Guthman and Mansfield 2013, 2015; Hayes-Conroy and Hayes-Conroy 2015; Neely 2015). Additionally, it might facilitate an often missed, yet likely very productive, engagement with research on human health in other disciplines, particularly medical anthropology (Farmer 1999; Fassin 2007; Kalofonos 2010; Biehl 2011; Moyer 2015) and social epidemiology (Krieger 1994; Poundstone, Steffanie, and Celentano 2004).

This article reports the findings from research completed from May 2013 through June 2014 and January through June 2016 in northeast South Africa as part of an ongoing project examining the relationships among HIV/AIDS, livelihood systems, and the natural environment. The first section of the article provides a review of research on health and environment in geography and related disciplines. This is followed by an assessment of the current trajectories of HIV/AIDS in South Africa before turning to the case study and methodology. Qualitative interviewing was completed with residents in three rural communities, which is integrated with ethnographic observations of a rural primary care clinic to document the ways that residents and the health care sector are managing HIV. The third section details some of the key findings in

terms of how HIV-positive individuals and households are managing their health. We assert that expanded access to ART is resulting in new and complicated relationships between citizens and the state, which are produced and continuously negotiated based on resource needs specific to HIV management. While initiating care for HIV-positive patients on ART, clinics and other health care agencies advocate behavioral changes that confront preexisting human-environment interactions, particularly in the realm of nutrition and food access. Furthermore, we argue that ART messaging is challenging cultural practices such as the use of traditional medicine, while also placing distinct burdens on female-headed households. The article concludes with some of the implications of these findings for geographic research on health and environment interactions and political ecologies of health. We emphasize how research on governmentality could benefit from geographic scholarship in showing how the possibilities for therapeutic citizenship are historically mediated and spatially produced.

## Health and Environment in Geographic Research

Geographic research on human health and the environment has experienced a renaissance in recent years, with productive contributions being made from a number of subfields, particularly health geography, political ecology, and environmental justice. One such trajectory is research that leverages scholarship on political ecologies of health (King 2010, 2015, 2017; Jackson and Neely 2015) that responds, in part, to an earlier call for a political ecology of disease approach (Turshen 1977, 1984; Mayer 1996). In an early review, King (2010) identified the benefits of political ecology for research on human health that could link with health geography and cognate fields. In the article, he emphasized how political ecologies of health would assist in the examination of the political economies of disease, health discourses, and the interactions between social and ecological systems. This connected with other studies at that time asserting that health should be seen as 'biosocial' and part of the naturesociety tradition within geography (cf. Mansfield 2008).

Jackson and Neely (2015) built on this emerging field by asserting the value of integrating other disciplinary perspectives, specifically, medical anthropology, history of medicine, and science and technology studies (STS) to advocate a particular 'practice' of a political ecology of health. They suggested that this multidisciplinary engagement informs understandings of the production and circulation of knowledge, as well as the 'politics around who gets sick and who remains healthy, the provision of health care, and the production, circulation, and application of knowledge about health' (Jackson and Neely 2015, 48). Additionally, they asserted that even amidst the growth of political ecology research on disease and health, the field has 'yet to fully incorporate questions about the nature of healthy and unhealthy bodies' (Jackson and Neely 2015, 50). Although the invocation of nature has different connotations, one such meaning is the value of political ecology for interrogating health and environment interactions, both within the body itself and between the individual social actor and the body politic. As has been noted by scholarship within health geography, the places created and transformed by particular political economies and cultural dynamics result in varying outcomes for health and wellbeing (Kearns and Moon 2002). Therefore, centering the individual body within broader networks of power and domains of meaning is necessary to identify the diverse factors shaping vulnerability to disease and possibilities for health management.

In an assessment of public health interventions on Buruli ulcer in Ghana, Hausermann (2015) advanced the concept of assemblage to analyze the multiple, and at times conflicting, actors and institutions that converge in particular moments to manage illness. She asserted that these assemblages cut across social and spatial networks, relying on diverse ways of knowing and sets of practices that challenge the binary of traditional and biomedical knowledge. Rather, Buruli ulcer sufferers draw on this diversity depending on their distinct needs and as such, the resulting practices generate a particular spatiality of the state that is constituted by 'fractured and prosaic practices shaping treatment inaccessibility and access' (Hausermann 2015, 2217). Important to our later discussion are the ways Hausermann's study reveals multifaceted ways of knowing health that subsequently inform the strategies employed by local actors. Buruli ulcer sufferers confront unequal social networks and health care landscapes that present inconsistent and often uneven pathways for treatment. In essence, the assemblage is a social construction that is tied together by political, economic, and cultural dynamics that generate diverse and uneven outcomes for people. Additionally, in confronting the binary of traditional and biomedical

health care, Hausermann shows that individuals navigate a range of options depending on availability, belief systems, or personal preference.

Related work within geography has centered on the body. Asserting that studies have tended to 'black box' the body, Guthman and Mansfield (2013) engaged with environmental epigenetics to identify diverse processes 'through which the supposedly external environment actively enters, shapes, and becomes part of the body' (350). Similarly, in a recent review, they concluded that the field of epigenetics helps uncover how bodies change in relation to their biophysical, psychosocial, and nutritive environments (Guthman and Mansfield 2015). The value of focusing on the individual body and its relationship with infectious disease is helpfully articulated by Neely's (2015) examination of the coincidence of tuberculosis (TB) and HIV in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Neely concentrated on the concept of local biologies to conceptualize health as being simultaneously biological, cultural, and social. These studies have usefully shown how attention to the body foregrounds the lived experiences for those attending to a health challenge or maneuvering through a political bureaucracy to access medications or other resources needed to meet basic needs. They also serve as a reminder of the limitations of biomedicine and epidemiology in tending to focus on only one disease agent, when in fact people often confront a variety of challenges, such as the coincidence of HIV and TB, which manifest distinctly through their synergistic relationships. Individual experiences with illness can vary dramatically, either as expressed within the body or through the possibilities for management within broader landscapes.

In addition to these social impacts, emerging research indicates that HIV/AIDS has significant effects for human and environment interactions, with some scholarship asserting that HIV and the natural environment operate as a syndemic relationship (Talman, Bolton, and Walson 2013). The implication is that the interactions between food insecurity and HIV infection are circular, such that households affected by HIV/AIDS are less able to ensure adequate supplies of food and are more likely to consume fewer nutrient-rich foods, thereby increasing levels of malnutrition within the household. As a result, many HIVpositive individuals and households in sub-Saharan Africa are responding by relying on other sources for food consumption, such as the collection of plants and insects from communal areas (L. M. Hunter, Twine, and Patterson 2007) or engaging in hunting to offset food insecurity (McGarry and Shackleton 2009).

Other research from South Africa has outlined the underlying context shaping political and economic opportunities in the contemporary era. Drawing on detailed ethnographic research from KwaZulu-Natal, M. Hunter (2010) argued that declining marriage rates overlap with areas of extreme income inequality that combine in reshaping gender dynamics and sexual relationships. Specifically, he suggested that the high rates of HIV in the area were likely produced by shifting cultural mores about the 'materiality of everyday sex' in which boyfriend-girlfriend 'gift' relationships are of increasing importance not only for income needs but also a range of moral and reciprocal obligations. As M. Hunter (2010) noted, 'Without addressing the structural reason why men and women have more than one sexual partner, any behavioral intervention campaign is unlikely to provide a major breakthrough' (26).

These contributions bridge to work in other disciplines, particularly medical anthropology (ScheperHughes 1993; Kalofonos 2010; Nguyen 2010; Biehl 2011; Cousins 2016; Winchester et al. 2016), which helps uncover the daily challenges that people face in accessing critical resources for survival, overcoming stigma, and challenging structural regimes of power and privilege. In an assessment of HIV intervention in West Africa in the late 1990s, Nguyen (2010) advanced the concept of therapeutic sovereignty as a new form of political power in which the processes determining who gets to live amidst the epidemic 'are mechanisms that decide exception in matters of life and death' (7). Due to the scarcity of drugs at that time, sick people positioned themselves with governmental and nongovernmental groups to access drugs, which necessitated new forms of social organization and performance. Specifically, Nguyen (2007) documented the role of confessional testimonials that 'trained people to talk about themselves, and talking about yourself came to be about staying alive' (9). This resulted in a form of therapeutic citizenship in which those who needed to secure drugs had to align themselves with external imaginaries of good conduct around sexual decision making. Similarly, in detailing the constraints in accessing health care in Brazil, Biehl (2011) asserted that HIV management results in 'highly privatized politics of survival' (120), as individuals rely on a diverse array of actors and institutions to acquire information and care within a state that was

'pharmaceutically present (via markets) but by and large institutionally absent' (114).

These studies have usefully advanced Foucault's concept of governmentality by demonstrating the ways in which sick people elect to embody the logics of the state to access desperately needed resources. As Cousins (2016) explained, therapeutic citizenship 'captures the ways in which people living with HIV maintain excellent adherence to ART regimes in parts of Africa with weak public health systems, and claim resources from public or non-governmental organization programs by negotiating conflicting moral economies of obligation, reciprocity, and value' (4). This insight presents a critical avenue of investigation to integrate with geographical research on the body. By situating attention at the level of the individual, and also an individual's bodily ecologies, the myriad ways in which people experience illness are better revealed. Some diseases have visible symptoms that contribute to societal responses and stigmas, whereas others are subtle and largely invisible, yet central to the bodily experience. Leveraging political ecology to studies of disease and health obligates a more expansive analysis that considers the places, landscapes, networks, and political economies in which individuals are located. This would assist in analyzing the broader political and spatial economies that social actors navigate to secure their health or manage illness. Research on political ecologies of health that engages with the concept of therapeutic citizenship would also help examine differential exposure to the conditions that contribute to the spread of infectious disease or poor health. These experiences are embodied in varying ways that are intimately connected to the places and landscapes in which people live. Additionally, the possibilities for health management or 'effective' therapeutic citizenship are imagined and stabilized by the expectations of a health care sector that can ignore the political and economic conditions that individuals confront on a daily basis (cf. Farmer 1999).

The remainder of the article examines the management of HIV in contemporary South Africa by focusing on the diversity of resources needed to adhere to treatment regimens. We work to show that although improvements in access to ART in the Global South result in HIV being likened to a chronic condition, within South Africa therapeutic citizenship collides with political and economic systems that challenge the capacity to effectively manage health. This is demonstrated through two particular patterns in which HIV and therapeutic citizenship intersect: traditional medicine and food. In considering the specific mandates associated with ART, our objective is to leverage political ecology to engage with governmentality to evaluate how ART messaging does not easily map onto the landscapes of rural South Africa. We argue that regardless of expanded access to ART, current treatment regimens remain constrained by historical spatial economies that generate unequal possibilities for HIV citizenship.

## Case Study and Methodology

The following sections are informed by research that has been conducted in South Africa, which has been particularly affected by the HIV/AIDS epidemic. It is estimated that currently 7 million of South Africa's 55 million citizens are infected with HIV (UNAIDS 2015), meaning that there are more people living with the disease there than in any other country in the world (Beaubien 2013). UNAIDS (2015) estimates that 19.2 percent of South African adults between the ages of fifteen and forty-nine are HIVpositive, of whom 4 million are women and 240,000 are children under the age of fifteen. There are an estimated 2.1 million orphans under the age of eighteen due to AIDS. Our findings derive from a mix of quantitative and qualitative methods conducted in three communities in northeast South Africa. Figure 1 is a map of the study region that identifies the study areas of Ntunda, Mzinti, and Schoemansdal.

All three communities were part of the KaNgwane Bantustan during apartheid. The Bantustans were spatial containers for the majority African population that corresponded with what the national government presented as distinct ethnic 'homelands' (South Africa Department of Information 1967; South Africa Information Service 1973). These territories built on the Native Reserves established by the British during colonialism to segregate the population while providing a steady supply of labor to the mines, farms, and service industries in the country. Those living in the area of Swazi ancestry were expected to reside within KaNgwane and as such faced constrained economic opportunities for decades. The Bantustans were part of 'separate development' planning that asserted they would eventually become independent countries, thereby leaving the majority of the country for the white minority population (Malan and Hattingh 1976). Although national census estimates during the apartheid era need to be discounted, the Surplus Peoples Project estimated that from 1960 to 1980 the proportion of the total black population living in

Figure 1. Map of the study region.

<!-- image -->

the Bantustans rose from 39 to 53 percent (Platzky and Walker 1985).

Atotal of sixty-one interviews were conducted in the three communities, with thirteen in Ntunda, twentyone in Mzinti, and twenty-seven in Schoemansdal (these numbers reflect their relative sizes to support a comparative design). Respondents were selected from their previous participation in a structured household survey that was completed in July 2013 with 327 participating households. The survey was similar to the recently completed census but had additional questions on household health, use of natural resources, and perceptions of disease and well-being. The primary respondent, self-identifying as the responsible head of the household, answered the questions but the survey instrument gathered a range of demographic, health, and environmental patterns for all members of the household and extended family. In some cases, family members were living in urban locations seeking employment and sending remittances back to the household. In others, children were sent to schools outside of the area. Taken together, information was gathered on 1,546 individuals within the 327 households. Households were identified using a random and spatially stratified sampling procedure to ensure representation from the entire geographic extent of the three communities. In cases where people were not home, enumerators returned two more times on different days and at different times to reduce bias within the sample. The number of surveys in each location was calculated to obtain a representation of 10 to 20 percent based on the population of the communities.

One benefit of the structured survey is that it enabled the research team to build on information previously collected to conduct qualitative interviews to develop a longitudinal assessment on HIV management. Households were divided into those that reported having an HIV-positive member and those that reported not having an HIVpositive member. It is important to emphasize that households and individuals that identified as HIV-negative could be HIV-positive, either because they were not symptomatic at the time of the visit and thus had not been tested or because they simply elected to keep their status private. Regardless, the reporting of HIV status is what was used to separate households for a comparative assessment. Qualitative interviews followed a cohort design in which a negative household was paired with a positive household based on similar characteristics, specifically the age of household head(s), number of household members, educational level of the household head(s), and economic information in terms of employment and pensions.

In addition to the qualitative interviews, the second author conducted observations at one of the community's primary clinics in 2014. Clearance was obtained from the clinic's supervisor at the nearby hospital to conduct observations for two weekdays during business hours. A translator who was also assisting with the qualitative

interviews supported the observations, which included a semistructured interview with an HIV/AIDS counselor who works at the clinic. The clinic is located on the corner of a busy intersection, enclosed by a fence and staffed by two security guards. The entire compound includes two buildings, a larger building for treatment of all diseases except HIV/AIDS and a smaller building in the back designated for voluntary counseling and testing (VCT) of HIV/AIDS. While at the clinic, particular attention was paid to the demographics of patients visiting, the reasons for their visits, and the particular messaging health care workers communicated for certain diseases. Data collection methods followed all university and country-specific human subject protocols, and any identifying information has been removed so that the identity of informants is protected. We use pseudonyms for our informants in the article.

In the following sections, data from the clinic observation are integrated with the qualitative interviews to detail the lived experiences for those managing HIV in the study region. Although there are a number of factors shaping the possibilities for health management, we concentrate on traditional medicine and food as central to the production of therapeutic citizenship for HIV-positive people.

## HIV Management in Rural South Africa

We begin the discussion with an interview conducted by the first author in January 2016 with Amahle. Also present was a research assistant to help with the translation between English and SiSwati; however, most of the interview was conducted in English. Amahle spoke with us for nearly two hours, sitting in a green plastic chair in the narrow passageway between two doors that entered into separate parts of her home. Because of the tight confines, the interview team sat on the ground, which meant that we were looking up to Amahle during the interview. It was a hot day as it was the height of the summer, and the soil of her yard was dry and compacted. The summer heat was particularly pronounced because the region was experiencing a severe drought that was caused by El Ni ~ no. As we approached the house to request the interview, the South African Weather Service was reporting that thirty-one locations in the country had reached new maximumtemperature records (van Rooyen 2016). Strict water rationing was occurring within many cities and farmers throughout the country were reporting the loss of livestock and crops due to the drought.

Amahle's house is located in the western section of the community and is only accessible by walking on a slight uphill path that weaved past the other houses. Due to histories of racial segregation that accompanied colonial and apartheid spatial policies, this rural area has high population densities with limited economic opportunities for many residents. Amahle is somewhat unique because she is employed locally, although she had been forced to switch to her current position because her former employer would not accommodate health complications from her illness. Amahle tested positive for HIV in 2004 when she was pregnant with her daughter. She did not begin taking ARVs until she started experiencing symptoms from the disease, including sweating and fainting. Within South Africa and other countries in the Global South, the provision of ARVs has tended to occur when the CD4 count reaches a specific threshold. The CD4 count is a measure of the number of CD4 T lymphocytes (CD4 cells) in a blood sample. For someone who tests positive for HIV, it is a critical indicator of the health of the immune system and the state of HIV progression. A person who does not have HIV could have a CD4 count of anywhere between 500 and 1,500. At the time Amahle began taking ARVs, her CD4 count was 42. Amahle shared that her brother had committed suicide that year and the stress weakened her immune system, thereby forcing her to seek care.

In describing her experience with treatment, she indicated that she had to switch between different drug regimens because of the side effects. As she described:

Mostly, people are too weak, and it gives them side effects. There are those who are a little bit weaker. So it goes with your weakness and you have to take drugs twice a day.

We then began discussing the ways in which she was managing her health. Much of the conversation turned to resources needed for meeting daily needs, particularly food, which Amahle indicated was critical to her. As she explained:

I'm talking from experience that people who are taking ARVs, they need more food, more and different kinds of food. Because many people who are taking ARVs, if they do not get enough food, the drugs that they are taking have side effects, and their bodies, they don't look nice.

In describing the ways in which the virus was embodied, she turned to the relationships between drugs and food, noting that for HIV-positive individuals:

They need healthy food. HIV needs healthy food. So when taking ARVs and healthy food, your body will look

normal, so those people whom you can easily identify them that they are taking ARVs it is because they are not taking enough or [eating] healthy food . . . so there is a disadvantage because the ARVs when you are taking them, you have to eat, and other people they have died due to taking ARVs without food.

In many ways, Amahle is fortunate to be living in South Africa at this time, because the national government has become a global leader in the provision of ARVs. By moving to treat patients whose CD4 count is 500 or lower, in line with recommendations from the WHO in 2013, the government has significantly reduced the chances of patients progressing from HIV disease to AIDS, which has the potential to extend an individual's life for years or decades. It should be noted that the WHO changed its recommendations in late 2015, advising that ART should begin as soon as someone tests positive for HIV. Additionally, the agency indicated that anyone at risk of becoming infected should be given protective doses of ARVs (WHO 2015). This protocol has not been widely implemented in South Africa as of yet and presents a challenge because this expansion could mean as many as 9 million more people would require treatment in the Global South (McNeil 2015). Yet in this area, the management of HIV is not simply a matter of accessing services such as testing or drug provision. HIV involves stigma, which in Amahle's case influenced her employment opportunities. Because of the response from her previous supervisor, she had to shift to another position that was further from her home. This placed additional burdens on her ability to provide for herself and her family. Amahle explained that

I worked for four months, then I got sick in September. I can say that I couldn't get the post because of my illness because the employer said he is not employing sick people. So I had to go to my permanent job. My permanent job is the one that can tolerate my situation.

Amahle also shared that she had recently been taking medications for TB, which the doctors discovered due to the side effects from ART. She explained:

[The drugs] made me sick and I laid down, and thereafter is when they discovered TB. They did check for TB earlier, but they couldn't find it, until when I was sick by the ARVs and that is when they discovered the TB after many tests, mind you. It was March, April, May, and June is where they discovered that I have a TB, and I was on TB treatment until September.

To attend to multiple health challenges, Amahle maneuvers through a public health infrastructure that faces ongoing resource constraints. For all three communities, public primary care clinics and hospitals are the main source of health care. At the time of the research, Ntunda did not have a clinic, although one opened in 2015. Prior to that, residents explained that they would either choose not to pursue health care for particular ailments, use traditional medicine, or travel to other communities. Traveling to clinics in other communities resulted in costs for families that are estimated to spend a sizable portion of their monthly income on transport costs. One study estimated that poorer households might spend over 10 percent of their household income on health-related transport costs (Honda et al. 2015). The Mzinti community has one clinic, whereas Schoemansdal is close to several public and private care facilities. This is beneficial for Amahle because she lives close to public care facilities; however, it reveals the diversity of factors influencing HIV management that vary across rural landscapes. Many of these factors, whether bureaucratic, cultural, ecological, or gendered, are often first experienced after testing positive for HIV.

## ARTand Traditional Medicine

Community clinics are the primary location where testing for HIV occurs, which is accompanied by VCT. VCT typically consists of two counseling sessions, a pretest counseling session given prior to testing and a posttest counseling session following the HIV test when results are provided. After undergoing VCT, patients ready to start ART must sign a contract from the Department of Health and Social Services that asks the patient to understand what the medication will do, the possible side effects, the required daily regimen, and that HIV is not curable. In contrast to these concrete requirements, however, the last stipulation requires that 'the patient is committed to his/her health . . . and will cooperate with the clinic.' This last condition effectively permits the clinic to advocate particular behavioral changes that are coupled with drug provision. This protocol is central to the initiation of therapeutic citizenship. Patients are expected to not only take ARVs but also internalize practices associated with treatment. Being a good patient necessitates behavioral changes and technologies that constitute a mosaic for ART. In particular, clinic messaging for HIV-positive individuals in the study region confronts deeply embedded cultural practices in addition to food and nutrition requirements.

The VCT counselor explained that the first thing she tells HIV-positive patients is that they must never mix muti (traditional medicine) with ARVs. At the end of a counseling session with a new group of patients starting ARVs, the counselor continually reiterated that they must not go see traditional healers or use muti (also muthi or umuthi ). There are different categories of traditional healers, including umthandazis, sangomas , and inyangas . In this area, umthandazis are understood as faith healers who might engage with an African Christian church and use Biblical teachings and prayer with their treatment. Inyangas are one type of healer who has expertise in the use of medicinal plants and other practices, and a sangoma is thought to have the power of communicating with one's ancestors. In counseling HIV-positive patients, the VCT counselor indicated that sangomas often grind the ARVs together with muti thinking that it will strengthen the patient, but this does not work. In addition to this clinical message reaching (and changing the minds of) HIV patients, the clinic offers a health lecture for roughly ten to fifteen minutes every morning, where they reiterate that their patients should not use muti but should instead follow clinic protocols in treating illness.

Efforts by public health care facilities to change patient behavior confront existing cultural practices, some of which are deeply rooted. Depending on the study, research in South Africa suggests either a modest or substantial reliance on traditional medicine. In an article widely cited in the literature, Kale (1995) indicated that there were as many as 200,000 traditional healers in the country on whom 80 percent of black South Africans depend for treatment. Other studies report on the role of medicinal plants for routine household needs (Makhado et al. 2009) and the reliance on traditional healers in both urban and rural areas (Nattrass 2005; Peltzer and Mngqundaniso 2008; Peltzer 2009). In addition to visiting traditional healers, the collection of medicinal plants or secondary vegetation from surrounding communal areas is used for a variety of purposes. Interestingly, some studies suggest that there are certain needs that are satisfied by traditional medicine, such as improving personal well-being or spiritual needs (Ross 2008). Drawing from research in this same study region, King (2012) reported that nearly 20 percent of households reported collecting medicinal plants and 45 percent had a family member who had met with a sangoma for a particular reason.

Given these dynamics, it is notable that most of our informants had adopted the clinics' recommendation, either discursively or in practice, not to use muti . As one HIV-positive resident explained, 'The vegetables are very important but not muti . At the clinic they tell us not to use muti when you are on treatment.' Another resident interviewed said, 'What I know is that we don't use muti as much as before. Now we use medicine from the clinic.' One resident expressed a sentiment heard regularly in the region; namely, that religious faith plays a role in not visiting traditional healers. The reliance on traditional medicine is predicated on belief in its effectiveness (Ashforth 2005) and, as such, a number of respondents identified themselves as Christian and saw the use of traditional medicine as a violation of their faith. Still another resident in Mzinti emphasized the dangers of mixing muti with ARVs, commenting:

Because I know that I'm already positive, and being positive you can only be treated at the clinic. Should I go to a sangoma they will give me muti , and muti will contradict the medication.

These sentiments aligned with interviews with HIVpositive individuals in the area, where similarly negative views pertaining to muti were expressed. Aided in part by clinic messaging, what was once a deeply embedded cultural practice is becoming increasingly associated with illness. Adhering to the therapeutic expectations of ART, patients are either avoiding traditional medicine or failing to report its use for fear of recrimination. Yet the avoidance of traditional medicine is only one of the recommendations made by the public health infrastructure to HIV-positive individuals. Also emphasized is the importance of securing food to maintain adherence to ART and support the immune system. This recommendation, although seemingly benign, is particularly challenging given the resource needs and uneven landscapes in which HIVpositive individuals are positioned.

## Food

In contrast to the negative value judgment on muti , health care workers emphasize the benefits of certain foods for HIV-positive patients. In a counseling session with a group of patients about to start ART, one VCT counselor told her patients that they should grow small gardens of spinach, lettuce, and beetroot. She instructed her patients to eat oranges, bananas, and other fruits and to only drink 100 percent juice. Additionally, she routinely advises patients that they

cannot eat too many oils or fats and that if they want to eat chicken, they must first peel the skin. Finally, she said that they should drink two liters of water per day. HIV patients in the study region have seemingly internalized these food and nutrition messages. One interviewed resident stated, 'Eating spinach, cabbage, and beetroot makes you strong in dealing with HIV,' and another said, 'People who are sick need vegetables like spinach and cabbage.' Several interviewees expressed specific behavioral changes in response to clinic messaging. One resident explained, 'One thing that I do not use is chicken skin, but the rest I do eat, like beetroot, spinach, apples, and other green vegetables.' When asked if he had always eaten this way, he explained, 'No. It's what they told me [to do] at the clinic.' Similarly, another resident explained that she started growing a garden in direct response to the clinic workers telling her to eat vegetables.

For most HIV-positive patients in the study region, however, there is a wide disconnect between clinic messaging surrounding health and nutrition and the feasibility of adhering to such mandates. Within South Africa as a whole, there are troubling patterns in terms of food access and food insecurity. In a recent assessment, Fukuda-Parr and Taylor (2015) reported on the South African National Health and Nutrition Examination, which showed that 54 percent of households in 2012 were either experiencing hunger or at risk of hunger. Additionally, the study reported that children between the ages of zero and three were either experiencing hunger or at risk of hunger, and 27 percent of children in this age range were stunted. As they noted, 'South Africa is an outlier in comparison to other countries with similar levels of income per capita, ranking 67 out of 99 countries in the Social and Economic Rights Fulfilment (SERF) Index, which measures state performance in implementing the right to food' (Fukuda-Parr and Taylor 2015, 4). This is especially troubling given that some studies estimate that those infected with HIV typically require up to 15 percent more energy and 50 percent more protein, as well as more micronutrients (Friis 1998, cited in Kaschula 2008; Beisel 2002).

Food insecurity is widespread in the study region and is experienced at different levels. The 2013 household structured survey showed that 26 percent of household heads ate less than desired because there was not enough food, and 16 percent of all household heads reported that they had skipped meals. HIV-positive individuals more frequently reported that they had lost weight because there was not enough to eat.

As one resident explained, 'What happens is that we're getting short of it [food], not that we go to bed without food.' Another resident said, 'I starve every now and then. And I don't get different types of food. Sometimes I get bananas, sometimes nothing.' Meanwhile, others simply do not have enough food in the household and must occasionally skip meals. As one resident explained, 'Yes, I do skip a meal for the sake of my children that at least they [can] eat.' This often occurs near the end of the month when savings start to dwindle.

The emphasis on accessing healthy and quality food as a means of adhering to ART presents a number of challenges for rural populations. The first critical dimension shaping opportunities for agrarian production is the spatial legacies of colonial and apartheid systems of racial segregation. Even with the democratic transition that culminated in the 1994 elections, high population densities constrain the possibilities for agricultural production in many rural regions in South Africa. As evidence of this, Murphree (1990) reported a human population density in the communal areas of Zimbabwe of five to ten people per square kilometer. By comparison, the human population density in the communal areas of the Mpumalanga and Limpopo Provinces in the same year was calculated at 174 people per square kilometer (Els 1996). Additionally, historical state investment in agriculture within the Bantustans was extremely limited, and in the postapartheid era there has been a focus on commodity crops for foreign export as opposed to foods grown for household consumption. The aggressive push for sugarcane farming within Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal provinces following the 1994 democratic elections is emblematic of this approach within rural areas (African Connexion 2002). As such, it is only in the rarest cases that residents have a farm outside of their home property that provides space for agricultural production. As evidence of this, of the 327 surveyed households, fewer than 6 percent reported owning a farm.

Given the limited opportunities for farming, most residents maintain household gardens that are used to produce a variety of crops, including maize, which is a dietary staple. Household gardening predates the messaging from clinics advocating the benefits of gardens; however, interviews with HIV-positive individuals revealed an insistence on the need to maintain gardens to offset food insecurity and access nutritious foods advocated by public health institutions. Many

residents expressed the desire to grow a garden but were unable to do so because of the financial strain farming would place on them. One person remarked:

We don't grow because we are not fenced. The goats and cows come here and eat our vegetables. . . . If we've got a fence [next] time when you come you will find everywhere [it is] green! Beetroot, lettuce, onions, I [would] use it.

## Another resident expressed a similar concern, noting:

It is not exactly that we grow everything because goats enter here. The place is not properly fenced. I don't grow spinach and cabbage, only mealies (corn) and butternuts.

A series of interviews conducted by the first author from January through June 2016 emphasized the entanglements between HIV management, food security, and environmental change. As previously mentioned, the interview with Amahle and others in January coincided with a severe drought that was brought to the region by El Ni ~ no patterns. Many residents expressed their concern about being unable to plant crops because of their reliance on precipitation for irrigation. This was the case for the family whose garden is pictured in Figure 2, just behind the dirt mound in the foreground.

The head of the household is an HIV-positive grandmother named Mandla who expressed their suffering because of the lack of rain at that point in the year. She indicated that when there was rain she would plant sweet potato and cassava for herself and the grandchildren living with her. As she explained, 'I used to grow butternut leaves because there wasn't any rain. Now I have planned to grow other things because it has rained a bit.' Mandla shared that during times of

Figure 2. Household garden. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

scarcity, she would ask her children living elsewhere to send some monies for support. Yet even with this financial safety net, the challenges she faces in managing HIV through the provision of particular foods are compounded by global environmental change, which undermines the capacity of household gardens to provide consistent food for individuals and families.

Unemployment was continually cited as a major obstacle to financial, and therefore food, security. Unemployment is high in these areas, with a recent estimate of the expanded unemployment rate for Mpumalanga Province at 41 percent (Statistics South Africa 2016). This is pronounced for younger people, as the national unemployment rate for youth fifteen to twenty-four years of age was estimated at 40 percent in 2012. A recent research report emphasized that 'youth unemployment also reflects the spatial inequalities that stem from apartheid-era policies of 'separate development.' Using the broad definition, youth unemployment in rural areas is 82 percent compared to 58 percent in urban formal areas' (Ardington et al. 2014, 1). Migration to periurban and urban centers is one response, as is seeking work at commercial farms, particularly the banana and sugarcane plantations that surround these communities. The provision of basic income grants by the South African Social Security Agency is a significant factor keeping many families out of extreme poverty. As Ferguson (2015) noted, 44 percent of South African households receive some form of grants, which are distributed for a number of purposes, ranging from child care support to old age pensions or disability. Household members told us time and again about the importance of these grants for meeting basic needs while potentially providing some resources for seeking employment or educational opportunities.

Although the scarcity of land for farming presents challenges to residents, financial difficulties associated with unemployment tend to be even more indicative of food insecurity. One interviewed mother said of her daughter:

What is problematic is that they [the clinic] said she must eat well, but how could she eat well while she is unemployed? How can she buy those [vegetables]? She is not working.

The same resident complained of the recommended 100 percent juices being too expensive. In discussing the challenges for employment, one person said:

First for me, I am not able to cope [with HIV] because of starvation. The rest are coping because they eat well, for they are employed . . . they are always healthy compared to us.

Similarly, when another interviewee was asked in what ways families could manage HIV, she said, 'It is by getting employment, because that way you can be self-sustaining and independent and be able to buy whatever you want.' In response to the food insecurity experienced by one interviewed resident, she said:

If [the government] can help by assisting when they find that you're busy or bring food to the patient because if there is somebody who is sick, no one is working in that family. Like me during the time when my kids were sick, I only received help from neighbors and their friends. They brought food and gave it, so I will cry to the government to provide food parcels to the people with HIV-food parcels with special food for positive people.

For the majority of residents, particular behavioral changes surrounding food and nutrition are not feasible given economic and spatial constraints that limit the opportunities for food production. The ability of many households to purchase these foods at local markets or grocery stores is limited by high unemployment and few opportunities for income-generating activities. Food insecurity, therefore, is multifaceted and is produced through the intersection of economic, environmental, and spatial patterns that produce uneven landscapes for those attempting to adhere to ART messaging as therapeutic citizens.

## Conclusions

This article demonstrates the value of integrating perspectives on governmentality and political ecologies of health by detailing how the possibilities for therapeutic citizenship are undermined by political and ecological conditions that have been produced over time. Scholarship within geography and the social sciences has usefully shown the challenges to health management, in terms of either limited responses by state agencies to Buruli ulcer disease (Hausermann 2015) or efforts to secure drugs during the early stages of the HIV/AIDS epidemic (Nguyen 2010). Yet this article builds on these studies by attending to the continued challenges even with state investment in response to the epidemic. Rural clinics and hospitals provide opportunities for testing and ART; yet, these clinical encounters show that therapeutic citizenship is unattainable for many without concomitant structural transformation. The landscapes that HIV-positive individuals navigate to manage their health are uneven due to historical systems of land allocation and dispossession, limited employment opportunities, and marginal biophysical conditions for agricultural production. These contemporary dynamics are directly tied to historical processes that perpetuate uneven development and, consequently, uneven opportunities for therapeutic citizenship.

Geographic research on governmentality must attend not only to the political expressions of the state but also to the ways in which its agenda is advanced through the creation, manipulation, and maintenance of uneven spatial formations. This article extends some of the existing work by demonstrating how historical spatial patterns produce particular therapeutic citizens. This can occur through decentralized health care management that makes the clinics and local hospitals the key sites in which citizens confront the public health infrastructure, which assists in evidencing how the state might be made, as noted earlier, 'pharmaceutically present (via markets) but by and large institutionally absent' (Biehl 2011, 114; 2010). Although expanded access to ART in the Global South represents a remarkable development for HIV-positive individuals, the capacity to live as a therapeutic citizen is shaped by deeply rooted spatial patterns that present other challenges for HIV management. These spatial histories generate unique experiences with HIV because the ways in which the virus is embodied vary both within and outside the infected body. HIV citizens regularly confront the limits of the state through the lack of economic opportunities and unmet food needs advocated by treatment regimens.

Our discussion shows a critical disconnect between the messaging communicated by health care workers and the broader political and ecological landscapes in the region. In reality, a suggestion as seemingly benign as 'eat healthy and nutritious food' involves much more. Rather, it is entangled with social, ecological, and economic systems in ways that end up reinforcing differential vulnerabilities for residents. HIV management in the contemporary era occurs within landscapes that have been produced over centuries to the benefit of the minority of the population. Apartheid spatial segregation resulted in high population densities and few opportunities for agricultural production or formal economic employment, thereby depriving rural populations of desperately needed resources essential to their health and well-being. Additionally, this discussion helps reveal future health challenges. Food security is further undermined due to environmental variability that can accompany climate change. As a result of these patterns, HIV-positive patients rely on a mix of agrarian practices to secure

resources for themselves and their families, including relying on capital income to purchase foods at nearby markets and grocery stores. Additionally, small-scale gardens on family property confront seasonal and longer term change, which was the case during the drought brought on by El Ni ~ no conditions in 2015 and 2016. Given these dynamics, the specific encounters between people and the state reveal the complexities of HIV citizenship that are produced at the intersection of social and environmental systems.

We conclude by returning to Amahle, who began our discussion of HIV management in rural South Africa. Amahle represents a more hopeful moment in the country's experience with the epidemic. With increased access to ART, HIV-positive individuals face new possibilities for managing the disease such that with proper treatment they can live for years or decades. From a previous period when access to ART was significantly more constrained, this is a profound transition that has led some public health institutions to liken HIV to a chronic condition. Yet these developments are not uniformly experienced, and for many the management of HIV remains a daily struggle, not only in terms of accessing lifesaving drugs but also in securing other resources critical to the maintenance of health. In short, HIV is a dynamic and daily phenomenon that fluctuates based on one's particular immune system, individual needs, responsibilities to others, social networks, and position within broader landscapes of power. Because the embodiment of the disease is individualized, Amahle manages her HIV in ways that are specific to her own experiences of gender, employment opportunities, stigma, or coincidence with other infectious disease patterns. This constellation of factors challenges the behavioral recommendations for HIV-positive people, while also presenting new relationships with the state that are specific to HIV citizenship. Future geographic research must continue to attend to how historical spatial processes produce inequitable health outcomes for people and places and the ways in which these processes remain meaningful in the contemporary era.

## Acknowledgments

Our research assistants, Wendy Ngubane, Golden Nobela, and Tsakani Nsimbini, were invaluable in enabling the qualitative interviewing. We thank Kathy Cappelli for generating the map for Figure 1.

Finally, this research would not have been possible without the generosity of time and spirit from the many people we met.

## Funding

This research was funded by a National Science Foundation CAREER grant (GSS#1056683). Marina Burka was supported by a National Science Foundation Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) award to assist with the qualitative interviewing and clinic observations.

## References

- African Connexion. 2002. Sweat is sweet. [Promotional report.] Year 17, first quarter, 28-30.
- AIDS.gov. 2017. Global statistics. Accessed January 11, 2017. https://www.aids.gov/hiv-aids-basics/hiv-aids101/global-statistics/.
- Ardington, C., A. Case, A. Menendez, T. B € arninghausen, D. Lam, and M. Leibbrandt. 2014. Youth unemployment and social protection . SALDRU Research Brief, Southern African Labour and Development Research Unit. Accessed March 1, 2016. http://opensaldru.uct.ac.za/ handle/11090/723
- Ashforth, A. 2005. Muthi , medicine and witchcraft: Regulating 'African science' in post-apartheid South Africa? Social Dynamics 31 (2):211-42.
- Beaubien, J. 2013. After missteps in HIV care, South Africa finds it way. All Things Considered . NPR, August 27. Accessed September 1, 2017. http://www.npr.org/sec tions/health-shots/2013/08/27/215734826/after-mis steps-in-hiv-care-south-africa-finds-its-way.
- Beisel, W. R. 2002. Nutritionally acquired immune deficiency syndromes. In Micronutrients and HIV infection , ed. H. Friis, 23-42. Boca Raton, FL: CRC.
- Biehl, J. 2011. When people come first: Beyond technical and theoretical quick-fixes in global health. In Global political ecology , ed. R. Peet, P. Robbins, and M. J. Watts, 100-30. London and New York: Routledge.
- Cousins, T. 2016. Anti-retroviral therapy and nutrition in southern Africa: Citizenship and the grammar of hunger. Medical Anthropology 35 (5):433-46.
- de Waal, A., and A. Whiteside. 2003. New variant famine: AIDS and food crisis in southern Africa. Lancet 362 (9391):1234-37.
- Drimie, S. 2003. HIV/AIDS and land: Case studies from Kenya, Lesotho and South Africa. Development Southern Africa 20 (5):647-58.
- Els, H. 1996. Game ranching and rural development. In Game ranch management , ed. J. du and P. Bothma, 581-91. Pretoria, South Africa: Van Schaik.
- Farmer, P. 1999. Infections and inequalities: The modern plagues . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Fassin, D. 2007. When bodies remember: Experiences and politics of AIDS in South Africa . Berkeley: University of California Press.

- Ferguson, J. 2015. Give a man a fish: Reflections on the new politics of distribution . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Friis, H. 1998. The possible role of micronutrients in HIV infection. SCN News 17:11-12.
- Fukuda-Parr, S., and V. Taylor. 2015. Food security in South Africa: A human rights and entitlement perspective. In Food security in South Africa , ed. S. Fukuda-Parr and V. Taylor, 3-24. Cape Town, South Africa: University of Cape Town Press.
- Guthman, J., and B. Mansfield. 2013. The implications of environmental epigenetics: A new direction for geographic inquiry on health, space, and nature-society relations. Progress in Human Geography 37 (4):486-504.
- ---. 2015. Nature, difference, and the body. In The Routledge handbook of political ecology , ed. T. Perreault, G. Bridge, and J. McCarthy, 558-70. London and New York: Routledge.
- Harrison, A., S. E. Short, and M. Tuoane-Nkhasi. 2014. Refocusing the gender lens: Caregiving women, family roles and HIV/AIDS vulnerability in Lesotho. AIDS and Behavior 18 (3):595-604.
- Hausermann, H. E. 2015. 'I could not be idle any longer': Buruli ulcer treatment assemblages in Ghana. Environment and Planning A 47:2204-20.
- Hayes-Conroy, A., and J. Hayes-Conroy. 2015. Political ecology of the body: A visceral approach. In The international handbook of political ecology , ed. R. L. Bryant, 659-72. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
- Honda, A., M. Ryan, R. van Niekerk, and D. McIntyre. 2015. Improving the public health sector in South Africa: Eliciting public preferences using a discrete choice experiment. Health Policy and Planning 30 (5):600-611.
- Hunter, L. M., W. Twine, and L. Patterson. 2007. 'Locusts are now our beef': Adult mortality and household dietary use of local environmental resources in rural South Africa. Scandinavian Journal of Public Health 35 (69):165-74.
- Hunter, M. 2010. Love in the time of AIDS: Inequality, gender, and rights in South Africa . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- Jackson, P., and A. H. Neely. 2015. Triangulating health: Toward a practice of a political ecology of health. Progress in Human Geography 39 (1):47-64.
- Jewkes, R., and R. Morrell. 2010. Gender and sexuality: Emerging perspectives from the heterosexual epidemic in South Africa and implications for HIV risk and prevention. Journal of the International AIDS Society 13 (1):6.
- Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS. 2008. Report on the global AIDS epidemic. Geneva: UNAIDS.
- ---. 2015. South Africa: HIV and AIDS estimates. Geneva: UNAIDS. Accessed June 30, 2017. http://www. unaids.org/en/regionscountries/countries/southafrica.
- ---. 2016. Global AIDS update. Geneva: UNAIDS. Accessed January 23, 2017. http://www.who.int/hiv/ pub/arv/global-aidsupdate-2016-pub/en/.
- Kale, R. 1995. Traditional healers in South Africa: A parallel health care system. British Medical Journal 310 (6988):1182-85.
- Kalofonos, I. A. 2010. 'All I eat is ARVs': The paradox of AIDS treatment interventions in central Mozambique. Medical Anthropology Quarterly 24 (3):363-80.
- Kaschula, S. A. 2008. Wild foods and household food security responses to AIDS: Evidence from South
- Africa. Population and Environment 29 (3-5):16285.
- Kearns, R., and G. Moon. 2002. From medical to health geography: Novelty, place and theory after a decade of change. Progress in Human Geography 26 (5):605-25.
- King, B. 2010. Political ecologies of health. Progress in Human Geography 34 (1):38-55.
- ---. 2012. 'We pray at the church in the day and visit the sangomas at night': Health discourses and traditional medicine in rural South Africa. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102 (5):1173-81.
- ---. 2015. Political ecologies of disease and health. In The Routledge handbook of political ecology , ed. T. Perreault, G. Bridge, and J. McCarthy, 343-53. London and New York: Routledge.
- ---. 2017. States of disease: Political environments and human health . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Krieger, N. 1994. Epidemiology and the web of causation: Has anyone seen the spider? Social Science &amp; Medicine 39 (7):887-903.
- Love, R. 2004. HIV/AIDS in Africa: Links, livelihoods, and legacies. Review of African Political Economy 31 (102):639-48.
- Makhado, R. A., G. P. von Maltitz, M. J. Potgieter, and D. C. J. Wessels. 2009. Contribution of woodland products to rural livelihoods in the northeast of Limpopo Province, South Africa. South African Geographical Journal 91 (1):46-53.
- Malan, T., and P. S. Hattingh. 1976. Black homelands in South Africa . Pretoria, South Africa: Africa Institute of South Africa.
- Mansfield, B. 2008. Health as a nature-society question. Environment and Planning A 40 (5):1015-19.
- Masanjala, W. 2007. The poverty-HIV/AIDS nexus in Africa: A livelihood approach. Social Science &amp; Medicine 64 (5):1032-41.
- Mayer, J. D. 1996. The political ecology of disease as one new focus for medical geography. Progress in Human Geography 20:441-56.
- McGarry, D. K., and C. M. Shackleton. 2009. Comment: Is HIV/AIDS jeopardizing biodiversity? Environmental Conservation 36 (1):5-7.
- McGrath, J. W., M. S. Winchester, D. Kaawa-Mafigiri, E. Walakira, F. Namutiibwa, J. Birungi, G. Ssendegye, et al. 2014. Challenging the paradigm: Anthropological perspectives on HIV as a chronic disease. Medical Anthropology 33 (4):303-17.
- McNeil, D. G., Jr. 2015. World health group proposes extending H.I.V. therapy's reach. New York Times , October 1:A8.
- Moyer, E. 2015. The anthropology of life after AIDS: Epistemological continuities in the age of antiretroviral treatment. Annual Review of Anthropology 44:259-75.
- Murphree, M. W. 1990. Decentralizing the proprietorship of wildlife resources in Zimbabwe's communal lands . Harare, Zimbabwe: Centre for Applied Social Sciences, University of Zimbabwe.
- Nattrass, N. 2005. Who consults sangomas in Khayelitsha? An exploratory quantitative analysis. Social Dynamics 31 (2):161-82.

- Neely, A. H. 2015. Internal ecologies and the limits of local biologies: A political ecology of tuberculosis in the time of AIDS. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 105 (4):791-805.
- Negin, J. 2005. Assessing the impact of HIV/AIDS on economic growth and rural agriculture in Africa. Journal of International Affairs 58 (2):267-81.
- Nguyen, V. K. 2010. The Republic of therapy: Triage and sovereignty in West Africa's time of AIDS . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Peltzer, K. 2009. Utilization and practice of traditional/complementary/alternative medicine (TM/CAM) in South Africa. African Journal of Traditional, Complementary, and Alternative Medicines 6 (2):175-85.
- Peltzer, K., and N. Mngqundaniso. 2008. Patients consulting traditional health practitioners in the context of HIV/AIDS in urban areas in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. African Journal of Traditional, Complementary, and Alternative Medicines 5 (4):370-79.
- Platzky, L., and C. Walker. 1985. The surplus people: Forced removals in South Africa . Johannesburg, South Africa: Raven.
- Poundstone, K. E., S. A. Strathdee, and D. D. Celentano. 2004. The social epidemiology of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Epidemiologic Reviews 26 (1):22-35.
- Republic of South Africa. 2012. Global AIDS response progress report . Health and Development Africa Ltd. Accessed March 1, 2016. http://www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/ en/dataanalysis/knowyourresponse/countryprogressre ports/2012countries/ce\_ZA\_Narrative\_Report.pdf.
- Ross, E. 2008. Traditional healing in South Africa: Ethical implications for social work. Social Work in Health Care 46 (2):15-33.
- Schatz, E., and C. Ogunmefun. 2007. Caring and contributing: The role of older women in rural South African multi-generational households in the HIV/AIDS era. World Development 35 (8):1390-1403.
- Scheper-Hughes, N. 1993. Death without weeping: The violence of everyday life in Brazil . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- South Africa Department of Information. 1967. The progress of the Bantu peoples toward nationhood . Pretoria, South Africa: Department of Information.
- South Africa Information Service. 1973. Progress through separate development: South Africa in peaceful transition . 4th ed. NewYork: Information Service of South Africa.
- Statistics South Africa. 2016. Quarterly labour force survey: Quarter 1, 2016 . Pretoria, South Africa: Statistics South Africa.
- Talman, A., S. Bolton, and J. L. Walson. 2013. Interactions between HIV/AIDS and the environment: Toward a syndemic framework. American Journal of Public Health 103 (2):253-61.
- Turshen, M. 1977. The political ecology of disease. Review of Radical Political Economics 9:45-60.
- ---. 1984. The political ecology of disease in Tanzania . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- van Rooyen, F. 2016. In the grip of a monster El Ni ~ no. Popular Mechanics , March 16:44-47.
- Winchester, M. S., and B. King. 2017. Constructing landscapes: Health care contexts in rural South Africa. Medicine Anthropology Theory 4 (1):151-76.
- Winchester, M. S., J. W. McGrath, D. Kaawa-Mafigiri, F. Namutiibwa, G. Ssendegye, A. Nalwoga, E. Kyarikunda, et al. 2016. Routines, hope, and antiretroviral treatment among men and women in Uganda. Medical Anthropology Quarterly 31 (2):237-56.
- World Health Organization. 2015. Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: What's new? Geneva, Switzerland: WHO.
- World Health Organization, Joint United Nations Programme on HIV and AIDS, and UNICEF. 2010. Towards universal access: Scaling up priority HIV/AIDS interventions in the health sector . Geneva: HIV/AIDS Department, World Health Organization.

BRIAN KING is an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802. E-mail: king@psu.edu. His research interests focus on the impacts of conservation and development in southern Africa, social and environmental justice, and the intersections between livelihoods, health, and environment.

MARINA BURKA was involved with this project as an undergraduate student in the Department of Geography at The Pennsylvania State University. She was a Fulbright Scholar at the University of Glasgow and currently works as a paralegal at the Legal Assistance Foundation, Chicago, IL 60603. E-mail: mburka@lafchicago.org

MARGARET S. WINCHESTER is a Research Associate in the Department of Health Policy and Administration at The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802. E-mail: winchester@psu.edu. Her research areas include global health policy, health care access for vulnerable populations, and the sociality of HIV.