## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Bringing Back the Mines and a Way of Life: Populism and the Politics of Extraction

## Erik Kojola

To cite this article: Erik Kojola (2018): Bringing Back the Mines and a Way of Life: Populism and the Politics of Extraction, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2018.1506695

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2018.1506695

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 20 Dec 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 39

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Bringing Back the Mines and a Way of Life: Populism and the Politics of Extraction

Erik Kojola

<!-- image -->

Environmental Studies Department, Davidson College

Conflicts over resource extraction are key political issues in the contemporary United States and are a mobilizing issue for right-wing populism exemplified by President Donald Trump ' s claims of ending the ' war on coal. ' Through a political ecology framework attentive to culture, discourse, and history, I examine how mining is symbolic of broader cultural, geographic, and class divides. Mining is mobilized in extractive populism through rhetoric of giving power back to the people, insiders versus outsiders, resource nationalism, and cutting burdensome government regulations. I study the emblematic case of the rural Iron Range mining region in northern Minnesota and the recent rightward swing in this historically Democratic stronghold, which I argue is intertwined with the micropolitics of struggles over proposed copper mines. Through ethnographic observations and interviews with local community and political leaders, workers, and residents, I find that support for mining among white, working-class, and rural residents is made meaningful through nostalgia for preserving mining as a way of life and anger at outsiders disrupting their livelihoods and extractive moral economy. These discourses resonated with the populist, nationalist, and racist rhetoric of Trump ' s campaign. I argue that place-based and class identities and social imaginaries linked to mining are an important dynamic in emergent authoritarian populism and for understanding what motivates reactionary political movements and why populist politicians use mining to construct authenticity. Key Words: class, discourse, political ecology, populism, resource extraction .

有 关 资 源 搾 取 的 冲 突 ， 是 美 国 当 代 的 关 键 政 治 议 题 ， 并 且 是 右 翼 民 粹 主义 的 动 员 议 题 ， 并 由 唐 纳 德 ． 特 朗 普 总 统 宣 称 终结 ' 煤 炭 战 争 ' 为代 表 例 子 。 我 通 过 关 注 文 化 、 论 述 与 历史 的 政 治 生 态 架构 ， 检 视 矿 业 如 何作 为 更 为 广 泛 的 文 化 、 地 理 与 阶 级 划分 之 象 徵 。 矿 业 在 搾 取 式 民 粹 主义中 ， 通 过还 权 于 民 、 内 部 人 与 外 部 人 的 对 立 、 资 源 国 族 主义 ， 以 及 减 少 繁 重 的 政 府 规 范 之 修 辞进 行 动 员 。 我 研 究 明 尼 苏 达 北 部 乡 村 的 铁 矿 山 脉 矿 业 区 的 象 徵 性 案 例 ， 以 及 此 一 历史 上为 民 主 党 的 版 图 在 晚 近 的 政 治 右 转 ， 我 主 张 其 与 所 提 出 的 铜 矿 之 微 政 治 斗 争 相 互交 织 。 我 通 过 民 族 志 观 察 ， 以 及 对 地 方 社 群 和 政 治 领 导 者 、 工 人与 居 民 的 访 谈 ， 发 现 白 人 工 人 阶 级 与 农 村 居 民 对 矿 业 的 支 持 ， 通 过 保 存 矿 业 作 为 生 活 方 式 的 怀 旧 ， 以 及 对 外 地 人 破 坏 其 生 计 和 对 搾 取 式 道 德 经 济 的 愤 怒 来 製 造 意 义 。 这 些 论 述 与 特 朗 普 所 宣 传 的 民 粹 主义 、 国 族 主义 和 种 族 主义 修 辞 相 互 呼 应 。 我 主 张 ， 根 据 地 方 及 阶 级 的 身 份 认 同 ， 以 及 连 结 至 矿 业 的 社 会 想 像 ， 是 对 于 浮 现 中 的 威 权 民 粹 主义 、 以 及 理 解 什 麽 驱 动 反 动 式 政 治 运 动 和 为 何 民 粹 主义 政 客 能 够 运 用 矿 业 来 建 构本 真 性 的 重 要 动 态 。 关 键 词 ： 阶 级 ， 论 述 ， 政 治 生 态 学 ， 民 粹 主义 ， 资 源 搾 取 。

Los conflictos asociados con la extracci  on de recursos son asuntos pol  ı ticos claves en los Estados Unidos contempor  aneos y constituyen un tema movilizador para el populismo de derecha, cuyo ejemplo es el clamor del Presidente Donald Trump de terminar ' la guerra del carb  on ' . A trav  es de un marco de ecolog  ı a pol  ı tica atento a la cultura, el discurso y la historia, examino c  omo la miner  ı a es simb  olica de las m  as amplias divisorias culturales, geogr  aficas y de clase. La miner  ı a es movilizada en el populismo extractivo por medio de ret  oricas como devolver el poder al pueblo, nacionales contra extranjeros, nacionalismo de los recursos y la supresi  on de molestas regulaciones gubernamentales. Estudio el caso rural emblem  atico de la regi  on minera de la Iron Range en el norte de Minnesota y el reciente giro a la derecha de este basti  on hist  oricamente Dem  ocrata, lo que a mi parecer est  a entrelazado con la micropol  ı tica de las luchas sobre propuestas relacionadas con minas de cobre. Por medio de observaciones etnogr  aficas y entrevistas en la comunidad local y con l  ı deres pol  ı ticos, obreros y residentes, encuentro que el apoyo a la miner  ı a entre los blancos, la clase trabajadora y los residentes rurales se hace significativo a trav  es de la nostalgia por preservar la miner  ı a como un medio de vida, y por la ira contra los for  aneos que perturban su sustento y la econom  ı a moral extractiva. Estos discursos resonaron en la campa ~ na populista, nacionalista y de ret  orica racista de Trump. Yo argumento que las identidades basadas en lugar y clase, lo mismo que los imaginarios relacionados con la

miner  ı a, son una din  amica importante en el emergente populismo autoritario y sirve para entender lo que motiva los movimientos pol  ı ticos reaccionarios y por qu  e los pol  ı ticos populistas usan la miner  ı a para construir autenticidad. Palabras clave: clase, discurso, ecolog  ı a pol  ı tica, extracci  on de recursos, populismo.

S ince the mid-2000s there has been renewed interest in populism with the rise of populist right-wing politicians in Western Europe and the United States (Solty 2013; Moffitt 2016; Bonikowski 2017). Scholars and activists have sought to understand the political -economic conditions, political strategies, and discourses that have contributed to contemporary right-wing populism, particularly the election of U.S. President Donald Trump (Azari and Hetherington 2016; Oliver and Rahn 2016). I argue that resource extraction is an important mobilizing issue for populism in the United States because of how mining is connected to place-based and class identities, nationalism, and masculinity (Scott 2010; Emel, Huber, and Makene 2011; Himley 2014; Li 2015). Trump ' s declarations that he will put coal miners back to work as part of his campaign to ' Make American Great Again ' are indicative of how mining is deployed in populist themes of anti-elitism, speaking for the people, and us versus them (Oliver and Rahn 2016) and used to advance conservative and nationalist political projects.

In this article, I explore the discursive, cultural, and affective dynamics of resource extraction that are mobilized by conservative politicians in a form of extractive populism that has contributed to rightward swings in rural, industrial, and predominantly white regions. Through a political ecology approach (Peet and Watts 1996; Nesbitt and Weiner 2001; Moore 2005; Peluso 2012; Li 2015), I conceptualize conflicts over resource extraction as political, economic, and cultural struggles over rights, identity, and livelihoods. I contribute to growing political ecology scholarship that uses theories of collective memory and affect (Legg 2004; Sultana 2011; Lundgren and Nilsson 2018; Perreault 2018; Threadgold et al. 2018) by emphasizing the role of people ' s racialized and gendered emotions and memories of place in reproducing the hegemony of extractive capitalism (Ekers, Loftus, and Mann 2009; Marston and Perreault 2017) rather than motivating resistance.

I also expand on analysis of contemporary rightwing populism in the United States (Cramer 2016; Oliver and Rahn 2016) that has largely neglected the role of place-based identities and socionatures. I argue that explanations for white working-class conservatism and antienvironmentalism need to move beyond general national-level accounts and explanations based on single dimensions to develop nuanced analysis of the ways in which power and ideology operate through the interconnections of nature, class, race, and gender (Spruyt, Keppens, and Van Droogenbroeck 2016). Research needs to consider the particular socionatures and histories that shape why reactionary populists like Trump gain support in particular places and how rural and working-class communities understand support for extractive populism as common sense and a way to defend moral economies (Jenkins 2016; McQuarrie 2017; Scoones et al. 2018).

I use the upper Midwest, specifically the northern Minnesota Iron Range -a rural mining region -as an emblematic site to examine how and why a historically Democratic region swung rightward in ways connected to the cultural and class politics of mining. In the 2016 election, Trump won in towns across the region that had not supported a Republican presidential candidate since the 1930s. At the same time, there is a growing conflict over developing new copper mines that has split the Democratic coalition over the tensions between job creation and environmental conservation. Through ethnographic fieldwork in rural mining towns; indepth interviews with residents, workers, and local leaders; and discourse analysis of social media and newspaper coverage, I explore how place-based and class identities, collective memories, and moral economies shape the social imaginaries of proposed mining. How are these imaginaries and discourses constituted by right-wing populism in ways that affect political shifts in northern Minnesota?

I find that mine supporters frame copper mining through themes of insiders versus outsiders, excessive government regulation, renewing heritage, and nationalism. Copper mining is made meaningful through desires to bring back a prosperous past based on a moral economy in which mining provided stable jobs for white men and to defend the right of local communities to create livelihoods from

extracting natural resources. Opposition to mining is then interpreted by Iron Rangers as elite urban environmentalists and government bureaucrats interfering in their livelihoods and disparaging their way of life while privileging urban people of color and immigrants. Trump ' s populist message appealed to people ' s sense of powerlessness and anger while drawing on nostalgia to provide hope for reasserting the moral and economic worth of rural places (Lewin 2017) and renewing masculinity through industrial labor.

Building on Huber ' s (2013) concept of energy populism in which expanding cheap fossil fuels is seen as standing up for the people, I point toward a broader extractive populism that promotes extractive capitalism and antienvironmentalism as protecting the people, renewing the ' good life, ' and promoting national security. Extractive populism also relies on a discourse of what Perreault (2018) called ' masculine nationalism, ' in which heroic male miners can provide material resources to secure the nation against foreign enemies while restoring heteronormative middle-class families.

## Populism and Resource Extraction

Populism is a complex, contested, and fraught term (Laclau 1977), and I build on approaches that theorize populism as a political style, strategy, and ideology, rather than a coherent set of political philosophies or policies. Jansen (2011) conceptualized populism as a mode of political practice that is used as a means to gain support. These approaches focus on the rhetoric, emotional appeals, embodied practices, and narratives used by politicians across the political spectrum (Jansen 2011; Moffitt 2016; Agnew and Shin 2017). Populism involves claims to stand up for and give voice to ' the people ' while critiquing the elite (Laclau 1977; Badiou 2016). Populist rhetoric often constructs an outside threat and a sense of crisis and loss that can then be solved by empowering the people and a return to an idealized past (Agnew and Shin 2017; Balthazar 2017; Kenny 2017).

Populism can be deployed in conservative and progressive movements. Claims to the people can deploy inclusive or exclusionary visions based on classed, racialized, and gendered notions of ideal citizens (Badiou 2016). I focus on what has been called right-wing (Green et al. 2016), nationalist

(Gusterson 2017), nostalgic (Balthazar 2017), or authoritarian populism (Hall 1985) to highlight the ways in which populism has been mobilized in contemporary conservative politics in the United States to blame economic and social woes on government bureaucrats, immigrants, racial others, and environmental regulations while claiming to stand up for working-class and rural people (Oliver and Rahn 2016; Koch 2017; Scoones et al. 2018). Right-wing populists ofen claim that traditional political parties and urban elites ignore the working class and favor urban communities, people of color, and immigrants (Inglehart and Norris 2016; Bobo 2017; Lamont, Park, and Ayala-Hurtado 2017).

Integrating theories of populism with political ecology ' s attention to regional-level political -economic, discursive, and cultural dynamics of natural resources (Walker 2003; McKinnon and Hiner 2016) is productive for understanding the role of place-based and class identities and environmental imaginaries in populist movements. Populism is linked to natural resource extraction in the United States because miners and mining regions are symbolic of the people and the idealized heartland (Taggart 2000). This is based on a colonial and racial imaginary of white settlers and pioneers making a living out of an empty land (Ekers 2009; Perreault 2018). Rural spaces are romantically imagined as idyllic and white landscapes (Ageyman and Spooner 1997; Holloway 2007). Mining is often made meaningful through narratives of masculine labor and nostalgia for when white men could depend on the stability of industrial jobs to sustain vibrant communities (Scott 2010; Rolston 2014). Environmental protections are presented as hurting working-class people and threatening the masculinity of male workers in rural extractive industries (Foster 1993; Loomis 2015). Environmental regulations are also framed as outside elites and bureaucrats interfering in local communities ' rights to maintain livelihoods (Harvey 1996; McCarthy 2002).

Natural resources are deeply connected with nationalist imaginaries and the material embodiment of the nation (Perreault 2013; Forchtner and Kølvraa 2015). Managing natural resources is a major state-making project (Whitehead, Jones, and Jones 2007), and notions of citizenship, belonging, and identity are navigated through land and nature (Coronil 1997; Valdivia 2008; Perreault and Valdivia 2010). Resource nationalism is a discourse

that claims to protect the nation by developing domestic supplies of natural resources (Forchtner and Kølvraa 2015). Mining development is often justified as empowering the nation to compete with foreign countries and provide the materials necessary for security (Kohl and Farthing 2012; Bridge 2014; Arsel, Hogenboom, and Pellegrini 2016; Rosales 2017; Arbatli 2018). Rhetoric about resource independence generates political legitimacy for expanding extraction to protect the people in the face of material scarcity and uncertain geopolitics (McCarthy 2002; Scott 2010; Phadke 2011). Perreault (2013) argued that resource nationalism must be understood within place-based histories, historical memories, and social imaginaries of nature and the nation. Subnational identities tied to regions and cities also motivate mobilization to demand local communities ' control over resources (Tidwell and Tidwell 2018).

## The Minnesota Iron Range

This article provides empirical research on an understudied sociopolitical context, the northern Minnesota Iron Range, and how and why this historically leftist region has undergone a rightward shift. Much of the scholarly and media attention to mining politics and working-class conservatism in the United States is on Appalachia, Western states, and the Pacific Northwest (Walker 2003; Prudham 2005; Lewin 2017), whereas research on working-class politics has focused on postindustrial landscapes of the Rust Belt (Cramer 2016). Yet these places have unique characteristics and do not represent all rural, industrial, and resource extraction regions.

The Iron Range is a sociocultural region and geographic area that spans over 100 miles from Grand Rapids, Minnesota, to Ely, Minnesota. The Iron Range is the largest iron ore -producing area in the United States, with mines operating since the 1880s. The region is emblematic of extractive regions with geographic isolation, strong community identity, a predominantly white population, and an economically dominant mining industry. Currently, the region is struggling with unemployment and population loss largely due to shifts in the global steel industry and increased mechanization (Manuel 2015).

The region has a unique sociopolitical history of strong unionism and populist, and at times radical, politics as well as being in a politically progressive state with relatively strong environmental protections (Manuel 2015). In Minnesota, the Democrats are the Democratic Farmer-Labor (DFL) Party, which reflects the populist tradition of an alliance among farmers, workers, and urban progressives. Even as other extractive, industrial, and rural regions like Appalachia began shifting to the right in the 1970s and 1980s (Edsall and Edsall 1992; Davis 2017), the postwar liberal alliance between labor and the Democratic Party has been maintained, although tenuously, for longer in the Iron Range (Manuel 2015). Unions like the United Steelworkers continue to have some strength, but industrial decline and institutional and cultural shifts are weakening the liberal coalition.

## Political Shifts in the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election

The 2016 U.S. presidential election marked a major political shift, as Trump won across the Iron Range, where a Republican presidential candidate had not won since Herbert Hoover in 1928 (Kraker 2016). Statewide, Hillary Clinton narrowly beat Trump (46.4 percent to 44.9 percent), but Trump carried much of northern Minnesota, including winning some Iron Range precincts by 15 percent. The 2016 election was a reversal, as Trump narrowly won precincts that Barack Obama won in 2012 with over 60 percent of the vote. 1

## Conflicts over Proposed Copper Mining

Since the early 2000s, multinational mining companies have been exploring copper deposits in northeastern Minnesota -what is believed to be one of the world ' s largest reserves -and several companies have proposed projects. Yet, copper mining is embroiled in public controversy with contested regulatory processes and mobilization from supporters and opponents (Kojola 2018). The proposed mines bring the prospect of job creation and economic growth. On the other hand, Minnesota does not have any copper mines, and this type of mining is more hazardous than the existing iron ore mines. Copper mining would extract small amounts of metal from ores that contain sulfides that create hazardous sulfuric acid when exposed to air and water. The proposed mines are also located in more environmentally sensitive areas, including the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness (BWCAW), which is one of the most visited wilderness areas in the

United States. Conflicts over copper mining have challenged the long-standing Democratic coalition between Iron Range labor and Twin Cities progressives.

## Populism and the Cultural Politics of Copper Mining on the Iron Range

I examine the cultural meanings, affects, and discourses that animate contention over copper mining and support for right-wing populism in the Iron Range through ethnographic observations of daily life and public events and in-depth interviews. I spent the summer of 2017 living in Ely, Minnesota, and took several shorter trips to the Iron Range from 2015 to 2017 to conduct interviews, attend government hearings, and visit operating iron ore mines. I attended pro-mining rallies and marches and other public events, like summer festivals, where pro-mining groups had a presence. I also conducted twenty-nine in-depth interviews with community leaders, elected officials, retired miners, local residents, industry representatives, and union staff. Analysis of Web sites and social media of mining advocacy groups and newspaper coverage also provided insights into public debates and rhetorical strategies. I collected state and local news articles from 2004, when the first mine was proposed, through 2017, when the Trump administration made decisions to advance the projects.

Through analyzing interviews, textual data, and field notes, I find four emergent themes in the discourses around copper mining: outsiders versus insiders, excessive government regulation, renewal of a way of life, and resource nationalism. In the following sections I elaborate on these themes and provide emblematic examples.

## Outsiders versus Insiders

Pro-mining activists and leaders use us versus them rhetoric to frame mining opponents as outsiders -wealthy urban liberals -who want to preserve their wilderness playground and dictate how local communities -insiders -use the land. A retired white male miner and community leader told me,

But that ' s part of the people that are moving here, they are like my age, retired people, that have had good jobs, so they don ' t need a job. So they ' re fine and dandy with nothing happening here. They don ' t see any need for the industry or anything like that.

Opponents are interpreted as upper-class outsiders who want to stop development and preserve the environment for their enjoyment, which is disrupting the local extractive moral economy that provides residents with livelihoods through using natural resources. These tensions are part of broader rural -urban divides and reactions against perceived judgments of rural people as backward and competing visions of rural places as landscapes of consumption or production (Lichter and Brown 2011).

Anger at outsiders is linked to a sense that the government and Democrats are focused on the needs of urban communities, which are seen as either educated and elite or poor minorities and immigrants. Mining supporters often expressed anger at the Democratic Party for drifting from its working-class base and becoming a party of the educated urban elite and immigrants. Defending an implicitly white rural ' us ' then motivated voting Republican and turning against Democrats who opposed mining, which symbolizes a way of life and a set of values. In an op-ed for a regional newspaper, a man who identified as an Iron Ranger, third-generation union member, and lifelong Democrat wrote,

Not only do the Twin Cities Democrats not care about the Iron Range economy, they actually despise and look down upon us. The time for talking with these people is over. It ' s time to flip the Range to red and let them know we won ' t tolerate their anti-mining nonsense. The Iron Range is not going to be their playground. (Chezick 2017)

This writer framed the debate over mining as a rural versus urban issue and constructed a sense of rural people being disparaged. Voting Republican was presented as a way for the Iron Range to defend itself and reinvigorate masculine jobs in resource extraction and the economic and moral worth of rural regions that depend on extraction -not outdoor recreation tourism.

Trump ' s appeals to stand up for rural America and everyday working people resonated with Iron Rangers, who felt that establishment Democrats were ignoring their contributions and livelihoods. A city council member of a small Iron Range town and former miner told me that he was a lifelong union guy and Democrat but voted for Trump, who he saw as standing up for the ' working man. ' Democrats and environmentalists had gone too far in opposing ' everything, ' whereas Trump was addressing the important ' meat and potatoes ' issues.

Support for Republicans and Trump is also contested, however, even by some who support the mines. Another male union member from the Iron Range responded to the op-ed quoted earlier and argued that people should not vote solely on the copper mining issue and should be wary of Republicans who support policies that weaken unions and give tax cuts to the wealthy (Pliml 2017).

Anger with the Democrats and urbanites was also intertwined with concerns about racial others and immigrants. Urban versus rural divides are often racialized (Scoones et al. 2018) and rhetoric about the people is coded as white and rural (Holloway 2007). I found that some Iron Rangers expressed a sense that Democrats were more concerned about helping poor urban people of color than white, rural, and workingclass people. For example, an Iron Range state DFL representative whom I interviewed made a passing critique of a newly elected Latina state representative from Minneapolis who replaced a longtime white DFL stalwart. This revealed a resentment that the DFL was shifting toward urban people of color.

## Excessive Government Regulation

Mine supporters often described federal government actions delaying mine development as bureaucratic red tape and government overreach, which constrains local livelihoods and rights to make decisions about resource use. Within this logic, expansion of resource extraction and elimination of environmental protections becomes a populist cause of giving power back to the people and allowing the wise use of natural resources. One local pro-mining activist, a middle-aged white man, told me that one of the biggest problems is that the permitting process takes too long and there are ' too many fingers in the pie. ' He remarked how this frustration led him and others to support Trump.

Mine supporters say they are against environmental pollution but claim that locals, not outside regulators or environmentalists, are the best stewards of the land who will not let mining pollute their backyard. A white male retiree and community leader remarked,

Nobody wants to pollute our air or our water. That ' s why we live here. We ' ve been pretty good stewards of our land over the years. … We probably have the cleanest water, not only in the state of Minnesota, but probably in the whole country.

Iron ore mining is relatively less hazardous than other forms of mining such as coal, gold, and uranium mining, therefore, Iron Range communities have experienced less pollution than places like Appalachia or Montana. The proposed projects are copper mines, though, which brings new risks from acid mine drainage and development near wilderness areas.

## Renewal of a Mining Way of Life

Support for right-wing populism and expansion of resource extraction is also mobilized by emotional appeals to nostalgia and place-based identities. One white male pro-mining activist told me that his vision for the region was to ' go back to what we used to be. ' This is indicative of how resource extraction is imbued with social meaning through romantic nostalgia and imaginaries of the good life that are based on patriarchal and white supremacist ideologies (Bouzarovski and Bassin 2011; Smith and Tidwell 2016; UlrichSchad and Duncan 2018). Experiences of work in rural areas are shaped by race, class, and gender and represented through narratives of domesticity and gendered divisions of labor (Randall 2005; Scott 2007; O ' Shaughnessy and Krogman 2011). A middle-aged white male Iron Range resident recounted the past as a more prosperous time:

When I was growing up everybody ' s parents, or dad at least, worked there. Women didn ' t work really. Everybody had a stay-at-home mom. But at that point in time, those were good union jobs. So, everybody was making good money. It was a middle-class town. We didn ' t have any extreme poverty, and we didn ' t have any extreme wealth.

This memory constructs an idealized imaginary of the past as the good life, which Huber (2013) argued is an exclusionary vision that privileges a particular type of white and rural culture connected to masculine extractive labor. As Ekers (2009) argued, the loss of family breadwinning jobs for men in extractive industries can generate a crisis of masculinity, which I find contributes to the appeal of nostalgia in extractive populism.

Iron Range residents expressed a longing for a time when their communities were vibrant. A retired white male miner and community leader told me,

Back when I was growing up, we had like nine grocery stores in Ely. We had six women ' s clothing stores, five men ' s clothing stores. We had five car dealerships.

The extractive moral economy meant that mining companies provided jobs for local men and revenue for local businesses and schools. Downtown shopping districts and schools are now a symbol of the region ' s struggles. Copper mines are then presented as a fix that can breathe life back into ' dying mining towns. '

Right-wing populist rhetoric, such as Trump ' s ' Make America Great Again ' slogan, provides a sense of security in the face of economic dislocation through an appeal to nostalgia (Ulrich-Schad and Duncan 2018). One white male pro-mining activist told me that he thought Trump would help the working class:

He [Trump] was for the American people. He was for the American workers. … He wanted to bring business back to this country. Those are the things that your normal everyday working guy wanted to hear instead of watching their jobs go overseas because of excessive taxes and restrictions.

Taxes and regulations are blamed for job loss and deregulation and development offer the hope of putting men back to work and protecting the U.S. economy from overseas competition.

## Resource Nationalism

Support for mining is also driven by nationalist concerns about resource independence that are shaped by racialized and xenophobic fears of ' unfriendly ' foreign countries. A retired miner told me that the copper mines were needed to compete with China:

Your grandchildren will be working for the Chinese and they will mine it. Let ' s look at the world as a whole, when I was in high school they said, ' One fifth of the world lived in China. ' Do you think you ' re going to be able to hold them people back forever? In my lifetime they ' ve started getting enough to eat and they ' re going to progress. … The Chinese will not put up with welfare and all this other bullshit. If you don ' t make the muster in the morning son you ain ' t eating no rice.

His racist and xenophobic discourse presents China as a threat to the United States that is driven to expand and is not constrained by human rights and environmental protections. Thus, copper mines need to be constructed in Minnesota, so that the United States can compete and control its own supplies.

China serves as a scapegoat for economic struggles and job loss, rather than the multinational mining companies and corporate-friendly trade policies.

## Conclusion

This article traces the cultural, affective, and discursive dynamics of conflicts over proposed copper mining in northern Minnesota in relation to the upsurge of right-wing populism. Many residents and leaders understand federal government actions and environmentalism as an affront to their sense of a moral economy based on local communities ' rights to make decisions about resource use and the ability to sustain livelihoods by using nature. Right-wing extractive populism acknowledged people ' s sense of marginality and anger while providing a target -environmentalists and environmental regulations -and a vision of hope -a return to the heyday of mining and white masculine industrial labor. Copper mining is framed as a way to reassert the Iron Range as central to the nation ' s security and prosperity. Thus, the dominant framings of copper mining resonated with right-wing populist discourses of us versus them, giving power back to the people, and nationalism (Hochschild 2016; Oliver and Rahn 2016) that are intertwined with whiteness, xenophobia, and masculinity.

Drawing on political ecology perspectives (McCarthy 2002; Robbins 2002; Kosek 2006), I argue that class, race, and gender dynamics of place-based identities and moral economies tied to mining are a key part of the micropolitics of right-wing populism. Yet, these dynamics are often overlooked in the literature on populism in the Global North that focuses on a narrow concept of racism or xenophobia and national-level explanations (Inglehart and Norris 2016; Oliver and Rahn 2016; Spruyt, Keppens, and Van Droogenbroeck 2016; Bonikowski 2017). I add to emerging analysis of how right-wing populist movements mobilize place-based and class identities, emotions, and collective memories (Green et al. 2016; Hochschild 2016; Balthazar 2017; Gusterson 2017; McQuarrie 2017; Ulrich-Schad and Duncan 2018) by emphasizing the role of environmental imaginaries and the social meanings of land, labor, and natural resources. Right-wing politicians ' support for extractive populism and anti-environmentalism is not due simply to industry ' s political -economic power but also to the cultural and affective power of mining and

how it provides legitimacy and mobilizes white and rural people. Whereas much of the political ecology literature on collective memory and place has focused on resistance (Legg 2004; Sultana 2011; Lundgren and Nilsson 2018; Perreault 2018; Threadgold et al. 2018), I emphasize how these dynamics can reaffirm the hegemony of extractive capitalism. I show how defending rural livelihoods and sense of place can motivate support for nationalist, racist, and capitalist political projects, which demonstrates the contradictions in moral economies of resource extraction.

Extractive populism also resonates in rural regions because of political and economic conditions (Scoones et al. 2018). Populist messages resonate when there is a sense of crisis (Moffitt 2016), which is common in resource-dependent communities that face economic depressions and a sense of insecurity created by boom-and-bust cycles. In the Iron Range, populist politicians spoke to people ' s hardships through a narrative of hope for returning to a prosperous past. The current rightward swing also emerges from the particular political conjuncture and reaction to shifts in the Democratic party toward urban, upper class, and financial constituencies, the ' New Democratic Party, ' that was personified in Hillary Clinton (Frank 2016; McQuarrie 2017). Copper mine supporters framed Democrats who opposed mining as turning away from their labor base and becoming the party of urban liberal environmentalists. The 2016 presidential vote was also a broader reaction against the status quo, as progressive populist candidate Bernie Sanders defeated Clinton in the Minnesota primary, and I met several people who supported Sanders and then voted for Trump.

Although rural, white, working-class communities are not to blame for the election of Trump -wealthy and urban white voters were a large part of his success (Gusterson 2017; Walley 2017) -their support for right-wing populism has ideological and material implications. This has bolstered politicians who push privatization and deregulation to expand environmentally hazardous extractive development and advance racist, sexist, and anti-immigrant projects. Although right-wing populists claim that they will help rural and poor communities, their pro-industry policies accelerate the processes of neoliberal capitalism and automation that produce economic struggles in extractive regions and will reduce social and environmental protections. The mobilization of nostalgia, anger, and connections to place has reproduced commonsense beliefs that the Iron Range cannot exist without mining and has bolstered an extractive populist alliance between conservative politicians, mining companies, and rural, workingclass, white residents.

## Note

1. Data from Office of Minnesota Secretary of State, 2016 General Election Results by Precinct for precincts 6A and 6B, which include Hibbing and Virginia, Minnesota. http://electionresults.sos.state.mn.us/Results/ FedStatebyLEGDistrict/100?districtid ¼ 366

## ORCID

Erik Kojola

6229-1817

## References

- Ageyman, J., and R. Spooner. 1997. Ethnicity and the rural environment. In Contested countryside cultures: Otherness, marginalisation and rurality , ed. P. Cloke and J. Little, 197 -217. London and New York: Routledge.
- Agnew, J., and M. Shin. 2017. Spatializing populism: Taking politics to the people in Italy. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 107 (4):915 -33.
- Arbatli, E. 2018. Resource nationalism revisited: A new conceptualization in light of changing actors and strategies in the oil industry. Energy Research &amp; Social Science 40 (June):101 -18.
- Arsel, M., B. Hogenboom, and L. Pellegrini. 2016. The extractive imperative in Latin America. Extractive Industries and Society 3 (4):880 -87.
- Azari, J., and M. J. Hetherington. 2016. Back to the future? What the politics of the late nineteenth century can tell us about the 2016 election. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 667 (1):92 -109.
- Badiou, A., ed. 2016. What is a people . New York: Columbia University Press.
- Balthazar, A. C. 2017. Made in Britain: Brexit, teacups, and the materiality of the nation. American Ethnologist 44 (2):220 -24.
- Bobo, L. D. 2017. Racism in Trump ' s America: Reflections on culture, sociology, and the 2016 U.S. presidential election. The British Journal of Sociology 68 (November):S85 -S104.
- Bonikowski, B. 2017. Three lessons of contemporary populism in Europe and the United States. The Brown Journal of World Affairs 23 (1):9 -24.
- Bouzarovski, S., and M. Bassin. 2011. Energy and identity: Imagining Russia as a hydrocarbon superpower.

<!-- image -->

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-

Annals of the Association of American Geographers 101 (4):783 -94.

- Bridge, G. 2014. Resource geographies II: The resource -state nexus. Progress in Human Geography 38 (1):118 -30.
- Chezick, B. T. 2017. Let ' s help the anti-mining dems lose. Mesabi Daily News , August 12. Accessed November 28, 2017. https://www.virginiamn.com/ opinion/letters\_to\_editor/let-s-help-the-anti-mining-demslose/article\_a7c07eb4-7fb5-11e7-b0dc-0f113ed38264.html.
- Coronil, F. 1997. The magical state: Nature, money, and modernity in Venezuela . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Cramer, K. J. 2016. The politics of resentment: Rural consciousness in Wisconsin and the rise of Scott Walker . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
- Davis, M. 2017. The great god Trump and the white working class. The Catalyst . Accessed September 21, 2018. https://catalyst-journal.com/vol1/no1/great-godtrump-davis.
- Edsall, T. B., and M. D. Edsall. 1992. Chain reaction: The impact of race, rights, and taxes on American politics . New York: Norton.
- Ekers, M. 2009. The political ecology of hegemony in depression-era British Columbia, Canada: Masculinities, work and the production of the forestscape. Geoforum 40 (3):303 -15.
- Ekers, M., A. Loftus, and G. Mann. 2009. Gramsci lives! Geoforum 40 (3):287 -91.
- Emel, J., M. T. Huber, and M. H. Makene. 2011. Extracting sovereignty: Capital, territory, and gold mining in Tanzania. Political Geography 30 (2):70 -79.
- Forchtner, B., and C. Kølvraa. 2015. The nature of nationalism: Populist radical right parties on countryside and climate. Nature and Culture 10 (2):199 -224.
- Foster, J. B. 1993. The limits of environmentalism without class: Lessons from the ancient forest struggle of the Pacific Northwest. Capitalism, Nature, Socialism 4 (1):11 -40.
- Frank, T. 2016. Listen, liberal, or, what ever happened to the party of the people ? New York: Picador.
- Green, S., C. Gregory, M. Reeves, J. K. Cowan, O. Demetriou, I. Koch, M. Carrithers, et al. 2016. Brexit referendum: First reactions from anthropology. Social Anthropology 24 (4):478 -502.
- Gusterson, H. 2017. From Brexit to Trump: Anthropology and the rise of nationalist populism. American Ethnologist 44 (2):209 -14.
- Hall, S. 1985. Authoritarian populism: A reply. New Left Review 1 (151):115 -24.
- Harvey, D. 1996. Justice, nature and the geography of difference . Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
- Himley, M. 2014. Mining history: Mobilizing the past in struggles over mineral extraction in Peru. Geographical Review 104 (2):174 -91.
- Hochschild, A. R. 2016. The ecstatic edge of politics: Sociology and Donald Trump. Contemporary Sociology: A Journal of Reviews 45 (6):683 -89.
- Holloway, S. L. 2007. Burning issues: Whiteness, rurality and the politics of difference. Geoforum 38 (1):7 -20.
- Huber, M. T. 2013. Lifeblood: Oil, freedom, and the forces of capital . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Inglehart, R., and P. Norris. 2016. Trump, Brexit, and the rise of populism: Economic have-nots and cultural backlash . Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network.
- Jansen, R. S. 2011. Populist mobilization: A new theoretical approach to populism. Sociological Theory 29 (2):75 -96.
- Jenkins, J. 2016. Contested terrain of extractive development in the American West: Using a regional political ecology framework to understand scalar governance, biocentric values, and anthropocentric values. Journal of Political Ecology 23 (1):182 -96.
- Kenny, M. 2017. Back to the populist future? Understanding nostalgia in contemporary ideological discourse. Journal of Political Ideologies 22 (3):256 -73.
- Koch, I. 2017. What ' s in a vote? Brexit beyond culture wars. American Ethnologist 44 (2):225 -30.
- Kohl, B., and L. Farthing. 2012. Material constraints to popular imaginaries: The extractive economy and resource nationalism in Bolivia. Political Geography 31 (4):225 -35.
- Kojola, E. 2018. Indigeneity, gender and class in decisionmaking about risks from resource extraction. Environmental Sociology . Advance online publication. doi: 10.1080/23251042.2018.1426090.
- Kosek, J. 2006. Understories: The political life of forests in Northern New Mexico . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Kraker, D. 2016. Iron range voters turn to Trump to boost region ' s struggling economy. MPR News , November 17. Accessed January 6, 2017. http://www.mprnews. org/story/2016/11/18/iron-range-voters-turn-to-trump-toboost-regions-struggling-economy.
- Laclau, E. 1977. Politics and ideology in Marxist theory: Capitalism, fascism, populism . London: New Left Books.
- Lamont, M., B. Y. Park, and E. Ayala-Hurtado. 2017. Trump ' s electoral speeches and his appeal to the American white working class. The British Journal of Sociology 68 (November):S153 -S180.
- Legg, S. 2004. Memory and nostalgia. Cultural Geographies; London 11 (1):99 -107.
- Lewin, P. G. 2017. ' Coal is not just a job, it ' s a way of life ' : The cultural politics of coal production in Central Appalachia. Social Problems . Advance online publication. doi:10.1093/socpro/spx030.
- Li, F. 2015. Unearthing conflict: Corporate mining, activism, and expertise in Peru . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Lichter, D. T., and D. L. Brown. 2011. Rural America in an urban society: Changing spatial and social boundaries. Annual Review of Sociology 37 (1):565 -92.
- Loomis, E. 2015. Empire of timber: Labor unions and the Pacific Northwest forests . New York: Cambridge University Press.
- Lundgren, A. S., and B. Nilsson. 2018. Civil outrage: Emotion, space and identity in legitimisations of rural protest. Emotion, Space and Society 26 (February):16 -22.

- Manuel, J. T. 2015. Taconite dreams: The struggle to sustain mining on Minnesota ' s iron range, 1915 -2000 . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Marston, A., and T. Perreault. 2017. Consent, coercion and cooperativismo : Mining cooperatives and resource regimes in Bolivia. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 49 (2):252 -72.
- McCarthy, J. 2002. First world political ecology: Lessons from the wise use movement. Environment and Planning A 34 (7):1281 -1302.
- McKinnon, I., and C. C. Hiner. 2016. Does the region still have relevance? (Re)considering ' regional ' political ecology. Journal of Political Ecology 23 (1):115 -22.
- McQuarrie, M. 2017. The revolt of the Rust Belt: Place and politics in the age of anger. The British Journal of Sociology 68:S120 -S152.
- Moffitt, B. 2016. The global rise of populism: Performance, political style, and representation . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Moore, D. S. 2005. Suffering for territory: Race, place, and power in Zimbabwe . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Nesbitt, J. T., and D. Weiner. 2001. Conflicting environmental imaginaries and the politics of nature in Central Appalachia. Geoforum 32 (3):333 -49.
- Oliver, J. E., and W. M. Rahn. 2016. Rise of the Trumpenvolk: Populism in the 2016 election. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 667 (1):189 -206.
- O ' Shaughnessy, S., and N. T. Krogman. 2011. Gender as contradiction: From dichotomies to diversity in natural resource extraction. Journal of Rural Studies 27 (2):134 -43.
- Peet, R., and M. Watts. 1996. Liberation ecologies: Environment, development, social movements . London and New York: Routledge.
- Peluso, N. L. 2012. What ' s nature got to do with it? A situated historical perspective on socio-natural commodities. Development and Change 43 (1):79 -104.
- Perreault, T. 2013. Nature and nation: Hydrocarbons, governance, and the territorial logics of ' resource nationalism ' in Bolivia. In Subterranean struggles: New dynamics of mining, oil and gas in Latin America , ed. A. Bebbington and J. Bury, 67 -89. Austin: University of Texas Press.
- ---. 2018. Mining, meaning and memory in the Andes. The Geographical Journal 184 (3):229 -41.
- Perreault, T., and G. Valdivia. 2010. Hydrocarbons, popular protest and national imaginaries: Ecuador and Bolivia in comparative context. Geoforum 41 (5):689 -99.
- Phadke, R. 2011. Resisting and reconciling big wind: Middle landscape politics in the New American West. Antipode 43 (3):754 -76.
- Pliml, G. 2017. Despite concerns, staying blue. Mesabi Daily News , August 19. Accessed March 29, 2018. https://www.virginiamn.com/opinion/letters/despiteconcerns-staying-blue/article\_93b28e0a-853f-11e7-be14c7dce4708c08.html.
- Prudham, S. W. 2005. Knock on wood: Nature as commodity in Douglas-fir country . London and New York: Routledge.
- Randall, R. 2005. Wilderness wives: Domestic economy and women ' s participation in nature. In This elusive land: Women and the Canadian environment , ed. M. Hessing, R. Raglon, and C. Sandilands, 35 -56. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.
- Robbins, P. 2002. Obstacles to a first world political ecology? Looking near without looking up. Environment and Planning A 34 (8):1509 -13.
- Rolston, J. S. 2014. Mining coal and undermining gender: Rhythms of work and family in the American West . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Rosales, A. 2017. Contentious nationalization and the embrace of the developmental ideals: Resource nationalism in the 1970s in Ecuador. The Extractive Industries and Society 4 (1):102 -10.
- Scoones, I., M. Edelman, S. M. Borras, Jr., R. Hall, W. Wolford, and B. White. 2018. Emancipatory rural politics: Confronting authoritarian populism. The Journal of Peasant Studies 45 (1):1 -20.
- Scott, R. R. 2007. Dependent masculinity and political culture in pro-mountaintop removal discourse: Or, how I learned to stop worrying and love the dragline. Feminist Studies 33 (3):484 -509.
- ---. 2010. Removing mountains: Extracting nature and identity in the Appalachian coalfields . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Smith, J. M., and A. S. D. Tidwell. 2016. The everyday lives of energy transitions: Contested sociotechnical imaginaries in the American West. Social Studies of Science 46 (3):327 -50.
- Solty, I. 2013. The crisis interregnum: From the new right-wing populism to the Occupy movement. Studies in Political Economy 91 (1):85 -112.
- Spruyt, B., G. Keppens, and F. Van Droogenbroeck. 2016. Who supports populism and what attracts people to it? Political Research Quarterly 69 (2):335 -46.
- Sultana, F. 2011. Suffering for water, suffering from water: Emotional geographies of resource access, control and conflict. Geoforum 42 (2):163 -72.
- Taggart, P. A. 2000. Populism . Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.
- Threadgold, S., D. Farrugia, H. Askland, M. Askew, J. Hanley, M. Sherval, and J. Coffey. 2018. Affect, risk and local politics of knowledge: Changing land use in Narrabri, NSW. Environmental Sociology 4 (4): 393 -404.
- Tidwell, J. H., and A. S. D. Tidwell. 2018. Energy ideals, visions, narratives, and rhetoric: Examining sociotechnical imaginaries theory and methodology in energy research. Energy Research &amp; Social Science 39 (May):103 -07.
- Ulrich-Schad, J. D., and C. M. Duncan. 2018. People and places left behind: Work, culture and politics in the rural United States. The Journal of Peasant Studies 45 (1):59 -79.
- Valdivia, G. 2008. Governing relations between people and things: Citizenship, territory, and the political economy of petroleum in Ecuador. Political Geography 27 (4):456 -77.

- Walker, P. A. 2003. Reconsidering ' regional ' political ecologies: Toward a political ecology of the rural American West. Progress in Human Geography 27 (1):7 -24.
- Walley, C. J. 2017. Trump ' s election and the ' white working class ' : What we missed. American Ethnologist 44 (2):231 -36.
- Whitehead, M., R. Jones, and M. Jones. 2007. The nature of the state: Excavating the political ecologies of the modern state . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

ERIK KOJOLA is a Visiting Assistant Professor in the Environmental Studies Department at Davidson College, Davidson, NC 28035. E-mail: erkojola@davidson.edu. His research interests are in labor -environment relationships, the politics of resource extraction, and political ecology.