<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Sociolinguistic Consequences of Economic Convergence in Galicia, Spain

Kathryn L. Hannum

To cite this article: Kathryn L. Hannum (2020): Sociolinguistic Consequences of Economic Convergence in Galicia, Spain, The Professional Geographer, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2019.1709214

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2019.1709214

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 13 Feb 2020.

Submit your article to this journal C

Article views: 36

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Sociolinguistic Consequences of Economic Convergence in Galicia, Spain

Kathryn L. Hannum

Kent State University

Changes in the nature of capitalist production over the past thirty years have allowed regions to assert a greater political and economic presence in the new global marketplace. Galicia, a Spanish region located in the northwestern corner of the Iberian Peninsula, was once Spain ' s lowest economic performer. Galicia ' s late move from a rural agrarian to an industrialized and technology-based economy has been accompanied by urban growth and drastic changes in land use over the past three decades. These changes have brought cultural consequences to the region, including prominent language shift from the regional language of Galician to the prestigious majority language of Castilian. To help analyze these themes, this article looks at the aims and application of both the European Union (EU) regional development and cultural policies and uses remote sensing tools to track the land-use change of urban centers and agricultural land over a thirty-year period in Galicia, along with historical and current analysis of Galicia ' s economy and sociolinguistic geographies. Results show that a policy mismatch exists between EU regional economic and cultural policies, wherein the former inadvertently damages the latter. Key Words: development, economic geography, language, policy.

资 本 主义 生 产 性 质 在 以 往 30 年 的 变 迁 ， 使 得 各 地 区 在 新 的 全 球 市 场 中 保 持 了 更 有 力 的 政 治 和 经 济 影 响 力 。 隶 属 于 西 班 牙 的 加利 西 亚 位 于 伊 比 利 亚 半 岛 西 北 角 ， 曾是 西 班 牙 经 济 实 力 最 弱 的 地 区 。 在 过 去 30 年 间 ， 加利 西 亚从 农 村 农 业 经 济 发 展 为 工 业 化 技 术 型 经 济 ， 在城 市 发 展 和 土地 使 用 方 面 经 历 了 巨 大 变化 。 这 些 变化 给 该 地 区 带 来 了 文 化 影 响 ， 其 中 包 括 主 要 语 言 从 加利 西 亚 的 地 区 语 言 转 变 为以 卡 斯 提 尔 大多 数 人 使 用 的 主 要 语 言 。 为 分 析 这 些 课 题 ， 本 文 审 视 了 欧 洲 联 盟 （ EU ） 地 区发 展 和 文 化 政 策 的目 标 和 应 用 ， 利 用 远 程 感 应 工 具 跟 踪 加利 西 亚 30 年 来 城 市 中 心 和 农 业 用 地 的 土地 利 用 变 化 ， 同 时 对 加利 西 亚 经 济 和 社 会 语 言 学 地 理 的 历史 和 现 状 进 行 分 析 。 结 果 表 明 ， 欧 盟 地 区 经 济 政 策 和 文 化 政 策 之 间 存 在 政 策 错 配 现 象 ， 前 者 不 经 意 地 对 后 者 造 成 了 破 坏 。 关 键 词 : 发 展 ， 经 济 地 理 ， 语 言 ， 政 策 。

Los cambios ocurridos durante los pasados treinta a ~ nos en la naturaleza de la producci  on capitalista han permitido que las regiones reivindiquen una mayor presencia pol  ı tica y econ  omica en el nuevo mercado global. Galicia, una regi  on espa ~ nola localizada en la esquina noroeste de la Pen  ı nsula Ib  erica, fue en un tiempo la del desempe ~ no econ  omico m  as bajo. El tard  ı o paso de una econom  ı a rural agraria a una econom  ı a industrializada y de base tecnol  ogica en Galicia ha estado acompa ~ nado de crecimiento urbano y de cambios dr  asticos en el uso del suelo durante las pasadas tres d  ecadas. Estos cambios han acarreado consecuencias culturales para la regi  on, incluyendo un desplazamiento ling € u  ı stico prominente del lenguaje gallego regional hacia el prestigioso lenguaje castellano de la mayor  ı a espa ~ nola. Para mejor analizar estos temas, este art  ı culo mira los prop  ositos y aplicaci  on del desarrollo regional y las pol  ı ticas culturales de la Uni  on Europea (UE) y usa herramientas de percepci  on remota para rastrear en Galicia el cambio del uso del suelo en los centros urbanos y en la tierra agr  ı cola durante el per  ı odo de treinta a ~ nos, junto con un an  alisis hist  orico y contempor  aneo de la econom  ı a y las geograf  ı as socioling € u  ı sticas gallegas. Los resultados indican que existe un desfase pol  ı tico entre las pol  ı ticas regionales econ  omicas y las culturales de la UE, donde las primeras involuntariamente hacen da ~ no a las  ultimas. Palabras clave: desarrollo, geograf  ı a econ  omica, lenguaje, pol  ı tica.

C hanges in the nature of capitalist production over the past thirty years have sped the convergence of states and regions to a more equitable plane of economic competition (Paasi 2013). Devolution in many parts of the world has allowed substate territories to develop unique economic plans and more readily join the global economy. The same economic logic that once labeled developed and undeveloped states is now applied to substate regions. Local autonomy makes capital generation less dependent on location or natural resources in regions that might once have been overlooked in developed countries (Amin 2002). This economic advancement has cultural implications, however, especially for peripheral regions that have evolved in relative isolation. Within the European Union (EU), a Europe of regions rhetoric has been pressed, resulting in policies aimed at advancing regional economies to that of the EU average, simultaneously protecting regional heritage and cultural diversity.

Since the 1970s, the EU has made regional cohesion a priority, dedicating roughly one third of its budget to regional development. A large set of studies have analyzed the economic efficacy of these policies, resulting in mixed outcomes (Dall ' Erba and Fang 2017). Recent studies have pointed to a need for geographically tailored policy, which focuses on place-based initiatives considering regional characteristics to maximize economic convergence (Iammarino, Rodr  ı guez-Pose, and Storper 2018; Bourdin 2019). What has been overlooked in this expanding body of literature are the possible cultural implications of an economically converging and cohesive EU. The policies encouraged in the Europe of regions strategy present an unplanned

<!-- image -->

Figure 1 Galicia, Spain. Map compiled by Mark A. Rhodes II.

<!-- image -->

tension between economic development and minority cultural protection. This article investigates the dual efficacy of regional convergence and diversity and cultural protection goals in the case of Galicia, Spain. This article aims at highlighting the inadvertent policy mismatch of regional development and cultural protection within the EU.

The strong regional nature of Spain is an excellent example of how varied geographies and histories have produced very different stories of social and economic outcome at the substate level. Spain has a modern history of social and political turmoil that has culminated with a new wave of democracy, an embrace of globalization, and membership in the EU community. Peripheral regions of Spain each experienced Spanish history differently and thus developed different social and economic fabrics. Some, like Catalonia and the Basque Country, benefited from early industrialization and strategic trade hub locations, developing vibrant regional economies, cultural identities, and nationalistic tendencies. These wealthy regions fostered prestige for their cultural markers, including their respective languages of Catalan and Basque. These regional languages came to be associated with the wealthy classes who spoke them, mirroring the success of the regions themselves. The peripheral region of Galicia (Figure 1), despite also having a unique culture and language, was economically marginalized in Spain for hundreds of years and consequently suffered low language prestige (Garcia and Blanco 1986; L  opez Valc  arcel 1991; Rodr  ı guez 1991; Beswick 2007). Consequently, Galician remained spoken predominantly in the countryside, whereas Castilian (the term for the Spanish language used in Spain) became far more prevalent in cities. In recent decades, Galicia has been growing its gross domestic product (GDP) to that of the EU regional average (Eurostat 2019). With this convergence, an urban population majority has emerged, accompanied by a shift in speakership from the regional language of Galician to the state majority language of Castilian.

Regional effects of the globalized economy and a devolved EU are exemplified in Galicia, where a historically agrarian economy has given way to a service and technology-based economy only in the last thirty years. Importantly, these changes have led to phenomenal urban growth in the region. Cultural heritage might be lost in the process, however, as language loss, more technically referred to as language shift (Fishman 1967, 1989), has sped alongside urbanization and economic advancement. This article uses a variety of publicly available data coupled with remote sensing methods to look at EU policy implementation in Galicia and the inadvertent sociolinguistic consequences of EU economic and cultural policy mismatch.

## Situating Regional Economy and Regional Identity in Europe

Due to the restructuring of state coalitions into suprastate entities, regions are allowed more inclusion for competition with other regions and states, instead of being held to consensual management

within the state system (Murphy 1999; Keating and Loughlin 2013). In Europe, regions can jump over the central state government by appealing straight to the EU Assembly of European Regions to lobby for regional needs and interests (Cappelen 1993; Bachtler, Mendez, and Wishlade 2016). Many peripheral regions of Europe have been experiencing economic convergence since the reform of structural funding and regional development funding implementation (Cappelen et al. 2003; Esposti and Bussoletti 2008; Keating and Loughlin 2013).

The Europe of the regions is an often employed phrase in EU promotion and policy dissemination. It refers to the idea of Europe as a collection of microterritorial cultural identities and the EU attempt to endow such substate entities with cultural and political autonomy (Clark and Jones 2018). Whereas the Europe of the regions political rhetoric has been in effect since the 1980s, European regionalism stems from a much longer history of localized socioeconomic development. Many of the states comprising the EU are a patchwork of substate regions with their own diverse cultures and histories, which have been mobilized into national identities in the modern era (Seixas and Storm 2018). This multicultural backdrop relates to the economic realities of many regions, because isolated regions are usually the most differentiated culturally and marginalized economically within a given state. Yet, in the twenty-first century, cultural diversity itself can act as an economic driver, attracting tourism and investment through highlighting of unique regional traits and place branding.

Place branding, or new regionalism, places regions within flexible, multiscalar territorial frameworks and focuses on institutions as central to identity construction, dissemination, and transformation (Catt and Murphy 2003; Bristow 2010). Regional identity then acts as a catalyst for economic development and local competitiveness. Regions mobilize through local administrative action to solidify territorial, institutional, and symbolic borders to compete economically, independent of the central state (Zimmerbauer and Paasi 2013). Strong regional identity lends itself to a strong, marketable image and local economy (Zimmerbauer 2011), an idea that policy planners use in decision making (Heller 2003; Paasi 2013). Regions, defined as political, economic, and administrative entities within a larger state system (Keating and Loughlin 2013), often contain parallel national identities as well. Historic nationalities operate as ready-made markers of identity and can be appropriated by the regional government for economic and political gain.

Strong central institutions produce and regulate the construction of a national sense of self. Through institutionalized state building, a pattern of behavior becomes established and social relations are defined (Scott 1998). Badges of identity, such as language, do not exist independent of social systems. Due to the importance of institutions in incubating identities, competition among groups for recognition from central institutions is more than symbolic; it is paramount for group identity survival. Recognition of a group identity can bolster economic gain, extend political power, and normalize social norms through the extension of institutional privileges to unique groups (Hornsby and Agarin 2012). Decentralized governments provide a more inclusive forum for minority groups to participate, giving groups a better chance to gain representation and achieve institutional response (Marten 2015). Paasi (2013) theorized that regional identities are not possible without regional institutionalization and the thickening of institutional networks (Amin and Thrift 1995), which engage people with the regional territory as opposed to the state. National and regional identities are relational and flexible concepts, not exclusively defined by boundaries but by the local, regional, state, and global network interactions that normalize and redefine societies. Local institutions such as education, family, government, and economic sectors socialize citizens in the identity of their region, providing markers by which to recognize sameness and difference. Identity markers include but are not limited to clothing, gestures, interests, values, possessions, accent, and language. Language is arguably the most salient identity marker (Fishman 1977). Language instantaneously alerts others who you are and where you come from and in this way is inextricably linked to identity. It is no surprise, then, that language preservation is often the galvanizing fight in many nationalist struggles, because official language creation and standardization is often a key step in the solidification of regional or national devolution.

Much of the literature on culture and development prioritizes economic assessment, concerning how culture affects or impedes development (Yousfi 2010; Huggins and Thompson 2014). This case study takes the reverse approach, asking how development affects culture, specifically language. A variety of cases illustrate the endeavor that autonomous regions face in trying to preserve local linguistic culture while advancing economically; the Basque Country, Catalonia, Scotland and Wales (Bond, McCrone, and Brown 2003), Cornwall (Donaldson 2006), and Finnish regions (Paasi and Zimmerbauer 2011) have all undergone language slip over the course of political integration and economic convergence in Europe. As they have gained autonomy, regional governments have developed unique strategies for both advancing economically and protecting regional languages. Many factors determine the outcomes of economic advancement on linguistic culture, including but not limited to social prestige of the language, speakership of elites, urban versus rural tradition, and immigrant influxes. Spain is a country with an exceptional amount of internal cultural and economic difference, and many of Spain ' s regions or autonomous communities exemplify these categorical challenges.

## Spanish Political Economy

The Spanish constitution of 1978 established regions as autonomous communities within the unified political entity of Spain. Each region has been granted different levels of self-rule, the most independent of them being the three historical nationalities of Catalonia, the Basque Country, and Galicia (Seixas 2003). Governmental functions are assumed by either the central government or the autonomous communities or shared between the two as laid out in Article 5 of the constitution (Senado de Espa ~ na 2019). From 1980 to 2008, Spain experienced steady GDP growth and life expectancy increase overall. Inflation-adjusted GDP per capita in Spain in 1980 was $16,000, and the average Spaniard lived to seventy-six years of age. By 2008, GDP per capita had grown to $34,284 and average life expectancy had increased to eighty-one years (Gapminder World 2015). Spain was improving along most indicators of human development and growing financially as well. Wealth distribution over this time period was unequal within Spain, however, as a few regions tended to skew the average upward. The regions of Catalonia and the Basque Country, being early industrializers and economically powerful regions of Spain for years, profited after Spanish regional devolution, with little redistribution. Poor, primarily agrarian regions such as Extremadura, Galicia, and Asturias suffered from geographic isolation and lack of industry or infrastructure to compete internally or connect internationally. Membership in the EU further rearranged economic policy and encouraged regional political, social, and economical devolution. Although all regions in Spain took an economic hit during the global recession of 2008, the historically poor regions of Spain lagged significantly behind high-performing regions despite overall Spanish growth since inclusion in the European community in 1986 (Farrell 2001).

The mixture of globalization and devolved political autonomy has given economically sidelined regions the chance to speed convergence with the global marketplace over the past three decades. This has had a drastic impact in historically impoverished regions. EU incorporation and provision has sparked the economy of peripheral regions through accelerated integration and implementation of regional action funds (Keating and Loughlin 2013). Galicia has moved from a primary-sector economy of subsistence and some commercial activity to an emerging innovation economy of high-tech industrialization and urban economic activity clusters.

According to its regional policy doctrine, the EU currently sets aside e 358.1 billion a year for regional convergence in several areas (European Commission 2019a). Cohesion funds promote research and development, technology, support for small enterprises, employment, and education opportunities to boost

GDP per capita. Rural funds are dedicated to rural development, helping rural areas meet specific environmental, social, and economic challenges in the global marketplace. Maritime funds are dedicated to helping fishing-dependent regions transition into economically and environmentally sustainable production (European Commission 2019a). Spain receives funding in all categories of EU assistance totaling e 27 billion, with most money going to regions that are between 70 percent and 90 percent of the EU GDP per capita average (European Commission 2019a). The EU on the whole has seen regional growth increase disparities decrease as a direct result of these funds (Fiaschi, Lavezzi, and Parenti 2018). Spanish receipt of funding has resulted in some specific shortcomings (Medeiros 2017; Gonz  alez-Alegre 2018), but the cohesion policy goal has seen modest success in the country in terms of regional convergence to EU GDP average (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development [OECD] 2012).

## Galician Economic History

Due to the social structure of a primarily rural populace, Galicia has developed later than technologically advanced regions of Spain or Europe (Keating 2000). Large numbers of scattered rural settlements, a dominant agricultural tradition, and the tradition of split-property inheritance have produced a high degree of land fragmentation in the region and decreased productivity of agricultural output (Keating 2000; Crecente, Alvarez, and Fra 2002). Galicia was rich in wood and granite, but these resources were not processed in the area; rather, they were shipped to industrial centers elsewhere in Spain, taking wealth away from Galicia (Keating 2000). In 1995, 25 percent of Galicia ' s workforce was employed in agriculture, fishery, or forest production, the largest rate of primary-sector employment in Spain at the time (Rodr  ı guez-Pose 2000). Galicia has operated one of Europe ' s largest fishing fleets off the northern coast for more than fifty years and still ships sought-after seafood products all around the world (Keating 2001). The Prestige oil spill in 2002 briefly halted Galicia ' s fishing operation, forcing them to reevaluate environmental practices (Sur  ı s Regueiro, Garza Gil, and Varela Lafuente 2007) and demonstrating the importance of economic diversification.

Membership in the EU has strengthened Galicia ' s industrial investments and helped foster a service and manufacturing-based economy. The European single market encourages regional development and participation, which is bolstered by allocating funding to regions (Keating 2000). From 2007 to 2013, Galicia received e 2.2 billion from the EU for regional development (European Commission 2019a). Galicia

concentrated funds for this period in its emerging knowledge-based economy, specifically in research and development, information and communication technologies, and transport and energy (European Commission 2019a). Further investigation of Galician remuneration shows considerable funding of transport and energy, as well as environmental management.

Galicia has been climbing the development ladder (Sachs 2008) since inclusion in the EU. Galicia ' s GDP has doubled, reaching approximately e 60 billion in 2011 (OECD 2012). From 1980 to 1995, Galicia had the second slowest economic growth rate of all Spanish regions (Rodr  ı guez-Pose 2000). In the following decade, however, Galicia had the highest rate of GDP per capita increase of all Spanish regions according to a 2012 OECD report. Since 2015, agriculture in Galicia has contributed less than 2.5 percent of GDP total value added, and less than 40 percent of the land is used for agriculture. In 2011, Galicia achieved 75 percent of the EU average GDP, moving it from a convergence region to a transition region along European commission guidelines (OECD 2012).

## Urbanization and a Shifting Galician Economy

Restructuring of the Galician economy and the decline of agricultural production have affected the regional landscape in an abandonment of farms and an expansion of urban space. Data provided by the Ministry of Rural Affairs in 2008 revealed more than 100,000 family farms in Galicia averaging under 10 ha that had been divided through a split inheritance system (Constenla Bergueiro 2008). This system divides land by the number of children in a family, resulting in smaller and smaller plots over the generations. Galicia also has an elderly population and a decreasing population rate. These factors have pushed residents, especially young workers, out of the countryside and into cities.

Analysis of remotely sensed images showing landuse change over time allows a comparison of land use from as far back as the 1960s. These images can be analyzed for urban growth (Wilson et al. 2003) and rural land-use change (Muller and Zeller 2002; Weng 2002). To analyze land-use change alongside language shift, I have created two land-use change maps, which illustrate themes of urbanization and rural land use in Galicia over a thirty-year period.

Images of Galicia from April 1984 and April 2014 were collected from U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) Earth Explorer. The year 1984 was selected as the start date to gather data before Galician industrialization and EU inclusion. In the 1980s, over half of the Galician population lived in village settlements of less than 5,000 people (Ferr  as Sexto 1996). By the mid-2010s, thousands of these villages had been abandoned. The data were gathered in 2014, providing an even thirty-year window of data. April was selected because it is a typically lush growing period in the region, thus aiding in remote sensing analysis of land cover and providing a stable comparison between the images. Using Idrisi (now Terraset) software, three images in each data set were stitched together using the mosaic tool to create two images of Galicia, one from 1984 and one from 2014. False color composites were built to get an idea of the land cover being represented in each of the resulting images, as well as true color images with which to compare the false color images for healthy and unhealthy vegetation patterns, urban areas, and other land uses. A detailed supervised classification then took place, training the software to recognize each of the following land cover types in both the 1984 and 2014 images: water, clouds, grass, trees, built environment, burn scars or open land quarries, and fallow fields. After training the images, a supervised classification model ran a maximum likelihood classification to pick out the total land being used for each of the trained land cover types. Using the land change modeler in Idrisi, the 1984 and 2014 images were compared along each of the training categories for losses and gains. The land change modular was also used to display the landuse changes in each of the categories, isolating each cover type in classified image form, clearly displaying losses, gains, and persistence. The images used here display fallow field change (Figure 2) and built surface gains (Figure 3). These images depict a substantial shift from agrarian to urban land use over the past thirty years.

Galicia has historically been an agrarian region, specializing in dairy, nuts, and cereals. Over the past several decades, however, this rural livelihood has declined severely. Figure 2 shows fallow field change between April 1984 and April 2014. Pink indicates fields that were once healthy but are now lying fallow, green indicates fields that were once fallow but that are now vegetated, and purple shows persistence. The image not only shows agricultural decline but also reflects the phenomenon of land abandonment in Galicia, which has left an estimated 1,200 villages entirely empty (Frayer 2015). Figure 2 also shows the fragmentation of the rural landscape in Galicia due to the split inheritance system practiced throughout the region. These small parcels make agricultural activity difficult and unproductive. Concomitant with a rural depopulation, Galicia ' s urban land developments have been significant since 1980, as the population has largely relocated to urban centers along the Atlantic coast.

EU regional policies have inadvertently encouraged the growth of urban communities in Galicia. Galicia itself has encouraged this growth due to incentives of increased EU funding for larger populations in urban tax areas (Keating 2000). The proliferation of an urban

Figure 2 Fallow field change between 1984 and 2014. New Fallow fields are shown in pink. Data collected from USGS Earth Explorer, Landsat 5 &amp; 7. Map compiled by author.

<!-- image -->

landscape within Galicia is evident in Figure 3, showing all new built surfaces since 1984 in black. New roads and railways are visible connecting the expanded cities of the Atlantic coast, as well as resurfaced and renovated towns. As Galicia ' s economy has diversified into industrial sectors and away from agriculture, its urban growth has been drastic. Urban development in Galicia during the housing bubble (1997 -2008) was rapid and not reflective of population growth (Gonz  alez P  erez 2007).

Since economic recovery, urban development in the north -south coastal corridor continues, drawing rural residents to urban jobs and single-family homes on the west coast. The southern cities of Vigo and Pontevedra have expanded considerably with EU inclusion and have been able to attract new industrial plants, including the manufacturing plant for Peugeot Citron in Vigo. A Coru ~ na in the north is also home to the textile giant Inditex, the parent company of Zara, Mossimo Dutti, and other global fast fashion brands. Inditex ' s large industrial complex is situated just outside the metro area. Due to these new industries, one third of Galicia ' s population is located in the Atlantic coastal beltway connected by new infrastructure since 1984 (Gonz  alez P  erez 2007). Although spurring Galicia ' s economy, urban development has had implications for cultural heritage. Speakership of the Galician language, historically predominant in the countryside, is now in steady decline.

Figure 3 New urban surfaces between 1984 and 2014. Data collected from USGS Earth Explorer, Landsat 5 &amp; 7. Map compiled by author.

<!-- image -->

## Usage of Galician and Castilian

Speakership of Galician and Castilian in Galicia is roughly split in half, between those who always or mostly use Galician and those who always or mostly use Castilian, based on the latest published language survey results from the Galician Statistical Institute (Instituto Galego de Estatistica [IGE] 2013). As a co-official language, Galician is used in all government institutions and is taught in public schools across the region. Although it has undergone a variety of changes in the past decades, it is generally mandated that Galician be used to teach half of a pupil ' s classroom hours, although language of choice is often dependent on preferences of students in each locale (Hannum 2019). It is also important to note that Galician and Castilian are related, which aids in the learning and comprehension of Galician. Although high speakership levels of both languages persist, these figures also indicate the frequency of code switching (switching languages) in the region, because about half indicate the use of both languages yet favor one or the other. Looking at speakership by age

Figure 4 Language slip between 2001 and 2011. Data collected from Instituto Gallego de Estatistica and compiled by Luz Agromartin. Map compiled by author.

<!-- image -->

begins to reveal the overall trend in Galicia. Younger people tend to speak Castilian more frequently than Galician, and elderly people speak Galician more frequently than Castilian (IGE 2013). This indicates that Galician speakers are dwindling, and Castilian speakers will become the dominant group in the coming years.

Galicia ' s population of 2.75 million is now largely concentrated along the Atlantic coast in metro areas of more than 100,000 residents. The IGE periodically releases survey data related to speakership of each language in the region, although the scale of the data has changed over the years. 2011 was the last year for which language data were compiled at the municipality level, making it the most revealing for geographical analysis and correlation to land-use change. These data were compiled by Luz Agromartin in a Google fusion table format. I then downloaded these data with her permission to use in making the ArcMap product seen here.

Figure 4 shows the distribution of those who indicate ' always ' using Galician from 2001 and compares it with the distribution of specifically Galician speakers in 2011. Over a period of ten years, Galician speakership in the communities, surrounding urban areas has drastically declined. These data, coupled with the remote sensing figures, show a clear correlation between urbanization and decline of solely Galician speakers in the region. The components of this visible language shift are several, each relating to economic convergence. First, it is important to remember that Castilian is the hegemonic language in the region; therefore, it carries more social prestige. Galician speakers are thus incentivized to adopt Castilian when coming into contact with Castilian speakers or when in Castilian spaces (Garcia 1986; L  opez Valc  arcel 1991; Rodr  ı guez 1991; Monteagudo and Santamarina 1993; Beswick 2007). Galicians are migrating to urban areas and adopting Castilian, which is the more socially prestigious language. Second, urban sprawl engulfs rural areas, incentivizing a shift in those places to Castilian due to greater contact with urban institutions and people. Third, there has been a slight shift from Galician to Castilian in place, as monolingualism turned into bilingualism in small towns and villages (Ramallo 2018).

## Discussion

Economic convergence has brought industry, investment, and growing urbanization to Galicia. Although this growth is in line with the EU goals of regional convergence to the EU average GDP per capita, it has inadvertently threatened the linguistic cultural heritage of the region. Protection of cultural heritage is an explicit aim of the EU and is an essential component of other economic endeavors, such as tourism within the framework of new regionalism.

Although the EU stresses economic convergence as a desired target for a ' harmonious and cohesive Europe ' (European Commission 2019a), cultural diversity is also a goal of the European Commission, with special attention paid to linguistic diversity: ' culture and its specificity, including multilingualism are key elements of the European integration process ' (European Commission 2007). This rhetoric promotes the idea of a Europe of regions, each region bringing a distinct cultural heritage to the European community, which prides itself on protecting and promoting its cultural heritage, specifically language. Absent from the policy frameworks is any acknowledgment that economic convergence has covert cultural repercussions, including but not limited to linguistic heritage.

Throughout the twentieth century, Galicia maintained high speakership levels of the regional language due to its significant rural tradition of self-sufficient economy, which helped protect the language from Francoist repression. The economic changes that have been brought to the region in the twenty-first century have incentivized urbanization and, with it, a language shift from Galician to Castilian. As the outlined sociopolitical history of the Galician language given earlier has shown, Castilian has and continues to hold more prestige, incentivizing Galicians to switch languages to move up the development ladder. As Galicia converges to the EU economic average through urban industry and corporate investment, its historically rural language of lesser prestige is increasingly threatened.

Given the data presented here, Galicia will continue to experience language loss as younger generations settle in urban areas where the Galician language is not practiced or actively protected. Despite ongoing language shift in the region, the Galician language is considered to be one of the most valuable cultural markers of the Galician nation (Iglesias- Alvarez and Ramallo 2002). Across the region, rural symbols are used as value markers of Galician heritage and identity, of which the language, as an expressive and living entity, takes precedence (Campos 1999).

Without its national language, the cultural identity of the Galician nation is threatened. Sociolinguistic ramifications are seldom connected to international economic policy, yet these effects must be considered to avoid cultural homogenization and future economic loss. Regions like Flanders (Belgium), Wales (UK), and South Tyrol (Italy) have all experienced similar linguistic crises while pushing for economic convergence. Policy that appreciates the subtle intricacies of economics and culture is needed to better serve underdeveloped regions like Galicia.

The linguistic heritage of Galicia and other minority language regions is a valuable asset to regions hoping to promote unique cultural traits within the new regionalism framework. The European Commission agenda for culture in a globalizing world stresses the importance of resisting cultural homogenization in a globalized setting and states that culture is at the heart of development: ' Through this unity in diversity, respect for cultural and linguistic diversity and promotion of a common cultural heritage lies at the very heart of the European project. This is more than ever indispensable in a globalizing world ' (European Commission 2019b, Article 1).

Considering this call to action, the data presented here should aid EU policymakers in their crafting of future economic policy as it pertains to regions. Economic policies that favor cultural heterogeneity, emphasize local embeddedness, and highlight regional differences across Europe as valuable assets would help to slow the trend of language shift seen here. Despite the overall trend of language shift in Galicia, there are pockets of young, educated Galician speakers active in cities (Gonz  alez 2008) and on the Internet (Guinovart 2003). These groups should be identified as cultural assets per the goal of the unity in diversity project and provided with resources to incentivize investment in the Galician language and showcase the potentially lucrative nature of the local language.

## Conclusions

Galicia, as a peripheral region of Spain, has experienced economic convergence over the past thirty years due to globalization and encouraged by membership in the EU. Galician economic development is representative of many peripheral regions in the EU that have been able to participate in the global economy in recent years and assert their regional identity with increased political autonomy and economic strength. Several factors are indicative of Galicia ' s emergence as a knowledge-based economy from a subsistence agriculture and commercial economy. Jobs have moved from primary-sector agriculture and resource extraction to tertiary-sector industry, arts, and manufacturing. Rural depopulation has accompanied decreased agricultural productivity, and urban growth has expanded along Galicia ' s industrial and increasingly interconnected coastal corridor. These changes in Galicia ' s economy and land-use structure are indicative of the region ' s convergence to the economic standards of the Spanish central government and EU GDP per capita averages. At the same time, Galicia exemplifies linguistic homogenization in the face of increased urbanization in part due to this economic advancement. Due to the region ' s history as a peripheral region with meager economic standing, the Galician language has little social capital and is more often spoken in rural places. Urbanization and industrialization hasten language shift in Galicia,

inadvertently undermining the European Commission policies for the protection of multiculturalism and multilingualism. Unlike Catalonia and the Basque Country, regions with prestigious historic languages, regions like Galicia show how the EU quest for economic convergence has paradoxically threatened aspects of Europe ' s cultural heritage. The valued multilingualism and cultural heritage promoted in the European Commission framework is being overlooked in favor of economic convergence in peripheral regions with poor cultural prestige. The rhetoric of the agenda for culture in tangent with economic advancement policies in the EU inadvertently contradict one another when applied to the economic and social trajectory of a peripheral region with a historic language like Galicia. /H17039

## ORCID

Kathryn L. Hannum http://orcid.org/00000001-5635-6215

## Literature Cited

- Amin, A. 2002. Spatialities of globalisation. Environment and planning A: Economy and Space 34 (3):385 -99.
- Amin, A., and N. Thrift. 1995. Globalisation, institutional ' thickness ' and the local economy. In Managing cities: The new urban context , ed. P. Healey, S. Cameron, S. Davoudi, S. Graham, and A. Madani-Pour, 91 -108. Chichester, UK: John Wiley &amp; Sons.
- Bachtler, J., C. Mendez, and F. Wishlade. 2016. EU cohesion policy and European integration: The dynamics of EU budget and regional policy reform . London and New York: Routledge.
- Beswick, J. 2007. Regional nationalism in Spain: Language use and ethnic identity in Galicia. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
- Bond, R., D. McCrone, and A. Brown. 2003. National identity and economic development: Reiteration, recapture, reinterpretation and repudiation. Nations and Nationalism 9 (3):371 -91. doi: 10.1111/1469-8219.00102.
- Bourdin, S. 2018. Modeling and simulation of Cohesion Policy funding and regional growth diffusion in an enlarged European Union. In Spatial analysis and location modeling in urban and regional systems (pp. 123 -41). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
- Bourdin, S. 2019. Does the cohesion policy have the same influence on growth everywhere? A geographically weighted regression approach in Central and Eastern Europe. Economic Geography 95 (3):256 -87. doi: 10.1080/ 00130095.2018.1526074.
- Bristow, G. 2010. Resilient regions: Re-' place ' ing regional competitiveness. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 3 (1):153 -67.
- Campos, J. R. 1999. Tambi  en se puede inventar la naturaleza? El poder del lenguaje de la cultura posmoderna. Etnogr  afica 3 (1):49 -70.
- Cappelen, A., F. Castellacci, J. Fagerberg, and B. Verspagen. 2003. The impact of EU regional support
- on growth and convergence in the European Union. JCMS : Journal of Common Market Studies 41 (4):621 -44. doi: 10.1111/1468-5965.00438.
- Cappelen, R. 1993. Interregional cooperation in Europe: An introduction. In Regional networks, border regions and European integration , 1 -20. London: Pion.
- Catt, H., and M. Murphy. 2003. Sub-state nationalism: A comparative analysis of institutional design . New York: Routledge.
- Clark, J., and A. Jones. 2018. The ' Europe of the regions. ' In Handbook on the geographies of regions and territories , ed. A. Passi, J. Harrison, and M. Jones, 373 -84. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
- Constenla Bergueiro, G. 2008. Land development in Galicia a new perspective. Accessed May 8, 2015. http:// www.fao.org/fileadmin/user\_upload/Europe/documents/ Events\_2009/Landcons5/1-1.pdf.
- Crecente, R., C. Alvarez, and U. Fra. 2002. Economic, social and environmental impact of land consolidation in Galicia. Land Use Policy 19 (2):135 -47. doi: 10.1016/ S0264-8377(02)00006-6.
- Dall ' Erba, S., and F. Fang. 2017. Meta-analysis of the impact of European Union structural funds on regional growth. Regional Studies 51 (6):822 -32. doi: 10.1080/ 00343404.2015.1100285.
- Donaldson, A. 2006. Performing regions: Territorial development and cultural politics in a Europe of the regions. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 38 (11): 2075 -92. doi: 10.1068/a37104.
- Esposti, R., and S. Bussoletti. 2008. Impact of Objective 1 funds on regional growth convergence in the European Union: A panel-data approach. Regional Studies 42 (2): 159 -73. doi: 10.1080/00343400601142753.
- European Commission. 2007. European agenda for culture. Resolution 2007c 287/01. European Commission, Brussels.
- European Commission. 2019a. The EU ' s main investment policy -Regional policy -European Commission. Accessed July 8, 2019. http://ec.europa.eu/regional\_pol-icy/en/policy/what/investment-policy/.
- European Commission. 2019b. EUR-Lex -Access to European law. Document 52007DC0242 - EN - EURLex. Accessed July 8, 2019. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/ legal- content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52007DC0242.
- European Commission. n.d. Cohesion policy open data. Accessed May 5, 2018. https://cohesiondata.ec.europa.eu/. Eurostat. 2019. Eurostat. Accessed September 15, 2019. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/main/home.
- Farrell, M. 2001. Spain in the EU: The road to economic convergence . New York: Springer.
- Ferr  as Sexto, C. 1996. Cambio rural na Europa atl  antica. Os casos de Irlanda e Galicia (1970 -1990) [Rural change in Atlantic Europe: The cases of Ireland and Galicia (1970 -1990)]. Santiago de Compostela, Spain : Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Xunta de Galicia.
- Fiaschi, D., A. M. Lavezzi, and A. Parenti. 2018. Does EU cohesion policy work? Theory and evidence. Journal of Regional Science 58 (2):386 -423. doi: 10.1111/jors.12364.
- Fishman, J. A. 1967. Bilingualism with and without diglossia; diglossia with and without bilingualism. Journal of Social Issues 23 (2):29 -38. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-4560. 1967.tb00573.x.

- Fishman, J. A. 1977. Language and ethnicity. In Language, ethnicity and intergroup relations , ed. H. Giles, 15 -57. New York: Academic Press.
- Fishman, J. A. 1989. Language and ethnicity in minority sociolinguistic perspective . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
- Frayer, L. 2015. In Spain, entire villages are up for sale -And they ' re going cheap. Accessed April 9, 2016. http:// www.npr.org/sections/parallels/2015/08/23/433228503/ in-spain-entire-villages-are-up-for-sale-and-theyre-goingcheap.
- Gapminder World. 2015. Accessed May 5, 2016. http:// www.gapminder.org/data/.

Garc  ı a, C., and L. Blanco. 1986. El castellano en Galicia [The Castilian language in Galicia]. In Manuel ALVAR et al., El castellano actual en las comunidades biling € ues de Espa ~ na, Junta de Castilla y Le  on/Consejer  ı a de Educaci  on y Cultura, Salamanca, 49 -64. Salamanca, Spain: Regional Government of Castille and Leon/Council of Culture and Education.

- Gonz  alez, M. 2008. O novo galego urbano [The new urban Galician]. In Cada palabra pesaba, cada palabra med  ı a. Homenaxe a Ant  on Santamarina , ed. M. Brea, F. Fern  andez Rei, and X. L. Regueira, 363 -74. Santiago de Compostela, Spain: Universidade de Santiago de Compostela.
- Gonz  alez-Alegre, J. 2018. Active labour market policies and the efficiency of the European Social Fund in Spanish regions. Regional Studies 52 (3):430 -43. doi: 10. 1080/00343404.2017.1315396.
- Gonz  alez P  erez, J. M. 2007. Urban planning system in contemporary Spain. European Planning Studies 15 (1): 29 -50. doi: 10.1080/09654310601016481.
- Guinovart, X. G. 2003. A lingua galega en Internet [Galician language on the Internet]. In Nacionalismo e globalizaci  on: lingua, cultura e identidade , ed. A. Bringas and B. Mart  ı n, vol. 1, 71 -88. T  abola, Spain: Universidade de Vigo.
- Hannum, K. L. 2019. Language policy and practice between urban and rural schools in Galicia, Spain. GeoJournal :1 -16.
- Heller, M. 2003. Globalization, the new economy, and the commodification of language and identity. Journal of Sociolinguistics 7 (4):473 -92.
- Hornsby, M., and T. Agarin. 2012. The end of minority languages-Europe's regional languages in perspective. JEMIE 11:88.
- Huggins, R., and P. Thompson. 2014. Culture, entrepreneurship and uneven development: A spatial analysis. Entrepreneurship &amp; Regional Development 26 (9 -10): 726 -52. doi: 10.1080/08985626.2014.985740.
- Iammarino, S., A. Rodr  ı guez-Pose, and M. Storper. 2019. Regional inequality in Europe: Evidence, theory and policy implications. Journal of Economic Geography 19 (2): 273 -98.
- Iglesias- Alvarez, A., and F. Ramallo. 2002. Language as a diacritical in terms of cultural and resistance identities in Galicia. Estudios de Socioling € u  ı stica 3 (2):255 -87.
- Instituto Galego de Estatistica. 2013. Encuesta estructural a hogares: Conocimiento y uso del gallego [Structural household survey: Knowledge and use of Galician]. Accessed May 5, 2016. https://www.ige.eu/web/mostrar\_ actividade\_estatistica.jsp?idioma=es&amp;codigo=0 206004.
- Keating, M. 2000. The minority nations of Spain and European integration: A new framework for autonomy?
- Journal of Spanish Cultural Studies 1 (1):29 -42. doi: 10. 1080/713683431.
- Keating, M. 2001. Rethinking the region culture, institutions and economic development in Catalonia and Galicia. European Urban and Regional Studies 8 (3): 217 -34. doi: 10.1177/096977640100800304.
- Keating, M., and J. Loughlin. 2013. The political economy of regionalism . London and New York: Routledge.
- L  opez Valc  arcel, X. M. 1991. Normalizaci  on e did  actica da l  ı ngua. Cadernos de lingua 4:113 -30.
- Marten, H. F. 2015. Parliamentary structures and their impact on empowering minority language communities. In Cultural and linguistic minorities in the Russian Federation and the European Union , 253 -77. Springer International Publishing.
- Medeiros, E. 2017. European Union cohesion policy and Spain: A territorial impact assessment. Regional Studies 51 (8):1259 -69. doi: 10.1080/00343404.2016.1187719.
- Monteagudo, H., and A. Santamarina. 1993. Galician and Castilian in contact: Historical, social and linguistic aspects. Trends in Romance Linguistics and Philology 5: 117 -73.
- Muller, D., and M. Zeller. 2002. Land use dynamics in the central highlands of Vietnam: A spatial model combining village survey data with satellite imagery interpretation. Agricultural Economics 27 (3):333 -54. doi: 10.1111/j. 1574-0862.2002.tb00124.x.
- Murphy, A. B. 1999. Rethinking the concept of European identity. In Nested identities: Nationalism, territory and scale , ed. G. Herb and D. H. Kaplan, 53 -74. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
- Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2012. Regions at a glance: Spain. Accessed May 7, 2015. http://www.oecd.org/governance/ regional- policy/Country-statistics-profile-Spain.pdf.
- Paasi, A. 2013. Regional planning and the mobilization of ' regional identity ' : From bounded spaces to relational complexity. Regional Studies 47 (8):1206 -19. doi: 10. 1080/00343404.2012.661410.
- Paasi, A., and K. Zimmerbauer. 2011. Theory and practice of the region: A contextual analysis of the transformation of Finnish regions. Treballs de la Societat Catalana de Geografia 71 -72:163 -78.
- Ramallo, F. 2018. Linguistic diversity in Spain. In Manual of Romance sociolinguistics , ed. W. Ayres-Bennett and J. Carruthers, vol. 18, 462. Berlin: De Gruyter.
- Rodru  ı guez, F. 1991. Conflicto lingu  ı stico e ideolox  ı a na galiza. Laiovento, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
- Rodr  ı guez-Pose, A. 2000. Economic convergence and regional development strategies in Spain: The case of Galicia and Navarre. EIB Papers 5 (1):88 -115.
- Sachs, J. 2008. Common wealth: Economics for a crowded planet. New York: Penguin.
- Scott, J. C. 1998. Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Seixas, X. M. N. 1997. Idioma y nacionalismo en Galicia en el siglo XX: Un desencuentro hist  orico y algunos dilemas en el futuro [Language and nationalism in Galician in the twentieth century: An historical disagreement and some future dilemmas]. Revista de Antropolog  ı a Social 6:165 -91.

- Seixas, X. M. N. 2003. A state of many nations: The construction of a plural Spanish society since 1976. In The social construction of diversity: Recasting the master narrative of industrial nations , ed. C. Harzig and D. Juteau, 284 -307. Oxford, UK: Berghahn.
- Seixas, X. M. N., and E. Storm. 2018. Regionalism and modern Europe: Identity construction and movements from 1890 to the present day . London: Bloomsbury.
- Senado de Espa ~ na. 2019. Constituci  on Espa ~ nola. Accessed May 17, 2019. http://www.senado.es/web/conocersenado/normas/constitucion/index.html.
- Sur  ı s Regueiro, J. C., M. D. Garza Gil, and M. M. Varela Lafuente. 2007. The Prestige oil spill and its economic impact on the Galician fishing sector. Disasters 31 (2): 201 -15.
- Weng, Q. 2002. Land use change analysis in the Zhujiang Delta of China using satellite remote sensing, GIS and stochastic modelling. Journal of Environmental Management 64 (3):273 -84. doi: 10.1006/jema.2001.0509.
- Wilson, E. H., J. D. Hurd, D. L. Civco, M. P. Prisloe, and C. Arnold. 2003. Development of a geospatial model to
- quantify, describe and map urban growth. Remote Sensing of Environment 86 (3):275 -85. doi: 10.1016/ S0034-4257(03)00074-9.
- Yousfi, H. 2010. Culture and development. In Culture, institutions, and development: New insights into an old debate , ed. J. P. Platteau and R. Peccoud, vol. 84, 32 -64. London and New York: Routledge.
- Zimmerbauer, K. 2011. From image to identity: Building regions by place promotion. European Planning Studies 19 (2):243 -60.
- Zimmerbauer, K., and A. Paasi. 2013. When old and new regionalism collide: Deinstitutionalization of regions and resistance identity in municipality amalgamations. Journal of Rural Studies 30:31 -40.

KATHRYN L. HANNUM is a PhD Candidate in the Department of Geography at Kent State University, Kent, OH 44240. E-mail: khannum1@kent.edu. Her research interests include national identity, sociolinguistics, public policy, and migration, primarily as they relate to substate regions in Europe and Latin America.