## ALTERNATIVE AND VIRTUAL RURALITY: AGRICULTURE AND THE COUNTRYSIDE AS EMBODIED IN AMERICAN IMAGINATION

LISA M. BUTLER HARRINGTON

<!-- image -->

ABSTRACT. Affection for agrarian livelihoods and rural and small-town environments has long been held by residents in many of the world's 'more developed' countries. Although the rural proportion of the U.S. population has shrunk to a minority over the last century, fondness for rurality continues to manifest itself in a number of ways. Attachment to the rural ideal or rural idyll can be considered as attachment to the idea of a type of place, rather than specific place attachment. Based on literature, field observation, computer searches, and data from the U.S. Census of Agriculture, connections to idea(l)s of rurality apparent in popular culture are identified and illustrated. These include rural and agricultural tourism, small-scale farming and large-lot rural subdivisions, urban agriculture, farmers' markets and community-supported agriculture, creation of housing developments around farm activities, and rural-named housing and business developments. Idealized relationships with rurality call upon health and wellbeing, connecting to nature, aesthetics, privacy, and respect and nostalgia for rural livelihoods. Keywords: environmental perception, rural geography, place attachment.

T he developed (particularly Anglophone) world has long held an emotional attachment for agrarian livelihoods, rural landscapes, and small-town environments, although the proportion of nonurban populations in these countries has shrunk to a minority. In spite of conditions that have led to most Americans having only 'superficial' exposure to rurality (Lichter and Brown 2011 , 566 ), attachment to what is imagined as rural continues. Relationships with rurality, and especially imagined or virtual rurality (Cloke 2006 , 22 ; Woods 2011 , 9 ), manifests itself in a number of ways. These range from miniaturization of farming as hobby farms and urban agriculture to symbolic references to bucolic settings in the names of housing subdivisions.

## THE RURAL IDYLL AND PLACE ATTACHMENT

Geographers and others often consider place attachment, but generally with the idea of attachment to a specific place (Relph 1976 ; Tuan 1977 ; Manzo and Devine-Wright 2014 ; Cresswell 2015 ). Although rarely addressed in geography, psychologists Leila Scanell and Robert Gifford noted that people also can have attachments to 'generic' places ( 2014 , 27 ). Kinds of places or idea(l)s of place types to which people may be attached include seashores, cities, rivers, and mountains. Americans also commonly display attachment to a cultural

This manuscript is based on a paper presented at the 2015 Quadrennial U.K.-U.S.-Canadian Rural Geography Conference, funding for which was provided by the Kansas State University Faculty Development Awards program and the KSU Department of Geography. Comments by John A. Harrington, Jr., anonymous reviewers, and journal editor David Kaplan helped to refine the paper and are greatly appreciated. Daniel Block provided the opportunity to visit urban farm locations in the Chicago area.

LISA M. BUTLER HARRINGTON, Department of Geography, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506 -2904 , USA; [lbutlerh@ksu.edu].

construct of rurality, which may be connected to the scholarly idea of 'the rural idyll.' Attachment often is grounded in nostalgia, or a fondness for the remembered or supposed positive aspects of the past -ideas of rurality frequently are based on positive conceptions of past rurality.

The idea and practice of the 'rural idyll' has been a part of the wide attachment to the real and imagined rural across much of the global North. Generally, 'the rural idyll' describes 'the positive images surrounding many aspects of the rural lifestyle, community and landscape, reinforcing, at its simplest, healthy, peaceful secure [sic] and prosperous representations of rurality' (Little and Austin 1996 , 101 ) -in other words, idealized rurality. Attention to the rural idyll has been particularly strong in the U.K., but the same phenomenon exists in the United States and other countries. While the British concept is perhaps more rooted in romanticized village and manor life (Bunce 1994 ), the American attachment to rurality has been connected to Jeffersonian ideals and the concept of the self-sufficient 'yeoman farmer.'

David Bell identified three 'ideal-typical idylls . . . : the pastoral ('farmscapes'), the natural ('wildscapes') and the sporting ('adventurescapes'). The farmscape reflects the agricultural landscape (but artisanal rather than agribusiness)' ( 2006 , 150 ). Although this paper focuses on displays of attachment to (idealized) farmscapes through visual landscapes, land use, and symbols, there are common links to nature and adventure as well. In particular, ranch-stay opportunities often combine pastoral, natural, and adventure aspects. For many Americans, simply interacting with farm animals may represent an 'adventure.' National parks would be included as wildscape rural idylls.

The significance of virtual rurality and attachment to idealized characteristics of the countryside and agrarianism lies in several aspects of societal change. First, seeking out rural lifestyles has a tendency to create fragmentation of farming and forest areas. Associated with this, creation of more housing developments in peri-urban locales increases transit and energy use. Second, the seeking of rural experiences by tourists and recreationists leads to additional income sources (and possibly survival) for farms and ranches. Income opportunities can encourage additional rural developments, such as bed-and-breakfasts. Third, a continuing belief in, and social memory of, positive attributes of farming and other rural livelihoods creates continued support for farming-friendly policies. Fourth, linking rurality to attributes like health and more 'natural' lifestyles continues the tendency to create idealized pictures of rurality among members of the public. This is done through advertising and other popular communications that sometimes connect nature experiences to health benefits when reporting on research (see Shute 2012 ; Khazan 2015 ). Fifth, nostalgia and attachment to the rural idyll is maintained as a part of the importance of farming in U.S. history and reinforces values like self-sufficiency and connections to nature. Such nostalgia may be associated with (Euro-American) social memory as well as individual memory.

## PURPOSE AND METHODS

This paper updates consideration of the 'rural idyll'/idealization in the United States; frames consideration not as specific place attachment, but as the very seldom considered idea of attachment to type of place; and connects type-ofplace rurality attachment to potential reaction to place homogenization and to social memory. It illustrates forms of virtual rurality that appear in the United States, updating some of the work done by Michael Bunce ( 1994 ) in the United Kingdom and North America and similar to Michael Woods' ( 2011 ) U.K. discussion. 'Virtual rurality' described here includes imagined and created expressions of rural areas and small towns with early to mid-twentieth century characteristics. Forms of rural/semirural living that bear some resemblance to traditional agriculture and rural life but that are unlikely to by themselves fully support a family today are included. Landscape changes creating virtual rurality may be facilitated by attachment to a type of place in social imagination -rather than the more commonly addressed attachments to specific places/locations, virtual rurality is associated with generalized type-of-place attachments and nonlocation-specific attempts at place-making based on rural idea(l)s.

Only visible portrayals and creation of a 'virtual rurality' that reflects adoption of aspects of idealized rural characteristics in popular culture are considered here. Underlying social tensions are not included in this discussion (compare with Mitchell 1996 ), nor are portrayals of rurality in fine art, literature, mass marketing, and film. Popular cultural connections to manifestations of rurality that are described here require physical locations, but do not necessarily require a specific location.

A blend of research methods have been applied to the identification and illustration of linkages of popular culture to idealized or imagined rurality. Gathering qualitative evidence has been central, but quantitative data also are included. Based on literature, field observation, computer searches, and data from the U.S. Census of Agriculture, a number of forms of connection to rural environments or landscapes apparent in popular culture have been identified and are presented through examples. A singular discourse analysis has not been followed, although the variety of evidence presented here reflects discourses visible in advertising of recreational opportunities, real estate, lifestyles, and consumer goods.

## MANIFESTATIONS OF ATTACHMENT TO IDEALIZED RURALITY

Linkages of popular culture to the countryside take a number of forms, some of which may be considered 'virtual rurality' or depictions of idealized rural conditions. Six types of connections are identified and described here: 1 ) rural and agricultural tourism and recreation, including dude-ranch stays and newer versions of rural tourism (Che, Veeck, and Veeck 2005 ; Phillip, Hunter, and Blackstock 2010 ); 2 ) small scale farming and large-lot rural subdivisions, sometimes combined with gentrification (Ghose 2004 ); 3 ) creation of housing developments around farm activities (Damrosch 2010 ; Runyon 2013 ); 4 ) housing and

business developments carrying bucolic names; 5 ) urban agriculture and related activities; and 6 ) farmers' markets and community-supported agriculture (Brown 2001 ; Schnell 2007 ; Brown and Miller 2008 ). Some of these manifestations are 'manufactured landscapes' like subdivisions created to embody specific idealized rural characteristics and others symbolically connect with rural ideals, but they all reflect the rural as 'an object of desire (because it is notmodern in a good way )' (Bell 2006 , 150 ). In addition, some manifestations of 'new urbanism' seek to imitate idealized small towns and may include smallscale agricultural production (Furuseth 1997 ).

Demonstrations of attachment to idealized rurality in popular culture -and those addressed here -are locational or place-based (Table I). Locations that may be associated with rurality or rural characteristics, however, range from the very rural to the urban, with rural tourism potentially quite rural, and urban agriculture obviously in cities. The naming of housing and business developments is primarily an instance of rural portrayal, but developments may be situated in peri-urban locations and naming may actually be of a large-lot rural subdivision. Thus, the embodiments of rurality described here are not necessarily mutually exclusive. Farmers' markets require locations, but these are most likely to be where potential customers are concentrated (mainly urban areas), although the production on which they are based may be peri-urban to rural. Farmers' markets often employ logos that portray visions of rurality. Community-supported agriculture projects (CSAs) are likely to serve urban to suburban locations, but production generally occurs in more rural places.

## RURAL AND AGRICULTURAL TOURISM

Beginning with what might be considered one of the popular culture connections to rurality that often come closest to actual rural conditions, certain

TABLE I-EMBODIMENTS OF THE RURAL IDEAL IN AMERICAN POPULAR CULTURE. LARGER CHECK MARKS INDICATE THE MOST LIKELY MANIFESTATIONS; SMALLER CHECKS INDICATE SECONDARY RELIANCE OR APPEARANCE.

tourism destinations and recreational pursuits are oriented toward experiencing rural (including fairly wild) places. Cultural relationships with the countryside may be conceived of as connecting to nature (Bunce 1994 ). The 'nature' might be quite domesticated as in many agrarian landscapes, but also can include minimally human-impacted environments. Associations of people with the rural, from tame to wild versions, may be enacted through tourism.

Tourism related to nature study and the pursuit of picturesque views dates to the eighteenth century in the United States (Nash 1973 ; Huth 1990 ). In some cases this verged upon wilderness tourism, as wealthy Americans and Europeans sought out beautiful scenery and notable natural features, beginning with locations like the Hudson Valley and Niagara Falls, then extending to western regions as rail lines became established. The Yellowstone region became an early draw even before it was made more easily accessible by rail. As more scenic areas gained protection, national parks and monuments received growing attention, particularly Yosemite, Yellowstone, Glacier, the Grand Canyon, and Sequoia. Most of the dramatic national park areas -the best known naturefocused tourism destinations -are located in the western United States, but draws of 'nature' (sometimes quite modified) include state and local parks, national forests, and other public lands across the country. Bunce included New York's Central Park as a part of the nature-focused 'countryside ideal,' along with other city parks ( 1994 ).

In the twentieth century, the attraction of the rural West led to the establishment of 'dude' or guest ranches. They gave city dwellers an opportunity to have a rural experience based on the romance of western ranches and cowboy culture: 'Looming large on the national scene as a vehicle for relaxation, [they] played an important role in perpetuating America's continuing romance with the West' (Rodnitzky 1968 , 111 ). They still play a role, in spite of the negative connotation of 'dude' in a working environment. A number of dude ranches were established in the 1920 s, as the urban population of the United States continued to grow and cowboy/Western movies achieved popularity (see Agnew 2015 ). The Dude Ranchers' Association, established in 1926 , listed 100 U.S. member ranches in 2016 (Dude Ranchers' Association, n.d.). The images of cowboys in popular culture via movies and print (including 'dime novels') likely contributed to the growth of the popularity of dude ranches and western rural vacationing.

Some ranches combine working cattle and guest functions, to provide more adventurous guests with a more 'authentic' rural experience, like McGinnis Meadows Cattle &amp; Guest Ranch, Montana; Colorado Cattle Company &amp; Guest Ranch; and The Hideout Lodge and Guest Ranch, Wyoming. Although most guest ranches are located in western states, there also are such operations in more eastern parts of the country, such as KD Guest Ranch, Ohio; Malibu Dude Ranch, Pennsylvania; Horseshoe Canyon Ranch, Arkansas. Western ranches offer more dramatic settings and wider activity space; the few eastern guest ranches might be thought of as lying generally between the western

FIG. 1 -Colorado Cattle Company website photo captioned, 'Our Property,' June 2015 . (Http://coloradocattlecompany.com/photo-gallery/; higher resolution photo courtesy of Colorado Cattle Company; reproduced by permission.)

<!-- image -->

ranches and farm stays in terms of their overall settings and available activities (Figures 1 -3 ). However, eastern ranches also seek to connect to perceptions of the historical working American West: KD Guest Ranch uses 'Bringin' the West to the East ! ' as its tagline.

A less adventurous form of agritourism is farm-centered, including both stays and day-trip activities, rather than ranch-based. Farms are generally much smaller than ranches, but those that offer agritourism opportunities also are much more common than ranch opportunities, especially in the eastern United States By the 2012 Census of Agriculture, the number of farms reporting income from agritourism and recreational services had reached 33 , 161 (USDA 2014 ).

Many features and activities are classified as agritourism, including farm tours, day camps, hands-on chores, farm stands or shops, 'U-pick' harvesting of produce, farm stays (bed-and-breakfast) and guest ranches, on-farm classes, fairs and festivals, pumpkin patches, Christmas tree farms, orchard dinners, barn dances, and hay or sleigh rides. Additional activities include clay target shooting, horseback riding ('equine agritourism'), fishing, hunting, naturebased tourism, rural weddings, and winery tours (University of California Cooperative Extension 2015 ; USDA AgMRC 2016 ). Schnepf Farms in Arizona, a very large operation, evolved from strictly production agriculture on several thousand acres to include a number of agritourism activities (Schnepf Farms 2016 ).

Bed-and-breakfast services often operate out of small farms. There are many such facilities across the United States, from Maine to Florida to Alaska and Hawaii. Calling on the idealized vision of rural and farm life, Crow Farm advertised that its farmstay B&amp;B provides a unique visitor experience for the area, the ability to immerse in farm life as it used to be . . . home-cooked meals, purring barn cats,

FIG. 2 -KD Guest Ranch, Ohio, website photo captioned, 'There's no better way to relax and appreciate the hills and valleys of southeastern Ohio than from the back of a horse ! ' (http:// kdguestranch.com/; reproduced by permission.)

<!-- image -->

rustic barns, meandering walking trails through the wide open fields and a friendly angus beef herd. The wide open vistas of fields epitomize the lush heartland of historic Kent County, Maryland. 1 ( 2015 )

In some cases landholdings are very small, including only a little production (often organic) and perhaps a few animals -basically, pets -like sheep and donkeys to contribute to the idyllic feel of the place. In these cases, guests are most likely experiencing an 'enhanced' bed-and-breakfast stay rather than most of the activities that take place on a working farm. In other cases the farms are larger (perhaps several thousand acres), with greater production and opportunities for guests to help with farm chores like feeding livestock. The U.S. Farm Stay Association has expectations that members actually are engaged in agricultural activities (Farm Stay U.S. 2010 -16 ). In 2016 , the association listed 826 total farms, ranches, and vineyards as farm-stay locations ( 555 , 227 , and 44 , respectively), although operation names may not match their designations. For

FIG. 3 -KD Guest Ranch, Ohio, website photo captioned ''A horse can become a child's best friend ! ' (http://kdguestranch.com/; reproduced by permission.)

<!-- image -->

example, some farm names include ranch: Rancho do Amantes, California; Wolf Lake Ranch, Michigan; St. John Ranch and Lodge, Louisiana.

Although some people opt for rural experiences immersed in natural or near-natural environments like national parks and wilderness areas, many seek more interconnected/tamed 'nature-society' situations as exemplified by farming and ranching as described above. In either case and beyond local economic benefits, there has been a great deal of research linking 'nature' to actual health and well-being (Russell and others 2013 ). Hence rural visits may confer multiple benefits. From small to large, agritourism experiences are designed to cater to the (idealized rural) expectations of tourists. These normally forego the more dangerous and perhaps disturbing aspects of agriculture. 2

## SMALL-SCALE FARMING AND LARGE-LOT RURAL SUBDIVISIONS

While urbanites can temporarily take part in agrarian and other rural recreation and tourism opportunities, many Americans opt for something more permanent. Situating one's life in rural to semirural environs may take the form of living on small and 'hobby' farms or in large-lot subdivisions. Residents in peri-urban areas often have jobs in the city and pursue part-time farming. Small farms at times serve as an approximation of traditional mixed farming, with both crop production and a small number of livestock. Small-scale farming more closely connects to rural environs and lifestyles than other manifestations of 'the rural idyll' described below.

There is a range in size, from small farms to hobby farms to large-lot subdivisions, although there are not clear dividing lines among these three categories of land holdings. It can be difficult to differentiate large-lot subdivisions from

hobby farming, as both may involve activities traditionally associated with farming, such as keeping livestock or growing produce for sale. Small farms may or may not be considered under the 'hobby' label, which generally denotes traditional farming activities at less than a commercial or livelihood scale.

An interesting counter to the longstanding trend toward fewer and larger farms is the contemporaneous tendency toward more small to very small (micro) farms. On the small side (generally quite small by U.S. standards), in 1992 there were 387 , 711 farms in the range of ten to forty-nine acres; this increased by 52 percent -to 589 , 549 -at the 2012 enumeration (U.S. Department of Commerce 1992 ; USDA 2014 ). Similarly, there were 166 , 496 farms of one to nine acres (microfarms) in 1992 , but this increased by 34 percent, to 223 , 634 farms in 2012 . Among the fifty states, thirty-nine saw increases in the number of microfarms from 1992 to 2012 . 3 For example, in New England microfarms increased in every state from 1992 to 2012 , although Vermont saw a slight decline from 2007 to 2012 (Figure 4 ). Likewise, virtually all western states also saw increases in the number of microfarms (Figure 5 ), with slight decreases in California and Oregon and very slight increases in Colorado and Idaho during

FIG. 4 -Changes in New England microfarm numbers, 1992 -2012 . (Sources: U.S. Department of Commerce 1992 ; USDA 2014 .)

<!-- image -->

FIG. 5 -Changes in western U.S. microfarm numbers, 1992 -2012 . (Sources: U.S. Department of Commerce 1992 ; USDA 2014 .)

<!-- image -->

the 2007 -2012 period marked by the economic and real estate downturn. Small and microfarms would generally fit the label of 'hobby farming' or John Fraser Hart's ( 1992 ) 'nonfarm farms,' but they do allow people to partake in farming activities on a small scale and in this part of the rural idyll. Particularly at one to nine acres, it is unlikely -though not impossible -that a farm would support a family strictly through agricultural production. It is more likely that farm proceeds supplement other income sources. Small and microfarms are particularly suited to organic production (with premium pricing) and vineyards, sometimes with bed-and-breakfast facilities.

Overlapping with microfarms, but generally much less involved with agricultural production, large-lot 'rural' subdivisions normally are located in periurban areas, may be part of organized areal development of homesites rather than piecemeal creation of individual microfarms, and are frequently a component of urban sprawl. Lot sizes often are in the range of microfarms, or larger.

The Maryland Department of Planning considers large lots as one-half to twenty acres in size ( 2010 ). Based on the rapid increase of large-lot residential developments, the department expressed concerns that the fragmentation of

landholdings reduces the economic viability of forestry and farming activities, as well as causing other environmental and social problems, such as water-quality degradation, a need and additional costs for expanded infrastructure, and increased impermeable surface area.

Widespread large-lot development seemingly reflects an equally widespread desire for living locations that are wealthy in space. Rather than choosing to live in developments where homes are close together, many people opt for a much more rural feel, with open space or forest separating them from their neighbors. Large house lots commonly are one to ten acres in size (overlapping with the USDA's smallest farm classification of one to nine acres), although parcels of one-half to twenty acres may be classed as large lots by planning agencies. At these sizes, many farm-related activities may be allowed, depending on local policies and homeowners' association rules. For example, in some developments certain types of livestock are permitted, while others -like pigs or chickens -are banned. Properties are particularly presented as suitable for horses, from 'horse lots' to 'equestrian estates.' The use of the term 'estates' to describe housing developments in the United States seems to reflect a desire to connect to a connotation of prestige. Some of these include large, high-cost homes and may indicate gentrification of rural areas, at least as far as having more high-income residents goes. Monis Farm Estates in New Hampshire offers homes starting at just under $ 460 , 000 , but the Dutchess Farm Estates development in Pennsylvania portrays itself as 'exclusive,' with 'luxurious' homes with a starting price of well over $ 1 million. 'Farm Estates' naming is no guarantee of actual status, however, and may well label a housing development with small lots and homes.

## HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS COMBINED WITH FARMING AND FOOD PRODUCTION

Many Americans today are not interested in small-scale farming or large-lot maintenance and living, but still have some desire to connect to rural environs, the idea of farming, or the food they eat. A relatively uncommon phenomenon, but growing in application, is the creation of pastoral and farming efforts as a part of housing developments. In these cases, agricultural activities are not related to individual properties, but to the development as a whole. Sometimes referred to as agrihoods, it has been estimated that the United States now has about 200 of these developments (Wong 2015 ; see also Erbentraut 2015 ; Anderson 2016 ). The production-focused areas are sometimes referred to as 'communal' land (Donally 2015 ), but under variable models management of this part of the development is often contracted.

Farmcolony in Greene County, Virginia, was one of the earliest of this style of subdivision, developed in the mid1970 s. It was created on a 285 -acre farm, divided into areas for large homesites ( 95 acres with forty-eight

lots), a working farm ( 120 acres), and a 'mountain preserve with horse and hiking trails' ( 70 acres) (Land Choices 2007 ). Lot owners own shares in the remaining property, livestock, equipment, and farmhouse. In a description of the impetus for the development, the idyllic view of farms is clear:

Farmcolony is a unique community built around a working farm, offering homeowners an opportunity to enjoy all the benefits of living on a farm without the usual worries or responsibilities. For those who have long had a dream of living on a farm surrounded by clean air, open land, and nature's critters, Farmcolony is built on a model offering just that -at a price far less than buying a large working farm.

The concept for Farmcolony came from Gilbert Edwards, a Florida real estate developer. Edwards considered farm life idyllic . . . . Realizing he wasn't alone in his desire to combine country life with proximity to a metropolitan area, he developed the concept for Farmcolony. (Land Choices 2007 )

Another development dating to the mid1970 s is Fearrington Village in Pittsboro, North Carolina. The 'village' was built on a farm, which includes belted Galloway cattle, Tennessee fainting goats, and donkeys as aesthetic livestock: 'There are now over thirty Belties grazing our rolling pastures. The Belties' sole purpose is to greet village guests and coax a smile or two' (Fearrington Village n.d.). Hay is grown to feed the livestock, in addition to pasturage, and gardens have been established that partly provide produce to a village-located restaurant. It is more upscale and has many more residents than Farmcolony. Ease of access to Chapel Hill is an advertised benefit of Fearrington Village.

Bucking Horse is a new farm-connected housing development in Fort Collins, Colorado. It has received media attention, particularly related to the planned-farming aspects of the development. Portions of the development are quite compact (townhomes), while urban estate-type lots are intended to be relatively large (up to approximately 0 . 65 acres in size). In a story on National Public Radio, Luke Runyon described the development:

It's being turned into a neighborhood totally devoted to local food. When finished, Bucking Horse will support more than a thousand households. . . . at Bucking Horse, agriculture is the big draw. Land has been set aside for vegetables. There will be goats and chickens, too. Soon they'll be hiring a farmer. The neighborhood plan is infused with the quaint, pastoral, even romantic view of farming. ( 2013 )

The master plan includes areas labeled as 'working farm' (appearing as about 1 -1 . 5 acres), pasture, CSA, and 'Future Neighborhood City Park ( 6 acres) and Community Gardens.' Describing the development of 'more than a thousand households' as 'totally devoted to local food' seems to be an overstatement given the fairly limited space devoted to production, but even the

townhomes have the option of edible plants as their attached garden theme (Bellisimo 2015 ). The poolhouse has a distinctively barnlike appearance (Figure 6 ). Connecting to concerns with social sustainability and capital-building, the developer describes the neighborhood as being designed around fulfilling the hunger for community. . . . Local vendors will have the chance to share their products and create relationships with those visiting the village, while community gardens and gathering places will encourage homeowners not only to interact but to bond with their neighbors. A trail system, community gardens, a working farm as well as a garden for the farm-tofork restaurant, are all part of the proposed master plan to protect our land. (Bellisimo 2015 )

Although sustainability is cited in some of the promotional materials for the development, the focus seems to be on social aspects, health, and open space; there is no evidence of incorporation of renewable-energy (solar or wind) use in the subdivision, for example.

A final example of a recent development meant to connect with food production is the Edwards Addition in Monmouth, Oregon. The developer converted a family sod farm to housing, but was inspired by 'smart growth' (and seemingly 'new urbanism') tenets (TGM 2005 ). This development, predating Bucking Horse, has several characteristics in common with the Colorado development: a range in housing and lot sizes, a mixture of land uses, inclusion of food production, a desire to foster relationships among residents, and frequent use of front porches on houses. The developer -Olsen Design &amp; Development 2013 -explains the situation in this way:

our Village Farm is about growing things -food, friendships and community. We grow around five tons of organic local fruits and vegetables each year for Edwards Addition neighbors. . . . The farm eventually will cover up to three acres and house the community garden. Similar to a CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) model, interested Edwards Addition residents can work on

FIG. 6 -Poolhouse, Bucking Horse subdivision, Fort Collins, Colorado. (Photograph by author, June 2015 .)

<!-- image -->

the farm in exchange for produce or they can buy a share of what the farm produces. It's local and all organic -what could be more sustainable than that?

These types of developments reflect the 'blurring of conventional boundaries between country and city . . . indicating an urbanization of the rural and (albeit to a lesser extent) a ruralization of the urban,' noted by Paul Cloke ( 2006 , 18 ). They indicate the desirability of (aspects of) rurality, but with the desirable characteristics associated with present-day urbanization, particularly the desire for modern, often very large, homes and conveniences of access to cities. Those aspects of rurality that are desired -space, nature, pastoral scenery, and fresh (frequently organic) produce -become a part of living, but generally without the responsibility and time commitments that would be inherent in farm and woodlands ownership.

Moving even further away from the historic reality of rurality, housing developments -subdivisions typical of the latter twentieth century and early twenty-first century -and retail shopping centers often attempt attachment to positive perceptions of rurality. This may be done simply through naming and icons.

## RURAL-NAMED HOUSING AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENTS

Like the embodiments of rurality described earlier, housing and business developments require actual space or locations for their creation. However, individual plots of land in typical subdivisions may be much smaller and buildings more crowded together. Food production and 'naturalness' are far less in evidence than on small farms, large-lot subdivisions, and 'agrihoods.'

Ironically, housing developments in the United States frequently are given bucolic names, such as Canterbury Farms and Long Meadow Farms, but farming and livestock are likely to be banned. Oftentimes these developments have relatively small lot sizes and the type of population densities that would rarely be seen in rural areas, except for what might be observed in compact, small villages. In addition to very frequent use of the word 'Farm' or 'Farms' in development names, other idyllic names include variations on 'Vineyard,' 'Orchard,' 'Grove,' 'Lea,' 'Meadow,' 'Woods,' 'Countryside,' and 'Village.' 'Pasture' is quite rare. As noted by Timothy Cresswell, names confer meaning and help to create places (or place identities) ( 2015 ). The rural idyllic names conferred to settled areas help to create attractiveness in the minds of potential residents.

A Google search was used to identify farm-named subdivisions by using the words 'farm' and 'subdivision' and reviewing the first twenty pages of 'hits' (with ten returns per page) on the search terms to identify existing U.S. housing developments with 'Farm' or 'Farms' as part of their names. The search also was done using the words 'subdivision' and 'farming' together, which resulted in inclusion of subdivisions that incorporated the term 'Farming.' A

TABLE II-EXAMPLES OF HERITAGE SUBDIVISION NAMING.

| SUBDIVISION NAME   | STATE          | CITY ENVIRONS   |
|--------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Bakers Farm        | Alabama        | Huntsville      |
| Tutwiler Farm      | Alabama        | Trussville      |
| Taylor Farms       | Arizona        | Taylor          |
| Anderson Farm      | Colorado       | Loveland        |
| Clarke Farms       | Colorado       | Parker          |
| Smith Farm         | Florida        | Lake Worth      |
| Browns Farm        | Georgia        | Powder Springs  |
| Carmichael Farms   | Georgia        | Canton          |
| Taylor Farm        | Georgia        | Powder Springs  |
| Walker Farm        | Georgia        | Perry           |
| Sutherland Farms   | Idaho          | Meridian        |
| Fisher Farm        | Illinois       | Winfield        |
| Aiken Farm         | Kentucky       | Louisville      |
| Couret Farms       | Louisiana      | Lafayette       |
| Forbes Farms       | Louisiana      | Hammond         |
| Hawkes Farm        | Maine          | Gorham          |
| Starkey Farm       | Maine          | Houlton         |
| Greene Farms       | Michigan       | Ypsilanti       |
| Matthaei Farms     | Michigan       | Ann Arbor       |
| Hart Farm          | Minnesota      | Rochester       |
| Brooks Farm        | Missouri       | Lee's Summit    |
| Dawkins Farm       | Mississippi    | Olive Branch    |
| Adams Farm         | North Carolina | Greensboro      |
| Blair Farm         | North Carolina | Morehead City   |
| Butler Farm        | North Carolina | Vanceboro       |

total of 155 housing developments that could be identified with state of location were found in this sample. Proposed subdivisions were not included because development names may differ once established.

Names frequently seem to be based on past owners of the farm that had been subdivided for housing. (Table II indicates examples of farm-named subdivisions based on surnames.) Other times, however, housing and commercial developments appear to have been named specifically to instill the development with a sense of the rural idyll, like Stonegate Farm (Wisconsin), Heritage Farm(s) (Arkansas, South Carolina, and Texas), and The Hamlet at Wulf Crest Farm (Virginia) (Table III). Some simple associations with farms are popular in subdivisions, including Old Farm (Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Utah, Wisconsin) or Olde Farm (Ohio), the related Old Farm Lakes and The Old Farm Village (both in Illinois), Heritage Farm(s) (Arkansas, South Carolina, Texas), and simply The Farm (Arkansas, Colorado) or The Farms (North Carolina). Additionally, some subdivisions take their names from rural activities or features (Table IV), with attempts to create names

TABLE III-EXAMPLES OF BUCOLIC OR ROMANTIC RURAL-IDYLL SUBDIVISION NAMES.

| SUBDIVISION NAME              | STATE          | CITY ENVIRONS    |
|-------------------------------|----------------|------------------|
| Cambridge Farms               | Georgia        | Hoschton         |
| Fieldstone Farms              | Georgia        | Rock Spring      |
| Pebble Creek Farm             | Georgia        | Grayson          |
| Saddlebrook Farm              | Georgia        | Auburn           |
| Ellendale Farm                | Indiana        | Crown Point      |
| Normandy Farms                | Indiana        | Indianapolis     |
| Sugar Bush Farm               | Indiana        | Brownsburg       |
| Beech Spring Farm             | Kentucky       | Louisville       |
| Canterbrook Farms             | Kentucky       | Louisville       |
| Little Spring Farm            | Kentucky       | Louisville       |
| Long Farm Village             | Louisiana      | Baton Rouge      |
| Peachtree Farm                | Massachusetts  | North Andover    |
| Wayside Farm                  | Massachusetts  | East Bridgewater |
| Country Hill Farm             | Missouri       | Saint Peters     |
| Four Winds Farm Estates       | Missouri       | St. Louis        |
| Westglen Farms                | Missouri       | St. Louis        |
| Kinmere Farms                 | North Carolina | Charlotte        |
| The Farm at Riverpointe       | North Carolina | Davidson         |
| Maypine Farm Estate           | Ohio           | Cleveland        |
| Riverwood Farm                | South Carolina | Greenville       |
| Gleannloch Farms              | Texas          | Houston          |
| Long Meadow Farms             | Texas          | Houston          |
| The Hamlet at Wulf Crest Farm | Virginia       | Leesburg         |
| Kilkenny Farms                | Wisconsin      | Waunakee         |
| Stonegate Farm                | Wisconsin      | Center           |

that might be associated with the Old World (especially Great Britain and Ireland).

Besides larger single-family home developments, some apartment complexes and senior living have associated themselves with the rural idyll, even though the population densities are far from what might be expected in rural areas or villages (Figure 7 ). 'Farm' occasionally appears in shopping center names (Riverdale Farms, Connecticut; Old Farm Shops, Illinois; The Farm, Oklahoma), but numerous shopping centers have taken their names from other kinds of 'idyllic' rural places, to include Village, Orchard, or Meadow.

Developments that connect to rurality strictly through naming, or perhaps through naming and minor design features, have little to link them with actual rurality. They generally are not in a truly rural location, and have little to no characteristically rural activities. Moving to potentially even more urban locations, it is possible to find at least traditionally rural activities -farming with crops and sometimes small livestock -even though the location would not be identified as 'rural' on a map.

TABLE IV-EXAMPLES OF HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS NAMED FOR RURAL ACTIVITIES AND FEATURES.

| Adrian Woods          | Hampton Glen     | Marsh Haven      |
|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Avington Glen         | Heritage Fields  | Marsh Oaks       |
| Brookedale Woods      | Hickory Fields   | Prairie Crossing |
| Deer Creek            | Horseman's Park  | Prairie Knoll    |
| Deer Meadow           | Horseman's Ranch | Prairie Ridge    |
| Deer Ridge            | Hunter Acres     | Shadow Woods     |
| Deerpath              | Hunters Chase    | Tall Timbers     |
| Deschutes River Woods | Hunters Pointe   | Timber Lakes     |
| Drovers Crossing      | Hunters Ridge    | Timber Ridge     |
| Dunham Marsh          | Hunters Run      | Timber Trail     |
| Fox Glen              | Marsh Aire       | Wood Glen        |

## URBAN AGRICULTURE

Urban agriculture has existed for centuries, but fell out of favor (or at least attention) during much of the twentieth century. There has recently been a resurgence in efforts to farm -at very small scales 4 -in U.S. cities, however. Urban farming is supported for several reasons: as a reaction to food deserts that lack retail opportunities for buying fresh foods, particularly vegetables and fruit; as a means to improve local environments by reclaiming empty lots and brownfields; and as a means to strengthen local communities, or social capital. A number of benefits are associated with community gardening, including physical health and social relationships (Hale and others 2011 ). There are now numerous nonprofits that support urban agriculture in the United States, and sometimes serve as incubators for urban farming or food production businesses: Urban Farming â ; Growing Power, Inc.; Cultivate Kansas City; Michigan Urban Farming Initiative; City Fresh; City Slicker Farms; Lynchburg Grows. Education and CSAs are commonly a part of nonprofits' activities.

Urban farming is quite intensive. In addition to vegetables, production may include some fruit crops, herbs, chickens/eggs, beekeeping, and even goats. Urban food production may also take the form of indoor hydroponic, aquaponic (plant-water-fish), and other activities, such as composting with earthworms or growing mushrooms. Buildings that had formerly housed manufacturing have sometimes been converted for 'agricultural' purposes (Figure 8 ).

Rather than relating (much) with the idyll, urban agriculture is more strongly linked to the practicalities of food production and community-building near where people live. However, agriculture is very clearly associated with rurality in most contexts, and in the thinking of most Americans. Urban agriculture also links to ideas of health (healthy foods) and environmental wellbeing (reduced food-miles). Likewise, farmers' markets and other direct connections of consumers with producers draw upon desires for healthy and/or more locally produced food. The relationships built among participants in

FIG. 7 -Farm-named dense-housing unit, Fort Collins, Colorado. (Photograph by author, June 2015 .)

<!-- image -->

FIG. 8 -The Plant (Chicago) urban farm, with 'vertical farming' taking place inside the former meatpacking plant, as well as a small amount of outdoor production. A number of efforts, including aquaponics, mushroom production, and other endeavors are pursued in the space. (Photograph by author, April 2015 .)

<!-- image -->

cooperative urban agriculture and direct sales also build on desires for stronger interpersonal relationships and community-building.

## FARMERS' MARKETS AND COMMUNITY-SUPPORTED AGRICULTURE

Farmers' markets and CSAs have grown in popularity as modern life has become more distant from food production. These allow at least a symbolic connection to rural life or to locally sourced goods, and logos commonly call on unprocessed foodstuffs and/or elements of traditional American

<!-- image -->

FIG. 9 -Logos of two Maine farmers markets, Portland and Ellsworth, illustrating common rural imagery of red barns and farm fields. (Reproduced by permission.)

<!-- image -->

rurality (Figure 9 ). Research has shown that localness is important to consumers, that having a direct relationships with customers at farmers' markets is important to producers, and that CSA customers 'gain positive utility directly from picking up produce from the farm' (Brown and Miller 2008 ). Having increased 53 percent between 1994 and 2004 , to 3 , 706 farmers' markets (Baker, Hamshaw and Kolodinsky 2009 ), the number of listed markets continues to grow, more than doubling each of the last two decades. The U.S. Department of Agriculture currently lists 8 , 658 identified farmers' markets around the country, as well as 737 CSAs and 1398 on-farm markets (USDA AMS 2016 a, b, c).

Consumers may find locally sourced foods to be desirable from the perspective of freshness and reduced carbon footprints from transport over large distances, but they also frequently like to link directly with those producing their food, creating more confidence in food quality and production methods. A study in San Luis Obispo County, California, found that consumers perceive that farmers' market produce is fresher looking, fresher tasting, a higher-quality product, a better value for the money, more reasonably priced, more likely to be nationally grown, more likely to be locally grown, more likely to be good for the environment, and more likely to be traceable to the processor and grower when compared to supermarket produce. (Wolf, Spittler, and Ahern 2005 , 200 )

Buying directly from farmers was one of the primary reasons for going to a farmers market (Wolf, Spittler, and Ahern 2005 ).

Food sales with direct trade between producer and consumer is only one form of connection of food to the rural idyll. Agrarian imagery is widespread among many products (Bell 2006 ), but most clear as relates to food. Food sales mediated by large industrial food processors and wholesalers, restaurants, and retail outlets also attempt to attach to the idyllic, even

though 'idyllic' and 'industrial' generally are anathema to each other. Other consumer goods, most notably magazines, explicitly identify themselves with the rural idyll through naming: Country, Country Living, Country French , French Country Style , Country Sampler , and Cook's Country . They draw on perceptual linkages to health, naturalness, and 'the good life,' like other versions of popular cultural connections to rurality.

## DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The types and examples of popular culture associations with rurality and the countryside presented here echo Bunce's ( 1994 ) description of the Anglo-American countryside ideal and support Short's statements that, 'The rural idyll continues to exert a real influence in today's world' and that it 'remains seriously commercial at the start of the twenty-first century,' but illustrate the case of the United States at the current time ( 2006 , 143 ).

The examples presented above are evidence of place attachment -but in the sense of attachment to idea(s) regarding a type of place rather than specific places. Americans have turned to the creation of virtual rurality in housing developments, to include farming activities; in identification of suburban neighborhoods with rural-inspired names; in their recreational activities; and in localized food marketing and purchasing via direct sales. Some of these are closer to 'actual' rural conditions, like stays on working farms and ranches, and farming activities in large-lot subdivisions, while others simply call upon a connection to the rural idyll through imagery and naming.

Idealized relationships with rurality call upon several characteristics. These include health, connecting to nature, aesthetics, privacy, and respect and nostalgia for rural livelihoods. The latter is akin to American views of and respect for small business -a respect for independence and self-sufficiency. Some embodiments of virtual rurality in popular culture look to stronger senses of community. Nostalgia and idealized ruralities can be expected to link most with EuroAmerican social memory and a national history with roots in farming. Individual or personal memory probably plays more of a role for older Americans who are more likely to have grown up with some relationship with family-farming and small-town experiences. Exploration of ethnic variations in connection to rural idea(l)s is needed, as well as variations with individual memory.

Dydia DeLyser described 'creation' of authenticity in her description of a California ghost town and the experiences of visitors and staff ( 1999 ). Although I have referred to 'virtual rurality' here, I have also described the creation of new ('authentic') ruralities as well as visual portrayals or attempts to capitalize on attachment to idealized and nostalgic rural characteristics in American popular culture. People have been displaying attachment to a type of place through visual representations of idealized rurality, but in some cases there have been attempts to engage in idealized place creation, as in development of agrihoods or farm-focused subdivisions. As Bell noted, 'The idyll has a very powerful and

enduring ideological pull . . . and constantly morphs to fit with new times' ( 2006 , 150 ). At the most shallow level, naming alone has been used to attempt marketable place-making.

Efforts to identify with rurality may be, in part, a reaction to trends that geographers have considered as moving modern society toward homogenization and creation of 'placelessness' (Relph 1976 ; Cresswell 2015 ) -a lack of distinctive places, while people still have needs for place identities and 'aesthetic needs' (Droseltis and Vignoles 2010 ). Creating and attaching to visions of rurality might be seen as resistance to homogenization. Varying levels of 'authenticity' of rural-connected places (see Relph 1976 ), in terms of authentic meaning for people, and in terms of creation of (pseudo-) authenticities should receive further research attention (see, for example, Till 1993 ).

The United States has, like much of the world, become predominantly urban over the last century. During this period, and dating back to at least the mid1800 s move toward Romanticism, many Americans have retained or developed their own view of the rural idyll, often connected to memory and a sense of nostalgia. Memory and nostalgia may be individually or socially constructed. During various periods of time this has led to creation and expansion of different ways to experience or identify with the idealized rural (for example, the 1920 s and 1930 s for dude ranches; the late-twentieth century to present for farmers markets and CSAs). The 'reality' of expressions of rurality currently visible in popular culture varies, with some linkages much more rural and others visible in urban areas. Importantly, expressions of attachment to rurality as described here are apt to reflect Euro-American values, or at least to be connected to white American developments. Connections also may be strongest among older Euro-Americans, who are more likely to have at least experienced personal connections to farming and small town life during childhood. This does not mean that other groups do not also feel attachment to various ruralities (see Smith 2002 ). Investigation of rural attachment with varying social characteristics is lacking and should be pursued.

American society and environments are affected by embodiments of attachment to rurality in a variety of ways. These include environmental fragmentation, infrastructural needs, rural economics, changes in land management, support for new types of integration of communities or neighborhoods with food production, and reinforcement of values like independence, communitybuilding, and connection to nature and natural resources. Some experiences with rural environs may confer benefits to the health and well-being of residents and visitors (Russell and others 2013 ). Recognizing both the potentially positive and negative effects of the ways that rurality is played out may aid planning and other actions to maximize benefits to both rural places and society. Recognizing the role of perceptions of rurality, as ideal or idyll, and attachments to ideals of a type of place in popular culture also aids our understanding of how many people envision what is 'good' about the United

States and its history. There is much room, however, for further investigations of a number of aspects of virtual rurality and of attachments to type of place.

## NOTES

- 1 Reflecting the growth of popularity of vineyards and wineries in the United States, Crow Farm has apparently changed to Crow Vineyards; the posting from 2015 has been modified to reflect a vineyard, wine bottling, and the availability of other wineries in the area, although the farm stay section of the website (now at http://www.crowfarmmd.com/crow-farmstay-b-b) continues to note 'friendly' Angus cattle and other features noted in the quote shown.
- 2 Some activities that once took place on the farm and that would upset many visitors -like slaughtering animals -now often take place at another location, although small farms may use mobile slaughter services.
- 3 Those that saw a decrease in oneto nine-acre farms included Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Minnesota, Missouri, North Carolina, North Dakota, South Dakota, Tennessee, and Virginia. Kentucky saw a very large recorded decrease, while Virginia had marginally fewer microfarms in 2012 than in 1992 . For a large number of states, there was some decrease in the number of microfarms between 2007 and 2012 , likely a result of the global economic downturn and real estate crisis.
- 4 'Urban farms' often are of a size that might be referred to as gardens, but 'farm' is generally used.

## REFERENCES

- Agnew, J. 2015 . The Creation of the Cowboy Hero: Fiction, Film and Fact . Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland &amp; Company.
- Anderson, B. 2016 . Food Adds Flavor (and Value) to Real Estate: 'Agrihoods' and Other FoodBased Concepts. Urban Land , 28 June. [http://urbanland.uli.org/sustainability/food-adds-fla vor-value-real-estate-agrihoods-food-halls-food-based-concepts/].
- Baker, D., K. Hamshaw, and J. Kolodinsky. 2009 . Who Shops at the Market? Using Consumer Surveys to Grow Farmers' Markets: Findings from a Regional Market in Northwestern Vermont. Journal of Extension 47 ( 6 ): 1 -9 . [http://www.joe.org/joe/ 2009 december/a 2 .php].
- Bell, D. 2006 . Variations on the Rural Idyll. In Handbook of Rural Studies , edited by P. Cloke, T. Marsden, and P. Mooney, 149 -158 . London: Sage.
- Bellisimo, Inc. 2015 . Bucking Horse; Townhomes at Bucking Horse. [http://www.bellisimoinc.c om/projects/bucking-horse and http://www.bellisimoinc.com/projects/townhomes-buckinghorse].
- Brown, A. 2001 . Counting Farmers Markets. Geographical Review 91 ( 4 ): 655 -674 .
- Brown, C., and S. Miller. 2008 . The Impacts of Local Markets: A Review of Research on Farmers Markets and Community Supported Agriculture (CSA). American Journal of Agricultural Economics 90 ( 5 ): 1296 -1302 .
- Bunce, M. 1994 . The Countryside Ideal: Anglo-American Images of Landscape . London: Routledge.
- Che, D., A. Veeck, and G. Veeck. 2005 . Sustaining Production and Strengthening the Agritourism Product: Linkages among Michigan Agritourism Destinations. Agriculture and Human Values 22 : 225 -234 .
- Cloke, P. 2006 . Conceptualizing Rurality. In Handbook of Rural Studies , edited by P. Cloke, T. Marsden and P. Mooney, 18 -28 . London: Sage.
- Cresswell, T. 2015 . Place: In Introduction . 2 nd ed. Chichester: Wiley.
- Crow Farm, Maryland. 2015 . Our Story. [Formerly at http://www.crowfarmmd.com/our-story].
- Damrosch, B. 2010 . Developers Bet the Organic Farm. The Washington Post . 25 March.
- DeLyser, D. 1999 . Authenticity on the Ground: Engaging the Past in a California Ghost Town. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 89 ( 4 ): 602 -632 .
- Donally, T. 2015 . Growing Sociability: Integrating Communal Spaces with Development. Urban Land , 12 January. [http://urbanland.uli.org/development-business/growing-sociability-integra ting-communal-spaces-development/].
- [Dude Ranchers' Association. N.d. [http://www.duderanch.org/listings\_all.php].](http://www.duderanch.org/listings_all.php)

- Erbentraut, J. 2015 . 'Agrihoods' offer suburban living built around community farms, not golf courses. The Huffington Post , 17 August. [http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/agrihood-thecannery-davis-california\_us\_ 55 ce 205 ce 4 b 07 addcb 42 d 5 b 0 ].
- Farm Stay U.S. 2010 -16 . About Farm Stay U.S. [http://www.farmstayus.com/about].
- Fearrington Village. N.d. Our Belted Galloway Cows. [http://www.fearrington.com/gardens-beltie s-farm/belted-cows/].
- Furuseth, O. 1997 . Neotraditional Planning: A New Strategy for Building Neighborhoods? Land Use Policy 14 ( 3 ): 201 -213 .
- Ghose, R. 2004 . Big Sky or Big Sprawl? Rural Gentrification and the Changing Cultural Landscape of Missoula, Montana. Urban Geography 25 ( 6 ): 528 -549 .
- Hale, J., C. Knapp, L. Bardwell, M. Buchenau, J. Marshall, F. Sancar, and J. S. Litt. 2011 . Connecting Food Environments and Health through the Relational Nature of Aesthetics: Gaining Insight through the Community Gardening Experience. Social Science &amp; Medicine 72 ( 11 ): 1853 -1863 .
- Hart, J. F. 1992 . Nonfarm Farms. Geographical Review 82 ( 2 ): 166 -179 .
- Huth, H. 1990 . Nature and the American: Three Centuries of Changing Attitudes , New ed. Lincoln, Neb: University of Nebraska Press.
- Khazan, O. 2015 . How walking in nature prevents depression. The Atlantic , 30 June.
- Lichter, D. T., and D. L. Brown. 2011 . Rural America in an Urban Society: Changing Spatial and Social Boundaries. Annual Review of Sociology 37 : 565 -592 .
- Little, J., and P. Austin. 1996 . Women and the Rural Idyll. Journal of Rural Studies 12 ( 2 ): 101 -111 . Manzo, L., and P. Devine-Wright, eds. 2014 . Place Attachment: Advances in Theory, Methods and Applications . London: Routledge.
- Maryland Department of Planning. 2010 . A Summary of Land Use Trends in Maryland. [http:// www.mdp.state.md.us/PDF/OurWork/LandUse/MDP 2010 \_LU\_Summary.pdf].
- Mitchell, D. 1996 . The Lie of the Land: Migrant Workers and the California Landscape . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Nash, R. 1973 . Wilderness and the American Mind . Rev ed. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
- Olsen Design &amp; Development. 2013 . Edwards Addition: Features (Urban Farm). [http://www.olse ncommunities.com/home/olsencommunities/edwardsaddition/amenities/].
- Phillip, S., C. Hunter, and K. Blackstock. 2010 . A Typology for Defining Agritourism. Tourism Management 31 : 754 -758 .
- Relph, E. 1976 . Place and Placelessness . London: Pion.
- Rodnitzky, J. L. 1968 . Recapturing the West: The Dude Ranch in American Life. Arizona and the West 10 ( 2 ): 111 -126 .
- Runyon, L. 2013 . Forget Golf Courses: Subdivisions Draw Residents with Farms. Morning Edition , National Public Radio, 17 December. [http://www.npr.org/blogs/thesalt/ 2013 / 12 / 17 / 251713829 /f orget-golf-courses-subdivisions-draw-residents-with-farms].
- Russell, R., A. D. Guerry, P. Balvanera, R. K. Gould, X. Basurto, K. M. A. Chan, S. Klain, J. Levine, and J. Tam. 2013 . Humans and Nature: How Knowing and Experiencing Nature Affect Well-Being. Annual Review of Environment and Resources 38 : 473 -502 .
- Scanell, L., and R. Gifford. 2014 . Comparing the Theories Of Interpersonal And Place Attachment. In Place Attachment: Advances in Theory, Methods and Applications , edited by L. Manzo and P. Devine-Wright, 23 -36 . London: Routledge.
- Schnell, S. M. 2007 . Food with a Farmer's Face: Community-Supported Agriculture in the United States. Geographical Review 97 ( 4 ): 550 -564 .
- Schnepf Farms. 2016 . Schnepf Farms. [http://www.schnepffarms.com].
- Short, B. 2006 . Idyllic Ruralities. In Handbook of Rural Studies , edited by P. Cloke, T. Marsden and P. Mooney, 133 -148 . London: Sage.
- Shute, N. 2012 . Ah, Wilderness! Nature Hike Could Unlock Your Imagination. National Public Radio, 13 December. [http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/ 2012 / 12 / 13 / 167181498 /ah-wilde rness-nature-hike-could-unlock-your-imagination].
- Smith, J. S. 2002 . Rural Place Attachment in Hispano Urban Centers. The Geographical Review 92 ( 3 ): 432 -451 .
- Till, K. 1993 . Neotraditional Towns and Urban Villages: The Cultural Production of a Geography of 'Otherness'. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 11 : 709 -732 .

- Transportation and Growth Management Program (TGM), State of Oregon. 2005 . Connecting Transportation and Land Use Planning: Smart Development. Edwards Addition, Monmouth, Oregon. [http://www.oregon.gov/lcd/tgm/docs/casestudies/edwards.pdf].
- Tuan, Y. 1977 . Space and Place . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- University of California Cooperative Extension, UC Small Farm Program. 2015 . Agritourism. [http://sfp.ucdavis.edu/agritourism/].
- U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS). 2014 . 2012 Census of Agriculture, United States Summary and State Data, Vol. 1 , Geographic Area Series, Part 51 . Washington, D.C.
- U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Agricultural Marketing Research Center (AgMRC). 2016 . Agritourism. [http://www.agmrc.org/commodities-products/agritourism/].
- U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS). 2016 a. Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) Directory Search. Last updated 9 Dec. [http://sea rch.ams.usda.gov/CSA/].
- U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS). 2016 b. Farmers Markets Directory Search. Last updated 9 Dec. [http://search.ams.usda.gov/farmersmarkets/].
- U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS). 2016 c. On-Farm
- Markets Directory Search. Last updated 9 Dec. [http://search.ams.usda.gov/OnFarmMarkets/].
- U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS). N.d. National Count of Farmers Market Directory Listings. Graph. [http://www.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/f iles/media/FarmersMarketDirectoryListing.jpg].
- U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1992 . 1992 Census of Agriculture, Vol. 1 , Geographic Area Series, Part 51 , United States Summary and State Data . Washington, D.C.
- Wolf, M. M., A. Spittler, and J. Ahern. 2005 . A Profile of Farmers' Market Consumers and the Perceived Advantages of Produce Sold at Farmers' Markets. Journal of Food Distribution Research 36 ( 1 ): 192 -201 .
- Wong, K. 2015 . Northern California's First Agrihood Will Bring Organic Veggies to Former Industrial Land. Civil Eats , 28 July. [http://civileats.com/ 2015 / 07 / 28 /northern-californias-firstagrihood-will-bring-organic-veggies-to-former-industrial-land/].
- Woods, M. 2011 . Rural . Abingdon, U.K.: Routledge.