<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## The Three American Wests

Joe Weber

To cite this article:

Joe Weber (2018): The Three American Wests, The Professional Geographer,

DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2018.1501707

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2018.1501707

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 14 Dec 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 17

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

## The Three American Wests

## Joe Weber

University of Alabama

In the twenty-first century, there are three American Wests, which cut across cultural, political, physical, and economic boundaries. Parts of the West are booming, building homes, and adding population; others are legally off limits to such development; and much of the West has been bypassed by such development and growth. These are called here the Booming West, Protected West, and Bypassed West. Maps of climate, political boundaries, ethnic and racial identities, or presidential voting patterns do not match these three Wests. Each West has a different relationship to the others and might see them as threats or opportunities, and each West can be expected to grow in different areas at the expense of other Wests. The boundaries between the three Wests could be important locations; sharp transitions can exist between Wests, perhaps nowhere more so than where a fast growing metro area abuts a national park or forest boundary. Finally, the effects of climate change cut across the three Wests and have different implications for their future. Continued population growth will further emphasize the boundaries between each of the three Wests and raise the stakes for their control. Key Words: American West, cities, protected areas, rural areas.

美 国 在 二 十 一世 纪 有 三 大 横 跨 文 化 、 政 治 、 物 理 与 经 济 边 界 的 西 部 。 西 部 中 的 若 干 部 分 正 急 速 发 展 、 兴 建 房 屋 , 并 增 加 人 口 ； 其 他 部 分则 在 法 律 上 禁 止 开 发 ； 而 西 部 多 半 地 方 则 是 错 过 此 般 发 展 与 成 长 。 本 文 于 此 将 这 些 地 区 称 为 ' 繁 荣 的 西 部 ' 、 ' 受 保 护 的 西 部 ' , 以 及 ' 被 忽 略 的 西 部 ' 。 气 候 、 政 治 疆界 、 族 裔 与 种 族 身 份 认 同 , 抑或 是 总 统 投 票 模 式 的 地 图 , 皆 无 法 与三 大 西 部 相 互 吻合 。 每 一个 西 部都 与 其 他两 者 有 着 不 同 的 关 系 , 并 将 之 视 为 威 胁 或 机 会 , 且 每 个 西 部都 被 认 为 会 以 其 他 西 部 为代价 , 在 不 同 的 地 区 成 长 。 这 三 大 西 部 之 间 的 边 界 可 以 是 重 要 的 地 点 ； 各 西 部 之 间 可 能 存 在 剧 烈 的 过 渡 , 而 此 情 况 或 许 在 紧 邻 国 家 公 园 或 森 林 边 界 的 快 速 成 长 都 会 地 区 中 最 为 显 着 。 最 后 , 气 候 变 迁 效 应 贯 穿 三 大 西 部 , 并 对 其 未来 产 生 不 同 的 意 涵 。 持 续 的 人 口 成 长 将 进 一 步 强 调 这 三 大 西 部 之 间 的 边 界 , 并 且 提 高 对 其 进 行 控 制 的 风 险 。 关 键 词 ： 美 国 西 部 , 城 市 , 保 护 区 , 乡 村 地 区 。

En el siglo XXI existen tres Oestes norteamericanos que sobrepasan los l  ı mites culturales, pol  ı ticos, f  ı sicos y econ  omicos. Partes del Oeste est  an florecientes, construyendo casas y aumentando de poblaci  on; otros est  an legalmente fuera de los l  ı mites de tal desarrollo; y una gran parte del Oeste ha sido dejado de lado de tal desarrollo y crecimiento. Aqu  ı denominamos a estas regiones el Oeste Floreciente, el Oeste Protegido y el Oeste Olvidado. Los mapas de clima, de l  ı mites pol  ı ticos, de identidades raciales y  etnicas, o los de los patrones de votaci  on para presidente, no concuerdan con estos tres Oestes. Cada Oeste tiene una relaci  on diferente con los otros y se podr  ı an visualizar como amenazas u oportunidades, en tanto que de cada Oeste se puede esperar que crezca en diversas  areas a expensas de los dem  as. Los l  ı mites entre los tres Oestes podr  ı an ser localizaciones importantes; transiciones agudas se pueden dar entre los Oestes, quiz  as en ninguna otra parte m  as que donde un  area metro de r  apido crecimiento colinda con un parque nacional o el borde de un bosque. Finalmente, los efectos del cambio clim  atico cortan a trav  es de los tres Oestes y tienen diferentes implicaciones para su futuro. El crecimiento continuo de la poblaci  on destacar  a mucho m  as los l  ı mites entre cada uno de los tres Oestes y suba las inversiones para su control. Palabras clave:  areas protegidas,  areas rurales, ciudades, Oeste americano.

M apping the American West has been an effort going back hundreds of years, and the region remains of tremendous interest to geographers and other scholars. Wright (2014) discussed four boundaries of the West: the 98th meridian, the Mexican and Canadian borders, and the Pacific slope. The eastern boundary represents the limits of rainfall that divides the humid east from western aridity, the western separates growth along the Pacific Coast, and national boundaries delimit the northern and southern boundaries. Although these boundaries were intended as symbolic of four major themes in the West -aridity, growth, wild nature, and cultural diversity -they provide useful boundaries for mapping the outline of the West.

Within these boundaries the West is unified by aridity and an experience of boom and bust conditions. The West also appears to contain contradictions, such as being both the most urbanized area of the country and the emptiest. The vast size and cultural and economic diversity of the West have attracted many to attempt to create regional subdivisions. Among the most notable was D. W. Meinig (1965, 1971), who mapped out the Mormon cultural region and the Southwest and provided one of the earliest and most detailed regionalizations of the American West (Meinig 1972, 1998). He was concerned with the development of specific regional nodes, including Phoenix, Salt Lake City, and Denver. More recently, Garreau (1981) divided North America into nine regions, of which the interior West is divided into the Empty Quarter and part of MexAmerica. Woodard (2011) provided a similar view, lumping most of the interior west as

<!-- image -->

the Far West, with only the Pacific Coast and parts of the Southwest as distinct regions. Zelinsky (1992) treated the interior West as a separate region within the United States, with the Upper Rio Grande Valley, Mormon Region, Colorado Piedmont, Washington ' s Inland Empire, and Central Arizona as distinct subregions. Most of the West was, however, undifferentiated.

More recently it is common in parts of the West to speak of the Old West and New West, based on whether economics have transitioned from a dependence on traditional extractive activities to a serviceand recreation-based economy (Shumway and Otterstrom 2001; Harner and Benz 2013). Studies have examined the development of the New West at the county level, although these vary tremendously in area, population, density, terrain, and land ownership patterns and their boundaries very rarely encompass a single large metropolitan area, let alone any meaningful delineation of economic or cultural areas.

It is argued here that attempts at understanding the West through such cultural or economic regionalization are limited by relying on state or county boundaries and not taking into account spatial patterns of land management and ownership and consequent possibilities for development. Although cultural differences continue to exist and could be increasing due to the influx of newcomers (Wright 1993; Larsen et al. 2007; Bryson and Wyckoff 2010; Post 2013; Williams and Wright 2015; UlrichSchad and Qin 2017), in the twenty-first century there are three American Wests, which are distinguished by opportunities for economic activities and population growth. Parts of the West are booming, building homes, and adding population; others are legally off limits to such development; and much of the West has been bypassed by such development and growth. These are called here the Booming West, Protected West, and Bypassed West, respectively. These three Wests also cut across cultural, political, physical, and economic boundaries; the reliance on counties or other boundaries to understand growth patterns will not distinguish them.

The origins of the three Wests lie in the uneven population growth of the region, the claiming of large swaths of the West by private and institutional owners, and the subsequent extension of formal government control and regulation throughout the area. Their existence is also the result of the scattered development patterns of the West. Unlike eastern states, population growth has been very uneven throughout the West (Figure 1), reflecting the traditional reliance on boom and bust economic patterns (Shumway and Otterstrom 2001; Otterstrom and Shumway 2003). Growth cannot be reduced to the presence of water or other resources, however; although early settlement nuclei in the West favored these locations, by the twenty-first century such distinctions had long been erased (Smith 2008). Water can and has been brought to where it is needed and population growth is detached from the location of natural resources. Locations near major highways or airports and currently favored amenities might attract development and population, but once profits level off growth will eventually move on to a new location. The perception, meaning, and location of recreational or residential amenities might change, especially those that are not fully natural (Larsen and Hutton 2012). Tourism is notoriously fickle and responds to a variety of cues that can be manipulated to reshape flows of visitors and money (Rothman 1998). Military spending has been very uneven within the country and in the West, with research and development, manufacturing, and vast training bases dependent on shifting political patronage (Markusen et al. 1991). The growing or shrinking areas of the West are the result not of natural conditions but of changing political and economic trends.

This article reviews what these three Wests consist of, where they are found, and their varied interrelationships. It also discusses their possible future, including how they will be affected by climate change.

## The Three Wests Defined

The Booming West is defined by growth, perhaps most commonly of population. Much of this has taken place in fast growing urban areas, and for that reason this region could be called the urban or metropolitan West. This is misleading, because many booming areas are too small or exist at too low a level of density to warrant the name urban. Sedona, Arizona, and Mammoth Lakes, California, are seasonal resorts and retirement destinations that might not meet traditional notions of urbanity but are very much part of the Booming West. Exurban or rural development in the form of ranchettes purchased by newcomers in states such as Colorado is another example; as with cities, the amenities that attracted people to these areas are threatened by their construction (Shumway and Otterstrom 2001; Harner and Benz 2013).

The Booming West is based not on the Old West extractive industries of the past but on an amenity-based or service economy. Scenery, outdoor recreation, and perceptions of a pleasant climate can attract residents and employers (Powers 1996). The Booming West therefore encompasses much of what has been defined as the New West, although defined based on the footprint of its growth rather than standard census or other boundaries.

Although many well-known places in this West have existed in some form since the 1700s or even earlier (Meinig 1998; Moehring 2004; Abbott 2008),

Figure 1 Population change by county, 2000 -2016. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

the current Booming West is really a fairly recent phenomenon, taking root since the end of World War II when a sustained period of spatially extensive growth took place. This is the West of urban and rural sprawl, traffic congestion, high-speed Internet, air pollution concerns, and other quality-of-life issues that follow from the spectacular influx of people often seeking clean air and more convenient small-town living (Travis et al. 2005; Rasker et al. 2009). It is also the West of space -time

convergence, with good air and highway connections among cities allowing for high-speed travel (Warf 2008; L ' Hostis 2009).

Even before Powell ' s (1879) report on the American West, the aridity of the region and its limited potential for agricultural settlement had been a concern. The second concern has disappeared, but that for water remains. An enormous body of literature (e.g., Karhl 1982; Worster 1985; Reisner 1986; Hundley 1992; Fradkin 1996; Nadeau 1997; Ross 2013; Standiford 2015; Fleck 2016) has emerged attacking the Booming West for its lack of sustainability and imminent collapse, the thought of which many authors clearly relish. Water has not so far been a major problem in the Booming West, however, because money and political power have always been found to transfer it to where it is needed via aqueduct, canal, or pipeline. The map of the Booming West is therefore a more accurate map of water availability than is Powell ' s map.

The Protected West is also well known. It originated in the late nineteenth century in efforts to set aside parts of the public domain for nonextractive purposes. Its most visible components are the national parks, monuments, recreation areas, and historic sites under the administration of the National Park Service (Foresta 1984; Runte 2010). Yellowstone and Yosemite National Parks, Glen Canyon and Lake Roosevelt National Recreation Areas, Sunset Crater and Dinosaur National Monuments, and Manzanar and Fort Bowie National Historic Sites are among the 111 park units in this West. Another large portion of the Protected West is made up of national forests, first created in 1891 to protect the West ' s forests and watersheds and administered by the U.S. Forest Service. These, along with national grasslands, are found in every state in the West. National wildlife refuges were created from 1903 onward to protect wildlife increasingly recognized as threatened by hunting and fishing. Today they are operated by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. The concept of wilderness protection areas became popular during the postwar boom period and was codified in a 1964 law that allowed their designation throughout the Protected West (Vale 2005). Portions of the Bureau of Land Management ' s (BLM) extensive holdings are also included within the Protected West, including national monuments, wilderness areas, and Areas of Critical Environmental Concern (ACECs). All of these places have regulations designed to preserve and protect natural resources, although not always exactly the same resources or to the same degree.

The Protected West also includes a variety of other areas that are outside the everyday lives of most Americans, where ordinary activities are regulated or prohibited and where few might go. Military bases are foremost among these. The earliest military bases in the interior West date to the period before the Civil War, when several outposts protected travelers on emigrant trails (Meinig 1998). More followed during the Indian Wars of the late nineteenth century, and a few, such as Fort Huachuca in Arizona, remain. During World War II the West offered ample spaces under federal control with good weather for flight training, and vast reservations were created (Meinig 2004). The Departments of Defense and Energy continue to operate many of these installations today. Although the average person would be unlikely to think of Arizona ' s Grand Canyon National Park and Barry Goldwater Bombing Range as the same kinds of places, they both represent areas where public travel and activities are limited, are both justified as economic engines for surrounding rural areas, and are both managed in part as wildlife habitats (Havlick 2007).

Indian reservations can also be thought of as part of the Protected West. They are complex political structures, often with a mix of private and tribal land and overlapping jurisdictions (Sutton 1976, 1991). They are not a part of the public domain, nor are they private land; the title to the land is held in trust by the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs. They can be thought of as jurisdictional rather than land management entities. Although they are not protected as other public land is (in parks or forests managed by specific agencies), they are not available for large-scale commercial or residential development by nontribal members the way other land in the West is (Frantz 1999). They are often remote from the Booming West and might be lacking in the scenery the public expects of national parks and other elements of the Protected West. They have usually been unattractive to outside investment, although those near large cities might see some development in the form of tribal businesses such as casinos or long-term commercial leases (Frantz 2012), and others have been exploited for energy development.

The third West includes everything else, including rural areas and small towns skipped over by the economic transformations of the Booming West as well as being left outside the Protected West. This West has not been transformed by the New West economy and remains part of the Old West. Former mining towns such as Butte, Montana (Wyckoff 1995), Goldfield and Tonopah, Nevada, or Miami and Globe, Arizona, are examples, as are small farming towns such as Safford, Arizona. Not all of these towns still have inhabitants; a well-known feature of the Bypassed West is the ghost town. These former mining communities represent nineteenth- or early twentieth-century booms that busted and were partly or entirely abandoned (DeLyser 1999, 2001, 2003). Some, such as Bodie, Calico, and Rhyolite, have become tourist attractions.

Many areas of the Bypassed West have lost population since the late nineteenth or early twentieth centuries and the area has low population densities today. The area is not empty, however. Empty is a very politically loaded term in the interior West, bringing to mind the virtual uninhabitants of the atomic testing era (Fuller 1984; Titus 1986; Fradkin 1989). Wasteland is another dated term that residents of this area would find unappealing. For that reason this West is referred to as bypassed. It has not benefited from space -time convergence as has the Booming West, with no air service and limited highway connections (Warf 2008; L ' Hostis 2009). Many smaller towns, such as Peach Springs, Arizona, were literally bypassed by the interstate highway system running between metropolitan areas in the Booming West, and much of the Bypassed West does not even have a Walmart nearby (Walmart 2018). This West encompasses the idea of the isolated West (Rasker et al. 2009).

The Bypassed West is similar to, but not the same as, the frontier. The traditional frontier was specified as being counties with a population density of less than two people per square mile (Dayton 1993; Lang, Popper, and Popper 1997; Otterstrom and Earle 2002). Many Western counties still meet this threshold, but the concept has returned to prominence as a tool in health care and other fields to identify poorly served and remote areas (Ottersman and Earle 2002; Cromartie et al. 2013; National Center for Frontier Communities 2017). Frontier status is associated with a number of challenges, such as poverty, limited health care services, higher costs, and remoteness from jobs and other opportunities, all of which describe the Bypassed West.

The BLM is the largest landowner in this West or, in some areas, the only landowner (Public Lands Interpretive Association 2018). The agency once oversaw the transfer of land to homesteaders but since 1976 only sells or trades land under limited circumstances. The near monopoly on land naturally limits the tax base of many bypassed areas and might make rural governments dependent on federal largesse. The BLM has several roles, including regulating and managing livestock grazing, mining, oil and gas drilling and regulating wind and solar power projects, all of which are extractive industries surviving from the Old West economy. The BLM ' s mission has changed, however, and the agency also manages a number of wilderness areas and ACECs that are part of the Protected West, which frequently brings it into conflict with those who favor looser or no restrictions on these activities (Skillen 2009). There remains considerable nostalgia for the older extractive industries, and ghost towns have been reimagined as scenes of pioneer success in taming the Old West (DeLyser 1999, 2003). These activities are of little significance, though, compared to the economic output of the Booming West or even the Protected West. Loss of this way of life for those few still involved in it has often been very contentious.

The Bypassed West is very likely the most vulnerable West in its ease of being exploited by outside interests. In the past it has been seen as a source of water for Los Angeles and other cities and an empty space where bombs can be dropped or radioactive waste dumped (Shumway and Jackson 2008). Today the Bypassed West is still seen as an empty space to be converted to more productive uses for the benefit of those living elsewhere, such as generating electricity for big cities. This West is the West of battles over endangered species and development; in the Protected West and Booming West these battles are less likely to exist, because there is often either little development or no remaining species that do not thrive in urban environments (Crifasi 2007).

## Mapping Out the Three Wests

The three Wests can be mapped to show their approximate locations. The Booming West is defined as including all urbanized clusters and areas according to the 2010 Census. These include census blocks added together to encompass settlements with at least 1,500 people outside group quarters (defined as facilities such as prisons, dormitories, or military housing). This definition allows for bodies of water or undeveloped land to allow for noncontiguous settlements and includes airports outside a populated area; city boundaries are not a part of the definition. There are 623 such places within the West.

The Protected West is defined as including national park units, national forests, military bases, Department of Energy land, wildlife refuges, the BLM ' s national monuments and ACECs, and wilderness areas administered by the National Park Service, National Forest Service, and BLM. Indian reservations, as well as state and local parks and private preserves, are also included. Boundaries for these came from the Protected Areas Database of the U.S. (PADUS; U.S. Geological Survey 2017). The Bypassed West is defined as everything not in the Booming or Protected Wests; this includes both private land outside the Booming West as well as BLM lands excluding wilderness or ACECs.

Figure 2 shows the three Wests as defined here. The Booming West is by far the smallest, and perhaps the most recognizable, because it is a map of well-known urban areas and rural resorts. It includes the Phoenix and Tucson metropolitan areas in Arizona, as well as smaller cities such as Prescott and Sierra Vista. Las Vegas, Pahrump, and the Reno -Sparks -Carson City area are included in Nevada, the Wasatch Front and St. George in Utah,

Figure 2 The three Wests. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

and Front Range cities in Colorado. Albuquerque and Santa Fe are part of the Booming West in northern New Mexico, and Las Cruces and El Paso are farther down the Rio Grande. Boise, Spokane, Washington ' s Tri-Cities, and many smaller cities

(often recreation or retirement oriented) are also part of the northern Booming West. Palm Springs, Victorville, and the Palmdale -Lancaster areas are included in California, although they are outliers of Los Angeles.

The Protected West is much larger in area and is often concentrated at higher elevations where national forests are found along with many national park units (Wyckoff and Dilsaver 1995). This includes portions of the Sierra Nevada and Cascade Mountains along the western boundary of the region, Idaho Rockies, the Greater Yellowstone area, Central Rockies, Black Hills, and the Mogollon region of Arizona and New Mexico. The Protected West is more than mountains, though; the Four Corners region is largely Indian country, and large portions of the Dakotas are included within reservations as well. The desert Southwest includes numerous national parks, including Death Valley, the largest in the lower forty-eight states, as well as vast military bases. Almost the entire Colorado River from eastern Utah to Mexico is included within the Protected West.

Although national parks such as the Grand Canyon are the best known part of the Protected West, it has a substantial residential population. This includes employees of national park units and other federal lands, military personnel stationed in bases, and the resident population of Indian reservations. The largest of these is that of the Navajo Nation, spanning Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah, home to 173,667 of the Din  e people. The Protected West also includes inholdings in national parks, such as major resort areas, or leases within national forests.

The Bypassed West is by far the largest of the three Wests in land area. It includes much of the Great Basin in Nevada, western Utah, and southern Oregon and Idaho. Much of the Inland Empire in eastern Washington as well as Montana and Wyoming are included as well. The Bypassed West is typically made up of valley bottoms and low mountains that cannot support forests or ski resorts. Although much of it is administered by the BLM there are areas in private ownership, especially in agricultural areas of the Palouse and Idaho ' s Snake River Plain.

Although counties are widely used as a unit of analysis in the American West (Shumway and Otterstrom 2001; Otterstrom and Shumway 2003; Loeffler and Steinicke 2007; Rasker et al. 2009; Marcus et al. 2012; Harner and Benz 2013; Nelson and Rae 2016), they cut across the three Wests. They were not used to map the Wests and are accordingly not shown on the map; Figure 2 therefore represents a more useful view of population and future growth than Figure 1.

## The Geographies of the Three Wests

Nye County, Nevada, provides an example of how conventional political boundaries can cut across the three Wests. Much of the county, the third largest in the United States, is within the Protected West, represented by Death Valley National Park (the largest in the forty-eight contiguous states), Ash Meadows and Desert National Wildlife Refuges (also the largest in the forty-eight contiguous states), Humboldt-Toiyabe National Forest (again the largest in the forty-eight contiguous states), several wilderness areas, and the vast Nellis Air Force Range and Nevada Test Site, one of the largest military bases in the country.

The county also includes the town of Pahrump, which contains 83 percent of the county ' s population and is a fast growing outlier of Las Vegas. It has grown from a small cotton farming and ranching area of 5,000 people to a suburb of almost 40,000 within thirty years and is firmly a part of the Booming West. In recent years it has added a hospital and community college, and highway improvements, impacts of development, and future water supplies are common concerns.

Across the vast expanse of Nye County also lie many small towns living in the shadow of a longgone mining boom; this boom in the first decade of the twentieth century reversed decades of population decline that had threatened Nevada ' s statehood (Elliott 1987). Tonopah, the county seat, reported 2,478 people in 2010 but reached as many as 10,000 in 1906 at its peak. Rhyolite also reached 10,000 residents in 1906 but collapsed soon after and remains one of the best known ghost towns in the West. Today both towns are firmly part of the Bypassed West.

Many other incongruities exist throughout the West. The town of Ft. Irwin, California, came into existence in the 1980s and has 8,845 people, a hospital, shopping, parks, schools, restaurants (even a Starbucks), a library, veterinarian, motel, bypass road, and 500-MW solar power project. It is clearly a part of the Booming West, yet it is located within the sprawling Army installation of the same name, putting it within the Protected West (and off limits to most Americans). Grand Canyon Village, Arizona, is another example: More than 2,000 people live in the community, supplemented by nearly 5 million visitors a year, with schools, hotels, restaurants, stores, a post office, a train station with daily passenger service, a busy transit system, and a fragile water supply system. It is also inside the boundary of Grand Canyon National Park and firmly within the Protected West. The opposite can also be found, with bypassed areas existing within big cities due to disinvestment from industry or the fickleness of the real estate market.

Concealed within the beauty and legal protections of the Protected West are many unsustainable practices. National parks often suffer from overcrowding and traffic congestion, requiring transit systems to keep people circulating, as at the Grand Canyon, Bryce, Zion, and Rocky Mountain National

Parks, among others. Yellowstone has had persistent problems with attempts to regulate snowmobile traffic and its attendant noise, air pollution, and wildlife impacts (Yochim 2009). Aircraft noise has become pervasive in parts of the Grand Canyon despite strictly regulated airspace (Ambrose and Florian 2008). Although the National Forest Service fights legal battles over roadless areas, it has built more miles of roads than any other federal agency (Federal Highway Administration 2008). Military bases have disturbed soils, vegetation, and wildlife and littered the desert with unexploded ordnance and radioactive materials.

Booming areas of the West need not be wealthy; in addition to the presence of urban poverty in fast growing cities, the second homes and luxury resorts in areas such as Sedona and Colorado ski towns are made possible by nearby communities housing restaurant workers, housekeepers, landscapers, and a strained system of social services. These are as much a part of the Booming West as the lavish homes and resorts they make possible. Likewise, unsanitary and dangerous colonias can be found on the outskirts of many booming cities, and Indian reservations contain some of the poorest rural communities in the country despite their location in the Protected West. It is evident that wealth and poverty cut across the three Wests.

The boundaries between the three Wests could be important locations. Sharp transitions can exist between Wests, perhaps nowhere more so than where a fast growing metro area abuts a national park or forest boundary. Tucson is a near perfect example of this, with Saguaro National Park, Coronado National Forest, and several county parks providing growth boundaries for urban expansion. Many western metropolitan areas have similar growth boundaries (Travis et al. 2005; Frantz 2012), giving the Booming West more defined boundaries than sprawling cities in the eastern United States (Lang 2002). This is not always the case, though, giving rise to the urban -wildland interface of interspersed homes and forest with heightened wildfire danger (Cohen 2008).

## Interrelationships among the Three Wests

Each West has a different relationship to the others. For the Booming West, the Protected West most obviously provides a playground, the location of outdoor recreational amenities long recognized as an important condition for growth (Ullman 1954). Some combination of national park units located outside a city, scenic drives and ski resorts in nearby mountains, lakes administered by any of several agencies, and opportunities to dirt bike and hunt exist around most western metropolitan areas. These could effectively serve as the city ' s park system and contribute to booming conditions.

The Protected West can also be a threat to the Booming West, however, by limiting areas for future growth. The existence of a species of tiny desert pupfish, averaging 0.75 inches in length and numbering fewer than 100 individuals, in a single underwater cave included within Death Valley National Park gave the Department of Interior the power to regulate groundwater pumping over a considerable area in Nevada, thwarting extensive development plans. As long as this species continues to exist, its presence could sharply limit the ability of Las Vegas to expand its water supply by groundwater pumping in northern Nevada (Deacon et al. 2007), threatening the future growth of the city.

Protected lands might be created deliberately for this reason. One motivation for the creation of California ' s Mojave National Preserve was to prevent the growth of Los Angeles and Las Vegas sprawling over the last open space between these cities (Hamin 2003). More recently, the 2015 creation of Basin and Range National Monument in Nevada was explained as a strategy for preventing the opening of the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste dump by blocking the only viable rail route to the site (Tetreault 2015).

In contrast, the Bypassed West could provide an area for future growth of the Booming West, as with freeways planned far in advance of future growth in empty desert valleys west of Phoenix (Maricopa Association of Governments 2007), as well as a source of resources such as water and a dumping ground for externalities. The proposed pipeline bringing water from northeast Nevada to Las Vegas and numerous solar or wind power projects are examples (Alagona and Smith 2012). The Bypassed West can also present threats to the Booming West in the form of drug production or extremists supporting political views that might threaten tourism or outside investment (Cockle 2012; Siegler 2016).

For protected areas, the Booming West is a threat due to congestion, spread of air pollution, the loss of starry skies, and perceptions of crime (as in Keiter 2013). It also represents the origin of many tourists, their dollars, and political support that parks need, however. Bypassed areas might be perceived as areas with low-value recreational or scenic resources. They could be used as a buffer area against the Booming West and, conversely, they could be viewed as potential expansion zones for protected areas. Among wildlife specialists there has been a considerable body of work calling for national parks to expand (Keiter 2013), either into areas of the Protected West managed by different agencies or into the Bypassed West. Wildlife sanctuaries for larger species should also be part of a connected web, with corridors connecting

major parks. Expansion into the Bypassed West would be crucial to such efforts.

For the Bypassed West, the Booming West can represent a threat of crime, social problems, unwanted diversity, and the loss of a way of life, as well as opportunities for work or easier access to health care services and shopping. The growth of the Protected West could likewise be viewed as the spread of unwanted federal restrictions as well as the growth of economic opportunity. The creation of a new national monument is likely to be opposed by many in the Bypassed West who fear still more restrictions on hunting, shooting, off-road vehicle use, or other activities. That these monuments often appear to be created to benefit those in the Booming West is another reason to oppose them; the creation of new protected areas might actually be more popular with those living farther from the proposed area (Hanink 1995). The actual benefits that locals receive might greatly exceed that of any extractive industries being displaced, but this is neither a simple substitution nor one that can easily overcome entrenched attitudes (Powers 1996; Powers and Barrett 2001). The expansion of military bases might also be opposed for much the same reason, especially if it should remove already scarce private land from the local tax base (Loomis 1993; Stephens 2018).

There are, of course, tremendous opportunities for conflicts within each West and tensions between the National Park Service and military over low-flying aircraft, ranchers and solar power plants, or land-use conflicts within booming cities and resort areas. These might be as significant as those between the Wests.

## The Future of the Wests

The map of the three Wests presented here is not the definitive or final map, and there will never be one, because the boundaries are constantly changing. The boundaries are messy, with overlaps, sharp boundaries in some areas, gradual transitions in others, outliers or islands, and some areas left undefined or contested. This is simply a reflection of the real world and should not be seen as a limitation of the methodology. Numerous refinements could, however, be made. The methodology used here is perhaps more appropriate for the larger, faster growing, and more urban states in the southern West, where the Booming West is largely urban; in northern states it might require a larger consideration of rural land use patterns, requiring data available only at the local level (Otterstrom and Shumway 2003; Harner and Benz 2013). Mapping at a larger scale would reveal more detail but make overlaps and incongruities more visible.

The approach used here defines the Bypassed West by what it is not rather than what it is. This is the opposite of those seeking to define frontier areas (Cromartie et al. 2013; National Center for Frontier Communities 2017), for which a specified methodology based on population, remoteness, or both is used. Cromartie et al. (2013) defined frontier areas as beyond urban areas and subdivided these areas by travel time to urban centers of different population thresholds to reflect access to goods and services. Such a distinction is useful but not attempted here, although it is certainly the case that some rural areas are more isolated (or more bypassed) than others (Rasker et al. 2009). Finally, analysis could be carried out to understand population and economic change at the local level and the relative value of different amenities as well as the interactions among the three Wests. Any such study would ideally avoid reliance on counties or other units that cut across the Wests; unfortunately, without such units, even measuring the population of each West is difficult.

The Booming West will certainly continue to spread as new housing booms produce new growth on the peripheries of each city and into formerly rural areas (Sultana and Weber 2014). Before the recession, the urban West was projected to increase by almost 40 million people by 2040 (Travis et al. 2005), and it was common to write of emerging megaregions that would connect separate metropolitan areas (Brookings Institution 2008; Nelson and Rae 2016). Among these was Arizona ' s Sun Corridor, including Prescott, Phoenix, Tucson, and Nogales, and the Front Range (extending from Albuquerque to Cheyenne and including Santa Fe, Pueblo, Colorado Springs, and Denver). Although growth has not yet returned to prerecession levels, discussions of these megaregions will eventually reappear as part of the Booming West. If these come to be, they will almost certainly transform areas of the Bypassed West, as well as create new boundaries with the Protected West and new tensions with both.

The Booming West will surely also suffer busts; those areas currently booming will continue to do so only until greater profits can be found elsewhere. New areas, and perhaps new industries, will eventually be favored (Smith 2008). Booming cities or resorts will become bypassed, joining the ranks of ghost towns and abandoned landscapes scattered across the West.

The Protected West will also likely grow, again almost always at the expense of the Bypassed West. Since the 1990s, several national parks or preserves and over two dozen national monuments have been created in this region, often with vocal opposition. The fast growing Las Vegas metropolitan area has seen four new national monuments created recently: Tule Springs Fossil Beds National Monument on the northern periphery of the city, Basin and Range farther north, Gold Butte to the east, and Castle Mountains south of the city. This suggests that

boundaries between the Protected and Booming Wests are areas to watch for new park units. Military bases will also likely expand, although again with resistance from residents of the Bypassed West, who see a loss of land and revenue (Stephens 2018).

There are also possibilities for the Protected West to shrink in places, however. Several dozen national park units, many in the West, have been eliminated from the system (Weber 2016). The 2017 reduction of Bears Ears and Grand Staircase Escalante National Monuments are recent examples. National forest boundaries can be amended, as in 1960 when a large parcel of forest land was sold to a developer who in turn created the booming Mammoth Lakes community on it (Loeffler and Steinicke 2007). Even wilderness is not permanent; these areas can be reduced by act of Congress, as happened in Arizona when the University of Arizona successfully lobbied to remove a wilderness designation from Mt. Graham to build an astronomical observatory there (Istock and Hoffman 1995).

Prospects for the Bypassed West to grow are limited; it will most likely shrink as the other Wests expand. Several state governments have expressed interest in taking over federal lands, a revival of the Sagebrush Rebellion of the 1970s and 1980s (Lawton 2014). If successful, this could provide an opportunity for large parts of the Bypassed West to join the Booming West.

One example of shifting boundaries between the Wests is the U.S. -Mexico border, which moved from the Bypassed to the Booming West in the late twentieth century, and more recently much of it has been added to the Protected West as concerns over illegal immigration grow (Arreola and Curtis 1994; St. John 2012). This area encapsulates many of the tensions within and among the three Wests; it also reminds us that the three Wests do not exist independent of the rest of the country, or the world. The Protected West serves as a playground for those living far away, who might be more passionate about its protection than many westerners. The Bypassed West exports electricity and provides many of the nation ' s military training bases. The Protected West is the creation of the federal government, and the role of the federal government in promoting and subsidizing the Booming West with dams, highways, military facilities, and airline service is well known (Jackson 1985; Markusen et al. 1991; Grubesic and Matisziw 2011; Fleck 2016).

Cultural differences still exist among much of the West, and they will continue to receive attention in a media atmosphere that emphasizes conflict and divisiveness as well as a legal system that values diversity. In several cases culture is implicated in land ownership or development patterns over a large enough area to be visible in the three Wests. Indian reservations with their closely intertwined cultures and overlapping legal jurisdictions and New

Mexico ' s Hispanic farming communities are two examples, but the premiere example is that of Utah. The state ' s early Mormon settlement and history, with a tightly coupled religious leadership and government and rapid growth based on communally managed irrigated agriculture, sets it apart from others. The results remain evident today, especially with regard to the Protected West. Land trusts to preserve valued areas are far more common in Colorado than in Utah, with the difference being explained by contrasting views toward the value and purpose of land (Wright 1993). Setting aside land for scenic values is not a strong consideration in Mormon Utah; the state also has a small acreage of wilderness areas compared to adjacent states and is at the forefront of recent efforts to take over public lands (Lawton 2014). These examples are consistent with Meinig ' s (1965, 1972) regionalizations; more recent cultural shifts have not yet had the sufficient time or political influence to shape the three Wests at the scale of Figure 1, although they have undoubtedly done so at the local level.

Needless to say, continued population growth and pressure for land development will raise the stakes for control of the three Wests. This might cause the boundaries between them to harden, as when the edges of urban development are shaped by a national forest boundary, whereas in other areas these boundaries might become more blurred or overlapping. The growth of the Booming West is associated with population inmigration; in rural areas this can be associated with newcomers bringing contrasting values and socioeconomic patterns that can create tensions (Shumway and Otterstrom 2001; Larsen et al. 2007; Loeffler and Steinicke 2007; Bryson and Wyckoff 2010; Larsen and Hutton 2012). Only nine of the West ' s fifty-one congressional districts, Nevada ' s first district; Colorado ' s first, sixth, and seventh; and Arizona ' s fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth districts are exclusive to one of the three Wests (in each of these cases, the Booming West). It is fortunate that the electoral geography is not more polarized among these Wests, because there are already likely to be significant political differences among the populations of the three Wests.

Long-term projections for the three Wests must also take into account the effects of climate change that will cut across the three Wests. In addition to an eastward move of the arid -humid border, the largest effect is likely to be decreased precipitation across the Southwest, although it is forecast to increase across the northern West (Ingram and Malamud-Roam 2013; Hsiang et al. 2017; Seager et al. 2018). Reduced snowfall will limit water in the Colorado River system, and forest fires and desert dust storms might become more frequent. Lower elevation areas will receive the greatest negative impacts, whereas more northerly and higher

elevations might see modest increases in economic activity although they are also exposed to more extreme weather events and especially damaging forest fires (Bramwell 2014; Hsiang et al. 2017; Kodas 2017).

Climate change will not have the same impact on each of the three Wests. Much of the urban Booming West, particularly in the Southwest, will face decreasing water supplies, and resort towns will see shorter ski seasons. The Protected West will face changing habitats that could greatly reduce their amenity values. The distribution of Joshua trees, the iconic plant of the Mojave Desert, will likely shift northward and to higher elevations, leaving California ' s Joshua Tree National Park largely devoid of its namesake plant (Cole et al. 2011). It is not just habitats that are changing; peak visitation to some western national park units has shifted earlier in the summer, possibly in response to warmer temperatures and longer tourist seasons (Buckley and Foushee 2012). This will likely accelerate, with parts of the West with summer peaks shifting toward a bimodal spring -fall season or even becoming winter destinations (Scott, McBoyle, and Schwartzentruber 2004). Climate change might be especially damaging to mountain parks, with reduced snowfall (and shrinking glaciers), vegetation change, reductions in habitat, and more frequent fires (Saunders and Easley 2006).

Boundaries between the three Wests might be redefined; booming areas in the desert suffering from water shortages, reduced air quality, and even hotter temperatures could find themselves bypassed by more northerly and higher altitude locations. Small towns in the Bypassed West, languishing in the Old West economy, might begin to boom if they possess cooler and wetter climates. The Booming West has the resources and public support to overcome adverse changes just as it has had the resources to overcome water shortages in the past; the Protected West has legal power to resist adverse impacts, whereas the Bypassed West has neither. Culture could also have a tremendous influence on how the Wests adapt to climate change. /H17039

## Literature Cited

- Abbott, C. 2008. How cities won the West: Four centuries of urban change in western North America . Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Alagona, P. S., and C. F. Smith. 2012. Mirage in the making: Mojave dreams. Boom: A Journal of California 2 (3):25 -44.
- Ambrose, S., and C. Florian. 2008. Sound levels and audibility of common sounds in frontcountry and transitional areas in Grand Canyon National Park, 2007 -2008. Accessed June 3, 2018. https://www.nps.gov/grca/learn/ nature/upload/GRCAFrontcountryRep-20081112.pdf.

Arreola, D., and J. R. Curtis. 1994. The Mexican border cities: Landscape anatomy and place personality . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.

- Bramwell, L. 2014. Wilderburbs: Communities on nature ' s edge . Seattle: University of Washington Press.
- Brookings Institution. 2008. Mountain megas: America ' s newest metropolitan places and a federal partnership to help them prosper. Accessed June 3, 2018. https://www.brookings.edu/ research/mountain-megas-americas-newest-metropolitan-places-and-a-federal-partnership-to-help-them-prosper/.
- Bryson, J., and W. Wyckoff. 2010. Rural gentrification and nature in the Old and New Wests. Journal of Cultural Geography 27 (1):53 -75.
- Buckley, L. B., and M. S. Foushee. 2012. Footprints of climate change in U.S. national park visitation. International Journal of Biometeorology 56 (6):1173 -77.
- Crifasi, R. R. 2007. A subspecies no more? A mouse, its unstable taxonomy, and Western riparian resource conflict. Cultural Geographies 14 (4):511 -35.
- Cockle, R. 2012. 20 years after Ruby Ridge siege, extremists are fewer in northern Idaho but still remain. The Oregonian, August 27. Accessed June 3, 2018. http:// www.oregonlive.com.
- Cohen, J. 2008. The wildland -urban interface fire problem. Forest History Today 14:20 -26.
- Cole, K. L., K. Ironside, J. Eischeid, G. Garfin, P. B. Duffy, and C. Toney. 2011. Past and ongoing shifts in Joshua tree distribution support future modeled range contraction. Ecological Applications 21 (1):137 -49.
- Cromartie, J., D. Nulph, G. Hart, and E. Dobis. 2013. Defining frontier areas in the United States. Journal of Maps 9 (2):149 -53.
- Dayton, D. 1993. Miles from nowhere: Tales from America ' s contemporary frontier . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
- Deacon, J. E., A. E. Williams, C. D. Williams, and J. E. Williams. 2007. Fueling population growth in Las Vegas: How large-scale groundwater withdrawal could burn regional biodiversity. BioScience 57 (8):688 -98.
- DeLyser, D. 1999. Authenticity on the ground: Engaging the past in a California ghost town. Annals of the Association of American Geosgraphers 89 (4):602 -32.
- ---. 2001. When less is more: Absence and landscape in a California ghost town. In Textures of place: Exploring humanist geographies , ed. P. C. Adams, S. Hoelscher, and K. E. Till, 24 -40. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- ---. 2003. Good, by God, we ' re going to Bodie! Ghost towns and the American West. In Western places, American myths , ed. G. Hausladen, 273 -95. Reno: University of Nevada Press.
- Elliott, R. R. 1987. History of Nevada . 2nd ed. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
- Federal Highway Administration. 2008. Status of the nation ' s highways, bridges, and transit: Conditions and performance. Accessed June 3, 2018. https://www.fhwa. dot.gov/policy/2008cpr/index.cfm.
- Fleck, J. 2016. Water is for fighting over, and other myths about water in the West . Washington, DC: Island.
- Foresta, R. A. 1984. America ' s national parks and their keepers . Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.

- Fradkin, P. L. 1989. Fallout: An American nuclear tragedy . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- ---. 1996. A river no more: The Colorado River and the west . 2nd ed. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Frantz, K. 1999. Indian reservations in the United States . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- ---. 2012. The Salt River Indian reservation: Land use conflicts and aspects of socioeconomic change on the outskirts of metro-Phoenix, Arizona. GeoJournal 77 (6):777 -90.
- Fuller, J. G. 1984. The day we bombed Utah: America ' s most lethal secret . New York: New American Library.
- Garreau, J. 1981. The nine nations of North America . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
- Grubesic, T. H., and T. C. Matisziw. 2011. A spatial analysis of air transport access and the essential air service program in the United States. Journal of Transport Geography 19 (1):93 -105.
- Hamin, E. M. 2003. Mojave lands: Interpretive planning and the national preserve . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Hanink, D. M. 1995. Evaluation of wilderness in a spatial context. Growth and Change 26 (3):425 -41.
- Harner, J., and B. Benz. 2013. The growth of ranchettes in La Plata County, Colorado, 1988 -2016. The Professional Geographer 65 (2):329 -44.
- Havlick, D. 2007. Logics of change for military-to-wildlife conversions in the United States. GeoJournal 69 (3):151 -64.
- Hsiang, S., R. Kopp, A. Jina, J. Rising, M. Delgado, S. Mohan, D. J. Rasmussen, et al. 2017. Estimating economic damage from climate change in the United States. Science 356 (6345):1362 -69.
- Hundley, N., Jr. 1992. The great thirst: Californians and water, 1770s -1990s . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Ingram, B. L., and F. Malamud-Roam. 2013. The West without water: What past floods, droughts, and other climatic clues tell us about tomorrow . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Istock, C. A., and R. S. Hoffman. 1995. Storm over a mountain island: Conservation biology and the Mt. Graham affair . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- Jackson, K. T. 1985. Crabgrass frontier: The suburbanization of the United States . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Karhl, W. L. 1982. Water and power: The conflict over Los Angeles ' water supply in the Owens Valley . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Keiter, R. B. 2013. To conserve unimpaired: The evolution of the national park idea . Washington, DC: Island.
- Kodas, M. 2017. Megafire: The race to extinguish a deadly epidemic of flame . New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt
- Lang, R. E. 2002. Open spaces, bounded places: Does the American West ' s arid landscape yield dense metropolitan growth? Housing Policy Debate 13 (4):755 -78.
- Lang, R. E., D. E. Popper, and F. J. Popper. 1997. Is there still a frontier? The 1890U.S. census and the modern American West. Journal of Rural Studies 13 (4):377 -86.
- Larsen, S. C., and C. Hutton. 2012. Community discourse and the emerging amenity landscapes of the rural American West. GeoJournal 77 (5):651 -65.
- Larsen, S. C., C. Sorenson, D. McDermott, J. Long, and C. Post. 2007. Place perception and social interaction on an exurban landscape in Central Colorado. The Professional Geographer 59 (4):421 -33.
- Lawton, N. 2014. Utah ' s transfer of public lands act: Demanding a gift of federal lands. Vermont Journal of Environmental Law 16 (1):1 -37.
- L ' Hostis, A. 2009. The shriveled USA: Representing time -space in the context of metropolitanization and the development of high-speed transport. Journal of Transport Geography 17 (6):433 -39.
- Loeffler, R., and E. Steinicke. 2007. Amenity migration in the U.S. Sierra Nevada. Geographical Review 97 (1):67 -88.
- Loomis, D. 1993. Combat zoning: Military land-use planning in Nevada . Reno: University of Nevada Press.
- Marcus, W. A., J. E. Meacham, A. W. Rodman, and A. Y. Steingisser. 2012. Atlas of Yellowstone . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Maricopa Association of Governments. 2007. Interstate 10 -Hassayampa Valley roadwork framework study. Accessed June 3, 2018. http://www.bqaz.org/pdf/has/map/ Executive%20Summary%20Poster%20-%20Front%20%20Hassayampa%20Framework%20Study.pdf.
- Markusen, A., P. Hall, S. Campbell, and S. Deitrick. 1991. The rise of the Gunbelt: The military remapping of industrial America . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Meinig, D. W. 1965. The Mormon culture region: Strategies and patterns in the geography of the American West, 1847 -1964. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 55 (2):191 -220.
- ---. 1971. Southwest: Three peoples in geographical change 1600 -1970 . New York: Oxford University Press.
- ---. 1972. American Wests: Preface to a geographical interpretation. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 62 (2):159 -84.
- ---. 1998. The shaping of America: A geographical perspective on 500 years of history: Vol. 3. Transcontinental America, 1850 -1915 . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- ---. 2004. The shaping of America: A geographical perspective on 500 years of history: Vol. 4. Global America, 1915 -2000 . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Moehring, E. P. 2004. Urbanism and empire in the far west, 1840 -1890 . Reno: University of Nevada Press.
- Nadeau, R. 1997. The water seekers . 4th ed. Santa Barbara, CA: Crest.
- National Center for Frontier Communities. 2017. Home page. Accessed June 3, 2018. http://frontierus.org/.
- Nelson, G. D., and A. Rae. 2016. An economic geography of the United States: From commutes to megaregions. PLoS One 11 (11):e0166083.
- Otterstrom, S. M., and C. Earle. 2002. The settlement of the United States from 1790 to 1990: Divergent rates of growth and the end of the frontier. Journal of Interdisciplinary History 33 (1):59 -85.
- Otterstrom, S. M., and J. M. Shumway. 2003. Deserts and oases: The continuing concentration of population in the American Mountain West. Journal of Rural Studies 19 (4):445 -62.

- Post, C. W. 2013. Heritage, amenity, and the changing landscape of the rural American West. Journal of Cultural Geography 30 (3):328 -55.
- Powell, J. W. 1879. Report on the lands of the arid region of the United States . Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
- Powers, T. M. 1996. Lost landscapes and failed economies: The search for a value of place . Washington, DC: Island.
- Powers, T. M., and R. N. Barrett. 2001. Post-cowboy economics: Pay and prosperity in the new American West . Washington, DC: Island.
- Public Lands Interpretive Association. 2018. Search public lands. Accessed June 3, 2018. http://publiclands.org.
- Rasker, R., P. H. Gude, J. A. Gude, and J. van den Noort. 2009. The economic importance of air travel in highamenity rural areas. Journal of Rural Studies 25 (3):343 -53.
- Reisner, M. 1986. Cadillac desert: The American West and its disappearing water . New York: Penguin.
- Ross, A. 2013. Bird on fire: Lessons from the world ' s least sustainable city . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Rothman, H. 1998. Devil ' s bargains: Tourism in the twentieth-century American West . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
- Runte, A. 2010. National parks: The American experience. 4th ed . Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
- Saunders, S., and T. Easley. 2006. Losing ground: Western national parks endangered by climate disruption. Accessed June 3, 2018. https://www.nrdc.org/sites/ default/files/execsum\_1.pdf.
- Scott, D., G. McBoyle, and M. Schwartzentruber. 2004. Climate change and the distribution of climatic resources for tourism in North America. Climate Research 27 (2):105 -17.
- Seager, R., J. Feldman, N. Lis, M. Ting, A. P. Williams, J. Nakamura, H. Liu, and N. Henderson. 2018. Whither the 100th meridian? The once and future physical and human geography of America ' s arid-humid divide: Part 2. The meridian moves east. Earth Interactions 22 (5):1 -24.
- Shumway, J. M., and R. H. Jackson. 2008. Place making, hazardous waste, and the development of Tooele County, Utah. Geographical Review 98 (4):433 -55.
- Shumway, J. M., and S. M. Otterstrom. 2001. Spatial patterns of migration and income change in the Mountain West: The dominance of service-based, amenity-rich counties. The Professional Geographer 53 (4):492 -502.
- Siegler, K. 2016. In Montana, an unease over extremist views moving out of the woods. National Public Radio, November 29. Accessed June 3, 2018. http://www.npr. org.
- Skillen, J. R. 2009. The nation ' s largest landlord: The Bureau of Land Management in the American West . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
- Smith, N. 2008. Uneven development: Nature, capital, and the production of space . 3rd ed. Athens: University of Georgia Press.
- Standiford, L. 2015. Water to the angels: William Mulholland, his monumental aqueduct, and the rise of Los Angeles . New York: HarperCollins.
- St. John, R. 2012. Line in the sand: A history of the Western U.S.-Mexico border . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Stephens, R. 2018. Nevada residents to Air Force: Take no more land. Pahrump Valley Times , January 8. Accessed June 3, 2018. https://pvtimes.com/news/nevada-residents-to-air-force-take-no-more-land/.
- Sultana, S., and J. Weber. 2014. The nature of urban growth and the commuting transition: Endless sprawl or a growth wave? Urban Studies 51 (3):544 -76.
- Sutton, I. 1976. Sovereign states and the changing definition of the Indian reservation. Geographical Review 66 (3):281 -95.
- ---. 1991. Preface to Indian country: Geography and law. American Indian Culture and Research Journal 15 (2):3 -35.
- Tetreault, S. 2015. New national monument blocks rail to Yucca. Las Vegas Review Journal , July 13. Accessed June 3, 2018. http://www.reviewjournal.com/news/newnational-monument-blocks-rail-route-yucca.
- Titus, A. C. 1986. Bombs in the backyard: Atomic testing and American politics . Reno: University of Nevada Press.
- Travis, W. R., D. M. Theobald, G. W. Mixon, and T. W. Dickinson. 2005. Western futures: A look into the patterns of land use and future development in the American West . Boulder: University of Colorado Center of the American West.
- Ullman, E. L. 1954. Amenities as a factor in regional growth. Geographical Review 44 (1):119 -32.
- Ulrich-Schad, J., and H. Qin. 2017. Culture clash? Predictors of views on amenity-led development and community involvement in rural recreation counties. Rural Sociology 83 (1):81.
- U.S. Geological Survey. 2017. Protected areas data portal. Accessed June 3, 2018. https://gapanalysis.usgs.gov/padus/.
- Vale, T. R. 2005. The American wilderness: Reflections on nature protection in the United States . Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.
- Walmart. 2018. Store locator. Accessed June 3, 2018. https://www.walmart.com/store/finder.
- Warf, B. 2008. Time -space compression: Historical geographies . London and New York: Routledge.
- Weber, J. 2016. America ' s lost national park units: A closer look. The George Wright Forum 33 (1):59 -69.
- Williams, J. S., and J. B. Wright. 2015. The geography of Buddhism in the four corners states. Journal of Cultural Geography 32 (3):304 -30.
- Woodard, C. 2011. American nations: A history of the eleven rival regional cultures of North America . New York: Penguin.
- Worster, D. 1985. Rivers of empire: Water, aridity, and the growth of the American West . New York: Pantheon.
- Wright, J. 1993. Cultural geography and land trusts in Colorado and Utah. Geographical Review 83 (3):269 -79.
- ---. 2014. Four symbolic boundaries of the American West. Geographical Review 104 (2):229 -41.
- Wyckoff, W. 1995. Postindustrial butte. Geographical Review 85 (4):478 -96.
- Wyckoff, W., and L. M. Dilsaver. 1995. Defining the mountainous West. In The mountainous West: Explorations in historical geography , ed. W. Wyckoff and L. M. Dilsaver, 1 -59. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

- Yochim, M. J. 2009. The snowmobile in Yellowstone . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
- Zelinsky, W. 1992. The cultural geography of the United States, revised edition . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

JOE WEBER is a Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487. E-mail: jweber2@ua.edu. His research interests include transport, the development of highway networks, and the changing geography of the National Park system.