## Ogallala Oases: Water Use,  Population Redistribution, and Policy Implications in the High Plains of Western Kansas, 1980-1 990

Stephen E. White

Department of Geography, Kansas State  University

This,  finally,  is the  punch line of our two hundred years  on the  Great  Plains.  We  . . . harvest wave after  wave  of  immigrants'  dreams  and  send  the wised-up dreamers on their way;  plow the top soil until it blows to the ocean; ship out the wheat, ship out the cattle;  dig up the earth itself and burn it in power plants and send the power down the  line; dismiss  the  small farmers,  empty  the  little  towns; drill the  oil and  natural gas  and  pipe it away;  dry up the rivers and  springs,  (and) deep drill for  irrigation  water  as  the  aquifer  retreats.  (Ian  Frazier 1989:209-210)

he public image of the High Plains has not fared well in recent years.  The  percepT tion that it is an exploited region in serious  economic  and  demographic decline  has led some to conclude that the problems in the region west  of the  98th  meridian and east  of the Rocky Mountains are of such severity as to warrant deprivatization of the  land and restoration  of  an  ecologically  safe  'buffalo  commons'  (Dallas and Aaronson 1990;  Matthews 1990; Popper and Popper 1988; 1987).  As  Paul (1  992) has  demonstrated, the  reestablishment of  the  buffalo  commons  in  portions  of  the southern  Canadian prairies  is  already  underway.

The  symptoms of  regional decline  include, among others,  low density, the demise of small towns,  continuous declines in county  populations since the turn of the century, lack of economic  opportunity,  selective  outmigration  of the young, an ever-increasing  median age, and reductions in the number of small-scale farms and  farm  population  (Burns  1982;  Murdock et al. 1986). Like the inhabitants of Appalachia, High  Plains  residents are  often  portrayed  a s dependent on agriculture and extractive industries,  the fates of which are controlled  by factors  external  to  their  region,  and  a s people who have little control over their region's  destiny.  In response to these  'problems,'  various policies  have  been  proposed.  These  range from  deprivatization and abandonment to triage approaches that focus resources on needy communities that have a reasonable probability of long-term  survival  with  assistance;  from growth-pole strategies at a microscale  to growth-pole  approaches  at  the  metropolitan scale;  and from  grass-roots self-help efforts to service  sharing among  communities  (Daniels 1989;  White 1992).

Contrary  to  these portrayals  of  the  High Plains  as  a withered  and exploited  place,  this study  highlights the  exceptions that  disprove the contention that the  High Plains is a 'failed region.' Throughout this  alleged desert of despair are  'oases'  of growth  and economic  viability-oases that depend upon their proximity to groundwater and the economic gains attributable  to groundwater exploitation. These Ogallala oases  are  sustaining their  populations and their  economic  well-being over the  long term.

The  gloomy  perceptions of the  High Plains trace  their origins  to  a certain  insensitivity about the region's  geography. Much of this literature  tends  to  generalize  from  aggregate trends for the  High Plains as  a whole  or from case studies of places that have not fared particularly well. All too frequently, the High Plains i s   portrayed a s   a homogeneous region when, in fact,  it  is  culturally and physically heterogeneous. To  be sure,  many  portions of the  High Plains are  in serious trouble,  but many others report  successes that  have  been obscured  in aggregate analyses.

The most striking differences in the cultural landscapes of the High Plains today are closely

Figure 1. The Ogallala region as  defined by the  1982 Congressionally-mandated Six  State  High Plains Ogallala Aquifer Regional Study. Source: High Plains Associates 1982.

<!-- image -->

associated with variable access to groundwater. Places  that  overlie  or  are  near  groundwater often  look  very  different  from  the  roadway than  places  without  groundwater.  The  presence of irrigation  systems in the field,  circular field  patterns associated with center-pivot irrigation; field leveling to permit the use of gravity-flow  systems; irrigation  ditches,  tail-water pits,  playa modification, and  irrigation dealers; the removal of hedge rows and shelter belts to permit the  use  of  center-pivot  systems;  corn growing where it could not otherwise without irrigation; a  higher  density  of  feedlots (supported by high-yielding irrigated  feed  grains); beef-packing  plants  (supported  by  the  feed lots), and container  plants (supported by beefpacking plants);  and ethnic  variety  (providing cheap  labor  for  the  packing  plants)  have  all combined in the creation  of a distinctive  cultural  landscape. The High Plains is,  in a word, heterogeneous.  Even  the  hydrologic  characteristics  of  the  aquifer  vary  greatly  over  short distances. Declarations about the demise of the High Plains that fail to recognize groundwater's role in the region's future are at best premature and at worst misguided.

Field  observations  vividly  demonstrate  that groundwater use is a driving force in the recent transformation  of the cultural  landscape in the Ogallala  region.  But  important  questions  remain for empirical analysis and policy prescription. To what extent is proximity to groundwater  use  positively  associated  with  population change and community sustainability? Is population  growth  in a  place  simply  a  matter  of location in one of the  high irrigation  counties or does growth  hinge on a location  in the intensively-irrigated portion  of  that  county? IS population growth in rural portions of high irrigation  counties  a s likely  as  in  incorporated places?  And  lastly, i s   population  growth  in proximity to irrigated agriculture contingent on the achievement of a certain threshold population?

This study examines  these questions  by measuring the  relationship  between  reported water  use by irrigators in 1990 and population change  between  1980 and  1990 in  32  western  Kansas counties.  To  do so  requires  analysis at  three different  scales: county, rural census  subdivision, and  place.  The  results are  reported  and  then  assessed  within  the context  of  regional-development  policy  options.

## Groundwater and Population in

## Western Kansas

Thirty-two counties  in western Kansas constitute a subregion  of the six-state, 184-county Ogallala region defined  and delimited  by the congressionally-mandated High  Plains  Study (High  Plains  Associates  1982)  (Figure  1). In 1980, the western Kansas portion of the Ogallala  aquifer  contained  more  than  245  million acre-feet  of  drainable  water  (O'Connor  and McClain 1982). Although  at  least a portion of each  county  in  the  study  area  overlies  the Ogallala aquifer, the local availability of groundwater ranges  from  very  abundant  to  none, often  within  the  same  county.  Most  of  the water  (over 90 percent) drawn from the Ogallala is used to irrigate crops (Kromm and White 1981). The  role of groundwater has increased as   the availability of surface water has declined. Since 1960, mean annual stream flow  has decreased substantially partly due to a decline  in base flow  brought about by groundwater depletion  and  partly  because  of  more  efficient on-the-farm water conservation measures. Runoff to streams has  declined by one-half  in western Kansas since 1959 (Ratzlaff 1992).

While Kansans used ditch irrigation with surface water  a s   early  a s   1881  near Garden City, Kansas (Sherow 1990), groundwater exploitation did not accelerate until  the mid-1950s. But between  1959  and  1987,  western  Kansas's share of the Ogallala water  pumped from the six-state region increased  from  5.4  percent to 15.5  percent  (Kromm  and  White  1991).  Irrigated  acres  almost  quadrupled rising  from 548,642 in 1959 to a peak of 1,956,087  in 1978 before  declining  to  1,607,301 acres  in  1987 (US. Census of Agriculture  1954;  1978;  1987; Kromm and White 1992). The decline in irrigated  acreage  is  attributable  to  lower  crop prices, higher energy costs, less water availability in some areas,  and farm  programs that encourage  irrigators  to  set aside  highly erodible land (Kromm and White 1991).

Contrary  to  popular  notions  about  the  demise of the High Plains, population in western Kansas has risen by 5.7  percent over the past thirty years,  increasing from 184,427 in 1960 to 194,873  in 1990. Concurrently,  the population in the six-state Ogallala region increased by 4.1 percent (U.S. Census of Population 1990). The local  variability of  population  change  since

1960 has been extreme,  however.  Two counties  in the study area achieved their maximum populations in 1900 while four others  peaked in  1910  (Self  and  White  1986).  Conversely, only seven of the counties attained their maximum populations in 1990.

## Causes of  Population Decline in the High Plains

The  long-term  decline  of  population in the High  Plains  has  various  causes,  among which are:  environmental  degradation,  technological change, economic  development  constraints, demographic  structure, and  external  factors. Environmental  conditions  include droughts, floods,  pestilence,  as  well as  human activities that  exceed the carrying capacity  of the  land. The impact of the dust-bowl era of the 1930s on the demise of the  Plains is  still  used as  an example to support the notion that the Plains i s  unsuited for cultivation (Weber 1991  ;  Popper and Popper  1988;  1987). A  1937 study  commissioned  by Congress  concludes  that  "even the  relatively small  population  of  the  Great Plains cannot be sustained adequately .  .  .  [and that]  the  explanation  lies  as  much  in  unwise land use as  in climate and other natural conditions."  In addition to concerns about over-cultivation,  overstocking  of range lands,  and uncaring absentee  owners,  the report also  mentions  unbalanced withdrawal and depletion of groundwater  supplies  as  a  major  problem for sustainability (U.S.  House  of  Representatives 1937:39).

In  her  review  of  literature  concerning  the collapse  of  small  towns  in  the  Great  Plains, Burns (1  982) concludes that while popular perceptions emphasize the physical environment as  the major constraint on community growth, the  academic  literature  regards  technological change as the major factor. Changes since 1920 include  automobiles, rural-free  delivery, and mail-order  houses  that  reduced  the  need for access  to  low-order  service  centers.  Combines, mechanical  pickers, irrigation equipment, and other sophisticated farm machinery required  centralization  of  mechanical service and  repair  skills,  and  not  every  community could afford to support a dealer and mechanic. Farm consolidation and decreased demand for labor brought on by mechanization further  re- duced farm  populations and the local demand for  small  businesses. Flora  and  Flora  (1987; 1988) and others  (US. Office of Technological Assessment  1986) point  out  that  larger  farm operations have also hurt small towns because they  rely  more often on suppliers outside the region  than  smaller operators, and  they  are more frequently owned by absentee  landlords who have no vested interest in the local community.  Fitzgerald  (1 988),  who  has  identified over  6,000 ghost  towns  in  Kansas,  similarly points to human-induced changes  rather than environmental events as the most likely explanation for the decline of small towns.

Another problem for most High Plains communities  has  been  their relative inability  to court manufacturing activities. Often-cited reasons  include  isolation  and  lack  of  access  to major  transportation corridors (Dietz 1992; Kale  1976). Weber  (1  991  )  suggests that there i s  a  clear  understanding  of perceived  lack  of economic attractiveness  in the Colorado  High Plains as  evidenced by communities that focus on recruitment  of such  undesirable  industries as correctional  facilities, land  fills,  and  large hazardous industrial waste dumping sites.

Other researchers emphasize the role of external factors in constraining community growth. Daniels (1  989) argues that small towns have  become more and more dependent on the national economy. Low commodity prices, l ow  land  values, recession, excess  capacity, high interest  rates,  and  declining  demand for exports all  work disproportionately against small  towns  (Daniels  and  Lapping  1987;  Drabenstott and Barkema 1990; Office of Technology Assessment  1986).

Yet while much has been made of the factors that discourage population growth in the High Plains,  little  or  no attention has been accorded to the often stunning  regional and sub-regional changes  in  population  and  their  association with groundwater  use.  What follows  is an attempt to right this imbalance.

## Population Change and the Ogallala Region

Studies  examining the relationship  between groundwater  use and population change in  the Ogallala region  have  produced  some  very mixed results. In their study of 294 non-metro-

politan  counties  in  the  Great  Plains  between 1940 and 1980, Albrecht and Murdock (1  985:i-ii)  conclude that  "high irrigation counties  have  experienced  population  increases, while  most other counties  in the Great  Plains have  had  population  declines."  The  relationship,  though statistically significant,  is not very strong.  Using path  analysis,  the  authors  conclude  that irrigation  development  increased both agricultural production and the retention of farm  and non-farm population.

Similarly,  Mann,  Sparling, and Young (1987) in  their study of local employment in 104 counties in portions of Kansas, Nebraska, Colorado, and Wyoming report that irrigation's impact on employment  is  statistically  significant  but  not substantially  large.  Thus  "modern, capital-intensive  irrigation  development  cannot,"  they conclude,  "be  regarded as  a very effective  instrument  for  regional development  policy  in the  post  industrial  economy" (Mann  et  al. 1987:1715).

In a study  of  184 Ogallala aquifer  counties, White  (1992)  reports  marked  regional  differences  in the  association  between  changes  in population, 1980-1 990,  and  changes  in  irrigated acreage. Population growth is more dependent  on irrigated  agriculture  in  Nebraska than in Kansas or Colorado where the momentum  of  historical  growth  patterns  correspond more with recent changes. Irrigated agriculture, nonetheless,  proves  to  be  a  statistically  significant  determinant in the central Ogallala region. In the more depleted southern portion of the aquifer  (Texas, Oklahoma,  and New Mexico), non-farm  employment  prevails  as the most important indicator of population growth while irrigated agriculture  has a very weak  association. When counties are subdivided based on whether or not they contain an urban place,  populations in counties  without  urban places continue to change much as  they have since 1940,  while change in those with urban places is primarily  associated with the size  of the central place and secondarily with change in irrigated acreage.

Past studies of population change in the High Plains are inconclusive and methodological differences  make it difficult to compare their  results.  Study  areas  vary  widely  as  do the  independent  variables  employed.  Equally  important,  the primary variable used to measure irrigation,  irrigated  acreage, does  not specify  the amount of groundwater used and, thus,  masks the  actual  dependence on  irrigation water. Moreover,  county-level data  obscure  the  degree to which the  inhabitants  within a county are really in proximity to irrigated agriculture.  It i s   noteworthy  that  the  controversial  proposal for making the Great Plains into a buffalo commons  relies  on  county-level  data  and  thus glosses  over  the  sizable variabilities within counties  and  between urban  and  rural places (DeBres and Guizlo 1992).

Finney County,  Kansas, for  example,  covers 1,302  square  miles. Cropland  in the  northern portions  of  the  county  is  almost  exclusively dryland with very little  groundwater  available, whereas the southern  portion near the Arkansas  River Valley is almost exclusively  irrigated. Field  observations confirm that population growth in Finney County is concentrated in the irrigated  region  centered  on  Garden  City,  a virtual boomtown, and not in the more sparsely-populated lands of the dryland farmer. The aggregate data for Finney County thus portrays an average situation that  is more fictional than  real for almost any portion of the county.

This  study  rectifies  these  problems  in  two ways.  First,  it measures the  intensity  of  irrigation  by water  use  rather  than  irrigated  acres. Second, it employs sub-county units of analysis t o  estimate  the  association  between  groundwater  use and  population change.  In addition t o  counties, census  subdivisions within  the county as well as  census-designated places are used as  units of observation.

## Groundwater Use in Western

## Kansas

Since  1957,  water-rights  owners  in  Kansas have been required to maintain records of their groundwater consumption, or their  reason for non-use, and to report usage to the Division of Water  Resources of the Kansas State Board of Agriculture  (Kansas Water Office 1991  ). Kansas i s the  only  Ogallala state with  such a requirement. The Division of Water  Resources began to computerize water-use  records  in the early 1980s;  published  county-level water-use  data in 1987; and made available water-use records for  each  legal  township  in  1989.  This  study examines the 1990 groundwater usage for legal townships and counties.

Groundwater use is not uniformly distributed

Figure 2. 1990 groundwater  usage for  western  Kansas  legal townships. Source:  Kansas Water Office and the Division of Water  Resources 1991.

<!-- image -->

in western Kansas (Figure 2). About 2.6  of the study  area's 3.6 million  acre-feet of  groundwater use occurs  in  Southwestern  Kansas Groundwater Management District Number 3, a 12-county district in the southern portion of the study area. An average of 1.62  acre-feet of groundwater were applied to each acre of land in  the  southern  portion of  the  study  area  a s compared to about 1.44 acre-feet per acre  in the  central and  northern  portions  of western Kansas (Kansas Water Office 1991 ).

Using 1990 water-use  data to explain population  change  during  the 1980s presents  a methodological  problem.  Because  townshiplevel water  data  are  unavailable  before 1989, one  must  assume  that  the  pattern  of  use  in 1990 is representative  of  usage during  the 1980s. This assumption  seems reasonable since most irrigation expansion in Kansas occurred  primarily  in the 1960s and 1970s. Few areas of new irrigation have been added since 1978 and the correlation of irrigated acreage in 1978 with that for 1987 in the Kansas Ogallala counties is very high (r = .971). Moreover, the spatial  pattern  of  groundwater  use  has  been extremely  stable  even  though  the  volume  of water  pumped  changes  annually  due  to  the variability of rainfall. Western Kansas has  three groundwater  districts and  each  has  management  plans  that  restrict  the  number  of  new wells  in accordance with hydrologic  formulas designed  to  reduce  groundwater  consumption, that is,  to promote a 'planned depletion.'

Water-use  reports  in  Kansas  are  based on about 29,000 water rights and 35,000  points of diversion that produce about 4.49 million acrefeet of water (3.59 million acre-feet in the study area)  (Kansas  Water  Office 1991 ).  Water-use reports represent irrigator estimates based on energy costs, hours  pumped, and  engine pumping rates. Although groundwater districts are beginning to develop mandatory metering plans,  most  irrigators (about 94 percent)  did not  meter  their  water  use  in 1990 and  their estimates may be biased upwards. Field observations suggest that some irrigators may overreport water  use  because if they were  to sell their water right, the buyer's annual water appropriation  would  be  based  on  usage  in the preceding  five years. The incidence of over-reporting is  assumed to  be a  uniform  phenomena. I also assume that the point of diversion is the place of use (as is almost always the case).

## Groundwater Use and Population Change

Multiple  regression analyses of the  association  between  groundwater  use  per  unit  area and  the  population  change  (in  percent)  between 1980 and 1990 in  western  Kansas are conducted  at  three  different  scales:  county, place,  and rural county subdivision. Standardized regression coefficients (Beta weights) are examined to measure the  relative importance of the independent variables.

## County Level

A comparison of the maps of county population change 1980-1990 (Figure 3) and groundwater use in 1990 (Figure 2) suggests a strong,  positive  association.  An  initial regression equation of eleven independent variables is reduced to six in order to eliminate problems of multicollinearity.  These variables-size of the

Figure 3. 1980-1990  percent change in population for western Kansas counties.  Source: US. Census of Population,  1980 and 1990.

<!-- image -->

largest  place  in  1980;  groundwater  use  per square mile in 1990; per capita income in 1980; the  percentage  of farm  employment  in 1980; the  percentage  change  in farm  size  between 1978 and 1987; and the percentage change in irrigated  acres  between  1978  and  1987-account for  sixty-two percent of the variance  in the population  change between  1980  and 1990 (Table 1).

An examination of Beta weights  reveals that population change  is  most closely  associated with the size of the largest place in the county. Groundwater  use  per  square  mile  in  1990, however,  is the  second  most  important factor and it contributes significantly to explanation of population  change  when  controlling  for  the other  independent variables.  Importantly,  the inclusion of reported groundwater  use  as  an independent variable  yields  a  higher  level of explanation  than  has  been the  case  for  other studies that  have used irrigated acreage as the indicator for water  use.

Although population changes have occurred among counties, a more substantial redistribution of population is underway within counties and that process invites our  attention.

## Place level

The  county-level analysis suggests a strong association  between  population  growth  and the  size o f the  place,  and  that  association  is confirmed  upon  examining  the  91  incorporated  or  census-designated  places in western Kansas between 1960 and 1990 (Figure 4 and Table  2).  Surprisingly,  only  places  with fewer than 500 inhabitants have  collectively lost population  since  1960.  Places  between  500 and 999 inhabitants experienced very close to zero growth, and places 1,000 or larger tended t o gain population. The population of the three largest cities, Dodge City, Garden City, and Liberal,  increased by almost 58 percent and they accounted  for much  of  the region's total growth. While small places have not fared well, larger towns in western Kansas defy the stereotypical  regional  image  of  decay  and  despair. Indeed,  population growth in the three largest places is well above the national average. More generally,  incorporated and census-designated places  grew  by  about  21  percent  between 1960 and 1990 while the remainder of the region declined by about 22 percent.

The impact  of selective outmigration i s reflected by the median age of a place's inhabitants. In 1990, median age varies inversely with size  of  place;  median  age  ranges  from  39.6 years  in the  smallest places (less than  500  inhabitants) to only 28.5 years in  the three largest cities.

To  what degree is growth for places of specified size related to proximity to groundwater use? Proximity to groundwater use is defined as groundwater  usage  in  the  legal  township containing the  place at  hand plus eight  other adjacent townships.  Thus for each place, I delimit a three-by-three township grid (18 by 18 miles) and tabulate  groundwater usage in that grid.  The  regression  analysis is conducted  on three  sets  of  places:  all  places,  places  larger than  500  inhabitants,  and  places  larger  than 1,000.

In the absence of detailed economic and agricultural  statistics  for  legal townships and  for most of the 91 places, the regression model is restricted to three independent variables: groundwater use in 1990, population in 1980, and  population  change  between  1960  and 1980.

Table  1. County-Level Multiple Regression Analysis o f Percent Population Change, 1980-1 990.

| Independent Variables                      | Beta Weights   | Correlation with Percent Population Change   |
|--------------------------------------------|----------------|----------------------------------------------|
| Size of largest place, 1980                | .640a          | .690a                                        |
| Water use per square mile, 1990            | .360b          | .537a                                        |
| Per capita income, 1980                    | ,313           | .570a                                        |
| Percent farm employment, 1980              | ,239           | -.515a                                       |
| Percent change farm size, 1978-1987        | ,030           | -.I 71                                       |
| Percent change irrigated acres, 1978-1 987 | ,018           | .43Za                                        |
| Adiusted R2                                | ,620           |                                              |

Figure 4. 1990 population by place and percent population change from 1980 to 1990. Source: U.S.  Census of Population 1980 and 1990.

<!-- image -->

| Table 2. Population Change by Size of Place, 1960-1990B   | Table 2. Population Change by Size of Place, 1960-1990B   | Table 2. Population Change by Size of Place, 1960-1990B   | Table 2. Population Change by Size of Place, 1960-1990B   | Table 2. Population Change by Size of Place, 1960-1990B   | Table 2. Population Change by Size of Place, 1960-1990B   | Table 2. Population Change by Size of Place, 1960-1990B   | Table 2. Population Change by Size of Place, 1960-1990B   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                           | Population                                                | Population                                                | Population                                                | Population                                                | Percent Change 1 960-1                                    | Median Age 1990                                           |                                                           |
| Size of Place                                             | 1960                                                      | 1970                                                      | 1980                                                      | 1990                                                      | 990                                                       |                                                           | N                                                         |
| 0-49 9                                                    | 12,789                                                    | 11,976                                                    | 11,166                                                    | 10,142                                                    | -20.7%                                                    | 39.6                                                      | 49                                                        |
| 500-999                                                   | 9,399                                                     | 9,624                                                     | 9,847                                                     | 9,392                                                     | -0.1%                                                     | 37.1                                                      | 12                                                        |
| 1,000-2,499                                               | 31,294                                                    | 32,611                                                    | 33,465                                                    | 32,653                                                    | 4.4%                                                      | 37.6                                                      | 20                                                        |
| 2,500-9,999                                               | 24,871                                                    | 27,555                                                    | 29,853                                                    | 28,572                                                    | 14.9%                                                     | 35.3                                                      | 7                                                         |
| 10,000 or more                                            | 39,144                                                    | 42,799                                                    | 51,168                                                    | 61,799                                                    | 57.9%                                                     | 28.5                                                      | 3                                                         |
| Place total                                               | 117,497                                                   | 125,545                                                   | 135,499                                                   | 142,558                                                   | 21.3%                                                     | -                                                         | 91                                                        |
| Non-place total                                           | 66,930                                                    | 58,598                                                    | 57,601                                                    | 52,308                                                    | -21.8%                                                    | -                                                         | -                                                         |
| Region Total                                              | 184,427                                                   | 183,143                                                   | 193,100                                                   | 194,866                                                   | 5.7%                                                      | 35.3                                                      | 32                                                        |

Table 3. Place-level Regression Analyses:  Percent Population Change, 1980-1 990.

| Independent Variables      | All Places                                 | Places 500 and Larger                      | Places 1,000 and Larger                    |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
|                            | Correlation with Percent Population Change | Correlation with Percent Population Change | Correlation with Percent Population Change |
| Yo A Population 1960- 1980 | .326a                                      |                                            | .620a                                      |
| Population 1980            | .295a                                      |                                            | .621 a                                     |
| Water Use 1990             | .420a                                      |                                            | .617a                                      |
|                            | Beta Weights from Multiple Regression      | Beta Weights from Multiple Regression      | Beta Weights from Multiple Regression      |
| % A Population 1960- 1980  | ,036                                       | ,002                                       | .093                                       |
| Population 1980            | ,207'                                      | .385'                                      | ,514'                                      |
| Water Use 1990             | ,353'                                      | ,581                                       | .461                                       |
| Adjusted R2                | .I94                                       | ,514                                       | .622                                       |

These place-level regressions suggest several conclusions  (Table 3). The level of explanation offered b y   the independent variables improves as  the size  of place  increases.  The increment i s   greatest  when one shifts from  all places  (R2 = .I 94) to places greater  than 500 (R2 = .514). Although groundwater  use is the most important determinant of population change in both size  categories, the  relative  difference  in  R2 values  implies a population threshold of about 500  inhabitants  beyond  which  proximity  to water is significantly associated with population growth. Not surprisingly,  the regression equation for places larger than 1,000 inhabitants accounts for even more of the variance in population change (R2 = 622).

Another finding of interest is the absence  of significant associations between historical

(1  960-1  980) and  recent  patterns  of  growth, when size of place and proximity to groundwater  use  are  controlled.  This  suggests  that population  decline  is  not  an  inevitable  outcome  predetermined  by  the  momentum  of history.  The roles of groundwater  use and size of place are more significant in all three regressions. Places of 1,000 or more,  however, report a  larger  Beta value  for  size  of place  than  for groundwater use which suggests that they may have reached a point where groundwater  use, though  still  important, i s   complemented  by forces of agglomeration and economy of scale that  propel these places to a "take  o f f  stage.

The  place-level  analysis  supports the  metaphor  of  Ogallala  oases  in  western Kansas. Population change is positively associated with groundwater  use regardless of scale. Generally,

places of 500  or  more are  growing provided that they have proximity to groundwater. What appears to be happening  is an immense shuffling of population in  western  Kansas. While the region's  population has only grown by  about  six percent  since  1960, massive population redistribution i s redrafting the demographic map. Larger places are growing while smaller  places and rural areas  are  losing substantial  numbers  of  people.  Thus  we  are witnessing  simultaneously  the siphoning  of people from most areas and the concentration of people  in a few-the 32  places that constitute the Ogallala oases.

Many places formerly  inhabited by humans are  now  given  over  to  irrigation equipment, corn,  wheat,  grain  sorghum,  and,  of  course, cattle. And  as  the  hinterlands of  small  places have disappeared,  those of larger  places have greatly expanded. The abandonment of land in western Kansas to a buffalo commons, whatever  the  merits  of  the  proposal  elsewhere, would mean elimination of those extensive irrigation-based  hinterlands  on  which  current growth centers vitally depend.

## Rural Census County Subdivisions

Although rural areas of western Kansas have lost population, the important  question i s whether  rural areas with groundwater are losing population in the same  proportions as are predominantly-dryland  areas? The  analysis requires aggregation of data  into census county subdivisions. By superimposing a map of these subdivisions on the map of legal  townships, the unit of  record for  groundwater  use (Figure 5), it is an easy  matter to sum up groundwater use for each  subdivision.  In  cases where  legal townships  cut  across  census  county  subdivision boundaries, groundwater use is allocated in proportion with the share of the township's area  in each subdivision. Each census county subdivision  that  contained  a  census-defined urban place or  was,  by definition,  a  place  in and of itself is eliminated from the analysis.

The  spatial pattern of these township population changes exhibits substantial  local  variability  (Figure 5).  Regression equations are  computed for 1)  all census county subdivisions, 2) those  of 500 population  and  larger,  and 3) those 1000 and larger (Table 4). Unlike the earlier analysis for places, the regression results for census county subdivisions are fairly weak. The three  independent  variables  do  not  explain population  change very  well.  All  three  equations have low R2 values and only in one casesubdivisions having more than 1,000  peoplei s  groundwater  usage  significantly  associated with population change. In sparsely populated areas, the historical  pattern of population change  is  more  important  than  groundwater use as an indicator of recent population change.

Comparison  of  the  three  levels  of  spatial analysis reveals that county-level data mask at least two important stories about the connection  between  groundwater  and  population change. The first of these is that while groundwater and the size of central place are important for understanding county-level population change, groundwater is an unimportant indicator of growth in sparsely-populated  areas  and in  small places having  fewer than 500 residents. The second of these stories is that groundwater proximity is the more important determinant of population growth for places between 500 and 1,000 inhabitants,  and it is a secondary factor after  size  of place in places  larger than  1,000 inhabitants.

## Western Kansas and the Ogallala Region

Kansas  contains about  17.5  percent  of the Ogallala region's total surface area and ten percent of its drainable groundwater  (Dugan and Schild  1991). But  what  about the  rest of this extensive region?  Unfortunately, other portions of the Ogallala region lack comparable data on local water use that would permit more extensive tests of the association of groundwater use and  population change. Therefore,  the  precision of the findings here cannot be replicated for the entire region.

But if comparative analytical data at the local level are lacking,  a variety of circumstantial  evidence  suggests  that  the  findings  for  western Kansas have region-wide applicability. Groundwater  as  an  agent  of  demographic  and  economic change is clearly visible on the cultural landscape  throughout  the  entire  Ogallala  region (Kromm and White 1992). And studies at the county level confirm a significant link between the magnitudes of irrigated acreage and

Figure 5. 1980--1990 percent population change: Census county subdivisions. Source: U.S. Census of Population 1980and1990.

<!-- image -->

Table 4. Rural Census County Subdivision Regression Analyses: Percent Population Change, 1980-1 990.

| IndeDendent Variables                                                           | All Townships                              | Townships 500 and Larger                   | Townships 1,000 and LarEer                 |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                 | Correlation with Percent PoDulation Change | Correlation with Percent PoDulation Change | Correlation with Percent PoDulation Change |
| % A Population 1960-1980 Population Density 1980 Water Use Per Square Mile 1990 | .045 .314a .I 59a                          | .282b -.053 -.011                          | .526a -.087 .439a                          |
|                                                                                 | Beta Weights from Multiple Regression      | Beta Weights from Multiple Regression      | Beta Weights from Multiple Regression      |
| % A Population 1960-1980 Population Density 1980 Water Use Per Square Mile 1990 | ,292' ,004 ,079                            | .290d -.043                                | .299d -.217d -.363d                        |
|                                                                                 |                                            | -.002                                      |                                            |
| Adjusted R2                                                                     | ,094                                       | .026                                       | ,262                                       |

population change (Albrect and Murdock 1985; White 1992). In addition, within the Ogallala, the two states(Kansas and Texas) with the largest increase in population between 1980 and 1990 also experienced the largest reductions of their groundwater in storage.

These associations between water use and population change may be confounded, however, by some major sub-regional disparities. First,theroleofgroundwateruseinpopulation redistribution depends, in part, on the stage and timing of irrigation diffusion. lrrigation reached the "take off" stage during the late 1940s inTexas and in the 1950s in much of Kansas and Colorado, but only after 1960 in areas generally north of 39 degrees North latitude (Green 1973; Weeks et al. 1988). As with irrigation, the spatial diffusion of groundwater depletionhasproceededfromsouthtonorth.

Second, levels of economic diversification vary significantly throughout the High Plains. West Texas, for instance, is much more diversified than many other Ogallala sub-regions.

places at the expense of surrounding rural areas,  particularly  in areas where irrigation is less pronounced. Third, the urban infrastructure of the High Plains is spatially heterogeneous. As a result, the size of place appears to be a more important factor in population change than water use. Therefore, the comparative advantage of place size favors continued growth in larger

Fourth,  population growth also depends on future  access to available groundwater and on anticipated  groundwater  use.  Saturated thicknesses vary  locally throughout the Ogallala region  a s   does  depth  to the  water  table.  Even when farms overlie substantial groundwater reserves,  irrigators  may  be unable  to afford  the energy  costs for  pumping groundwater  if the aquifer lies far below the surface. In many areas of the Ogallala, irrigation stops due to the economics of energy rather than the decline of the aquifer.

Finally, the magnitude of water use does not necessarily  equate to irrigator profits  from which to  enhance  the  local  economy.  Some irrigators simply produce more with less water. The  diffusion  and  adoption  of water-efficient irrigation technologies is not a spatially uniform process  in  the  Ogallala  region  (Kromm  and White  1990). In  some  counties  irrigators  are quick t o adopt low-pressure center-pivot sprinklers, surge  valves  for flood  irrigation, computer-based irrigation scheduling,  and tailwater  reuse  pits,  while  in  others  they  lag far behind.

Groundwater is the unifying factor impelling landscape  change  in the  Ogallala region  and deserves our attention. But the spatial diversity and the interaction of physical and cultural elements prevent easy conclusions or policy proposals. Based on this  analysis of western  Kansas, we  can  say, however,  that  the  region needs to be better  understood by students  of and policymakers for the High Plains.

## Summary and Policy Implications

A massive abandonment of the Ogallala region of  western Kansas  has  not  occurred; population  has  been  massively  redistributed, however.  Population  is  now  heavily  concentrated  in  what  I have  termed  Ogallala oases: places of 500 inhabitants or more that are sustained from the benefits associated with groundwater exploitation  in their  surrounding hinterlands. Outside of these oases, communities whose  hinterlands are dominated by dryland agriculture are generally faring more poorly.

Multi-scalar analysis demonstrates that at the county level,  population change is significantly associated with  groundwater  exploitation,  albeit less closely than with the size of the central  place.  County-level  analysis  masks  some important  local  differences,  however.  At  the place level, proximity to  groundwater  use emerges as  a major determinant  of population change,  particularly  among places with  more than  500  inhabitants.  In  rural areas,  however, the association between groundwater use and population change  is  insignificant except for  a weak,  statistically-significant  association  in  areas with 1,000  inhabitants or more.

These findings  conflict sharply  with Popper and Popper's (1  987) proposition that 'The federal  government's  commanding  task  on  the Plains for  the  next century will  be to recreate the nineteenth century, to reestablish what we would  call  the  Buffalo  Commons' (p.577). Their  proposal  is  even  more  inapt  for  those portions of the Ogallala region that are gaining population,  not losing it. To be sure,  sparselypopulated areas and small towns in the region are declining,  but many of the larger oases are holding their  own and,  in  32  cases, gaining people since 1960. These oases of growth depend,  in turn,  on seemingly  'empty  lands'  of irrigated crops and dryland farms that serve as their  hinterlands. Restoration of a buffalo commons would bring certain death to these oases, not to mention the forced  eviction of tens  of thousands  of  people  there  and  elsewhere  in the High Plains. Abandonment is a regional development  policy that  looks good only  if you are a buffalo.

An  alternative  approach  proposed  for  the Midwest  merely  prolongs the  anguish.  'Policies for  non-metro regions might best  be targeted,'  according to Miller (1  991  :57),  'at  pre- paring their citizens to be successful wherever economic opportunities are to be found,  often in MSAs . .  .  Such policies are intended to improve  the  economic  welfare  of  a  state,  not shore up particular places.' While this proposal stops  short of outright abandonment,  its prescription  for  slow  death  is  hardly  comforting for  the  residents  of  non-metropolitan  regions. Obviously  growth  policies  that  favor  metropolitan areas will  accelerate the  selective  outmigration of young, skilled, and educated workers from smaller places and leave behind an  older,  less educated  population to fend for them  selves.

A  third  approach  is  the  policy  of triage.  In this case, regional  resettlement policy  promotes  only  those  regional  centers  with  the critical  mass  to take  advantage  of  economies of scale (Daniels and Lapping 1987). Triage divides  communities  into  one  of  three  policy categories: 1  )  places with high probabilities  of success are targeted for  investment; 2 ) places that are hopelessly in decline are  ignored;  and 3) places that are already successful and do not need to be helped are also ignored.

In  their  study  of  Iowa  towns,  Daniels  and Lapping suggest growth is most likely in towns of 3,000 or more inhabitants. The results of this study suggest, however,  that the threshold for potential success in the Ogallala region may be as  low a s   500 inhabitants and that the policy of triage  classification  should  consider  the  proximity to groundwater as  well as  the  pattern of historical  growth.  In  western  Kansas,  several places between 500 and 3,000  inhabitants reported  population  gains  between  1960  and 1990; places  such as Cimmaron, Sublette, Lakin,  and  Elkhart have  proximity  to groundwater and probably will continue to grow without external assistance. Communities with less proximity to groundwater-Bird City, Atwood, and  Hill City,  for  example-have experienced significant  long-term  population declines  that perhaps warrant their exclusion from development efforts. Other communities  such as Goodland,  Ness City,  and  Scott  City,  though static  in  recent  years, may  still  benefit  from their  close proximity to groundwater,  and thus they are likely targets for development efforts. The policy of triage development thus has the advantages of accelerating  current  population redistribution trends in western Kansas without invoking  the  economic, social,  and  psychic costs  that  would  attend  policies  designed  to

eliminate  cultural  landscapes  throughout  the entire region.

It  is  ironic  perhaps  that  we are  depleting a non-renewable  water resource  to  produce food  during  an  era  of food  surplus  and  low crop  prices.  And  while  the  depletion  of  the Ogallala aquifer  may  be questioned  from  the standpoint  of  national  agricultural  policy,  for people and communities in the region, groundwater exploitation remains  a vital  matter.  Irrigated  agriculture  provides  the  region's economic  base  and  doubtless  that  base  will persist  in  many  parts  of the  Ogallala  region. While  many areas  have suffered  from  depletion, others  are  favorably  situated  over  significant supplies of groundwater.  By 1980, only about five percent of the Ogallala aquifer's preirrigation 3.25 billion  drainable acre-feet of water  had  been  tapped  (Kromm  and  White 1992).  Moreover, water  use has declined since 1980  in  response  to  a  declining  agricultural economy  and  to federal  programs  that  have removed land from cultivation,  improved onfarm irrigation efficiency,  and increased the effectiveness  of  local groundwater management districts in restricting water  use and promoting water-saving technologies  (Kromm and White 1992). In short,  Ogallala oases are not likely to evaporate in the near future;  they will continue to be the dominant force  shaping the cultural landscapes o f western  Kansas for  generations t o come.

## Acknowledgments

I am  grateful to the  Kansas Center for  Rural Initiatives  for  providing me with a fellowship  to support this  research. Thanks also go to Malcolm Ponte and Barbara Gibson for  producing the figures,  Christine Quader  for  preparing the  data,  and  David  Kromm and four anonymous reviewers for their many helpful suggestions.

## References

- Albrecht,  D.  E., and  Murdock,  S. H. 1985. The Consequences  of lrrigation Development in the Great Plains.  College  Station,  Texas:  The  Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Technical Report NO. 85-1.

Burns,  N. 1982. The  Collapse of Small Towns  on the Great Plains. Bibliography, The Emporia State Research Studies,  31-1.

- Dallas, R., and Aaronson, J. 1990. The Agricultural
- Collapse  of  the  Arid Midwest. Geographical Magazine October:16-20.
- Daniels,  T . L. 1989. Small Town Economic Development: Growth or Survival?  Journal of Planning Literature 4:413-429.
- Daniels,  T . L., and Lapping, M.  B. 1987. Small Town Triage: a Rural  Settlement Policy for the American Midwest. Journal of Rural Studies 3:273-280.
- De Bres,  K.,  and  Guizlo,  M. 1992. A  Daring Proposal for  Dealing with an Inevitable  Disaster? A Review of the Buffalo Commons Proposal. Great Plains Research 2:165-178.

Dietz, J. 1992. Economic Alternatives in the Buffalo Commons. Paper presented at the Annual meeting of the Association of American Geographers, San Diego,  California.

- Drabenstott,  M.,  and  Barkema,  A.  D. 1990. U.S. Agriculture Charts a New Course for the 1990s. Economic Review Jan/Feb:32-49.

Dugan, J. T. , and  Schild,  D.  E. 1992. Water-level Changes in the High Plains Aquifer-Predevelopment to 1990. Lincoln, Nebraska: U.S. Geological Survey,  Water  Resources Investigations  Report 91  -4165.

- Fitzgerald, D. 1988. Ghost  Towns  of  Kansas. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
- Flora,  C.  B. 1987. Changes in Rural Communities of the  Great  Plains  by the  Turn of the  Century. Proceedings,  Symposium  on  the  Rural  Great Plains  of  the Future, Great  Plains  Agricultural Council, pp. 247-261.
- Flora,  C. B. , and Flora, J. 1988. Public  Policy,  Farm Size, and Community Well-Being in Farming-Dependent  Counties  of  the  Plains.  In  Agricudure and Community Change in the U.S. ed.  Louis E. Swanson, pp. 76-129. Boulder, Colorado: Westview  Press.
- Frazier, I. 1989. Great  Plains.  New  York: Farrar/Straus/Giroux.
- Green, D. E. 1973. Land of the Underground Rain: lrrigation on the  Texas  High Plains, 1910-7970. Austin,  Texas: University  Press of Texas.
- High Plains Associates. 1982. Six State High Plains Ogallala Aquifer Regional  Study: Summary. A report to the  U.S.  Department of Commerce  and the High Plains Council.
- Kale,  S. 1976. Factors Associated  with Population Change  in  Rural  Areas.  Journal of  Community Development Society 7:42-58.
- Kansas  Water Office  and  the Division  of  Water Resources. 1991. 7990 Kansas lrrigation Water Use.
- Kromm,  D. E., and White,  S. E. 1981. Public  Perception of Groundwater  Depletion  in  Southwestern Kansas. U.S.  Department of the Interior through  the  Kansas Water  Resources Research Institute.
- , and - . 1990. Adoption  of Water-Saving

- Practices  by  Irrigators  in the  High Plains.  Water Resources Bulletin 26:999-1012.
- , and - . 1991. Irrigation in the High Plains of Western Kansas. Proceedings IRDC-90. Compilers  James Byrne  and  Catherine  Fleming,  pp. 61-72. The  University of  Lethbridge Water  Resources  Institute.
- , and  - , eds. 1992. Groundwater Exploitation  in  the  High  Plains.  Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
- Mann, R.,  Sparling,  E., and Young,  R. A. 1987. Regional  Economic  Growth from  Irrigation  Development:  Evidence  from  Northern  High  Plains Ogallala Groundwater Resource. Water Resources Research 23:1711-1716.
- Matthews,  A. 1990. The  Poppers  and  the  Plains. The New York  Times Magazine June 24:25-53.
- Miller,  G.  H. 1991. Tenth  District  Cities:  Recent Growth and  Prospects for the 1990s. Economic Review Jul/Aug:47-58.
- Murdock, S. H., Albrecht,  D. E., Hamm, R. R., Leistritz,  F . L., and Leholm, A.  G. 1986. The Farm Crises in the Great Plains: Implications for Theory and Policy Development. Rural Sociology 51 :406-435.
- O'Connor,  H. G.,  and McClain, T. J. 1982. Ogallala Aquifer Study in Kansas: Geohydrology. Topeka: Kansas Water Office.
- Paul,  A.  H. 1992. The  Popper  Proposals for  the Great Plains: A View from the Canadian Prairies. Great Plains Research 2:199-222.
- Popper,  D.  E., and  Popper,  F. J. 1987. The  Great Plains: From Dust to Dust. Planning 53(6):12-18. - , and  - . 1988. The  Fate  of  the  Plains. High Country News 20(18):15-19.
- Ratzlaff, J. R. 1992. Changes in the Rainfall-Runoff Relation for  Kansas Streams. Paper presented at the Water and the Future of Kansas Conference, Manhattan,  Kansas.
- Self,  H.,  and White,  S.  E. 1986. One Hundred and
- Twenty  Years  of  Population  Change  in  Kansas. Transactions, Kansas Academy of  Science 893 022.
- Sherow, J. E. 1990. Watering the  Valley:  Development  Along  the  High  Plains  Arkansas River, 1870-1 950. Lawrence:  University Press of  Kansas.
- United  States  Bureau  of  the  Census. 1960,  1970, 1980, 1990. Census of Population. Washington, D.C.:  U.S.  Government Printing Office.
- United  States  Bureau of  the  Census. 1954, 1978, 1987. Census of Agriculture.  Washington,  D.C.: U.S.  Government Printing Office.
- United  States  Congress,  Office  of  Technology  Assessment. 1986. Technology, Public  Policy, and the Changing of  American Agriculture. OTAF-285. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
- United States House of Representatives. 1937. The Future of the  Great Plains. Document No. 144. Washington,  D.C.
- Weber,  K.  R. 1991. Prologue  to  Which  Future? Demographic Patterns and Prospects for Eastern Colorado  Plains  Counties  One  Hundred  Years After  Settlement. In Forum of the Association for Arid Lands Studies,  ed. Claud Davidson, pp. 3338. Lubbock:  International  Center for  Arid  and Semiarid Land Studies.
- Weeks, 1. B., Gutentag,  E., Heimes, F. . ,  and Luckey, R. R. 1988. Summary  of the  High Plains  Regional Aquifer System Analysis in Parts of Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, New  Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and  Wyoming. Washington,  D.C.:  U.S.  Geological Survey  Professional Paper 1400-A.
- White,  S. E. 1992. Population Change  in the  High Plains  Ogallala Region: 1980-1 990. Great Plains Research 2:179-I 98.

Submitted 2/93,  Revised 7/93,  8/93,  Accepted 8/93.

White,  Stephen E. 1994. Ogallala Oases: Water  Use,  Population  Redistribution,  and  Policy Implications in the High Plains of Western Kansas, 1980-1 990. Annals of the Association of  American Geographers 84(1):29-45. Abstract.

Contrary to  recent  literature  that  portrays  the  High  Plains a s   an  over-exploited  region of  economic and  demographic  decline  and  a s   place that  should  be  deprivatized,  abandoned,  and restored to a buffalo commons, this study suggests that the irrigated Ogallala region is not dying. It is  experiencing, instead,  a major  redistribution  of  population  into  nucleated Ogallala  oases sustained by the presence of ample groundwater for irrigation. Although more remote rural areas with irrigated  agriculture  are  losing population, they  endure nonetheless  a s   important components of the cultural landscape in their  role as  hinterlands  for the Ogallala oases.

This paper examines the  relationship  between proximity to groundwater  use and population change in the Ogallala aquifer  region of Kansas during the 1980s. The analysis focuses on three levels; the  county,  incorporated and census designated  places,  and  rural census  county subdi-

visions. The association between proximity to groundwater and population change is statistically significant among counties, among places larger than 500 inhabitants, and among more denselypopulated rural areas.  Groundwater use is  not associated,  however, with population change in places  with  fewer than  500  people or  in sparsely-populated  rural census  county  subdivisions. These  patterns  of  population change  are  not merely  reflections of  historical inertia.  They  are better explained by active responses to the advantages of agglomeration and access to groundwater than to the passive unfolding of past patterns of population redistribution. In this context, a triage-type development policy that favors Ogallala oases  larger than  500 inhabitants seems a more appropriate response to regional problems than the alternatives of growth poles,  service sharing strategies,  outright abandonment,  or laissez-faire. Key Words: Population redistribution, Kansas,  High Plains,  Ogallala oases,  Ogallala aquifer,  irrigation,  groundwater.