## Patterns of Avian Population Density, Habitat Use, and Flocking Behavior in Urban and Rural Habitats During Winter"

Peter H. Yaukey University o f New  Orleans

This study examined the use of urban and rural habitats by woodland bird species in winter in the vicinity of Athens, Georgia, USA. Population densities of most species on urban sites were either comparable to or greater than those on rural sites, and most species were flexible in their habitat use patterns. On urban sites, only the golden-crowned kinglet  consistently  avoided  vegetation  that  had  been  opened  either  by  felling trees  or  clearing  undergrowth. Nuthatches and  chickadees flocked together less often  at urban  than at rural  sites. Key Words: urban environments, environmental change, avian ecology, birds, conservation.

## Introduction

rbanization is accompanied by a wide vaU riety of  changes in  the  physical environment, including changes in climate and microclimate,  hydrology,  vegetation,  and  wildlife populations (see  discussions by  Gill  and  Bonnett  1973; Douglas  1983; Adams  and  Dove 1989). The  influence  of  urban  areas  on  the surrounding  rural  landscape  occurs  through processes such as the outward diffusion of pollutants borne by air and water, and through the consumption of land by expanding metropolitan  areas.  The  outward  expansion  of  urban areas  causes  either  destruction  or  fragmentation of  the vegetation in the surrounding rural landscape. Researchers of forest fragmentation associated  with  urbanization  usually  consider the  urban  landscape from  the  perspective of organisms  that require  undisturbed forests, and  for  which urban  areas represent  a  sea  of uninhabitable land dotted with a few (at most) isolated islands  of  suitable undeveloped habitat. However, such a characterization oversimplifies the urban landscape, which really incorporates a wide variety of disturbed habitats that vary  greatly in  their  usefulness  to  plants  and animals. Some varieties of urban  land use, especially parks and residential areas, leave a substantial portion of the original vegetative cover intact, or allow vegetation  to reestablish itself after it has been cut. Other land uses, such as commercial  and  industrial  areas  with  their parking lots, roadways, and buildings, remove virtually all  of  the  vegetation  from  the  landscape.  While  even  the  most  natural  urban habitats  are  unsuitable  for  some forest  plants or  animals, such  relatively  undisturbed  areas lend diversity to the urban  landscape and enable several forms of  native flora and wildlife to occur in some areas of the city.

Research on the biotic communities in  urban environments has focused largely on urban wildlife (e.g.,  Davis and  Glick  1978; Poynton and  Roberts  1985; Adams  and  Dove  1989), especially birds.  Studies of  the  use  of  urban areas by birds have shown remarkably consistent results. Although  several species adapted to urban areas often increase in number when urbanization occurs  (Emlen 1974;  Guthrie 1974), urban areas are typically inhabited by a smaller  number  of  species  (species richness) than are undeveloped areas (Batten 1972; Emlen  1974; Gavareski 1976;  Vale and Vale  1976; Lancaster  and  Rees  1979; Jones  1981; Beissigner and Osborne 1982; Franklin and Wilkinson  1986; Horak  and  Cringan  1986; Mills et al.  1989;  cf. Aldrich and Coffin 1980). Often, the species that disappear are those that require  mature  forest or dense ground  cover. However, despite reduced species richness, urban  development  typically  results  in  an  increase in  total  bird  density due  to population increases  of  some  species  (including  exotics)

T h e   author thank Kathleen Parker, H. Ronald Pulliam, David Much, Paul Knapp, David Butler, Vernon Meentemeyer, Albert Parker, and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful guidance. The author also thanks the State Botanical Garden of Georgia, the  School of Forest Resources at the University of Georgia, and  the many benevolent landowners who allowed me access to their property. Chris Hamilton constrncted the map of the study area.

well suited to  urban areas (Pitelka 1942; Woolfenden  and Rohwer 1969; Guthrie  1974; Vale  and  Vale  1976;  Huhtalo  and  Jarvinen 1977; Aldrich  and  Coffin  1980; Franklin  and Wilkinson  1986; Rosenberg  et al.  1987; Mills et al.  1989;  Smith and Schaefer 1992). Despite such  increases  in  density,  urbanization  is  of concern  to  conservationists  because  endangered  and  threatened  species  often  survive poorly in urban areas.

Researchers  have  discovered positive  relationships between vegetation volume and both bird  species  richness  (Goldstein  et al.  1986) and  diversity  (Hohtola  1978) when  studying habitat  use  within  urban  areas.  Bird  species richness  has  been  reported  to  be  higher  in urban habitats with more trees (Lancaster and Rees 1979). Native plants have been positively associated with both the species richness (Green  1984;  Rosenberg  et  al. 1987;  Mills et al.  1989) and the diversity and abundance of native birds (Green  1984).

Most  urban  bird  studies  have  been  conducted in summer, and few studies have examined  anything  beyond  the  basic  population sizes and gross habitat use patterns of birds in urban  areas. Studies of bird  behavior in urban areas, apart  from  nest-placement  studies,  are rare (cf. Moulton and Adams 1991). If  urbanization is  to be  managed  to minimize the  loss of species,  however,  it is important to study the habits  of  birds  that use  these urban  areas. By understanding what life history characteristics allow these birds to thrive in urban habitats, it ultimately may be possible to understand why some  species are  vulnerable  to  urbanization, and to identify procedures  that could ameliorate the effect of urbanization  on them.

The purpose of this paper is to examine the use of urban habitats by native wintering birds in  northern  Georgia,  focusing on  the  use  of urban  residential  developments.  It  examines native bird species that are known to use such developments  and  addresses  three  questions: (1)  Do these  species occur  in  urban  areas  at different population densities than in rural areas? (2)  When  these  species use  urban  areas, do they extensively use highly disturbed habitats  or  concentrate  their  activity  into  small patches  of  relatively  natural  vegetation? ( 3 ) Does the flocking behavior of these species in urban  areas  differ  from  that  in  rural  areas? Flocking behavior was studied because changes in this avian survival strategy could potentially affect the ability of birds to use urban areas.

## Study Areas

Eight study sites near Athens, Georgia (33'56' N, 83"24' W), representing different densities of urban development were examined between November  and  February  in  the  winters  of 1989-1990  and  1990-1991  (Fig. 1). Four  primary sites were  studied the most  extensively. Two primary sites (Whitehall Forest,  15.2 ha, and Botanical Garden, 7.6 ha) were rural sites selected for comparison with the other, urban sites. Both had large areas of woodland dominated by loblolly  pines (Pinus  taeda) and shortleaf  pines (l? echznata), and  neither  site had residences or bird  feeders; however, both contained  roads  or  power  lines,  and  several greenhouses  were  present at  the  Botanical Garden.  The  other  two  primary  sites  contained high densities of residences: 3  1 in 6.7  ha at the Pine View Drive site, and 44 in 7.0 ha at the Davis Estates site. Lot sizes were generally 10.2 ha (0.5  acre). Bird feeders were present a t  a t  least three residences at each site. In addition to these primary sites, four secondary urban  sites  were  visited  solely  to  examine flocking behavior. The Red Fox Run East, Red Fox Run West,  and Whitehall  Lot sites were extensively forested and held lower densities of residences than Pine View Drive or Davis Estates. All  three,  except perhaps  Red  Fox  Run East,  held  bird  feeders. They were  examined only during the first winter  of the study. The final  site  was  Oconee  Cemetery,  an  urban cemetery  that  included  an  ornamental pine grove of  approximately 1.7  ha  surrounded on most sides by  lawn and  no buildings. Smaller areas  of  both  hardwood  forest  and  scrubby mixed  growth were also present. This site was examined only during the second winter.

## Data and Methods

Study Species

This  study  focused  on  small  arboreal  birds common in pine  woodlands. These were  the brown-headed  nuthatch (Sitta pusilla), Carolina  chickadee (Paws carolinensis), tufted  titmouse ( P a m bicolor), golden-crowned kinglet (Replus satrapa), ruby-crowned kinglet (Rep/us calendula), pine  warbler (Dendroica pznus),

Figure 1 : Map of study sites.

<!-- image -->

yellow-mmped  warbler (Dendroicu  coronata), red-bellied  woodpecker (Melanerpes carolinus), hairy woodpecker (Picoides villoms), downy woodpecker (Picoides  pubescens), and yellow-bellied  sapsucker (Sphyrapzcus varzus). These species  were  selected  because  they  commonly form mixed flocks in winter. The two kinglet species,  the  yellow-mmped  warbler,  and  the sapsucker do not breed in Georgia; the other species do, and occur in northern Georgia the year round.

I focused my examination of  flocking behavior  on the brown-headed  nuthatch  because it was numerous and occurred commonly both in and out of mixed-species flocks. I examined its flocking behavior by examining its association with two parids (family Paridae), the Carolina chickadee,  and  the  tufted  titmouse,  because they are generally considered to be the nuclear members  of  mixed  flocks  (e.g.,  Morse  1967, 1970).

## Bird Abundances

To determine  the  population  densities of  the study  species,  a  series  of  censuses  was  conducted  in  which  birds  were  counted  along

straight-line  transects at the four primary sites on 15 different dates in  1990-1991,  at various hours of the day. Transects varied from 30 m to 440 m in length, passed  within 25 m of all points on each site, and were walked at a rate of  40  &amp;minute. To examine  whether  bird densities were  greater  at rural  than  at urban sites, because of, for instance, restricted habitat suitability  for  woodland  birds  at  urban  sites, the  density of  each species was  compared between  each  rural  and  urban  site  using  onetailed  Mann-Whimey  U-tests (Griffith  and Amrhein  1991).

To assess  whether  density calculations had been  affected by missing birds that were relatively far from  the  transect (Emlen 1971, 1977), densities were  recalculated using  only birds within  5 m of the transect (where detection was optimal) and compared with the original  calculations. Although  densities of  several species may have  been  underestimated,  these analyses indicated that variations in detectability among sites or habitat  types had at most a minor effect on the patterns of  distribution of any species among sites and habitat  types reported below. Hairy woodpeckers and sapsuckers were excluded from the detectability analyses because of the small number observed.

## Habitat Characterization

Areas  of  similar  habitat  at  the  four  primary sites  were  mapped  on  base  maps  (obtained from  tax  assessors and  other  official  sources) according  to  their  degree  of  canopy  closure, dominant tree life form, and openness of understory. The canopy  was  classified as  either 'open' (trees felled for timber harvesting or to make room  for  a  yard  or  house)  or 'closed' (canopy appeared natural). Dominant tree life forms were classified as 'deciduous' (&lt; 10% of canopy stems were pine), 'pine' (5 90% pine), or  'mixed' (10-90% pine).  Stem  frequencies were  estimated  visually.  The  understory of each  stand  was  categorized  as  either  'open' (recently  mowed  or  raked)  or  'closed'  (not mowed or raked; seedlings present). Together, these yielded 12 categories of habitat ( 2 x 3 x 2). At two sites, a thirteenth category of habitat was included for stands of short pines (ca.  5 m tall).  Borders  between  vegetation  types  were marked  in  the  field  on  the  base  maps  of  the study  sites,  referring  to  property  boundaries depicted  on  those  maps;  distance  measure- ments used  in mapping were obtained by pacing,  and  directions  were  measured  with a Brunton compass.

To examine whether birds avoided the most disturbed habitats at urban sites, the frequency of  observation  of  each  species was  compared between habitats with open versus closed canopies,  and  between  habitats  with  open  versus closed  understories,  using  one-tailed x2 tests and Yates' correction for continuity (Zar 1984).

## Measurement of Distances between Nuthatches and Parids

I  quantified  the flocking  behavior  of nuthatches by assessing  whether they were flocked with  parids  and  by  measuring  the  distances among  birds  that  were  flocked.  T o   gather these  data,  I  followed  a  nuthatch  flock  at  a study site. At  ten-minute intervals I located the first  visible nuthatch,  and  paced  the  distance from  it  to  the  first  chickadee  I  detected.  In most  cases,  this  appeared  to  be  the  closest chickadee  to  the  nuthatch.  These  data  may have been biased to include the most active or noisy individuals of  both species, but did so at all  sites.  If  no  chickadee was  present  within 50 m, the nuthatch was recorded as 'unflocked.' I  measured  the  distance  to  the first titmouse  detected in  the same fashion. In the  first winter,  a  nuthatch  was  not  recorded to be unflocked until an additional ten minutes elapsed  without  my detecting a parid.  Although  only  the  nuthatch-parid association within the flock was examined, these birds consistently  were part of larger multispecific groups that typically traveled together through the habitat while foraging.

Distance data  were  condensed  from  the range of one to 50 meters to a scale of one to ten;  each  unit  represented  five  meters  of  distance. This compensated for the slight inaccuracies of  pacing long distances through  vegetation.  Two-tailed  Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests (Zar  1984) were  used  to  compare  inter-bird distances among sites, with 'unflocked' observations (&gt; 50  m)  included  as  the  highest  distance category in these analyses.

## Effect of lnterspecific  Attraction  on Variations in Flocking

Although  differences in  interspecific flocking behavior among sites can reflect changes in the

attraction of  the birds to each other, they may also reflect other factors such as  the  distribution  of  resources  used  by  the  birds,  or  their densities or intraspecific  grouping. One way to assess  the  effect o f   variations  in  interspecific attraction  on flocking is  to  ascertain whether variations in  flocking among sites can be  explained  by  these other factors; if  so, interspecific  attraction  need not be  invoked  as  an explanation. To determine whether variations in flock participation (occurrence within 50 m of each other) among sites could be accounted for apart from variations in interspecific attraction, an  estimate was  made of  how  close the  birds should  be  to  each  other  at  each  site  in  the absence of interspecific  attraction.  This  was evaluated by  taking a map of  the locations of parids detected in a  single census, and distributing  fictitious  nuthatches  onto  the  map  to determine what proportion of  them would be within 50  m  of a parid.  Nuthatches  were placed in all the locations where  they had actually  been  observed  in  censuses throughout the winter, both  to realistically replicate their use  of  different  locations  on  the  site  and  to generate  a  large  sample.  The  proportion  of fictitious nuthatches  that were within  SO m of a parid was averaged for all 15 censuses at each site.

Effects  of Habitat Configuration on Variations in  Flocking

Interspecific distances might vary among sites because of differences in  the  habitat  configurations  of  the  sites, such  as  differential availability of habitats in which both  species could occur. The effect of this was examined by randomly distributing parids and nuthatches onto maps of each study site in a way that mimicked their  observed  habitat  use  patterns,  and  then seeing how close together the birds ended up at each site. Specifically, the probability that a nuthatch would be within  50 m of  a  parid on a  given  date  at  a  site was  estimated  by  randomly placing parids onto a  map  of  the  site, with the same number in each habitat (and the same  number  within  SO  m  of  a  conspecific parid) as was observed in the census that day. Then,  100 nuthatches  (representing  locations of  100 field observations) were randomly  distributed  on the map,  but  constrained  so that the  proportion  in  each  habitat  type  equaled their  season-long  proportionate  use  of  each habitat  type on all  sites (sites were lumped  to overcome small sample sizes). The proportion of  nuthatches  within  SO  m of  a parid was calculated  in  this  fashion  for  each  census date, and averaged across all census dates at the site. Differences in the average density and intraspecific flocking of the parids at each site could confound comparisons among sites; thus,  between two and six censuses were excluded from each site in such a  way that maximally  equalized these factors. Despite this, analyses at the Botanical Garden  were conducted with fewer titmice than elsewhere.

This procedure overestimated inter-bird distances because it did not incorporate interspecific attraction. However, this bias occurred at all  sites, so  inter-site comparisons were still valid.

## Results

Bird Densities at  the Study Sites

Of the 4 4   tests in which the density of a species was  compared  between urban  and  rural  sites, only two showed species to be more numerous at the rural site: Golden-crowned kinglet densities  were higher at the Botanical Garden than Davis Estates,  and  downy woodpecker densities  were  higher  at  Whitehall  than  at  Pine View (Table  1). Densities of  all species either appeared higher at both of the urban sites than at either rural site, or did not vary with development in any consistent pattern.

## Habitat Use Patterns

In general, the study species appeared flexible in  their  vegetation  use,  varying  substantially from site to site in the percentage of time they spent  in  each  type  of  vegetation  (Table 2). Each species occurred  in habitats with  closed canopies and  understories  in  the  majority  of observations at  each rural  site, except for the ruby-crowned kinglet at the Botanical Garden (43%). Heavy  use  of the  closed  vegetation types at these sites was not surprising, because such habitat  types  composed at least 65%  of each  site.  Some  flexibility  of  the  species  in adjusting to habitat disturbance was  apparent at the Botanical Garden, where several species also extensively  used areas of mixed woods that had open canopies.

All  species  exhibited  a  general  pattern  of expansion into the more open habitat types at the urban  Pine View Drive site (Table 2). At least  SO% of  the  observations of  each  species

Table 1 Densitie9  of  Birds in  15 Censuses of the Primary Study Sites

|                | Sites            | Sites            | Sites     | Sites     | Sites   | Sites     | Sites         | Sites         | Sites   |
|----------------|------------------|------------------|-----------|-----------|---------|-----------|---------------|---------------|---------|
|                | Ruralb           | Ruralb           | Ruralb    | Ruralb    |         | Urban     | Urban         | Urban         | Urban   |
|                | Botanical Garden | Botanical Garden | Whitehall | Whitehall |         | Pine View | Davis Estates | Davis Estates |         |
| Species        | Mean             | SDC              | Mean      | S D       | Mean    | SD        | Mean          | SD            |         |
| B-h Nuthatch   | 105              | I1 50)           | 2 85      | I2 38)    | 4 17    | (240)     | 4 32          | I4 25)        |         |
| C Chickadee    | 341              | 1 2 15)          | 3 60      | I2 63)    | 5 36    | (2 69)    | 5 66          | I3 24)        |         |
| T Itmouse      | 044              | I0 64)           | 189       | I1 76)    | 149     | (2 03)    | 2 40          | I3 43)        |         |
| Gc Kinglet     | 9 61             | I6 24)"          | 6 54      | I3 98)    | 8 53    | 1411)     | 547           | I3 45)'       |         |
| R-c Kinglet    | 4 02             | I2 64)           | 3 42      | (154)     | 3 77    | I2 63)    | 4 80          | (355)         |         |
| P Warbler      | 061              | I1 20)           | 105       | (1 11)    | 198     | I2 30)    | 192           | I2 35)        |         |
| Y-r Warbler    | 148              | I1 30)           | 0 09      | (023)     | 198     | (2 68)    | 7 10          | (950)         |         |
| R-b Woodpecker | 0 70             | I084)            | 0 48      | I058)     | 0 20    | I0 52)    | 192           | (169)         |         |
| D Woodpecker   | 0 17             | (0 46)           | 0 66      | I066)*    | 0 10    | I038)*    | 0 86          | (131)         |         |
| H Woodpecker   | 000              | I000)            | 0 04      | (0 17)    | 0 00    | (000)     | 0 10          | I037)         |         |
| Y-b Sapsucker  | 0 09             | I0 34)           | 0 00      | (0 00)    | 0 20    | (0 77)    | 0 00          | I0 00)        |         |

bDensity in each urban site was compared with that in each rural site fir each species; site pairs in which the rural site had a statisti- c a I &amp;

significant higher density

than the urban site  (Mnnn-

'Standard ahtation of density.

were  in  habitats  with  an  open  understory  or open  canopy,  or  with  trees  that  were  much shorter  than  normal  canopy height  (pines ca. 5  m  tall).  The  nuthatch  made  heavy  use  of pines  that  had  both  open  canopies and  open understories, with 58%  of its observations occurring  in  this  habitat.  The  yellow-rumped warbler  focused  heavily  on  stands  of  short pines, where it occurred in 79% of the observations.

At  the urban  Davis Estates site,  the  switch to open habitats was even greater. At least 60% of  the  observations  of  each  species  were  in habitats with open canopies or open understories.  Many  species  made  heavy  use  of  pines with  an  open  understory  and  closed  canopy, and  of  mixed  pine/hardwood  areas with  both an open canopy and understory. Many species also  heavily used  pines with  an  open  canopy and  open  understory,  where  the  majority  of pine  and  yellow-rumped  warblers  were  recorded.  These  observations  do  not  indicate that the study species preferred humandisturbed  habitats,  but  simply that they  used them  frequently, despite being native to lessdisturbed woodlands.

## Use of Open-Canopy Vegetation

To  statistically  examine  whether  woodland species demonstrated  a preference  for closedcanopy  vegetation  within  urban  areas,  their frequency  of  occurrence  was  compared  between habitats with  open and closed canopies using xz tests. At  Pine View, only the  chickadee and  golden-crowned  kinglet used  closed-

Wimey

U-tern,  P

&lt;

0.07)

are mnrked with asterisks.

canopy habitats more than expected by chance (Table 2). At  Davis Estates, only the nuthatch, golden-crowned kinglet, and red-bellied woodpecker  used  closed  canopy  areas  more than would be expected by chance. Thus, only the  golden-crowned  kinglet significantly concentrated  into  closed  canopy  areas  at  both sites,  although  red-bellied  woodpecker  data were  unavailable  from  Pine  View.  All  other species  spent  extensive  time  in open canopy areas. Thus,  most  native  forest  birds  did not show  a  statistically significant preference  for closed canopy areas within urban sites.

## Use of  Open-Understory  Vegetation

xz tests were also used  to determine whether native woodland  species showed a  preference for habitats with  closed understories.  At  Pine View,  significantly more  chickadees, goldencrowned  kinglets, and  ruby-crowned  kinglets were  recorded  in  areas with  closed understories  than  expected  by  chance  (Table 2). At Davis Estates, the golden-crowned kinglet was again  more  often  found  in  closed  understory habitats  than  would  be  expected  by  chance. Thus,  although  some  species  at  Pine  View concentrated into areas with  closed understories,  no  species  except  the  golden-crowned kinglet  showed  this  pattern  significantly  at both sites.

Flocking Patterns at  Urban and Rural Sites In  1990-1 99 1, nuthatches  and chickadees differed  in  their  flocking  patterns  between  the two urban primary sites and the two rural pri-

Table 2 Percentage Use of Different Habitats by  Study Species

|                    |    |    |    |    | Mixed   | Mixed   | Mixed   | Mixed   |     |    |     |        |        |
|--------------------|----|----|----|----|---------|---------|---------|---------|-----|----|-----|--------|--------|
|                    | cc | co | oc | 00 | cc      | co      | oc      | 00      | Dec | SP | Nb  |        |        |
| Botanical Garden   |    |    |    |    |         |         |         |         |     |    |     |        |        |
| Habitat Availablee | 51 | 3  | 4  |  1 | 3       | 0       | 1       | 1       | 17  | <1 |     |        |        |
| Nuthatch           | 5  | 8  | 0  |  0 | 0       | 0       | 7       | 0       | 17  | 0  | 12  | NS     | -      |
| Chickadee          | 41 | 5  | 3  |  0 | 5       | 0       | 3       | 0       | 10  | 3  | 39  | NS     | NS     |
| Golden-cr Kinglet  | 45 | 1  | 3  |  0 | 2       | 0       | 1       | 1       | 9   | 9  | 103 | NS     | NS     |
| Ruby-cr Kinglet    | 43 | 5  | 5  |  0 | 0       | 0       | 5       | 0       | 0   | 2  | 42  | NS     | NS     |
| Yellow-r Warbler   | 67 | 7  | 7  |  0 | 0       | 0       | 0       | 0       | 0   | 0  | 15  | NS     | NS     |
| Whitehall Forest   |    |    |    |    |         |         |         |         |     |    |     |        |        |
| Habitat Availablee | 51 | 0  | 2  |  1 | 9       | 0       | 2       | 0       | 5   | 0  |     |        |        |
| Nuthatch           | 55 | 0  | 0  |  3 | 2       | 0       | 7       | 0       | 3   | 0  | 60  | NS     | NS     |
| Chickadee          | 32 | 0  | 1  |  1 | 3       | 0       | 4       | 0       | 8   | 0  | 72  | NS     | NS     |
| 'litmouse          | 45 | 0  | 0  | 13 | 20      | 0       | 13      | 0       | 10  | 0  | 40  | NS     | NS     |
| Golden-crKinglet   | 52 | 0  | 1  |  3 | 7       | 0       | 3       | 0       | 5   | 0  | 128 | <O 05  | NS     |
| Rubycr Kinglet     | 56 | 0  | 2  |  0 | 8       | 0       | 3       | 0       | 2   | 0  | 66  | NS     | NS     |
| Pine Warbler       | 67 | 0  | 0  |  0 | 9       | 0       | 0       | 0       | 5   | 0  | 21  | NS     | NS     |
| Downy Woodpecker   | 67 | 0  | 0  |  0 | 3       | 0       | 0       | 0       | 0   | 0  | 12  | -      | NS     |
| Pine View Drive    |    |    |    |    |         |         |         |         |     |    |     |        |        |
| Habitat Availablee | 14 | 9  | 1  | 22 | 5       | <1      | 4       | 36      | 1   | 8  |     |        |        |
| Nuthatch           | 3  | 8  | 0  |  8 | 3       | 0       | 0       | 8       | 0   | 3  | 40  | NS     | NS     |
| Chickadee          | 22 | 12 | 0  | 18 | 14      | 0       | 10      | 10      | 0   | 16 | 51  | <o 001 | <o 001 |
| Golden-cr Kinglet  | 44 | 6  | 0  |  3 | 1       | 0       | 8       | 1 0     | 0   | 11 | 71  | <o 001 | <o 001 |
| Ruby-cr Kinglet    | 22 | 0  | 0  |  8 | 3       | 0       | 6       | 1 3     | 0   | 28 | 32  | NS     | <o 001 |
| Pine Warbler       | 42 | 0  | 8  | 25 | 0       | 0       | 0       | 8       | 0   | 17 | 12  | -      | NS     |
| Yellow r Warbler   | 5  | 0  | 0  | 11 | 0       | 0       | 0       | 5       | 0   | 79 | 19  | -      | NS     |
| Davis Estates      |    |    |    |    |         |         |         |         |     |    |     |        |        |
| Habitat Availablee | 5  | 7  | 1  |  6 | 8       | 9       | 4       | 1       | 10  | 0  |     |        |        |
| Nuthatch           | 2  | 9  | 0  |  5 | 0       | 5       | 0       | 3 0     | 0   | 0  | 44  | <O 05  | NS     |
| Chickadee          | 8  | 14 | 0  | 24 | 10      | 6       | 8       | 29      | 2   | 0  | 51  | NS     | NS     |
| 'litmouse          | 0  | 2  | 0  |  9 | 7       | 9       | 4       | 3 0     | 9   | 0  | 23  | NS     | NS     |
| Golden-cr Kinglet  | 15 | 15 | 2  | 19 | 15      | 8       | 2       | 15      | 10  | o  | 48  | <o 001 | <o 001 |
| Ruby-cr Kinglet    | 2  | 4  | 2  |  4 | 7       | 7       | 2       | 2 7     | 5   | 0  | 44  | NS     | NS     |
| Pine Warbler       | 6  | 8  | 0  |  5 | 6       | 0       | 0       | 6       | 0   | 0  | 17  | NS     | NS     |
| Yellow-rWarbler    | 2  | 8  | 2  |  1 | 7       | 4       | 0       | 1 6     | 2   | 0  | 57  | NS     | NS     |
| Red-bWoodpecker    | 18 | 18 | 0  |  0 | 0       | 24      | 12      | 18      | 12  | 0  | 17  | <o 01  | NS     |

"Habitat abbreviations: CC=Clo.red canopy and understory; CO=Clu.red canopy and open understory; OC=Open canopy and closed  understory; 00=0pen canopy and open  understory; Dec=Deciduous; SP=Shon  pines.

"Sample size  (number o f birds used to calculate % use o f each habitat). Swne birds that were not categorized to habitat precisely enough to use in calculations  of % habitat use could neuenheless be determined  to be  in open/closed  canopy or understoy  habitats, and wwe included in the x2 test.s (tbus, sample sizes in some x2 tests u v e greater than N ) . All x2 t e s t f b r  which 1 J obseruations  were available were calculated.

'Probability  (in x2 tests) that birds used closed canopy habitats  (CC, CO, and Dec areas with closed canopies) more than open ones (all other habitats); df = 1 in all tests.

dProbability (in x2 temj that birds used closed  understory habitats ( C C , OC, and Dec or Sp areas with closed understories) more  than open ones (all other habitats); df = 1 i n all tests.

'Percentage o f study site covered by  each habitat iype.

mary  sites  (Table  3).  T h e   strongest  pattern evident within  these data was a lower tendency for nuthatches to occur in  flocks with  chickadees  at the  urban  sites.  However,  it  also  appears that  nuthatches that did flock with chickadees were usually closer to those chickadees  a t   the  Botanical  Garden  than  at  either urban site.

In  1989-1990, three  secondary  sites  (Red Fox Run East, Red Fox Run West, and Whitehall  Lot) with  lower  residential  densities than the primary urban  sites were  examined.  Nuthatch-chickadee flocking patterns  on  these sites were variable, but appeared approximately intermediate  between  urban  (high  residential density)  primary  and  rural  primary  sites.  In 1990-1991,  the Oconee Cemetery was  examined;  no  nuthatch  was  ever  flocked  with  a chickadee  during sampling there.

Although  nuthatch-titmouse flocking  patterns varied  among sites,  this was  not clearly related  to  differences  in  urbanization  among the four  primary  sites  (Table  3).  T h e  secondary  sites  also  showed  no  pattern  related  to urbanization,  as  they  showed  both  relatively long (Whitehall Lot) and short (Red Fox Run West) nuthatch-titmouse  distances  relative  to other  sites.  Nuthatches  at Oconee  Cemetery were never flocked with titmice.

Table 3 Statistcally  Significant  Differences in  Nuthatch-Pand Flocking among Sites, in  KolrnogorovSrnimov  Tests

| Year    | Species   | Site la   |   N | Site 2   |   N | P      |
|---------|-----------|-----------|-----|----------|-----|--------|
| 1989-90 | Chickadee | BG        |  90 | PV       |  36 | <o 01  |
| 1989-90 | Chickadee | BG        |  90 | RE       |  40 | <o 01  |
| 1982-90 | Chickadee | BG        |  90 | WF       | 102 | <o 01  |
| 1990-91 | Chickadee | BG        |  77 | PV       |  69 | <O 05  |
| 1990-91 | Chickadee | BG        |  77 | DE       |  71 | <o 001 |
| 1990-91 | Chickadee | BG        |  77 | oc       |  33 | <o 001 |
| 1990-91 | Chickadee | WF        |  91 | PV       |  69 | <O 05  |
| 1990-91 | Chickadee | WF        |  91 | DE       |  71 | <o 001 |
| 1990-91 | Chickadee | WF        |  91 | oc       |  33 | <o 001 |
| 1990-91 | Chickadee | PV        |  69 | DE       |  71 | <o 001 |
| 1990-91 | Chickadee | PV        |  69 | oc       |  33 | <o 001 |
| 1989-90 | Ttmouse   | RW        |  36 | PV       |  33 | <O 05  |
| 1989-90 | htrnouse  | RW        |  36 | BG       |  83 | <005   |
| 1989-90 | Titmouse  | RW        |  36 | WL       |  40 | <o 01  |
| 1989-90 | Titmouse  | DE        |  33 | WL       |  40 | <0 05  |
| 1989-90 | Ttmouse   | RE        |  35 | WL       |  40 | <O 05  |
| 1982-90 | Ttmouse   | WF        |  97 | WL       |  40 | <O 05  |
| 199&91  | Titmouse  | WF        |  75 | BG       |  67 | <o 001 |
| 1990-91 | Titmouse  | WF        |  75 | PV       |  61 | <o 001 |
| 1990-91 | Ttmouse   | WF        |  75 | DE       |  57 | <o 001 |
| 1990-91 | Titmouse  | WF        |  75 | oc       |  22 | <o 001 |
| 1990-91 | Titmouse  | BG        |  67 | oc       |  22 | <o 01  |
| 1990-91 | Titmouse  | WF        |  75 | oc       |  22 | <O 05  |
| 1990-91 | Titmouse  | DE        |  57 | oc       |  22 | <o 01  |

"Site abheviations: BG=Batm?ical Garden; WF=  Whitehall Forest; PV=Pzne  View; DE=Davis Estates; RE=Red For Rut, East; RW=Red Fox Run West; WL=Whitehall  Lot; OC=Oconee Cemetey. In each case, birds were c1a.w together at site  I  than at site 2.

## Effect  of  Parid  Density  on Distances between Bird Species

It  is  possible  that  nuthatches  were  closer  to parids at some sites simply because parids were more  numerous  at  those  sites.  The  highest mean  chickadee  densities  were recorded  at Davis Estates, followed by Pine View, Whitehall, and the Botanical Garden (Table 1). This sequence of decreasing density also represents sites with progressively more nuthatches flocked within 50 m of chickadees, except that Whitehall  and  the  Botanical  Garden  are  reversed.  Thus,  chickadee  density  differences cannot  account  for  differences  in  grouping among sites. The highest mean titmouse density was  at Davis Estates, followed by  Whitehall, Pine View, and the Botanical Garden (Table  1).  This is fairly similar to the order of sites ranked according to proximity of the birds; the most  nuthatches  were  within  SO  m  of  a  titmouse at  Whitehall, followed by Davis Estates, the  Botanical  Garden, and  Pine  View.  Thus, Titmouse  density  cannot  be  ruled  out  as  a potentially relevant influence on nuthatch-titmouse flocking.

## Effect of Interspecific Attraction  on Variations in  Flocking

When the locations at which  nuthatches  and chickadees were  found  in  censuses were used to estimate how  distances between these species  should  have  varied  among  sites  in  the absence of  interspecific attraction,  the  results suggested  that  interspecific  distances  should have  varied  minimally among sites (Table 4). Even  the  small  amount  of  variation  in  interbird  distances that  could have  been  produced without  interspecific attractions  did  not  produce the same pattern of variation among sites as was observed; nuthatches were predicted to be  within  50  m  of  a  chickadee  most  often (27%  of  the  time)  at  Davis Estates  and  least often  at Whitehall  (20%), the opposite of  the observed pattern. This suggests that variations in  interspecific  attraction  among  sites  could contribute  to intersite variations in nuthatchchickadee distances. There is  less  evidence of a role for interspecific attraction in variation in nuthatch-titmouse distances.  Examining  the locations of  sightings of  these  species in censuses  suggested  that  nuthatches  should  have been within  SO m of a  titmouse most often at Whitehall,  followed  by  Davis  Estates, which they were, even in the absence of interspecific attractions.

When nuthatches  and  either  chickadees or titmice were placed on maps according to their habitat  (vegetation) use  patterns  to determine whether  variations  in  habitat  configurations among  sites  could  account  for  differences in

Table 4 Proportions of Nuthatches Observed within 50 rn of Parids at Four Sites, Compared with Proportions Predicted Based on Birds Having No lnterspecific  Attraction,  and Based on Habitat Configurations of  the Sites

|                                   | Proportion of Nuthatches within 50 mof   | Proportion of Nuthatches within 50 mof   | Proportion of Nuthatches within 50 mof   | Proportion of Nuthatches within 50 mof   | Proportion of Nuthatches within 50 mof   | Proportion of Nuthatches within 50 mof   | Proportion of Nuthatches within 50 mof   | Proportion of Nuthatches within 50 mof   |
|-----------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| Method                            | Chickadee Site'                          | Chickadee Site'                          | Chickadee Site'                          | Chickadee Site'                          | Itmouse Site                             | Itmouse Site                             | Itmouse Site                             | Itmouse Site                             |
| Observed                          | 0 86                                     | 0 87                                     | 0 68                                     | 0 28                                     | 040                                      | 0 76                                     | 0 28                                     | 046                                      |
| Predicted (no attraction)         | 0 22                                     | 0 20                                     | 0 21                                     | 0 27                                     | 0 01                                     | 0 10                                     | 0 06                                     | 0 09                                     |
| Predicted (habitat configuration) | 0 23                                     | 0 20                                     | 0 20                                     | 0.20                                     | 0 06                                     | 0 08                                     | 0.09                                     | 0.08                                     |

'BG=Botanical  Garden; WF=Whrtehall Forest; PV=Pine View; DE=Dauis fitates.

distances between birds, these analyses showed that habitat configurations should produce virtually no variation in the proximity of the birds among sites (Table 4). Thus, changes in habitat  configurations among sites are unlikely to have  produced  significant differences in  distances between  nuthatches  and  parids  among sites.

## Discussion

This study sought  to  determine  whether  the native woodland  species that  winter  in urban areas do so in large or small numbers relative to rural  areas, and whether  birds wintering in urban  areas make widespread  use  of  humandisturbed habitats or concentrate into less-disturbed habitats within those areas. The native woodland bird species considered in this study used  urban  areas  at high  densities  and  were generalistic  in  their  habitat  use  within  such areas,  showing  little  preference  for  habitats with closed canopies  or understories. Although some previous studies have reported parids to use  urban  areas  in lower densities  than  rural areas,  these  studies  have  mainly  been  conducted  in  summer  (cf.  Graber  and  Graber 1979). The different  findings of  the  present study  may  be  explained partially  by  seasonal changes in the habitat use of the birds; indeed, DeGraaf (1978) and DeGraaf and Wentworth (1981) found that  chickadee densities in residential neighborhoods  were greater  in winter than summer. These differences emphasize the need  for  studies on urban  wildlife to be  conducted at all seasons.

The high densities of birds in urban areas in this study could have been caused by a variety of  factors that  either  increased survival in  the urban  areas, increased reproduction  (if young birds remained  at the  site until  the following winter),  or  attracted  birds  from  surrounding habitats.  The frequent use  of  bird  feeders in this  study  by  both  parids  suggests  that,  for these species, bird feeding may have increased densities in  urban  areas,  either  by  attracting parids  to  the  study  area  (Graber  and  Graber 1979) or by  decreasing their  overwinter mortality  (Jansson  et  al.  1981; Brittingham  and Temple  1988).

For  nuthatches,  which  used feeders  less often,  high  densities in  the  urban  areas  may have resulted from their  extensive foraging in ornamental  pines  in  residential  yards.  The affinity of nuthatches for pine seeds may have attracted them to these areas, where sampling suggested that cones may have been more numerous than at the rural sites (mean counts of cones per cone-bearing tree were 363.4 at Pine View ( N   = 3 l), 295.3 at Davis Estates ( N = 32), 249.1  at the  Botanical Garden  (N = 27), and 151.9 at Whitehall ( N   = 21); counts represent numbers  of  cones visible  through  binoculars from  a  position  approximately 5-10 m  from the trunk). The high  densities of  some other species are difficult to interpret. One possibility  stems  from  the  tendency  of  all  of  these species to travel with  mixed  flocks  containing parids. These birds may simply have been attracted to  urban areas  by  the  presence  of parids,  rather  than  because of  any  other  site characteristics associated with urbanization. In addition  to feeders and ornamental  plantings, a  variety  of  other  factors could  also produce high  bird  densities  in  urban  areas  (e.g.,  increased  over-winter  survival produced  by  anthropogenic  heat,  reduced  hawk  populations, etc.).

Another goal of this study was to determine whether the social behavior of birds using urban areas differed from that in rural areas. The social relationship of nuthatches to chickadees

did  appear  to  change,  as  these  species were flocked together  more  often  at rural  than  urban sites. The lack of mixed flock participation by nuthatches  at Oconee Cemetery suggested that  heterospecific  flocking  for  some  species may  virtually  disappear  because  of  urbanization under particular circumstances.  Nuthatches  here  appeared  to  not  flock  because they  heavily  used  an  ornamental  pine  stand that was typically avoided by both parids, perhaps because of  its isolation from  other areas of  tall  trees. Thus, creation of an isolated area of habitat that  is  used  by  one  species and not others may force normally social birds to avoid flocking  heterospecifically.  In  more natural habitats,  it is very unusual  to  find  nuthatches in places with no parids (personal observation).

Despite  the  apparent importance  of  habitat configuration  to  birds  in  the  cemetery,  the analyses of habitat preferences and locations of species  occurrence  on  other  sites  suggested that differences in the configuration of vegetation  and  other resources among the four primary sites did  not  produce  the  differences in flocking.  The failure of these explanations  provides  indirect  support  for  the  idea  that  birds were  farther  apart  at  urban  sites  because  the affinity of  the  birds  for each other was  diminished. Many authors have proposed advantages that  animals may  obtain  by  forming  groups, and these tend to be related to either foraging enhancement (e.g.,  Krebs  1973; Morse  1977, 1980; Barnard and Stephens 1983) or predator avoidance  (e.g.,  Pulliam  1973; Powell  1974; Thompson and Barnard  1983; Sullivan 1984a, b;  Hogstad 1988).  It  is  plausible  that  these species may have procured food more easily in urban than rural areas because of the proximity of bird feeders, or may have faced fewer predators in urban areas if fewer hawks were present there. Either  of  these mechanisms could have decreased the profitability of flocking for these birds,  causing flocks to break  down in  urban areas. However, field experiments conducted at Whitehall  Forest  and  the  Botanical  Garden (Yaukey 1991) have suggested that changes in predation pressure are more likely than changes in food availability to result in changes in grouping behavior for these species.

## Conclusions

This  study  represents  one  of  the  few  urban bird  studies  conducted in  the  southeastern

United  States in winter. There are several reasons not to extrapolate these findings to other species in different habitats. Because the precolonial  pine  woodlands of  the  southeastern United  States had  a  relatively open structure,  the  birds  examined  here  may  be  more suited  to  open,  disturbed  vegetation  than  are birds from regions that had more dense forest cover. Also, the species were studied at a time of  year  (winter)  when  they  are  likely  to  be generalistic in their habitat use. Summer studies may find birds much less tolerant of habitat disturbance and urban development.

This study has shown that several species of birds that used urban residential developments in winter  occurred at high densities, and  in  a broad variety of habitats, within those developments.  Further  work  is  needed  to  determine whether other species found in urban areas also use them generalistically and in high densities relative  to  rural  areas. Are  there  any  species that can  persist in urban  areas year after year, simply  by  hanging  on  in  small  fragments  of relict  habitat?  Although  studies  have  shown that patches of undeveloped habitat within urban  areas hold  species absent from  the developed neighborhoods themselves (Tilghnian 1987a, b),  such studies have not  run  for long enough  to  determine  the stability  of such populations.

The results of this study highlight the complexity of the urbanization process, which produces multifaceted changes in both  the  landscape and the organisms that inhabit it. While many  wildlife  species  disappear  from  urbanized  landscapes, many others remain,  such  as those  in  this  study. While  the  species in  this study occupied residential developments, areas of the city with different land use patterns are likely to  hold  different  communities  of  birds that behave differently than those in the neighborhoods studied here. The urban landscape is best characterized as  a complex set of habitats with  different  degrees  and  types  of disturbance,  which  retain  different  components  of the  original  biota.  The  flora  and  fauna  that remain may undergo a variety of changes. The native birds in residential developments in this study  showed  different  patterns of density, habitat  use, and  social behavior than  birds  in rural  areas.  Such  complex  differences  reveal that  the  effects of  habitat  disturbance  cannot be  adequately described  by  simple  studies of changes in community composition associated

with urbanization; they encompass a variety of complex alterations of behavior.  T h e  nuances of these changes, together  with their significance  for the survival  and  reproduction of the birds, must be more adequately understood before the impact of urbanization on the landscape  and  its  wildlife  can  be  comprehended fully. rn

## Literature Cited

- Adams,  L. W., and  L. E.  Dove.  1989. Wildlqe Reserves and  Corridors in the  Urban Environment. Columbia, MO: National Institute for Urban Wildlife.
- Aldrich, J.  W., and  R.  W.  Coffin.  1980. Breeding bird  populations from  forest  to  suburbia after thirty-seven years. American  Birds 34:3-7.
- Barnard,  C. J.,  and  Stephens, H.  1983. Costs  and benefits  of  single  and  mixed-species flocking  in fieldfares Turdus pilaris and  redwings T. iliams. Behaviour 84:9  1-12 3.
- Batten,  L. A. 1972. Breeding  bird  species diversity in relation  to  increasing urbanisation. Bird  Smdy 19:  157-66.
- Beissinger, S. R.,  and  D. R. Osborne. 1982. Effects of urbanization  on avian community organization. Condor 84:75-83.
- Brittingham, M.  C.,  and  S.  A.  Temple.  1988. Impacts of supplemental feeding on survival rates of black-capped chickadees. Ecology 69:58  1-89.
- Davis, A. M., and T. F .   Glick.  1978. Urban  ecosystems and island biogeography. Environmental Conservation 5:299-304.
- DeGraaf, R. M. 1978. Avian  communities and habitat  associations in  cities  and  suburbs. In Wildliife and People, ed. C. M. Kirkpatrick, 7-24.  Lafayette, IN: Purdue  University,  Department  of  Forestry and Natural Resources.
- DeGraaf, R. M., and J. M. Wentworth. 1981. Urban bird  communities and  habitats  in New  England. Transactions  of the  North  American  Wildliife  and Natural Resozirces Conference 46:3 96-41 3.
- Douglas, I.  1983. The Urban Environment. London: Edward Arnold.
- Emlen, J. T. 197  1. Population densities of birds derived from transect  counts. Auk 88:32342.
- . 1974. An urban bird community in Tucson, Arizona: Derivation, structure and regulation. Condor 76:184-97.
- . 1977. Estimating breeding season bird densities from transect  counts. Auk 94455-68.
- Franklin, T.  M.,  and J. R. Wilkinson.  1986. Predicted effects on birdlife of two development plans for  an  urban  estate.  In Wildlife Conservation and New Residential Developments, ed. K. Stenberg and W.  W.  Shaw, 105-17.  Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona, School of Renewable Natural Resources.
- Gavareski,  C.  A. 1976.  Relation  of  park  size  and vegetation  to  urban  bird  populations  in  Seattle, Washington. Condor 78:375-82.
- Gill,  D.,  and  P.  A.  Bonnett.  1973. Nature  in  the Urban Landscape: A  Study o f Cig Ecoqstms. Baltimore, MD: New York Press.
- Goldstein,  E.  L.,  M.  Gross,  and R. M.  DeGraaf. 1986. Breeding birds and vegetation: A quantitative  assessment. Urban Ecology 9:377-85.
- Graber, J. W., and R. R. Graber. 1979. Severe  winter weather and bird populations in southern Illinois. Wilson Bulletin 91238-103.
- Green, R. J.  1984. Native  and exotic birds in a suburban habitat. Australian Wildlife Research 11:  18190.
- Griffith, D. A., and C. G. Amrhein. 1991. Statistical Anabsis fir Geographers. Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ: Prentice-Hall.
- Guthrie, D. A.  1974. Suburban bird  populations  in southern  California. American Midland Naturalist 92:461-66.
- Hogstad, 0. 1988. Advantages of social  foraging of willow tits Pans montanus.  lbzs 130:275-83.
- Hohtola, E. 1978. Differential changes in bird community  structure  with  urbanisation: A study  in central Finland. Omis Scandinavica 9:94-100.
- Horak, G. C., and A. T. Cringan. 1986. Christmas Bird Count trends in a  rapidly growing community in northern Colorado. In Wildlife Conservation and  New  Residential Developments, ed. K. Stenberg and W. W.  Shaw, 21-30.  Tucson, AZ: University of  Arizona,  School  of  Renewable  Natural  Resources.
- Huhtalo,  H.,  and  0.  Jarvinen. 1977. Quantitative comparison of the  urban  bird  community  in Tornio, Northern Finland. Bird Study 24:179-85.
- Jansson,  C.,  J.  E h a n ,   and A. Von Bromssen.  1981. Winter mortality and food supply in tits P a m   spp. Oikos 371313-22.
- Jones, D. N.  1981. Temporal change in the suburban  avifauna  of  an inland city. Awtralian  Wildlife Research 8: 109-1 9.
- Krehs,  J.  R. 1973.  Social  learning  and  the  significance  of  mixed-species  flocks  of chickadees (Pans  spp.). Canadian Journal of Zoology 5  1:  1,27588.
- Lancaster, R. K.,  and  W .   E. Rees.  1979. Bird communities  and the structure of urban habitats. Canadian Journal of Zoology 57:2,358-68.
- Mills,  G.  S., J.  B.  Dunning, Jr.,  and J.  M.  Bates. 1989.  Effects  of  urbanization  on  breeding  bird community structure in southwestern desert habitats. Condor 91:416-28.
- Morse, D. H. 1967.  Foraging  relationships of brown-headed  nuthatches and pine warblers. Ecology 48:94-103.

- .

1970. Ecological aspects of some mixed-species foraging flocks of birds. Ecological Monographs 40:119-68.

- . 1977. Feeding behavior and predator avoidance  in  hetero-specific  groups. Bioscience 27:33239.
- . 1980. Behavioral  Mechanism in Ecology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Moulton, C. A.,  and L. W .   Adams.  1991. Effects of urbanization on foraging strategy of woodpeckers. In Wildlife  Consemation  in  Metropolitan  Environments, ed. L. W. Adams and D. L. Leedy, 67-73. Symposium Series 2 . Columbia, MD:  National Institute for Urban Wildlife.
- Pitelka,  F. A. 1942. High  populations of  breeding birds  within  an  artificial  habitat. Condor 44:17274.
- Powell, G. V.  N.  1974. Experimental analysis of the social value of  flocking by  starlings (Sturnus vulgaris) in  relation to predation and  foraging. Anzma1 Behaviour 22:SO 1-05,
- Poynton,  J.  C.,  and  D.  C.  Roberts.  1985.  Urban open  space  planning  in  South  Africa:  A  biogeographical  perspective. South Apican 30urnal of Science 81:33-7.
- Pulliam, H. R. 1973. On the advantages of flocking. Journal of Theoretical Biology 38:419-22.
- Rosenberg,  K. V.,  S.  B.  Terrill, and  G.  H .  Rosenberg.  1987. Value  of  suburban habitats  to desert riparian  birds. Wilson Bulletin 99:642-54.
- Smith, R. J., and J. M. Schaefer. 1992. Avian characteristics of an urban strip corridor. Wilson Bulletin 104:732-3 8.
- Sullivan, K. A.  1984a. The advantages of social for--aging  in  downy  woodpeckers. Animal  Behaviour 32 : 16-2 2 .
- . 1984b. Information exploitation  by  downy woodpeckers  in  mixed-species  flocks. Behaviour 9  1  : 2 9 4 - 3 1  1.
- Thompson, D. B. A.,  and Barnard, C. J.  1983. Antipredator  responses  in  mixed-species associations of lapwings,  golden plovers  and black-headed gulls. Animal Behaviour 3 1:585-93.
- Tilghman,  N.  G.  1987a. Characteristics of  urban woodlands affecting  winter  bird diversity  and abundance. Forest Ecology and Management 2 1:16375.
- . 1987b. Characteristics of  urban woodlands affecting  breeding bird  diversity and  abundance. Landscape and  Urban Planning 14:481-95.
- Vale,  T.   R.,  and  G.  R.  Vale.  1976. Suburban bird populations in west-central  California. 30urnal of Biogeography 3:157-65.
- Woolfenden, G. E., and S. A. Rohwer. 1969. Breeding birds in a Florida suburb. Bulletin o f the Florida State Museum 13:l-83.
- Yaukey, P.  1991. The effects of residential  development  on  interspecific  grouping  in  the  brownheaded  nuthatch (Sitta pulsilla). Ph.D. diss., University of Georgia, Athens, GA.
- Zar, J. H. 1984. BiostatisficalAna&amp;s. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

PETER H. YAUKEY is Assistant Professor  at the University  of  New  Orleans,  New  Orleans,  LA 70148.  His research  interests  cover various  aspects of biogeography, including animal migration, largescale Datterns of animal distribution, and the effects of environmental change on wildlife.