<!-- image -->

## Geographical Review

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/utgr20

## DOES LOCAL RURAL HERITAGE STILL MATTER IN A GLOBAL URBAN WORLD?

## Serge Schmitz &amp; Lauriano Pepe

To cite this article: Serge Schmitz &amp; Lauriano Pepe (2021): DOES LOCAL RURAL HERITAGE STILL MATTER IN A GLOBAL URBAN WORLD?, Geographical Review, DOI: 10.1080/00167428.2021.1890996

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00167428.2021.1890996

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 03 Mar 2021.

Submit your article to this journal C

Article views: 90

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## DOES LOCAL RURAL HERITAGE STILL MATTER IN A GLOBAL URBAN WORLD?

SERGE SCHMITZ

and LAURIANO PEPE

ABSTRACT. Since 1976 ,  the  NGO 'Qualité Village Wallonie' has worked to safeguard local rural heritage. Yet, over the years, the staff working at the NGO have noticed important changes  in  rural  communities,  including  other  perspectives  on  the  local  heritage.  This may be linked with rapid changes in demography or changes of interests with globalization. This paper documents the apparent loss of sense of local heritage among inhabitants of the Belgian countryside and, in doing so, reflects on the sense of local places in an era of  globalization.  Based  on  interviews  with  the staff  of  the  NGO and  on an e-survey, the research presents a number of explanations for the findings. The results show a shift of attention  away  from  religious  and  farming  heritage  toward  places  that  make  the  village unique.  The  notion  of  heritage  is  evolving  from  something  of  the  past  that  requires protection to things, sometimes intangible, that could be useful for the present and future generations.  People  claim  that  local  heritage  matters  for  the  bonding  and  well-being  of rural people. Keywords: Belgium, community, countryside, heritage, sense of place.

W hy should we take care of local heritage? While the trend in the scientific literature  increasingly  focuses  on  the  tourist  potential  of  heritage,  we  should acknowledge  that  most  local  heritage  presents  poor  marketability  for  tourism development. However, at the same time, local heritage seems to be important for identity building. Tangible things help to construct personal, place, and community identity (Di Méo 1994 ; Harvey 2001 ). The stewardship of local heritage contributes to the social health of communities and empowers social capital and local  identity  (Stephens  and  Tiwari 2015 ).  In  globalized  world  marked  by  the homogenization of culture, local heritage is identified as a valuable resource to maintain  and  develop  both  the  local  economy  and  community  (Brennan  et  al. 2009 ;  Sacco et al. 2013 ).  The bonding of the community is praised as a valuable objective,  especially  when  it  is  associated  with  a  sense  of  belonging,  because  it facilitates exchanges, social capital, and resilience. Local heritage can contribute to sharing a sense of place and finally to a sense of belonging to a community. It seems  particularly  relevant  in  rural  areas  faced  with  suburbanization  and  agriculture modernization.

Yet,  we  are  reluctant  to  use  the  concept  of  community  heritage  in  Belgium due  to  the  fragmentation  of  the  rural  society  where  several  practices  and representations  of  'rural'  coexist  (Schmitz 2000 ).  The  model  developed  by Keith Halfacree ( 2006 ) describing the great diversity of motivations, representations,  and  practices  in  rural  areas  may  be  used  to  encompass  this  diversity.  In

SERGE  SCHMITZ,  University  of  Liege,  UR  SPHERES,  Institut  de  Géographie,  Clos  Mercator, 3 , 4000 Liege,  Belgium;  [S.Schmitz@uliege.be].  LAURIANO  PEPE,  University  of  Liege,  UR  SPHERES, Institut de Géographie, Clos Mercator, 3 , 4000 Liege, Belgium; [Lauriano.pepe@uliege.be].

2

practice, maintaining local heritage could be seen as a burden that increasingly fewer numbers of inhabitants want to support.

If the concern with heritage has been largely documented in the literature, we did  not  find  a  paper  examining  the  end  of  the  sense  of  heritage.  This  paper focuses on the heritage of local value, which receives less attention from official authorities,  but  is  recognized  by  the  local  society  as  interesting  and  worth preserving  for  values  that  may  differ  from  the  authorized  heritage  discourse (Smith 2006 ;  Mydland and Grahn 2012 ).  In  fact,  any component of a landscape can become heritage (Di Méo 2007 ; Schmitz and Bruckmann 2020 ). Increasingly, the  concept  of  heritage  is  being  expanded  from  material  and  architectural elements to natural and intangible elements (ICOMOS 1999 ). Yet, in the process of  scrutinizing  the  issue,  it  is  important  to  separate  the  material  matter  that could be recognized as heritage from people's perceptions that shape, neglect, or forget this potential heritage. Heritage is not the object in itself, but the relationship with the object (Poulot 1993 ). Indeed, as André Gob ( 2017 ) argues, heritage value should be seen as a present value independent of the past values.

## THE  RESEARCH  CONTEXT

During the second part of the twentieth century, rural space in Belgium, a small country  ( 30 , 500 km 2 of  territory  and 11 . 5 million  inhabitants)  in  the  European Union  with  a  predominantly  urban  population  ( 91 . 5 percent)  (OECD 2018 ), experienced  a  major  decrease  in  the  number  of  farmers  and  accommodated urban  sprawl.  Large  sections  of  the  population  commute  to  cities  for  work, shopping,  and  recreation.  At  the  same  time,  the  rural  economy  experienced a diversification based on services, the primary sector, but also industrialization (Van  Hecke  et  al. 2010 ).  Concerning  the  demographic  situation,  rural  space experienced, on one hand, a loss of active people and the aging of the population and, on the other hand, arrivals of commuters that led to a decline in the native population's share of the total people. In the more attractive landscapes around major cities, a residential economy prevails resulting in the consumption and the commodification of the rural space (Woods 2011 ).

In  Wallonia  ( 3 . 6 million  inhabitants),  the  French  speaking  part  of  Belgium, the  NGO  'Qualité  Village  Wallonie'  (QVW)  has  worked  on  safeguarding  and highlighting  local  rural  heritage  since 1976 .  The  QVW helped  to  develop 2 , 500 projects  in 850 villages  during  recent  decades.  The  staff  of  QVW  has  noticed important  changes  in  rural  communities,  including  alternative  perspectives  on their heritage. This could be related to the various modifications that affect the countryside and its population with rapid demographic changes, including aging and  decline  of  the  native  population  and  the  arrival  of  commuters.  An  alternative hypothesis to explain these differing perspectives is related to changes in people's  lifestyles,  particularly  due  to  globalization  and  the  digital  revolution. Factors  such  as  the  rejection  of  Catholicism,  increased  mobility-including

frequent  leisure  travel-global  culture,  social  media,  and  the  increase  of  consumerism could all contribute to the loss of the sense of local heritage in Belgian society.

Our research aims to document this apparent loss of sense of local heritage among inhabitants of  the  Belgian  countryside  and,  in  doing  so,  reflects  on  the sense  of  local  places  in  an  era  of  globalization.  The  research  also  aims  to  help QVW by  analyzing  the  new  demands  of  rural  people.  During  the  process  of designing the methodology, the staff and the administrators of QVW took part in  defining the research objectives and were the first informants and commentators  of  the  results.  In  an  increasingly  urban  and  global  world,  what  does  the local  rural  heritage  mean  for  both  the  native  population  and  the  newcomers? Can we explain the new perspectives on the local heritage by a loss of interest in these outdated elements? Or, do the new generations of inhabitants focus their attention on renewed sorts of tangible and intangible heritage? Our hypothesis is that in the past, heritage played a role that nowadays lacks relevance for people. Moreover, the paper questions the notions of centrality and locality in old rural settlements  integrated  in  suburban  areas.  These  questions  go  well  beyond  the scope of Wallonia. All over the world, there is an interest in maintaining some tangible or intangible elements of the community history to support the collective memory and to bind people together. The research conducted on the theme of  heritage  during  recent  decades  shows  the  evolution  of  concerns.  It  started with pragmatic planning questions to introduce increasingly critical approaches (Veschambre 2007 ).  Because  heritage  is  culturally  dependent  (World  Heritage Center 2008 ;  Alberts  and  Hazen 2010 ),  special  attention  will  be  given,  in  this research,  to  the  literature  in  French.  Based  on  interviews  with  the  staff  and administrators  of  QVW  and  on  an  e-survey  of  rural  people,  the  research describes  and  suggests  explanations  for  this  apparent  loss  of  sense  of  local heritage.

## THE  EMERGENCE  OF  A  LOCAL  HERITAGE

In  Western  Europe,  the 1980 s  were  marked  by  an  interest  in  the  notion  of heritage,  not  only  national  heritage  that  makes  kings  and  nations,  but  also broader  expressions  of  heritage.  After  years  of  Americanization  of  European society, it has felt like a necessity to pay attention to heritage and to rediscover local and regional peculiarities. As a result of lifestyle changes, people's attention shifted  toward  noticing  vernacular  elements  of  their  environment  that  they perhaps  had  not  seen  before.  This  leads  to  the  emergence  of  new  heritage, more  'banal'  and  'quotidian,'  but  more  relevant  for  people  due  to  stronger attachment and symbolic meanings (Jones 2017 ;  Lekakis and Dragouni 2020 ).

The international literature  on heritage  has  shown  an  increasing  interest  in local  heritage  defined,  in  essence,  as  having  a  value  recognized  by  a  village  or a  community  (Carter  and  Bramley 2002 ), as well as in the population's

4

participation  in  the  production  and  preservation  of  heritage,  considering  heritage  as  a  social  process  (for  example,  Waterton  and  Smith 2010 ;  Mydland  and Grahn 2012 ; Jones 2017 ). In particular, Siân Jones ( 2017 ) suggests looking beyond the intrinsic aspects of heritage, such as its esthetic value or its historic past, and to take into account more 'intangible' values. This author refers to the concept of  social  values  used  in  various  ways,  but  that  she  defines  as  the  result  of  'a collective  attachment  to  place  that  embodies  meanings  and  values  that  are important to  a  community  or  communities'  (Jones 2017 , 22 ).  As  a  result,  even if  esthetic  or  historical  interest  may  still  be  important  in  the  production  of heritage,  the  population  will  produce  heritage  for  other  reasons,  such  as  to avert  a  threat  or  to  satisfy  a  desire  to  belong  to  a  group  of  individuals  and  to build an identity (Braaksma et al. 2016 ).  Today,  'cultural  heritage  is  seen  as  an instrument for the  development  of  social  experiences,  relations,  exchanges  and so forth' (Mydland and Grahn 2012 , 583 ).

## A  GEOGRAPHICAL  APPROACH

According to Brian Graham et al. ( 2000 ), geography and heritage intersect. First of all, heritage is a spatial phenomenon because it is embedded in space through its location, context, and spatial scale. Thus, the perception of heritage can vary according  to  the  environment  in  which  it  is  situated  and  the  scale  (local, regional, national, and international) at which we observe it. Secondly, cultural geography  considers  heritage  as  an  identity  component  of  a  place  and  geographers  are  interested  in  studying  specifically  how  the  history  of  the  place  is expressed,  particularly  by  the  individual.  Finally,  heritage  is  considered  as a  resource of the territory, useful for the development and attractiveness of the territory.  In  this  regard,  heritage  is  a  cultural  and  economic  good  to  be commodified.

Looking  at  the  French  geographical  literature  dealing  with  heritage,  Vincent Veschambre ( 2007 ) pointed to three periods. First, the geographers, who are more comfortable  with  the  material  world,  examined  particularly  pragmatic  issues  of heritage relating to planning and local development: how to integrate heritage in the contemporary living space and how can heritage play a role in local development,  especially  through  tourism  development.  Then,  in  the 1990 s,  an  array  of geographers influenced by new cultural geography paid increasing attention to the ontological  value  of  heritage  and  brought  out  the  links  with  personal  and  community identity. This work relates to the stance that heritage gives existence to the past, the territory, and the community (see Di Méo 1994 ). Finally, a critical current scrutinizes the political dimension of all heritagization (for example, Graham et al. 2000 ;  Carter  et  al. 2019 ).  Scholars  paid  particular  attention  to  the  following questions:  Who  makes  the  selection  of  heritage  goods?  For  which  purposes? What  is  the  process?  François  et  al.  ( 2006 )  describe  the  heritagization  stages, from  the selection of goods  and  the justification to the conservation, the

exhibition, and valorization. In each stage, the object changes in status or function or in both  characteristics  (Babelon  and  Chastel 1994 ).  When  heritagization becomes an official process, the agenda clearly defends the interest and priorities of  the  dominant  class  (Del  Pozo  and  González 2012 ).  Does  such  a  relation  exist when  examining  local  heritage?  Who  could  be  the  dominants  and  how  do  they exploit local heritage?

It is possible to summarize the approaches to heritage in a triangular diagram where  the  apex  represents  three  visions  of  heritage:  attachment,  resource,  and charge (Figure 1 ). The 'attachment' dimension reveals people's sense of place. Are local people attached to the heritage element? Do they give their allegiance to it? Are they ready to sacrifice time and money? (Shamai 1991 ; Waterton 2005 ; Schmitz 2012 ) The 'resource' dimension assesses the use, and sometimes the abuse, of heritage to contribute  to  extra  incomes  or  a  political  agenda.  Heritage  is  seen  as  an  asset  to economically  develop  the  area  or  to  consolidate  an  ideology.  This  can  lead  to commodification and the predation of the resource by a group of people (Landel and Senil 2009 ).  The  third  dimension,  'charge,'  less  underlined  by  the  literature (Caust and Vecco 2017 ), measures the feeling of burden. If people pay attention and maintain heritage, it is more experienced as a duty, a responsibility regarding the past and future generations. It may also be seen as an obstacle to new developments (Graham et al. 2005 ; Palazzo and Pugliano 2015 ). Depending on people's view and way of living, the sense of heritage for an object may move through this triangular space, giving more or less weight to each of the dimensions.

## HERITAGE  IN  A  RURAL  CONTEXT

While the rural spaces evolve and the social value of heritage leads to the recognition of heritage as an evolutionary process (Jones 2017 ), the current interest in rural local heritage is frequently characterized by a lack of interest by the official authorities (Mydland and Grahn 2012 )  or  by  a  weak  recognition  of  the  role  of  this  heritage among a large part of the population (Hodges and Watson 2000 ). Rural heritage is often 'described as carrying historic and/or scientific values and conceptualized as residing  in  physical  elements  and  historic  structures  that  were  created  by  its surrounding communities and their activities on the landscape, including farming, animal  husbandry  or  fishing'  (Lekakis  and  Dragouni 2020 , 86 ).  However,  rural

FIG. 1 -The three dimensions of the sense of heritage (Schmitz and Pepe 2021 ).

<!-- image -->

6

heritage has often been considered as a 'fixed' resource conserved and enhanced from the perspective of tourism development (González 2017 ) and from the commodification of the 'countryside ideal' (Mitchell 1998 ; Kneafsey 2001 ; Woods 2011 ). More recently, Stelios Lekakis and Mina Dragouni ( 2020 ) support the idea that in order to better understand the construction of rural heritage, it is necessary to know the context in which it is integrated, and to consider this heritage 'as a unified and intertwined  system,  highlighting  the  position  of  all  nodes,  such  as  material  and intangible aspects, local and distant communities, social relations, and production processes . . . ' ( 85 ).

## METHODS

This  research  aims  to  support  the  reflection  of  the  NGO  'Qualité  Village Wallonie'  (QVW).  After  more  than 40 years  of  projects  all  over  Wallonia, QVW questions both their actions and also the evolution of the sense of heritage (the  current  utility  of  local  heritage  and  its  future  prospects)  in  suburban countryside marked by global culture. In order to support QVW in their questioning,  we  first  conducted  semistructured  interviews  and  workshops  with  the staff  and  the  administrators  of  QVW.  Seven  interviews  were  recorded  and transcribed  for  analysis  by  both  authors.  Most  of  the  people  interviewed  have several  decades  of  experience  in  the  domain  and  can  trace  people's  interaction with local heritage over that time.

The  insights  gained  from  the  interviews  are  used  in  conjunction  with  the results  of  an  e-survey  filled  in  by 1091 people  from  March  to  June 2020 .  A  web page  with  a  URL  has  been  created  via  the  online  tool  'framaforms'  to  host  the survey.  We  restricted  the  number  of  entries  per  IP  address  to  one.  The  questionnaire  is  short  and  playful  to  avoid  participants  abandoning  it  during  the process.  It  allows  people  to  reflect  on  their  surroundings  and  their  involvements in  the  local  community.  We  restricted  the  identity  questions  to  the  name  of  the locality,  the  age,  the  gender,  the  period of living  in  the  locality,  the  ownership of the dwelling, and the past contacts with QVW. The questionnaire invited participants  to  list  emblematic  places  and  four  heritage  elements  of  their  municipality, and included 18 items rated on a Likert scale about the richness of the municipality from a heritage point of view, their personal involvement in heritage, the reasons for  a  moderate  personal  involvement,  and  their  views  on  the  contribution  of heritage  to  the  local  life.  Finally,  the  last  question  asked  was,  'Who  should maintain  local  heritage?'  One  of  the  objectives  of  this  questionnaire  is  thus  to position individuals in regard to the three dimensions of the sense of heritage that have been presented (attachment, resource, and charge). We shared the invitation to  fill  out  the  questionnaire  through  social  media  and  mailing  lists  from  several organizations, encouraging people to invite friends and neighbors to complete the survey. The e-mail briefly explained the research and included links to the questionnaire, and both the university research unit and QVW websites. We regularly

analyzed  the  characteristics  of  the  respondents  and  informed  the  partners  about gaps in our sample to relaunch invitations to underrepresented areas or ages.

Socio-demographic  information  on  the  survey  respondents  is  presented  in Table 1 . Admittedly, the sample is not fully representative of the Belgian population  living  in  the  countryside.  People  who  have  answered  are  clearly  more interested  in  heritage  than  the  average  Belgian.  However,  the  survey  gives  an image of the situation and its main objective is to extrapolate the findings issued from  the  interviews  to  a  larger  group.  The  sample  is  reasonably  balanced regarding  gender,  with  a  slight  bias  toward  men  ( 52 . 4 percent).  With  a  mean age of 55 years, the sample is older than the Belgian population. Effectively, the respondents aged between 18 and 54 years were underrepresented, but the older (more  than 54 years)  were  overrepresented.  The  survey  gathers  opinions  of people  from  all  Wallonia  with  an  emphasis  on  the  countryside.  Respondents declare, 73 . 6 percent of the time,-that they live in the countryside and less than one-third think they are living in an urban or semiurban  environment. Homeowners are also more represented ( 83 . 4 percent) than in the Belgian society ( 70 . 0 percent), but a part of this difference is explained by the emphasis on the countryside  where  the  share  of  tenants  is  lower  than  in  cities.  Concerning  the duration of residence, the majority of surveyed people have been living in their current  place  of  residence  for  more  than 20 years  ( 62 . 9 percent).  We  also  note that  more  than  half  of  the  sample  have  not  been  in  contact  with  QVW  in  the past ( 62 . 3 percent).

TABLE 1 -PROFILE  SAMPLE  (N = 1091 )

| ATTRIBUTE                   | CATEGORY                | PERCENTAGE   |
|-----------------------------|-------------------------|--------------|
| Gender                      | Female                  | 47 . 6       |
|                             | Male                    | 52 . 4       |
| Age                         | 15 - 24 years           | 5 . 4        |
|                             | 25 - 54 years           | 37 . 3       |
|                             | 55 - 64 years           | 28 . 0       |
|                             | More than 64 years      | 29 . 3       |
| Ownership of the housing    | Owner                   | 83 . 4       |
|                             | Tenant                  | 9 . 8        |
|                             | Cohabitant              | 6 . 8        |
| Declared living environment | Countryside             | 73 . 6       |
|                             | City                    | 18 . 5       |
|                             | Periphery               | 7 . 9        |
| Time of residence           | Under than 1 to 5 years | 11 . 3       |
|                             | 6 - 10 years            | 9 . 0        |
|                             | 11 - 20 years           | 16 . 8       |
|                             | More than 20 years      | 62 . 9       |
| Past contact with QVW       | Yes                     | 37 . 7       |
|                             | No                      | 62 . 3       |

8

## RESULTS

## A  CHANGING  PERSPECTIVE  ON  HERITAGE

The interviews with the staff and the administrators of  QVW pointed out that the  interest  in  local  rural  heritage  was  more  important  in  the 1980 s  and 1990 s than in 2020 .  This  differing  interest  could  be  explained  by  thinking  of  it  as  the life cycle of a product. People discovered their heritage in the 1980 s and invested in knowing and protecting it; then as the novelty faded, they slowly turned their interest  to  other  local  and  international  concerns,  such  as  climate  change mitigation  and  the  transition  movements.  The  issue  of  the  rural  local  heritage in Belgium was more relevant in the 1980 s because it was a way to resist drastic changes  of  the  countryside.  It  was  seen  as  important  to  preserve  some  rural features  to  ensure  rurality  and  the  village  identity.  This  was  marked  by  an interest  in  places  that  lost  their  utility  such  as  fountains,  outdoor  washhouses, chapels, churchyards, abandoned schools, and local train stops.

According to the survey, 85 percent of respondents acknowledged that their village has a rich heritage. Regarding the heritage elements listed, we noticed that castles  and  churches  are  the  most  cited  elements,  far  more  than  other  diverse elements  including  paths,  landscape  viewpoints,  public  squares,  postindustrial sites, natural curiosities, war memorials, gastronomic specialties, folkloric events, and  such.  The  vernacular  heritage,  which  were  the  core  business  of  QVW,  is scarcer  in  this  list.  However,  despite  the  existence  of  a  certain  interest  in  their heritage,  the  staff  of  QVW  underline  that  people  no  longer  know  the  function and the meanings of things around them. Indeed, local heritage has become part of a living environment where visual esthetic takes priority. For instance, a group of inhabitants wanted to restore a fountain to beautify a village, but they never considered  restoring  its  water-supply  function.  Practically,  this  last  proposal would  cost  more,  would  require  some  expertise  and  maintenance,  and  may cause  public  nuisances.  For  all  these  reasons,  the  fountain  was  transformed into  a  flower  container.  The  symbol  is  maintained  but  the  utility  of  delivering water does not represent enough interest. It is true that the new generations have no  direct  links  to  the  old  practices  of  peasantry;  the  local  memory  is  fading. Several interviews underlined the prevalence of beauty and the feeling created by this beauty.

I  think  that  people  are  touched  by  the  beauty,  like  to  conserve  traces  from  the  past,  the history. (Anne, 20 years with QVW)

Heritage  is  often  a  sensation;  it  is  something  that  is  inside.  Heritage  is:  What  a  beautiful thing! (Alain, 26 years with QVW)

A  broader  perspective  of  local  heritage  should  require  raising  awareness  for people.

Heritage  is  a  rather  vague  concept  that  must  be  explained  through  concrete  examples. People come to a first meeting and say: I am invited to a meeting on the heritage of my village  and  I  have  thought  carefully.  I  do  not  see  it  around  me.  (Anne, 20 years  with QVW)

## CONTRACTUAL  INVOLVEMENT  IN  LOCAL  HERITAGE

Sixty-one percent of people declare they are committed to the preservation of local heritage and to its enhancement. And concerning this commitment, the staff and administrators provided insight into a new sense of time and community engagement. Inhabitants seem very busy and when they accept to volunteer, they want to have a clear contract about their engagement. There is also a reluctance to commit oneself  for  a  long  period  and,  sometimes,  they  would  like  to  be  paid  for  their investments  in  the  community.  Therefore,  fellow  citizens  are  more  selective  and want to see fast results. This may be problematic because working on the restoration of heritage often requires time to study and reflect on the best solutions, but also to collect funds from both private and public actors. As with many places in the  world,  the  Belgian  countryside  has  entered  a  world  of  instantaneousness. People  await  a  response  to  an  e-notification  in  the  next  seconds,  but  forget  to preserve a chapel or a stone wall constructed centuries before.

Instead of the formation of small groups of citizens who like to highlight the local heritage, QVW increasingly intervenes to support people who are attached to a precise place. They collaborate for a precise target; then, the group disbands. The staff  and  administrators  also  noticed  an  overspecialization  of  volunteers  who increasingly collaborate within their professional competencies, avoiding discovering and being responsible for other tasks. The results of the survey support these views.  Fifty-three  percent  of  the  people  surveyed  agree  that  their  lack  of  time explains  their  relatively  weak  involvement  in  the  safeguarding  of  local  heritage (Figure 2 ).  It  is  also  interesting  to  note  the  diversity  of  responses  concerning  the lack of know-how. If most people have an interest in local heritage, 48 percent do not know how they can contribute to its enhancement. It seems that there are still some missions for QVW and similar organizations to support citizens to take care of their local heritage.

The results of the survey support the premise that the degree of investment seems  to  vary  with  age  and  with  length  of  residence  (Figure 3 ).  Younger  generations and newcomers might have less time to commit or less interest. On the contrary,  older  generations  seem  to  be  more  concerned  about  their  local  heritage. This is probably a way to both recall memories and transmit a part of their identity to the next generation.

## NEW  WAYS  OF  DWELLING

The staff and administrators of the NGO also noted that the ways of dwelling have changed drastically and could explain the changes of interest for both the

10

FIG. 2 -Respondents' levels of commitment in local heritage.

<!-- image -->

local  community  and  the  heritage.  Most  new  inhabitants  are  located  on  the periphery  of  the  village,  while  older  or  poorer  people  inhabit  the  historic center.  The  houses  in  the  historic  center  are  often  smaller,  without  a  large garden,  and  require  an  extensive  renovation  to  correspond  to  contemporary standards.  So,  the  young  generation  from  the  village  and  newcomers  inhabit peripheral districts. They are less and less confronted with historical heritage.

In  their  neighborhood,  there  is  no  heritage  because  it  is  brand  new.  You  can't  make someone aware of something they don't have around them. (Alain, 26 years with QVW)

Before,  there  was  an  interest  because  we  lived  in  the  village  and  we  knew  but  now  it's  so distended, 2000 people,  you  don't  know  anymore,  there  is  no  longer  this  sense  of  local heritage in the living environment. (Isabelle, 32 years with QVW)

Considering  social  life,  the  staff  and  administrators  underlined  the  impact  of social  media,  which  restrain  the  interactions  with  neighbors  and  consume  an increasing share of the spare time.

People  have  everything  at  their  fingertips  via  internet,  social  networks.  Even  for  contacts, they  no  longer  need  to  see  each  other.  It's  so  easy  with  the  different  technological  means. Before,  when  they  lived  in  a  closed  society,  they  all  knew  each  other,  they  had  activities within a tight geographical area. . . . Heritage is also no longer necessarily one of the points of  interest,  they  are  no  longer  obliged  to  have  a  local  hobby,  so  heritage  is  no  longer a compulsory step to know his village. (Marie, 15 years with QVW)

FIG. 3 -Respondents' levels of commitment according to their age and time of residence.

<!-- image -->

Increasing mobility is another factor that could be used to explain the decreasing interest in the village. In many cases villages do not offer facilities such as shops, bars, and school, thus people spend their time elsewhere. Moreover, the decline of  two practices  reinforce this trend of disappearing interpersonal communication within the village community: the practice of Catholicism and of gardening. Nowadays, people choose to engage with people through new information and communication technologies rather than their neighbors. In the same way, they can also develop a heritage that does not need to be locally embedded via soap operas, world sport events, social media, and the like.

## THE  SOCIAL  AND  IDENTITY  ROLE  OF  HERITAGE

Local historic heritage presents two weak points. Heritage could be described as an  outdated  issue,  increasingly  disconnected  from  contemporary  life,  and  is frequently situated in the old village center, which has lost most of its facilities. Nonetheless, the staff of QVW pointed out that local heritage still provides some services: it contributes to the identity of the village, it allows the community to

12

bond, especially on the occasion of inaugural ceremony or feasts, it enhances the living  environment,  and  should  allow  the  inhabitants  to  appropriate  spaces through  heritagization.  Heritagization  is  also  pointed  as  a  way  to  fight  the acculturation  of  space.  Moreover,  people  who  filled  in  the  survey,  and  are  not perfectly representative of Belgian society, tend to agree with most of the listed services:  local  heritage  supports  the  links  between  generations  ( 95 percent),  the inhabitants' well-being ( 94 percent), the links between inhabitants ( 91 percent), and  economic  development  ( 88 percent,  with  more  than 40 percent  totally agreeing).  However, 18 percent  of  the  respondents  assess  heritage  as  a  luxury (Figure 4 ).

The content analysis of the interviews shows a shift of attention away from the religious and farming heritage to places and buildings that make the village unique.

Each village has its own identity and the feeling of belonging to a village, to a community, it is also important for people to think that we have this thing in our village and maybe there is  no such thing elsewhere. (Delphine, 16 years with QVW)

It is important to think of what is occurring in terms of more than simply a loss of  the  sense  of  local  heritage,  and  instead  to  posit  it  as  something  that  continuously  evolves.  It  increasingly  shifts  from  something  from  the  past  that requires  protection  toward  things,  sometimes  intangible,  that  could  be  useful for the present and future generations. Moreover, these elements can be situated in  remote  places  that  inhabitants  frequent  during  their  open-air  leisure.  Beside a  renewed  interest  for  old  paths  that  linked  villages,  local  heritage  gains  in

FIG. 4 -Services delivered by local heritage according to survey respondents.

<!-- image -->

importance when it helps distinguish one village from the others. This trend is also  visible  in  the  reinvention  of  local  folklore  and  patronal  feasts,  which  give a pretext to organize parties. While losing their roots embedded in peasantry and Catholicism, by adopting the global and virtual culture and economy, people are looking to new elements that help them to be distinct.

Heritage must speak to me and if possible, speaks to me about myself. (Marie, 15 years with QVW)

The idea  that  heritage  is  both  a  common  good  and  an  individual  good,  which gives  rise  to  a  social  interaction,  is  an  interesting  one.  The  enhancement  of a heritage (through its restoration or during folklore events) will be done by the will  of  a  group  of  inhabitants.  Still  today,  through  this  common  will,  local heritage  allows  people  to  participate  in  the  collective  life  and  to  develop  an identity.  They  are  linked  to  the  group  that  appropriates  it,  both  from  an  emotional and symbolic point of view, and thus are able to distinguish this group of inhabitants,  this  neighborhood,  this  village  from  the  others.  Additionally,  heritage  can  contribute  to  shape  individual  identity.  An  individual's  identity  is  not limited  to  the  relationships  with  others,  but  also  to  the  relationships  with  the elements that constitute his or her environment (Proshansky et al. 1983 ).

If  they  are  not  natives  or  linked  to  an  old  family  from  the  village,  some  people  will  get involved in the preservation of the heritage of their new living environment. They will try to take  a  place  because  they  have  no  place.  When  they  get  involved,  it  is  to  say:  we  are interested  in  our  living  environment,  we  do  not  come  as  invaders  to  remove  everything. (Marie, 15 years with QVW)

Staff  and  administrators  of  the  NGO  like  also  to  emphasis  that  acknowledging and taking care of heritage is also to transmit a message.

I think people like it because they all have some information to bring and memories to tell they can convey. (Isabelle, 32 years with QVW)

Our heritage, that's it, it conveys a message as well. (Delphine, 16 years with QVW)

## WHO  IS  RESPONSIBLE?

While 87 percent  of  the  respondents  to  the  survey  consider  that  local  heritage should be placed higher on the political agenda, the question, 'Who should be in charge of local heritage?' is a central question. In Belgium, this responsibility can be  shared  between  the  owner,  the  state  (Wallonia),  the  municipality,  or  the inhabitants.  Because  the  regional  state  invests  mainly  in  monumental  heritage of  regional  and  international  interest,  the  municipality  may  be  the  appropriate level  to  handle  local  heritage,  but  it  lacks  the  income  required  to  cover  these expenses. Citizen involvement is needed if they want to preserve local heritage. Indeed,  they  have  the  opportunity  to  symbolically  appropriate  some  places  by investing  time,  competencies,  and  money,  and  so  to  maintain,  or  create  in  the case of newcomers, personal links with the village and the community. Ninety-

14

one  percent  of  the  people  surveyed  pointed  to  municipalities  as  the  entity principally  responsible,  which  was  followed  by  the  state  ( 80 percent),  owners ( 69 percent), citizens ( 68 percent), and actors of the tourism sector ( 60 percent).

Another  concern  pointed  toward  in  the  interviews  was  the  crosscutting  of heritage policy. While heritage could be restricted to historic monuments and be managed  by  one  dedicated  administration,  it  also  concerns  planning,  economic development,  tourism,  social  cohesion,  people  identity,  culture,  and  education. This  richness  could  become  a  nightmare  when  searching  for  support  from  the authorities.

## DISCUSSION

To reflect on the insights gathered during the interviews and the survey relating to the sense and caring for local heritage, it is important to go back to the facets of the meaning of places (Relph 1976 ). We suggest dividing the meaning of place into six  components:  materiality,  location,  functions,  people,  history  and  myths,  and finally,  personal  memories (Schmitz 2017 ).  Paying  attention  to  these  components helps us to understand the notion of an end of the sense of local rural heritage.

The  materiality  of  the  object  contributes  both  to  its  recognition  and  to  the difficulties  to  maintain  it.  Belgians  tend  to  list,  first,  castles  and  other  important buildings as elements of their local heritage, but they are not able to find resources to  preserve  them.  They  seem  to  accord  less  importance  to  small  pieces  of  rural landscape that require more awareness raising and interpretation. The location is another  concern,  as  we  have  seen  the  rural  local  heritage  migrates  with  the installation of the new generation in peripheral districts. The centers of the village are increasingly meaningless for this new generation and have no more functional interest. The people who live there are old and do not share the same interest as young  generations.  The  social  value  concerning  the  local  heritage  located  in  the village  center  is  not  shared  by  all  the  inhabitants  and  is  disappearing  with  the aging of the ancients. Moreover, newcomers and young generations do not know the  histories  of  the  buildings  and  places  and  so  are  not  aware  of  their  richness. They also  have  less  time  due  to  the  family  and  professional  activities,  which  are often  located  in  towns.  Finally,  and  probably  most  importantly,  they  do  not associate these places with significant events in their lives.

Newcomers  are  becoming  the  dominant  class  and  increasingly  shape  local policy  and  the  image  of  the  countryside.  In  many  cases,  the  sense  of  heritage moves  beyond  simple  and  singular  representations  of  the  past  to  encompass peculiar  elements  of  the  environment  that  do  not  have  a  long  history.  The definition of heritage is broadening and increasingly pays attention to previously marginalized forms of heritage, such as paths that are inherited from medieval times.  These  can  be  used  by  present  inhabitants,  thus  including  'practices  that might construct heritage implicitly, such as outdoor recreation' (Braaksma et al. 2016 , 75 ).

Was  the  interest  in  local  heritage  a  passing  fad  that  helped  people  to  face a crisis of identity around the 1980 s? Rural local heritage anchored in preindustrial times was very relevant during periods of crisis, in face of the urbanization of the countryside in trying to maintain rural identity. Heritage concern emerges from emergency due to the fear of losing important  elements of  identity  (Gob 2017 ). However, the new generation, with their new lifestyle, pay less attention to this  rurality  and  have  no  more  direct  contact  with  people  who  were  peasants. This heritage of previous generations may be seen as well as an obstacle to the restructuring  of  the  village.  It  became  a  burden.  The  new  generation  broadens their interests to other places and other themes, and seem less concerned by local objects arising from an unknown past. Alain Touraine ( 1973 , 7 )  already pointed out 50 years  ago:  'To  know  its  present,  society  looks  less  and  less  to  its  past, because the share of what is transmitted continues to decrease compared to the share of what is acquired.' Does it mean that there is a real loss of sense of rural local  heritage  in  Belgium  because  the  value  that  it  represented  disappeared, because  its  potential  for  commodification  is  weak?  Jean  Pierre  Babelon  and André Chastel  ( 1994 )  noticed  that  the  sense  of  heritage  is  based  sometimes  on the traditional values, which are attached to it and explain it, but sometimes and increasingly  in  the  name  of  a  new  feeling  that  bonds  the  community.  Yet,  the low  interest  in  local  heritage  is  also  a  sign  of  the  fragmentation  of  the  rural society that does not share common values and expectations for the local landscape (Rivera Escribano and Mormont 2007 ;  Halfacree and Rivera 2012 ).

The  Belgian  countryside,  as  with  other  rural  spaces  around  the  world,  has changed drastically in terms of demographics, economic function, land use, and in cultural points of view. If villages and rural landscapes incorporate landmarks from the past, which were seen as heritage by the previous generations, the use and even the meanings of numerous elements are being forgotten. These pieces of  heritage  do  not  represent  a  lot  to  present  inhabitants  and,  so,  lose  their heritage  values.  Even  if  the  people  who  participated  in  the  survey  state  having an interest in local heritage, they do not know whose is responsible and suggest a  broad  sharing  of  responsibility.  We  noticed  also  a  specialization  of  personal interest that is directed to a special element instead of the village, its inhabitants, and its surroundings as a whole. Thanks to the esthetic or peculiarities of some of these elements, individuals notice them and try to safeguard them. Heritage, and  the  negotiation  regarding  its  use,  the  duty  to  protect  it,  and  its  links  with society are in a process of continuous construction and deconstruction of meaning (Harvey 2001 ; MacDonald 2013 ; Carter et al. 2019 ). Looking at the interest in a  local  piece  of  heritage,  it  is  important  to  pay  more  attention  to  the  possible exploitation of it. If people do not see possible usages, it lacks interest. If they do not know its meanings, they are less equipped to like it. The Belgian countryside is  becoming  a  decor  reflecting  an  urban  way  of  life  where  heritage  should  be both  documented  by  historical  research  and  reinterpreted  considering  new perspectives of the population.

16

The  idea  that,  concerning  common  heritage,  we  would  not  be  owner  but responsible  (Landel  and  Senil 2009 )  seems  inappropriate  outside  the  cenacles who  list  the  world  and  national  heritage.  The  debate  between  those  who  prescribe maintaining historical structures and those who accept to adapt structures to contemporary life (Tyler 1999 ; Alberts and Hazen 2010 ) should encompass the discussion  about  the  sense  that  people  give  to  their  places.  Heritagization  is a process of rethinking history and ideological symbols, and allows people to feel the progress of the society (Ilchenko 2020 ). Indeed, the spirit of heritage cannot be  transmitted;  it  must  be  discovered  and  grasped  by  each  generation  and  be rooted in the present (Bortolotto 2011 ).  It  becomes  a  heritage  if  people  commit themselves.  Globalization  of  the  economy,  cultural  change  in  society  and  people's  identity,  including  in  villages,  is  more  or  less  connected  to  cities.  New technologies contribute to reduce the anchoring of rural people to their territory. However, four out five respondents to the survey, probably tens of thousands of people  from  Wallonia,  acknowledge  that  they  should  pay  attention  to  their heritage. While the notion of heritage is changing all the time and the value of landmarks can be totally different from the primary intention, the construction of local heritage seems to matter for rural people and contribute to the bonding and the well-being of the population.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  the  staff  and  administrators  of  QVW  for  their  contribution  to  this  research  and Michaela Korodimou and Mary Cawley for language editing of the manuscript.

## ORCID

Serge Schmitz http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3412-818X

Lauriano Pepe http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6243-1960

## REFERENCES

- Alberts, H. C., and H. D. Hazen. 2010 .  Maintaining Authenticity and Integrity at Cultural World Heritage Sites. Geographical Review 100 ( 1 ): 56 -73 .  doi: 10 . 1111 /j. 1931 -0846 . 2010 . 00006 .x.
- Babelon, J. P., and A. Chastel. 1994 . La notion de patrimoine .  Paris:  Liana Levi.
- Bortolotto, C. 2011 .  Le  trouble du patrimoine culturel immatériel. Terrain 26 : 21 -42 .
- Braaksma, P. J., M. H. Jacobs, and A. N. Van der Zande. 2016 . The Production of Local Landscape Heritage:  A  Case  Study  in  the  Netherlands. Landscape  Research 41 ( 1 ): 64 -78 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 01426397 . 2015 . 1045465 .
- Brennan,  M.  A.,  C.  G.  Flint,  and  A.  E.  Luloff. 2008 .  Bringing  Together  Local  Culture  and  Rural Development: Findings from Ireland, Pennsylvania and Alaska. Sociologia Ruralis 49 ( 1 ): 97 -112 .  doi: 10 . 1111 /j. 1467 -9523 . 2008 . 00471 .x.
- Carter,  R.  W.,  and  R.  Bramley. 2002 .  Defining  Heritage  Values  and  Significance  for  Improved Resource  Management:  An  Application  to  Australian  Tourism. International  Journal  of Heritage Studies 8 ( 3 ): 175 -199 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 13527250220000 / 18895 .
- Carter,  T.,  D.  C.  Harvey,  R.  Jones,  and  I.  J.  M.  Robertson. 2019 . Creating Heritage: Unrecognised Pasts and Rejected Futures .  London: Routledge.

- Caust,  J.,  and  M.  Vecco. 2017 .  Is  UNESCO  World  Heritage  Recognition  a  Blessing  or  Burden? Evidence from Developing Asian Countries. Journal of Cultural Heritage 27 : 1 -9 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j. culher. 2017 . 02 . 004 .
- Del  Pozo,  P.  B.,  and  P.  A.  González. 2012 .  Industrial  Heritage  and  Place  Identity  in  Spain:  From Monuments to Landscapes. Geographical Review 102 ( 4 ): 446 -464 . doi: 10 . 1111 /j. 1931 -0846 . 2012 . 00169 .x.
- Di  Méo,  G. 1994 .  Patrimoine  et  territoire,  une  parenté  conceptuelle. Espaces  et  Sociétés 4 : 15 -34 . doi: 10 . 3917 /esp. 1994 . 78 . 0015 .
- ---. 2007 . Processus de patrimonialisation et construction des territoires. In Colloque Patrimoine et industrie en Poitou-Charantes: Connaître pour valoriser , 87 -109 . PoitierChâtellerault, France: Geste éditions.
- François,  H.,  M.  Hirczak,  and  N.  Senil. 2006 .  Territoire  et  patrimoine:  La  co-construction  d'une dynamique et de ses ressources. Revue d'Économie Régionale &amp; Urbaine décembre 5 : 683 -700 . doi: 10 . 3917 /reru. 065 . 0683 .
- Gob,  A. 2017 .  Patrimoine  et  patrimonialisation.  In Patrimoine  culturel  immatériel ,  edited  by F. Lempereur, 15 -22 .  Liège,  Belgium: Presses Universitaire de Liège.
- González,  P.  A. 2017 .  Heritage  and  Rural  Gentrification  in  Spain:  The  Case  of  Santiago  Millas. International Journal of Heritage Studies 23 ( 2 ): 125 -140 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 13527258 . 2016 . 1246468 .
- Graham, B., G. Ashworth, and J. Tunbridge. 2000 . A Geography of Heritage .  London: Routledge. ---. 2005 .  The  Uses  and  Abuses  of  Heritage.  In Heritage,  Museums  and  Galleries:  An Introductory Reader ,  edited by G. Corsane, 28 -40 .  London: Routledge.
- Halfacree, K. H. 2006 .  Rural  Space: Constructing a Three-fold Architecture. In The Handbook of Rural Studies ,  edited by P. Cloke, T. Marsden, and P. Mooney, 44 -62 .  London: SAGE.
- Halfacree, K. H., and M. J. Rivera. 2012 .  Moving to the Countryside . . . and Staying: Lives beyond Representations. Sociologia Ruralis 52 ( 1 ): 92 -114 .  doi: 10 . 1111 /j. 1467 -9523 . 2011 . 00556 .x.
- Harvey, D. C. 2001 . Heritage Pasts and Heritage Presents: Temporality, Meaning and the Scope of Heritage Studies. International Journal of Heritage Studies 7 ( 4 ): 319 -338 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 13581650120105534 .
- Hodges,  A.,  and  S.  Watson. 2000 .  Community-based  Heritage  Management:  A  Case  Study  and Agenda  for  Research. International  Journal  of  Heritage  Studies 6 ( 3 ): 231 -243 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 13527250050148214 .
- ICOMOS [International Council on Monuments and Sites]. 1999 .  International Cultural Tourism Charter.  Managing  Tourism  at  Places  of  Heritage  Significance.  https://www.icomos.org/char ters/tourism\_e.pdf.
- Ilchenko, M. 2020 .  Working with the Past, Re-discovering Cities of Central and Eastern Europe: Cultural Urbanism and New Representations of Modernist Urban Areas. Eurasian Geography and Economics 61 ( 6 ): 763 -793 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 15387216 . 2020 . 1785907 .
- Jones, S. 2017 .  Wrestling with the Social Value of Heritage: Problems, Dilemmas and Opportunities. Journal of Community Archaeology &amp; Heritage 4 ( 1 ): 21 -37 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 20518196 . 2016 . 1193996 .
- Kneafsey,  M. 2001 .  Rural  Cultural  Economy:  Tourism  and  Social  Relations. Annals  of  Tourism Research 28 ( 3 ): 762 -783 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /S 0160 -7383 ( 00 ) 00077 -3 .
- Landel, P.-A., and N. Senil. 2009 .  Patrimoine et territoire, les nouvelles ressources du développement. Développement durable et territoires ( 12 ). doi: 10 . 4000 /developpementdurable. 7563 .
- Lekakis, S., and M. Dragouni. 2020 . Heritage in the Making: Rural Heritage and Its Mnemeiosis at Naxos Island, Greece. Journal of Rural Studies 77 : 84 -92 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.jrurstud. 2020 . 04 . 021 .
- MacDonald, S. 2013 . Memorylands, Heritage and Identity in Europe Today .  London: Routledge.
- Mitchell,  C. 1998 .  Entrepreneurialism,  Commodification  and  Creative  Destruction:  A  Model  of Post-modern  Community  Development. Journal  of  Rural  Studies 14 ( 3 ): 273 -286 .  doi: 10 . 1016 / S 0743 -0167 ( 98 ) 00013 -8 .
- Mydland, L., and W. Grahn. 2012 . Identifying Heritage Values in Local Communities. International Journal of Heritage Studies 18 ( 6 ): 564 -587 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 13527258 . 2011 . 619554 .
- OECD  [Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development]. 2018 .  OECD  Regional Statistics (Database). http://dx.doi.org/ 10 . 1787 /region-data-en.
- Palazzo, A. L., and A. Pugliano. 2015 . The Burden of History: Living Heritage and Everyday Life in Rome.  In Theory  and  Practice  in  Heritage  and  Sustainability ,  edited  by  E.  Auclair  and G. Fairclough, 54 -68 .  London: Routledge.

18

- Poulot,  D. 1993 .  Le  sens  du  patrimoine:  Hier  et  aujourd'hui  (note  critique). Annales.  Économies, sociétés, civilisations 48 ( 6 ): 1601 -1613 .  doi: 10 . 3406 /ahess. 1993 . 279233 .
- Proshansky, H. M., A. K. Fabian, and  R. Kaminoff. 1983 . Place-identity: Physical  World Socialization  of  the  Self. Journal  of  Environmental  Psychology 3 ( 1 ): 57 -87 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /S 0272 -4944 ( 83 ) 80021 -8 .
- Relph, E. 1976 . Place and Placelessness .  London: Pion.
- Rivera Escribano, M. J., and M. Mormont. 2007 .  Neo-rurality  and  the  Different Meanings of the Countryside.  In Les  mondes  ruraux  à  l'épreuve  des  sciences  sociales ,  edited  by  C.  Bessière, E. Doidy, L. Jacquet, G. Laferté, and Y. Sencebé, 33 -45 .  Paris:  INRA.
- Sacco,  P.  L.,  G.  Ferilli,  G.  T.  Blessi,  and  M.  Nuccio. 2013 .  Culture  as  an  Engine  of  Local Development  Processes:  System-Wide  Cultural  Districts  I:  Theory. Growth  and  Change 44 ( 4 ): 555 -570 .  doi: 10 . 1111 /grow. 12020 .
- Schmitz, S. 2000 . Modes D'habiter Et Sensibilités Territoriales Dans Les Campagnes Belges. In Des campagnes vivantes:  Un  modèle  pour  l'Europe? edited  by  N.  Croix, 627 -632 .  Rennes,  France: Presses Universitaires de Rennes.
- ---. 2012 .  Un Besoin De Territoire À Soi: Quelques Clés Pour Un Aménagement Des Espaces Communs. Belgeo ( 1 -2 ).  doi: 10 . 4000 /belgeo. 6627 .
- ---. 2017 .  Inscription territoriale et esprit du lieu. In Patrimoine culturel immatériel ,  edited  by F. Lempereur, 55 -64 .  Liège, Belgium: Presses Universitaire de Liège.
- Schmitz,  S.,  and  L.  Bruckmann. 2020 .  The  Quest  for  New  Tools  to  Preserve  Rural  Heritage Landscapes. Documents d'Analisi Geografica 66 ( 22 ): 445 -463 .  doi: 10 . 5565 /rev/dag. 593 .
- Shamai, S. 1991 .  Sense of Place: An Empirical Measurement. Geoforum 22 ( 3 ): 347 -358 .  doi: 10 . 1016 / 0016 -7185 ( 91 ) 90017 -K.
- Smith, L. 2006 . Uses of Heritage .  London: Routledge.
- Stephens,  J.,  and  R.  Tiwari. 2015 .  Symbolic  Estates:  Community  Identity  and  Empowerment through Heritage. International Journal of Heritage Studies 21 ( 1 ): 99 -114 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 13527258 . 2014 . 914964 .
- Touraine, A. 1973 . Production de la Société .  Paris:  Le Seuil.
- Tyler,  N. 1999 . Historic  Preservation:  An  Introduction  to  Its  History,  Principles  and  Practice . New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.
- Van Hecke, E., M. Antrop, S. Schmitz, M. Sevenant, and V. Van Eetvelde. 2010 . Atlas de Belgique: Paysages, Monde rural et Agriculture .  Ghent, Belgium: Academia Press.
- Veschambre,  V. 2007 .  Patrimoine:  Un  objet  révélateur  des  évolutions  de  la  géographie  et  de  sa place dans les sciences sociales. Annales de géographie 4 ( 656 ): 361 -381 .  doi: 10 . 3917 /ag. 656 . 0361 .
- Waterton, E. 2005 . Whose  Sense of Place? Reconciling Archaeological Perspectives with Community  Values:  Cultural  Landscapes  in  England. International  Journal of  Heritage Studies 11 ( 4 ): 309 -325 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 13527250500235591 .
- Waterton, E.,  and  L.  Smith. 2010 .  The  Recognition  and  Misrecognition  of  Community  Heritage. International Journal of Heritage Studies 16 ( 1 -2 ): 4 -15 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 13527250903441671 .
- Woods, M. 2011 . Rural .  London: Routledge.
- World  Heritage  Center. 2008 .  Operational  Guidelines  for  the  Implementation  of  the  World Heritage  Convention.  UNESCO:  World  Heritage  Center.  https://whc.unesco.org/en/guide lines/.