<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Sustaining Resilience: Modeling Nonprofit Collaboration in Recovery

Nicole S. Hutton

To cite this article: Nicole S. Hutton (2018): Sustaining Resilience: Modeling Nonprofit Collaboration in Recovery, The Professional Geographer, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2018.1443479

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2018.1443479

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 23 Apr 2018.

Submit your article to this journal C

Article views: 13

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Sustaining Resilience: Modeling Nonprofit Collaboration in Recovery

## Nicole S. Hutton

Old Dominion University

In New Zealand, where nonpro fi t and government partnerships have been formally developing since the 1990s, pathways for nonpro fi ts to improve outcomes for affected communities were open when a magnitude 7.1 earthquake occurred in rural Canterbury on 4 September 2010. As more than 13,000 aftershocks followed, including a 6.3 magnitude event on 22 February 2011 that caused fatalities and widespread structural damage in the city of Christchurch, signi fi cant action was organized in the nonpro fi t sector to revitalize the city. New nonpro fi t initiatives emerged in the central business district to address social concerns and foster engagement across the sector. This case study, undertaken three to four years after the most severe earthquakes, compared experiences from thirty-six local nonpro fi t organizations regarding collaboration within the nonpro fi t sector. Results showed that integrating nonpro fi t commitments to and perceptions of demands for social services into representative collective efforts supported sustainable organizational resilience into midterm recovery. Overamalgamation and prolonged restructuring, however, limited some collective efforts. Longitudinal analysis enabled development of a scalable connective structure for sustaining network resilience into long-term recovery, including collective action and collaborative issue assessment groups. Proactive implementation of similar partnerships might facilitate sustainable resilience in other urban multihazard settings. Key Words: nonprofit, partnerships, recovery, resilience, sustainable.

1990 年 代以 降 , 新 西 兰 的 非 盈 利 组织 与 政 府 间 的 伙伴 关 系 已 正 式 展 开 , 而 2010 年 九 月 四 号 在坎 特 伯 雷 乡 村 发 生 的 震 度 7.1 级 的 地 震 , 则 开 启 了 非 营 利 组织 增 进 受 影 响 社 区 的 后 果 之 管 道 。 随 着 超 过 一万三 千 次 馀 震 的 发 生 , 包 括 2011 年 二 月 二 十 二 日 震 度 达 6.3 级 的 地 震 造 成 基 督 城 广 泛 的 结 构 损 害 与 伤 亡 的 事件 , 非 营 利 部 门 便 开 始 组织 大 规 模 行 动 来 振 兴 该 城 市 。 中 央 商 业 区 浮 现 新 的 非 营 利 倡 议 , 以 应 对 社 会 担 忧 并 促 进 部 门 参 与 。 此 案 例 研 究 在 最 严 重 的 地 震 发 生 后 的 三 至 四 年 内 进 行 , 比 较 三 十 六 个 地 方 非 营 利 组织 在 非 营 利 部 门 中 的 合 作 经 验 。 研 究 结 果 显 示 , 将 非 营 利 组织 对 社 会 服 务 的 承 诺 和 对 该 需 求 的 感 知 整 合 进 代 议 的 集 体 努力 中 , 将 可 持 续 的 组织 回 復 力 转 化 为中 程 復 甦 。 但 过 度 混 合和 长 期 的 再 结 构 , 却 限 制 了 部 分 的 集 体 努力 。 长 时 程 分 析 , 让 持 续 网 络 回 復 力 的 可 尺 度 化 连 结结 构 之 发 展 进 入 长 程 復 甦 , 包 含 集 体 行 动 与 集 体 议 题 评 估 团 体 。 相 似伙伴 关 系 的 主 动 实 施 , 或 可 在 其 他 城 市 的 多 重 灾 害 环 境 中 促 进 可 持 续 的 回 復 力 。 关 键 词 : 非 营 利 , 伙伴 关 系 , 復 原 , 回 復 力 , 可 持 续 的 。

En Nueva Zelanda, donde las asociaciones no lucrativas y gubernamentales han estado ocurriendo formalmente desde los a ~ nos 1990, los caminos para que las no lucrativas mejoren resultados en comunidades afectadas se despejaron cuando ocurri  o un terremoto de magnitud 7.1 en el Canterbury rural, el 4 de septiembre de 2010. En la medida en que al sismo siguieron 13.000 r  eplicas, incluido un evento de magnitud 6.3 el 22 de febrero de 2011 que caus  o muertes y da ~ nos estructurales por doquier en la ciudad de Christchurch, una acci  on signi fi cativa se organiz  o en el sector no lucrativo para revitalizar la ciudad. Emergieron nuevas iniciativas sin  animo lucrativo en el distrito central de negocios para abocar las preocupaciones sociales e impulsar el compromiso a trav  es del sector. Este estudio de caso, emprendido de tres a cuatro a ~ nos despu  es del m  as severo de los terremotos, compar  o las experiencias de treinta y seis organizaciones no lucrativas locales en lo que concierne a la colaboraci  on dentro del sector no lucrativo. Los resultados mostraron que al integrar los compromisos de las no lucrativas con las demandas de servicios sociales y las percepciones sobe los mismos en esfuerzos colectivos representativos se refuerza una resiliencia organizacional sustentable de la recuperaci  on a plazo medio. El exceso de amalgamaci  on y la reestructuraci  on prolongada, sin embargo, limitaron algunos esfuerzos colectivos. El an  alisis longitudinal habilit  o el desarrollo de una estructura conectiva escalable para sostener la resiliencia encadenada en la recuperaci  on a largo plazo, incluyendo la acci  on colectiva y la colaboraci  on de los grupos de evaluaci  on. La implementaci  on proactiva de asociaciones similares podría facilitar una resiliencia sustentable en otros escenarios urbanos de riesgo m  ultiple. Palabras clave: no lucrativo, asociaciones, recuperaci  on, resiliencia, sustentable.

T he 11 February 2012 earthquake in Christchurch, New Zealand, killed 185 people, displaced more than 7,500 residents from their homes, and irreparably damaged more than 70 percent of the central business district (Chang-Richards et al. 2013; Johnson and Mamula-Seadon 2014). The nonpro fi t sector, an amalgamation of socially focused institutions that includes nonpro fi t, nongovernmental, and partially private or public civil society organizations, operates between and in support of governments, private businesses, and communities (Hudson 2009; Zimmer 2010). Before the disaster and resultant deployment of the Civil Defense, a function of national emergency response, nonpro fi ts in Christchurch bolstered government services for their target audiences. Nonpro fi ts also contributed to

socioeconomic support and community well-being during the recovery alongside the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, an integrative agency established two months after the earthquake to extend the local operations of the Civil Defense until 2016, well into long-term recovery, due to the severity of the damages (Chang-Richards et al. 2013; Fogarty 2014).

After the disaster, preexisting nonpro fi t organizations exhibited resilience by altering their operations to share the increased burden of care for migrants, youth, and families among themselves (Hutton, Tobin, and Whiteford 2015b). Cross-sector partnerships for social service production reduced compounded fi nancial and structural strain associated with the earthquake sequence and concurrent recession (Seville et al. 2006; Stevenson et al. 2011). Their emergent counterparts capitalized on postdisaster social cohesion to address community interactions by improving the built environment and providing support for psychological strain (Vallance 2011; Hutton, Tobin, and Whiteford 2016). Although many of these nonpro fi t operations endured into latter stages of recovery, some discontinued service after the initial relief period (Carlton and Vallance 2014). Those that persisted into midterm recovery bene fi ted from national connections and partnerships (Carlton and Vallance 2014; Hutton, Tobin, and Whiteford 2016). Further analysis of the composition of these collaborative efforts might indicate conditions developed within the sector that fostered sustained network resilience throughout recovery (Smith and Wegner 2007).

This study examined collective strategies to sustain resilience in two ways: (1) appraising resilient and sustainable capacities associated with participation in collective efforts and (2) modeling a structure for nonpro fi t involvement in collaborative efforts over the course of recovery that contributes to sustainable resilience. It was hypothesized that nonpro fi t collaborations would evolve over the course of recovery to re fl ect shifts in the organizational resources and operating environment.

Findings were based on interviews and focus groups conducted in late 2014 with representatives from a total of thirty-six locally operating nonprofits. Shifts in the perceived capacity to provide competitive, comprehensive services were identi fi ed in relation to participation in nonpro fi t sector partnerships. Results were evaluated using Smith and Wenger ' s (2007) facilitators of sustainable disaster recovery and Kimberlin, Schwartz, and Austin ' s (2011) key concepts for understanding the organizational histories of pioneering nonpro fi t human service organizations, to contextualize the contributions of connective structures to sustainable resilience. Longitudinal and categorization patterns of engagement were analyzed. A scalable model for nonpro fi t collaboration to support sustainability throughout recovery was proposed.

## Sustainable and Resilient Strategies in the Nonprofit Sector

To sustainably manage their operations, nonpro fi t organizations must continually balance the interrelated priorities: contributions to their target audiences, allocation of organizational resources, and relationships with in fl uential funders and policymakers in their operating environment (Dattani 2012). Sustainable organizations develop strong structures to adapt to emergent synergies with public and private partners, as well as within the nonpro fi t sector and among the audiences they serve (Hudson 2009). The organic nature of nonpro fi t operations facilitates continuity of service provision as economic, social, and environmental conditions fl uctuate (Paton and Johnston 2017).

Effective communication and collaborative efforts of redundant organizations bolster continuity following a disaster (Godschalk 2003; Weichselgartner and Kelman 2015). National and local nonpro fi ts ' connections elevate preexisting needs and prepare the sector for increased service demands (Parkin 2012; Robinson and Murphy 2014). International relief nonpro fi ts often use preexisting networks to expand their role with emergency management (McLean et al. 2012). Nonpro fi t organizations that emerge because of a disaster could shift the balance of existing partnerships as they negotiate their role in the recovery process (Simo and Bies 2007). Both new and established connections capitalize on fl exible operating structures, diversity, and functional redundancies to be resilient by bouncing back after a disaster (Beatley 2009; Aldunce et al. 2014) and maintaining relevance through reorganization as constraints shift during later stages of recovery (Wisner et al. 2004; Simo and Bies 2007). Appropriate sector-based channels with which to integrate nonpro fi ts into a cohesive collaborative effort that sustains resilience require more research.

## Nonprofit Contributions to Resilience in Recovery

Emergency management encompasses preparation, response, recovery, and mitigation (Paul 2011). Recovery, the phase with the most substantial gaps in the hazards literature (Smith and Wenger 2007), involves multiple phases in and of itself, which might overlap: (1) relief, (2) rehabilitation, (3) reconstruction, and (4) development (Paul 2011). This phase has long-term goals that differentiate it from response activities, which are typically for emergency purposes. The concept of sustainable recovery comes from the application of sustainable development

principles to hazards research, wherein recovery is no longer thought of as a solely linear or technological process because of the social component (Smith and Wenger 2007).

Although recovery is costly and its timeline is dif fi cult to distinguish, there are signi fi cant opportunities for locally operating organizations to improve the lives of their target audience to a better state than prior to the disaster (Patterson, Weil, and Patel 2010; Paul 2011). For socially focused nonpro fi ts, this might require a double burden of concurrent provision of relief or rehabilitation services to remain resilient and maintain advocacy for sustainable development goals throughout the recovery (Montz, Tobin, and Hagelman 2017). Breaking down barriers to collaboration with other organizations improves the ability to react quickly and comprehensively in emergencies (Bourk and Holland 2014). This study uses a retrospective approach to capture the adaptive capacities of nonpro fi t collaborative efforts across various fi elds of social service.

## Seismic and Nonprofit Activity in the Study Area

As of 2010, Christchurch had the lowest probability of seismic hazard on the east coast of New Zealand (Stirling et al. 2012). The last earthquakes over 6.0 magnitude recorded near the city occurred in 1869 and 1870 (Pettinga et al. 2001). The nearest active fault was 100 kilometers away (Pierpiekarz et al. 2014). This changed on 4 September 2010, when an earthquake measuring 7.1 on the Richter scale occurred 40 kilometers from the city. Three additional 6.0 magnitude and higher events disrupted the public perception of safety (Brookie 2012; Platt 2012). The February 2011 earthquake, which caused fatalities and extensive structural damage to the city, resulted in the fi rst state of emergency ever issued by New Zealand ' s national government (Fogarty 2014; Johnson and Mamula-Seadon 2014). The scale of recovery efforts strained government and community resources (Platt 2012; Fogarty 2014). Inventories taken two months, one year, and two-and-a-half years after the February earthquake revealed between 92 and 454 communitybased and nonpro fi t initiatives active during recovery (Carlton and Vallance 2014).

The nonpro fi t sector maintained and expanded social services during response and recovery, particularly as the long-term governance system for emergency management was established (Nicholls 2013). Legislation from the 1980s and 1990s formalized the nation ' s commitment to nonpro fi t inclusion in social service provision (Larner and Craig 2005). Similar to other welfare economies, such as England, socially focused nonpro fi ts contributed local knowledge and expanded access for marginalized groups through cross-sector partnerships that coproduced social services with government agencies (Dattani 2012; Phillips and Smith 2011; Pestoff, Brandsen, and Verschuere 2013; Came 2014).

Even nascent nonpro fi ts had to transition their operations to fi t the more partnership-focused operating environment of later recovery phases (Carlton and Vallance 2014; Hutton, Tobin, and Whiteford 2016). After reviewing more than 500 organizations, though, Brown et al. (2014) found social assistance and more broadly community services to be the least successfully recovered aspects of the private sector. This might have re fl ected ampli fi cation of nonpro fi t and coproduced services after the disaster. There is a gap in the literature regarding the sustainability of collaborative support mechanisms developed within the nonpro fi t sector to maintain and expand their role in postdisaster settings.

## Concepts for Sustaining Nonprofit Resilience throughout Recovery

To minimize socioeconomic costs and promote sustainability, emergency management efforts should be proactive, comprehensive, and in alignment with the operating environment, institutional resources, and social capacity. The mitigation and preparation phases provide opportunities to preemptively plan for sustainable resilience and the long-term continuation of resilient postdisaster operations of organizations and their agency connections into a sustainable recovery process (Mojtahedi and Lan Oo 2014). The grounded theory model identi fi es another time to develop sustainable resilience, which is toward the end of the rehabilitation phase when nonpro fi ts, including those that emerged postdisaster, proactively realign their operations (Chang and Shinozuka 2004; Doerfel, Lai, and Chewning 2010).

Kimberlin, Schwartz, and Austin (2011) identi fi ed pathways to sustainable resilience for nonpro fi ts through organizational leadership, evaluation, and engagement. Smith and Wenger (2007) called for a multilevel approach to sustainable resilience wherein self-determining entities come together in a supportive operating environment to align commitments, leverage resources, and resolve disputes. This study combines these principles to analyze postdisaster nonpro fi t-sector-based integration for social service provision and develops a model of collaboration involving collective leadership and evaluation to facilitate sustainable resilience.

## Methods

Data were collected from thirty-six social service -oriented nonpro fi ts to model aspects of integration that contributed to sustainable resilience. Participants included thirty-six nonpro fi ts: thirty-four organizations and two agency connection groups. Organizations were recruited in late 2014 from the Community Information Network Christchurch Web site, which lists more than 10,000 locally operating groups

ranging from sports clubs, to semiprivate companies, to big international nongovernmental organizations. Criteria for inclusion were based on (1) formal organization status; (2) location within the central business district or suburbs of Christchurch, New Zealand; (3) fi nancial records from the prior year indicating receipt of philanthropic funds from donors, such as religious institutions, the government, a society, or members; and (4) a mission statement expressing a social service focus.

Of the 108 original organizations approached, twenty-four participated. Some organizations did not respond to the request or declined to participate based on ideological difference with other approached organizations or due to strained resources; others provided relevant contacts at alternate organizations. Centrally located social service -oriented organizations included membership associations and other shared networks; therefore, once initial contacts were established, researchers used snowball methods to recruit twelve additional participants.

Results were categorized for analysis based on characteristics expected to alter operations during recovery, such as fi eld of work, date of emergence, and international or local af fi liation (see Table 1; Kimberlin, Schwartz, and Austin 2011; McLean et al. 2012; Brown et al. 2014; Carlton and Vallance 2014). Fields of work included community support, migrant services, sexual health, and international relief. Dates of emergence were recorded as either preexisting, indicated by a date

Table 1 Case study organizations overview

|             | Community support                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Migrant services                                                                             | Sexual health                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | International relief           |
|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Preexisting |  Healthy Christchurch  Project Lyttelton  Volunteering Canterbury  Community Garden Association  Neighborhood Trust a  City Mission a  Rural Support Trust  Avebury House  Meals on Wheels a  Public Service Association  Social Service Providers Aotearoa  Council of Social Services |  Refugee Council  Migrants Centre  Pegasus Health  Interpreting Canterbury  First Union |  Youth and Cultural Development Trust  District Health Board Public Health Division  District Health Board Sexual Health Centre  Family Planning a  Aids Foundation  Prostitutes Collective  Rodger Wright Centre a  Sexual Health Blood Borne Viruses Group |  The Red Cross  World Vision |
| Emergent    |  Foundation  All Right Campaign  Ministry of Awesome  Student Volunteer Army  Gap Filler  Greening the Rubble  CanCERN                                                                                                                                                                       |  Communication Language Information Network Group                                           |  298 Youth                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                |

of formation before September 2010, or emergent, which would have formally organized into a nonpro fi t after. Although this is a subset of active organizations, the varying characteristics and degrees of connectivity represented by these groups allowed for preliminary generalizations regarding the structure of collaborations appropriate for promoting sustainable resilience among social service nonpro fi ts.

Researchers assessed nonpro fi t interaction in late 2014 by conducting (1) semistructured interviews with a manager from each organization and group; (2) focus groups of three to fi ve staff members at fi ve of the sexual health, migrant services, or community support organizations; and (3) semistructured reviews of staff responses with management from those involved in focus groups. Focus groups captured variances in experiences attributable to size. In New Zealand, more than fi ve staff indicated a large nonpro fi t. International relief and emergent organizations did not participate in focus groups due to volunteer reliance.

Questions were framed to longitudinally track variances in collective engagement within the sector. When possible, participants were asked to re fl ect on changes up to two years prior to the earthquake. Managers responded to background questions regarding the organization ' s participation in any partnerships. Both manager interviews and staff focus groups addressed similar topics to capture any variance in perceptions based on roles within the sector, including (1) resources available to practitioners for fl uctuating

demand for services, (2) factors outside of the disaster that changed operations, and (3) impacts of partnerships with other nonpro fi ts on service provision.

A cross-case analysis was conducted. The full set of transcripts from each organization was themed based on nonpro fi t management, emergency management, and national governance literature to identify functional redundancies and alterations in the operating environment including coproduction (Dattani 2012; Pestoff, Brandsen, and Verschuere 2013; Weichselgartner and Kelman 2015). Instances and the duration thereof were recorded. The collective data were analyzed quantitatively to identify shifts in participation in partnerships, as well as commitment to and demands for services. Descriptive information was incorporated to characterize the perceived contribution of nonpro fi t collaboration to sustainable resilience. Based on reported participation in collective groups, a conceptual integration model to support sustainable resilience through partnerships has been developed using Smith and Wenger ' s (2007) facilitators of sustainable disaster recovery and Kimberlin, Schwartz, and Austin ' s (2011) key concepts for understanding the organizational histories of pioneering nonpro fi t human service organizations.

## Resilient Capacities and Engagement in Partnerships

Interviews and focus groups assessed the role of partnerships in sustaining resilience based on perceived improvements to partnerships, capacities to address complex cases, and commitments to service provision. Improvements to partnerships that were concurrent with increased capacities and commitments might indicate a capacity for sustainable resilience. Shared resources could engage additional target audiences with complex needs, and coordinated leadership could facilitate shared commitments to service provision (Smith and Wenger 2007; Kimberlin, Schwartz, and Austin 2011).

Fifty percent of all service providers perceived improved partnerships, reinforced commitments, and increased case complexity (see Table 2). Preexisting groups were twice as likely to experience all three indicators as emergent organizations. Although it is possible to assess these organizations collectively, it is also useful to determine variances in experience based on fi eld of work within the social services.

The community support fi eld maintained a large number of emergent organizations, which addressed youth engagement, area-speci fi c community building, and new urbanism. Preexisting organizations included unions, missions, and membership-based organizations. A higher percentage of emergent organizations perceived improvements in partnerships than preexisting ones, but the collective perception remained high at 79 percent. Emergent organizations showed reduced instances of all three indicators, which brought the results for the whole fi eld to 42 percent (see Table 2).

A nonpro fi t leader of an emergent community support organization expressed concern that any new idea, referred to here as a ' tall poppy ' to denote its difference from traditional ideas, was subject to increased public and nonpro fi t community scrutiny, stating: ' The anti-tall poppy sentiment must be changed. ' A preexisting nonpro fi t manager reported a different experience: ' There is not as much patch protection. ' Perhaps the relative competition felt by the emergent nonpro fi t representative was reduced postdisaster, but only the preexisting organizations bene fi ted from this perspective on the role of partnerships in reinforcing commitments. Nonetheless, at least 50 percent of the combined fi eld experienced improved partnerships with increased complexity of cases (see Table 2).

Eighty percent or more of migrant support organizations reported that partnerships improved and commitments were evident. Only 40 percent of the preexisting organizations and no emergent ones experienced increased case complexity (see Table 2), however. This could have changed during later recovery stages when resettlement programs restarted.

The emergent group in the migrant support fi eld, Communication Language Intercultural Network Group (CLING), was a collection of migrant services organizations that took action to ensure that risk communication included translations for local minorities. Their efforts required several years to effect change; consequently, their view of commitment improved over time (Hutton, Tobin, and Whiteford 2015a).

Preexisting organizations accounted for the majority of sexual health providers. These groups include two civil society partners and one group. The Sexual Health and Blood Borne Virus Group promoted collective campaigns and shared resources. Only one sexual health organization, which was associated with youth, was emergent. It existed prior to the earthquakes but had a temporary lapse in funding. All sexual health organizations experienced improved partnerships and evident commitments to care (see Table 2). One manager revealed potential causes of indicator overlap: ' The postearthquake era coincides with a lot of necessary change for the organization nationally; . . . probably has enhanced collaborative ventures. ' Disagreement arose considering increased case complexity. The emergent organization reported increased complexities but only 63 percent of preexisting ones identi fi ed this change (see Table 2). This might have re fl ected differences in their original care provision methods.

International relief organizations were all preexisting. All of the indicators were experienced by 100 percent of the fi eld, which is quite different even among preexisting organizations from other fi elds of work (see Table 2). One representative re fl ected: ' The national board is challenged to understand Christchurch ' s situation. Mini-partnerships are new as

Table 2 Environmental influences on organizations engaged in partnerships

| All (36)                                           | 31 86 25 69                                            | 22 61                                                       | 18 50                                                                                       |
|----------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Emergent (8)                                       | 7 88 3 38                                              | 4 50 2                                                      | 25                                                                                          |
| Preexisting (28)                                   | 24 86 22 79                                            | 18 64 16                                                    | 57                                                                                          |
| Full field (2)                                     | 2 100 2 100                                            | 2 100 2                                                     | 100                                                                                         |
| Emergent (0) 0 0                                   | 0 0                                                    | 0 0 0                                                       | 0                                                                                           |
| Preexisting (2)                                    | 2 100 2 100                                            | 2 100 2                                                     | 100                                                                                         |
| Full field (9)                                     | 9 100 9 100                                            | 6 67 6                                                      | 67                                                                                          |
| Emergent (1)                                       | 1 100 1 100                                            | 1 100 1                                                     | 100                                                                                         |
| Preexisting (8)                                    | 8 100 8 100                                            | 5 63 5                                                      | 63                                                                                          |
| Full field (6)                                     | 5 83 5 83                                              | 2 33 2                                                      | 33                                                                                          |
| Emergent (1)                                       | 1 100 1 100                                            | 0 0 0                                                       | 0                                                                                           |
| Preexisting (5)                                    | 4 80 4 80                                              | 2 40 2                                                      | 40                                                                                          |
| Full field (19)                                    | 15 79 9 47                                             | 12 63 8                                                     | 42                                                                                          |
| Emergent (6) 5 83                                  | 1 17                                                   | 3 50 1                                                      | 17                                                                                          |
| Preexisting (13) 10 77 8 62                        |                                                        | 9 70 7                                                      | 54                                                                                          |
| Partnerships improved # % improved # commitments % | Partnerships service provision were evident improved # | Partnerships complexity of cases increased % Partnerships # | improved, commitments to service provision were maintained, complexity of cases increased % |

Note: # D total number of organizations reporting experience with the indicator; % D percentage of that type of organization reporting experience with the indicator.

recovery transitions. ' These managers adapted their local partnerships to reinforce commitments to providing ongoing relief for increasingly complex cases because the local of fi ces received pressure from the international body to return to traditional operations in support of the overarching goals of the organization.

Three of the fi ve staff focus groups, including representatives from two community support organizations and one sexual health organization (see Table 1), reported improvements in partnerships and service provision. In focus groups, improved service provision was used in lieu of evidence of commitments and increases in case complexity. One focus group from the sexual health fi eld reported no change in either indicator. A group from the community support fi eld perceived diminishing service provision in spite of improved partnerships. These preexisting large organizations did not have dramatically disparate experiences from their fi eld of work as a whole because managers shared these perceptions.

Indicators of sustainable resilience were not always experienced concurrently. Field of work shows variation but does not clearly explain it. Date of emergence provides context for some perceptions but falls short of an explanation for variances. These could result from well-developed versus developing structures for connectivity within each fi eld or the goals of collective groups in each fi eld. Whether the perception of increased case complexity or commitment reinforcement motivated organizations to improve partnerships or resulted from improvements to them is beyond the scope of this study. Regardless, 86 percent of participants perceived improvements in partnerships and over 60 percent reported agreement with an additional indicator as well (see Table 2).

## The Role of Nonprofit Connections in Sustaining Resilience

Collective action addressed changes to two aspects of sustainable nonpro fi t management: (1) the needs of target audiences and (2) opportunities available in the operating environment (Dattani 2012). The approach to integration incorporated elements of sustainable resilience, such as leveraging resources and skills to maintain services, promoting commitments to holistic care, and referring increased demand to trusted care providers (Smith and Wegner 2007). Various levels of integration and frequency of engagement with collaborative endeavors are denoted in Table 3.

Personal connections with similarly focused existing nonpro fi ts often initially supported emergent organizations (see Tier 1 of Table 3), until competition increased during later recovery stages (Hutton, Tobin, and Whiteford 2016). An emergent community support group described its work as follows: ' brings together, provides proof, supports, provides

Table 3 Organizations reporting connectivity within the nonprofit sector

| Tier                              | Number engaged   | Nature                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|-----------------------------------|------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1. Personal connections           | 25 C             |  Partnerships with traditional and unlikely partners formed by staff and management of an organization to facilitate operations                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| 2. Collective action groups       | 6                |  Council convened and run by members to address a specific issue  Self-run organization convened by civil society partners to address a specific issue  Council of grant recipients convened by funders to                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| 3. Collaborative oversight groups | 8                | share resources  Self-run organization that nonprofit organizations can elect to be a member of to benefit from leveraged resources  Self-run organization that assesses and provides resources to organizations in the nonprofit sector  Council convened and run by members to set priorities for their field and coordinate service provision or advocacy efforts  International franchise management |
| 4. Elected representatives        | 1                |  Sector-wide representative to the nationally convened recovery authority                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |

introductions, and mentoring. We developed an Innovation Ecosystem Map. . . . ' This resilience in community leadership and engagement (Kimberlin, Schwartz, and Austin 2011) promoted their integration into collaborative efforts after they reorganized (Doerfel, Lai, and Chewning 2010).

Local branches of international nonpro fi ts relied on personal connections with well-established accommodation and food provision agencies to facilitate relief (Brady, Wills, and McNaughton 2012). A representative from a preexisting community support organization noted that local integration was imperative to sustainability: ' A lot of services have gone under. . . . Some organizations that planned to restrategize before the earthquakes said it was a result of the earthquakes or funding. Larger agencies would bring what they had done in America or England here. . . . It wouldn ' t work, but now they are gone and agencies like us are here to clean up. ' Additional levels of engagement with partners could provide the coordination needed to evaluate shared priorities and resources for individual organizations to sustain their resources into longterm recovery (Smith and Wenger 2007).

Collective action (see Tier 2 of Table 3) involved representatives of several organizations combining resources. For example, a group of nonpro fi ts organized based on their shared coproduction

commitments to the Ministry of Social Development highlighted evaluation, engagement, and resource sharing, which are resilient and sustainable components of collective action (Smith and Wenger 2007; Kimberlin, Schwartz, and Austin 2011). A representative stated, ' Weare looking at strong collaborative projects and evaluating together. ' Similar groups based on shared coproduction commitments formed and dissolved as needed before and after the earthquakes.

Some groups with shared coproduction commitments also engaged in collaborative oversight (see Tier 3 of Table 3). A government-convened collaborative organization described its role this way: ' We continually take the pulse in the interest of stemming need. ' Membership-based nonpro fi ts generated from within the nonpro fi t sector provided this function, too. Nonpro fi ts that contributed to the resilience of their target audiences prior to the establishment of the recovery authority achieved sustainable resilience themselves through collaboration to leverage resources and evaluate needs (Smith and Wenger 2007; Kimberlin, Schwartz, and Austin 2011). Services made resilient by functional redundancies also used collaborative oversight to sustain resources through coordination of care provision for complex cases (Smith and Wenger 2007; Weichselgartner and Kelman 2015).

Representation of the entire sector proved to be more dif fi cult (see Tier 4 of Table 3). A collective meeting entitled One Voice was convened by membership-based nonpro fi ts just months after the February earthquake. After two years lobbying the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, two nonpro fi t delegates were incorporated for the nonpro fi t sector, one speci fi cally representing services for the Maori, the native indigenous population. Nonpro fi ts showed resilience by gaining an additional means for engagement (Kimberlin, Schwartz, and Austin 2011). Because the sector ' s full range of commitments had to be amalgamated, however, it created disputes instead of sustainability (Smith and Wenger 2007).

Participation was highest in Tier 1 (see Table 3) of the engagement structure with twenty- fi ve reports of engagement. Any member of staff or management within an organization could develop personal connections to improve resilience, especially among emergent and international nonpro fi ts, but the dependability of these partnerships could waver over time. Therefore, integration into collective action, collaborative oversight, or both improved the connections that contributed to sustainable resilience. Tiers 2 and 3 included six and eight reports of engagement, respectively (see Table 3), because typically only one or two representatives from an organization were involved. These tiers could be formed and dismantled as needed to coordinate resources and evaluate the operating environment (Smith and Wenger 2007; Kimberlin, Schwartz, and Austin 2011). Representation of the whole sector by one representative (see Tier 4 of Table 3) only lasted until the entity to which the representative was elected dissolved and was not suf fi cient to achieve sustainability of many social service initiatives (Smith and Wenger 2007).

## Incorporating Multilevel Situational Assessment into Sector-Wide Prospecting

The proactive recovery transition model (Figure 1) is based on the nonpro fi t connections developed in reaction to the February 2011 earthquake. The model engages resilient organizations that have exhibited

Figure 1 Proactive recovery transition model for varying levels of nonprofit agency connections.

<!-- image -->

leadership after a crisis to capture expanded services or audiences (Kimberlin, Schwartz, and Austin 2011). It identi fi es levels of integration with partners that combine resources and commitments as the operating environment transitions to long-term recovery (Smith and Wenger 2007).

Squares represent organizations or groups. The number of squares available at each level of integration indicates the shift from connections available through each staff person to speci fi c representatives of the organization or sector. Shaded areas fade between squares at each level to identify potential for connections across area of origin, size, dates of emergence, and fi eld of work.

The reorganization arrow indicates that as an organization becomes more integrated with personal connections, collective action, and collaborative oversight, it achieves more sustainable resilience. First, personal connections allow the self-determined organizations to expand and establish services for an expanded target audience after a disaster (Dattani 2012). Then, collective action allows for resource sharing to engage in united campaigns. Finally, collaborative oversight sets priorities and leverages resources for broad swaths of organizations (Smith and Wegner 2007).

Forces within the model also operate in reverse to make resilience sustainable. Evaluation conducted collaboratively by the most integrated organizations might lead to realignment of collective action groups and individual nonpro fi ts (Chang and Shinozuka 2004; Doerfel, Lai, and Chewning 2010). For example, shared priorities might foster the creation of an elected representative to act outside the sector to leverage resources to continue expanded services (Smith and Wegner 2007). Dotted lines indicate that these might not be held long term.

Channels for integration can be established proactively, either in preparation for a disaster or when an organization revises its operations toward the end of the rehabilitation phase (Doerfel, Lai, and Chewning 2010; Mojtahedi and Lan Oo 2014). Once established, the model can expand and contract based on the need for action or oversight. It is unlikely that the entire structure would ever be dismantled regardless of the distance in time from the last disaster, because various components of it predate any expectation of risk in Christchurch.

## Limitations

This study had three primary limitations. First, extensive postdisaster research in the area reduced overall participation rates (Paton et al. 2015). National commitments to involve Maori researchers in studies of their own representative organizations also limited researchers without preestablished connections from studying those groups (Whenua 2007). The participating nonpro fi ts represented only the most successful because they had persisted into midterm recovery

(Doerfel, Lai, and Chewning 2010). Supplementing the initial set of respondents with snowball sampling facilitated inclusion of organizations representing marginalized groups, however, overrepresentation of some fi elds within the social services could have occurred (Sadler et al. 2010). Including more diversity and organizations that closed prior to that time might have altered results. Second, representatives might have misrepresented commitments to and in fl uences of partnerships to promote the organization or protect their position. Further, social desirability could have heightened participants ' perceptions of improved partnerships in favor of the current operating environment (Bright et al. 2017). Third, their memories of events from over three years prior could have been incomplete (Podsakoff et al. 2003, 2012). Although interviews and focus groups were con fi dential and questions were ordered to reduce inferences regarding desirability of a given response, the subjective nature of the questions and small organization sizes could have altered results (Podsakoff et al. 2012). Consequently, direct correlations between involvement with nonpro fi t networks and sustainable resilience were not determined (Podsakoff et al. 2003). Additional research to address these limitations is needed involving (1) the role of partnerships in nonpro fi ts that closed prior to midterm recovery and those serving indigenous populations and (2) inclusion of objective data that indicate organizational and sector-wide resilience.

## Conclusions and Applications

Following the earthquakes in Christchurch, New Zealand, existing connective structures and mutual understandings of organizational culture contributed to the capacity of various fi elds of work and the nonpro fi t sector as a whole to organize. Multiple levels of connectivity allowed for expanded service provision to be sustained through resource sharing and reinforced commitments to care delivery. Although the role of a representative for the entire sector to government-led initiatives was precarious in its capacity to advocate for all issues, membership organizations were in tune with the culture of the sector and successfully leveraged resources and guided expectations to open this channel. Collaborations of organizations with the intent to continuously assess and set priorities captured resilient aspects, such as functional redundancy and diversity, to coordinate initiatives and promote sustainability. Issue-speci fi c collective action campaigns sustained resilient ways to engage target audiences through resource sharing. Individual connections between management and partner organizations assisted in initial mobilization or expansion. For sustainable resilience, however, nonpro fi ts bene fi ted from increased integration with representative groups.

Integrated groups could have supported bold realignments due to their mutual commitments to

service provision. Shared oversight allowed managers to address concerns regarding their operating environment collectively and, thereby, proactively form collective action groups to address issues before the impacts were felt. This also reduced disputes among the organizations whose combined work provided base and niche services for their target audiences (see Figure 1). With reduced competition gleaned from a shared understanding of priorities, the capacity to individually reorganize and collectively realign service provision and campaigns as needed increased.

This case study addressed gaps in the emergency and nonpro fi t management literature on (1) the role of organizational age, size, and fi eld in facilitating sustainable resilience and (2) the integration of nonpro fi ts into sector-speci fi c partnerships working toward disaster risk reduction and sustainable development. This research analyzed nonpro fi t connections formed among urban social service providers in reaction to a disaster to propose a conceptual model for sustainable resilience by formalizing pathways of connectivity.

Practitioners can contract and expand the proactive recovery transition model to address natural and technological hazards, as well as other stressors that require nonpro fi ts to practice sustainable resilience, such as an economic downturn. Nonpro fi ts should use this model proactively as a part of disaster mitigation or, in the absence of such planning, during the rehabilitation phase to promote sustainable resilience. The model encourages nonpro fi ts to (1) identify aspects of their operations that contribute to postdisaster resilience, such as the capacity to address more complex cases; (2) leverage agency connections that contribute to sustainable resilience, including political and funding priorities; and (3) mobilize the appropriate tiers of connectivity to increase appropriate representation and manage competition. National and local emergency management agencies have started to prioritize nonpro fi t engagement with recovery efforts. Utilization of the model would prepare the sector to address and improve opportunities for increased involvement with the appropriate level of collaboration from within the sector. Because this structure was limited to the nonpro fi t sector, it could be applicable outside of nations committed to coproduction. The model, however, requires re fi nement through more detailed longitudinal research, identi fi cation of geographic contributors to connectivity, application of additional resilience indicators, and testing outside of the social services. ■

## Literature Cited

- Aldunce, P., R. Beilin, J. Handmer, and M. Howden. 2014. Framing disaster resilience: The implications of the diverse conceptualization of ' bouncing back. ' Disaster Prevention and Management 23 (3):252 -70.
- Beatley, T. 2009. Planning for coastal resilience best practices for calamitous times . Washington, DC: Island.
- Bourk, M., and K. Holland. 2014. From silos to fl ows: Spatial metaphor and communication responses to the
- Christchurch earthquakes. Australian Journal of Emergency Management 29 (2):35.
- Brady, K., J. Wills, and E. McNaughton. 2012. Across the ditch: Exploring the partnership between the Australian and New Zealand Red Cross in disaster recovery. Presented at Australian and New Zealand Disaster and Emergency Management Conference Earth Fire and Rain, April 16 -18, Brisbane, Australia.
- Bright, C., E. Haynes, D. Patterson, and M. Pisu. 2017. The value of social network analysis for evaluating academic -community partnerships and collaborations for social determinants of health research. Ethnicity &amp; Disease 27 (Suppl. 1):337 -46.
- Brookie, R. 2012. Governing the recovery from the Canterbury earthquakes 2010 -11: The debate over institutional design. Wellington, New Zealand: Victoria University of Wellington.
- Brown, C., J. Stevenson, S. Giovinazzi, E. Seville, and J. Vargo. 2014. Factors in fl uencing impacts on and recovery trends of organisations: Evidence from 2010/2011 Canterbury earthquakes. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 14:56 -72.
- Came, H. 2014. Sites of institutional racism in public health policy making in New Zealand. Social Science and Medicine 106:214 -20.
- Carlton, S., and S. Vallance. 2014. First to respond, last to leave: Communities roles and resilience across the ' 4Rs. ' 2015. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 14:27 -36.
- Chang, S., and M. Shinozuka. 2004. Measuring improvements in the disaster resilience of communities. Earthquake Spectra 20 (3):739 -55.
- Chang-Richards, A., S. Wilkinson, E. Seville, D. Brunsdon, and R. Potangaroa. 2013. Long-term reconstruction in Christchurch: Learning from its governance structure. Paper presented at i-Rec conference, Ascona, Switzerland, May 26.
- Dattani, P. 2012. Public value and performance management in third sector organisations: Third sector performance. In Management and finance in not for profit and social enterprise , ed. G. Manville and R. Greatbanks, 131 -58. London: Ashgate.
- Doerfel, M., C. Lai, and L. Chewning. 2010. The evolutionary role of interorganizational communication: Modeling social capital in disaster contexts. Human Communication Research 36 (2):125 -62.
- Fogarty, S. 2014. Exploring New Zealand ' s capability to strategically manage logistical responses to major civil defence and emergency management events. Master ' s thesis, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand.
- Godschalk, D. 2003. Urban hazard mitigation: Creating resilient cities. Natural Hazards Review 4:136 -43.
- Hudson, M. 2009. Managing without profit: Leadership management and governance of third sector organizations . London: Directory of Social Change.
- Hutton, N., G. Tobin, and L. Whiteford. 2015a. Migrant labor relations: The role of non-pro fi ts following the earthquakes in Christchurch, New Zealand. Papers in Applied Geography 1 (4):365 -72.
- ---. 2015b. Third sector organisations and earthquake recovery planning in Christchurch, New Zealand. Third Sector Review 21 (2):7 -29.
- ---. 2016. Modeling non-pro fi t resilience in long-term recovery in Christchurch, New Zealand. The Professional Geographer 68 (4):603 -12.
- Johnson, L., and L. Mamula-Seadon. 2014. Transforming governance: How national policies and organizations for

- managing disaster recovery evolved following the 4 September 2010 and 22 February 2011 Canterbury earthquakes. Earthquake Spectra 30 (1):577 -605.
- Kimberlin, S., S. Schwartz, and M. Austin. 2011. Growth and resilience of pioneering nonpro fi t human service organizations: A cross-case analysis of organizational histories. Journal of Evidence-Based Social Work 8 (1 -2):4 -28.
- Larner, W., and D. Craig. 2005. After neoliberalism? Community activism and local partnerships in Aotrearoa New Zealand. Antipode 37:402 -24.
- McLean, I., D. Oughton, S. Ellis, B. Wakelin, and C. Rubin. 2012. Review of the Civil Defence emergency management response to the 22 February Christchurch earthquake . Wellington: New Zealand Ministry of Civil Defence and Emergency Management.
- Mojtahedi, S., and B. Lan Oo. 2014. Stakeholders ' approaches to disaster risk reduction in the built environment. Disaster Prevention and Management 23 (4):356 -69.
- Montz, B., G. Tobin, and R. Hagelman, III. 2017. Natural hazards: Explanation and integration . New York: Guilford.
- Nicholls, D. 2013. Personal resilience in NGO organisations: MSD Summer Scholarship Papers, University of Canterbury . Report for the Ministry of Social Development -Family and Community Services Canterbury, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
- Parkin, B. 2012. A new way forward: A community sector response establishing a relationship that is based on capacity, the building of trust, and the security in working together. Paper presented at the Australian and New Zealand Disaster and Emergency Management Conference, Brisbane, Australia, April 16.
- Paton, D., E. Anderson, J. Becker, and J. Petersen. 2015. Developing a comprehensive model of hazard preparedness from the Christchurch earthquake. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 14 (1):37 -45. doi:10.1016/j.ijdrr.2014.11.011.
- Paton, D., and D. Johnston. 2017. Disaster resilience: An integrated approach . Charles C Thomas Publisher.
- Patterson, O., F. Weil, and K. Patel. 2010. The role of community in disaster response: Conceptual models. Population Research Policy Review 29 (2):127 -41.
- Paul, B. 2011. Environmental hazards and disasters: Contexts, perspectives and management . Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
- Pestoff, V., T. Brandsen, and B. Verschuere. 2013. Coproduction as a maturing concept. In New public governance: The third sector and co-production , ed. V. Pestoff, T. Brandsen, and B. Verschuere, 1 -12. London and New York: Routledge.
- Pettinga, J. R., M. D. Yetton, R. J. Van Dissen, and G. Downes. 2001. Earthquake source identi fi cation and characterisation for the Canterbury Region, South Island, New Zealand. Bulletin of the New Zealand Society of Earthquake Engineering 34 (4):282 -317.
- Phillips, S. D., and S. R. Smith. 2011. Between governance and regulation: Evolving government-third sector relationships. In Governance and regulation in the third sector: International perspectives , ed. S. D. Phillips, S. R. Smith, and S. P. Osborne, 1 -36. London and New York: Taylor &amp; Francis.
- Pierpiekarz, M. R., D. Johnston, K. Berryman, J. Hare, J. Gomberg, R. William, and C. S. Weaver. 2014. Lessons learned from the 2010 -2011 earthquake sequence in Canterbury, New Zealand. Paper presented at 10th U.S.
- National Conference of Earthquake Engineering: Frontiers of Earthquake Engineering, Anchorage, AK, July 21.
- Platt, S. 2012. Rebuild field trip February 2012: Reconstruction in New Zealand post 2010 -11 Christchurch earthquakes . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Architectural Research Ltd.
- Podsakoff, P., S. MacKenzie, J. Lee, and N. Podsakoff. 2003. Common method biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology 88 (5):879 -903.
- ---. 2012. Sources of method bias in social science research and recommendations on how to control it. Annual Review of Psychology 63:539 -69.
- Robinson, S., and H. Murphy. 2014. Frontiers for the study of nonpro fi t organizations in disasters. Risk, Hazards and Crisis in Public Policy 4 (2):128 -34.
- Sadler, G., H. Lee, R. Lim, and J. Fullerton. 2010. Recruitment of hard-to-reach population subgroups via adaptations of the snowball sampling strategy. Nursing &amp; Health Sciences 12 (3):369 -74.
- Seville, E. P., D. Brunsdon, A. Dantas, J. Le Masurier, S. Wilkinson, and J. Vargo. 2006. Building organisational resilience: A New Zealand approach to resilience. What does it mean for an organisation? Auckland, New Zealand: Resilient Organisations Research Programme.
- Simo, G., and A. Bies. 2007. The role of nonpro fi ts in disaster response: An expanded model of cross sector collaboration. Public Administration Review 67 (1):125 -42.
- Smith, G., and Wenger, D. 2007. Sustainable disaster recovery: Operationalizing an existing agenda. In Handbook of disaster research , ed. H. Rodríguez, E. L. Quarantelli, and R. R. Dynes, 234 -57. New York: Springer.
- Stevenson, J., H. Kachali, Z. Whitman, E. Seville, J. Vargo, and T. Wilson. 2011. Preliminary observations of the impacts the 22 February Christchurch earthquake had on organisations and the economy: A report from the fi eld (22 February -22 March 2011). Bulletin of the New Zealand Society for Earthquake Engineering 44:65 -77.
- Stirling, M., G. McVerry, M. Gerstenberger, N. Licht fi eld, R. Van Dissen, K. Berrymen, P. Barnes, et al. 2012. National seismic hazard model for New Zealand: 2010 Update. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America 102 (4):1514 -42.
- Vallance, S. 2011. Community, resilience and recovery: Building or burning bridges? Lincoln Planning Review 3 (1): 4 -8.
- Weichselgartner, J., and I. Kelman. 2015. Geographies of resilience: Challenges and opportunities of a descriptive concept. Progress in Human Geography 29:249 -67.
- Whenua Tangata, Community and Voluntary Sector Research Centre. 2007. Code of practice for the Tangata Whenua, Community and Voluntary Sector Research Centre, version 2.1. Unpublished manuscript, Aotearoa, Community Research.
- Wisner, B., P. Blaikie, T. Cannon, and I. Davis. 2004. At risk: Natural hazards, people ' s vulnerability and disasters . 2nd ed. London and New York: Routledge.
- Zimmer, A. 2010. Third sector-government partnerships. In Third sector research , ed. R. Taylor, 201 -17. New York: Springer.
- NICOLES. HUTTON is Assistant Professor in the Department of Political Science and Geography at Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529. E-mail: nhuttons@odu.edu. Her research interests include environmental justice and resilience building.