

the  geographical  review

## SHIFTING SYNANTHROPY OF THE CROW IN EASTERN NORTH AMERICA

## DANIEL W. GADE

abstract. The American crow ( Corvus brachyrhynchos ) falls into a category of wild organisms, called 'synanthropes,' that have developed an affinity for, or dependency on, human interventions in the landscape. The distribution and numbers of crows in North America east of the Mississippi River have been largely tied to the anthropogenic fragmentation of the forest. As ground feeders, crows need open space for foraging, but they also need trees for nesting and roosting. Conflicts between corvids and people centered on the former's damage to agriculture. Both Native American peoples and Euro-American settlers sought to thwart corvine preference for maize through a series of ingenious measures. After  rural concern about corvine depredations greatly diminished. The appearance of large winter roosts in cities shifted the conflict with crows. Like humans, crows have undergone change, and their synanthropic character can be seen as fundamental to their biogeography. Keywords: crow, maize, North America, synanthropy.

T he extraordinary numbers and wide distribution of the American crow ( Corvus brachyrhynchos ) owe much to human interventions (Figure  ). Anthropogenic landscapes are congenial to crows for foraging and protection from predators. Several genetically transmitted attributes have allowed this species to capitalize on the human presence. An opportunistic feeder of the first order, crows eat seeds of wild and domesticated plants as well as insects, amphibians, eggs, fledglings, and small rodents, not to mention roadkill and garbage. Omnivory has enhanced their success, but so has their complex social life. Crows exhibit a large repertoire of vocalizations, communal roosting, and cooperative breeding behavior. Corvine ability to learn and adapt has brought humans into their design for survival. With a brain larger in proportion to its size than that of any other avian species, the crow's intelligence makes it much more than a creature of instinct. 1

The American crow offers a prime example of synanthropy, defined as 'a mutualistic relationship of an organism with humans.' 2 Why, when, and where this species hitched its star to the walking and talking primate that has come to dominate life on the planet is a conundrum of time, space, and ecology. In North America crows have been around much longer than humans, which raises questions about the circumstances that brought man and bird together. The spaces that the crow occupies are best examined in multiscalar perspective. Its remarkable adaptability best explains the continental spread, whereas its intelligence is most evident in a farming neighborhood. The habitat requirements of the crow most clearly emerge at the level of the region. These spatial scales of the human-crow interface, when combined with time scales from the prehistoric to the observable present, unfold a particular perspective on an organism that is more holistically inclusive than the constraints of reductionist science. 3

/ornament11 Dr. Gade is  a  professor  emeritus of geography at the University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont -.

## Crow Distributions and Past Processes

The continent-wide presence of the American crow places it as one of the most ubiquitous native avian species today (Figure  ). The same cannot be said for the past. The vegetation shifts that corresponded with the advance and retreat of the Pleistocene ice sheet affected crow distribution and numbers. Closed forest cover did not favor its spread, although lightning fires, blowdowns, beaver activity, and forest blight created local or regional openings that crows could have occupied until the canopy regenerated. Acorns, wild fruits and seeds, insects, eggs, and birds nourished prehuman crow populations. With the arrival of Homo sapiens on the North American continent the crow, preadapted to environmental change, benefited from the considerable power of paleotechnic humans to transform the surface of the earth. The open habitats that Paleo-Indian (  ,  - b.c. ) hunters and gatherers with the use of fire facilitated hunting, but they also encouraged crows.

The appearance of agriculture in eastern North America during the late Archaic (  - b.c. )  further extended these landscape modifications. An early inventory of small-seeded, domesticated plants faded away with the diffusion of the much more productive and nutritional maize ( Zea mays ). By a.d.  , the Middle Woodland Period, maize had spread east of the Mississippi River, and by a.d.  its cultivation had become established in the lower Great Lakes. By a.d.  maize had become the basis of indigenous subsistence almost everywhere in eastern North America south of  ° N. 4 Adaptability to a range of climates had much to do with the substantial genetic plasticity of this crop. Crows relish maize and would have accompanied this crop's expansion over a millennium without responsibility for that spread. More generally, however, it was the creation of open land through burn- ing  and  cultivation  that  favored crows (Maxwell  ; G. M. Day  ;  Whitney  ,  - ).  Between a.d.  and  ,  when native populations declined sharply due to disease and displacement, the  forest  regenerated  and pushed out crows.

An ornithological separation became apparent between a closed forest canopy and the modifications that reduced the forest to patches. Though in the  same family and genus, ravens  ( Corvus corax )  were birds of that wilderness; crows ( Corvus brachyrhynchos ), of its anthropogenic transforma-

<!-- image -->

F .  The American crow ( Corvus brachyrhynchos ), as painted by Alexander Wilson (  - ),  who  used  the cornfield as an appropriate backdrop to display this bird. This species is  - centimeters long and weighs  grams; its black feathers have a violet sheen. Wilson, who had came to the United States from Scotland in  , developed an interest in bird illustration, which then led to observation of avian habits. Source: Reproduced from Wilson  -,   :  following p. .

F .  Winter roosts in cities in eastern North America past or present with an estimated crow population of at least , . Inset map: Distribution of the crow in North America. Source: Adapted from Verbeek and Caffrey , . (Cartography by M. K. Gade)

<!-- image -->

tion. As forests were cut and farms established, ravens disappeared and crows took their place. A history of observations east of the Mississippi River testified to that distinction. William Byrd confirmed the plethora of crows and rarity of ravens for settled eastern Virginia in the early eighteenth century ([  ]  ,  ).  François Michaux, traveling in Tennessee in  ,  made a distinction between the Atlantic states, where crows ravaged the cornfields, and the still wild land west of the Appalachians, where these plumed marauders were absent (  ,  ). Michaux then distinguished Kentucky, which had farms and thus some crows, with Tennessee, which still had neither. In  , on a  -kilometer-trip along the Natchez Trace from Nashville to Natchez, the ornithologist Alexander Wilson noted the presence of ravens, absence of crows, lack of settlers, and paucity of Indians (  ,  :  - ).

On another trip in western New York State, Wilson noted the same correspondence of ravens and forest cover (  ,  :  ). The significance of that is the contrast with other observations made earlier in this region. The Iroquois had humanized the landscape of western New York that included forty villages. In  military authorities destroyed these settlements and dispersed their inhabitants (Parker  ,  ).  The demise of a large Indian presence and subsequent regeneration account for De Witt Clinton's observation in  that numerous ravens, but no crows, occurred around Seneca Lake (Eaton  - , vol.  ). After Euro-American settlers around Seneca Lake replaced the forest with farms, crows became abundant, and the raven disappeared (Figure  ).

Midwestern states had similar correlations. In Ohio, as settlement expanded from east to west across the state in the nineteenth century, crows increased in numbers (Peterjohn  ). In Michigan crows went from uncommon to common with the advance of settlement, a change apparent in Kalamazoo County between  and  (Brewer  ,  ). For Wisconsin, Arlie Schorger postulated a sparse crow population before  (  ). By  , settlers had cut down most trees and turned much of Wisconsin into an agricultural landscape, and the crow had become the state's major bird pest in spite of strong and continual persecution (Robbins  ). T aken together, these observations point to a temporal pattern: Native Americans had humanized the land before the arrival of European settlement and were accompanied by crows. As Indians died or their agricultural land use disintegrated, regeneration subsequently brought back the forest and, with it, ravens. Euro-American settlers again modified the landscape, and, with that, crow numbers increased. Bird species as an indicator reinforce William Denevan's 'pristine myth' thesis (  ).

## The Microscale: Crows in the Cornfield

Corvine affinity for maize made the cornfield the stage on which man and bird played out a morality tale of the yeoman versus the feathered trickster. Maize offers omnivorous crows what it offers humans: a concentrated dose of carbohydrates and some protein. From the perspective of foraging efficiency, maize filched from the field at certain times of the year provides higher-quality nutrients with less expenditure of calories than does food obtained by predation or scavenging. A stout, long-

ish bill that can sink  centimeters into the soil equips the crow to efficiently dig up kernels. A pouch behind its tongue allows for the efficient transport of kernels to feed its young and itself. Because the crow does not scratch up the ground with its feet like a gallinaceous bird, subtle clues must enable the crow to know just where to find buried kernels that have not yet germinated (Barrows  ,  - ). Ravages of crows in a maize patch peak about ten days after planting. By then the seeds have germinated and sent up a plumular leaf above the soil. The crow pulls the radicle from the ground, exposing the seed swelled with moisture, and snaps it off. Attracted by such delicate morsels, a small flock of crows can systematically remove all of the corn in a  ×  -meter field before the farmer makes his morning field inspection. Once the maize leaf reaches  centimeters, the lateral root system is too strong to be easily pulled out; also, at that stage, the now-shriveled kernel has been depleted of its nutritive content.

From the crow's perspective, the maize-planting period from late May to mid June can be counted on to provide food for its young. The coincidences of the availability  of  soft  maize  kernels  and the nesting season, when the nutrient demand reaches its peak, helps to explain the intensity of these depredations. A third crowfeeding phase occurs fourteen weeks later, when the maize ear is in the milk stage. To reach the tender kernels, the bird pecks a hole in the husk, exposing the whole ear to air and thus to rot. Until mechanical harvesting made the practice obsolete, in the fourth feeding phase the crow repeated the peck-and-eat strategy on the ear as it was drying on the stalk, cut, and bundled into shocks. Gleaning extended the feeding opportunities, for in the process of harvest the kernels fell to the ground, which the crows would retrieve. One early study found that, in December, about half of the food intake of the crow came from corn; in January and February it approached a third (Barrows and Schwarz  ,  ). In central New York State, Paul Hering found that cultivated grains constituted  percent of winter crow food,  percent of that from gleaned maize (  ). Y et John Emlen found no correlation between the density of crow population in New York counties and the proportion of cropland in maize (  ,  ).

Several other vertebrates were also pests on maize in eastern North America. Locally, several mammals were a problem. Among them were chipmunks ( Tamias striata ), which ate maize seed after it was planted, and squirrels ( Sciurus canadiensis ), which entered fields near harvest time from nearby oak and chestnut woods. Under the cover of darkness, raccoons ( Procyon lotor ) and black bears ( Ursus americanus ) entered the fields to pluck the ripening ears from the stalk. Other species of blackbirds had less affinity for maize. 5

Crows were the most vexatious cornfield intruder. Their capacity to devastate a planted field at several stages in the agricultural cycle surpassed that of any other animal. Powerful flight enables crows to arrive in flocks at their feeding sites far   kilometers is not unusual  from their nesting or roosting site. Airborne movement also makes it impossible to track them. Innate cautiousness and an uncanny capacity to read human intentions have made them difficult to approach or to kill.

F .  An early-winter view of a pioneer clearing in western New York State, circa  . Crows found in this setting had food sources that ranged from standing crops, to eggs and young of poultry, to household food scraps. Large trees offered observation points and nesting sites for crows. Source: Reproduced from Turner  , facing p.  .

<!-- image -->

Astuteness and avidity are traits that have characterized this corvine from the preColumbian period to Euro-American settlement and into the twenty-first century.

## Native Peoples and Crows

Gabriel Sagard, seventeenth-century missionary to the Huron, wrote that his charges complained bitterly about crow thievery ([  ]  ,  ). No mention was made of how the Huron dealt with that aggravation, but native Americans elsewhere had several strategies to keep crows away. The Mohawk built special platforms around cornfields, from which women and children carried out scare tactics (Onion  ,  ). Similarly, the Cherokee erected in their fields high scaffolds where old women perched and frightened away crows 'with their screetches' (Adair [  ]  ,  ). Farther west, Henry Schoolcraft's expedition to the Upper Midwest found high platforms in use; from them the Indians could watch for marauders coming from the sky or the land (Figure  ). This strategy may have reached its culmination  kilometers down the Mississippi at Cahokia, the largest prehistoric concentration of people in pre-Columbian North America. At least  ,  people and possibly many more farmed  ,  hectares of agricultural land on the American Bottoms, a fertile area of silt loam, ideal for maize (Woods  ). Cahokian cornfields, located up to  kilometers from the town and ceremonial site constructed largely of earthworks, required eternal vigilance against animal intruders throughout the growing season. Archaeological evidence points to the construction of wooden platforms, which enabled crop watchers to see over the tall plants (Woods  ).

F .  'Guarding the Corn Field,' an engraving made from a painting by Seth Eastman. Eastman sketched this scene near the Lower Saint Croix River in  and painted it in water colors in  or  (McDermott  ). Agriculturalists in many tribes of eastern North America constructed platforms from which to watch the cornfield. Source: Reproduced from Schoolcraft  -,  : plate  .

<!-- image -->

Algonquin tribes protected their maize in another way. Roger Williams noted that the Narragansett 'put up little watch-houses in the middle of their fields in which they or their biggest children lodge, and early in the morning prevent the birds [from eating their maize]' ([  ]  ). Samuel de Champlain observed in eastern Massachusetts a great many little houses scattered over the fields (  ,  :  ). Among the Mohegans in Connecticut, some members of a given community remained near the fields to protect the crops during the planting season (Oberg  ,  ).  In  the  North  Carolina Indian village of Secota, guard huts were positioned in cornfields to frighten thieving fauna (Bry [  ]  ) (Figure  ). An ingenious biological solution to keep crows away was to hang hollowed-out gourds from poles erected in the fields to provide the purple martin ('a warlike bird') with nesting sites (Lawson [  ]  ,  - ; Feduccia  ). In aggressively defending their territory these smallish but feisty passerines would harasses the much larger crows until they flew away, thus protecting the crop. Elsewhere, the Narragansetts trained hawks to 'keepe the little Birds from their Corne' (Williams [  ]  ,  ).

Unlike the Southwest, the eastern part of the continent did not systematically trap crows to keep them away from cornfields. Nor was crow killing widely practiced, although in one recorded case Indians invited Plymouth colony settlers to shoot those that invaded their fields ( Relation . . . [  ]  ,  ). Algonquin peoples had a de facto taboo against killing crows, which in their mythology were the provi-

dential bearers of maize from its place of origin (Williams [  ]  ,  ). However, only people could have dispersed maize, so dependent as it was upon human intervention. Aborigines took several measures to minimize crow damage. Four or five kernels placed in one hole lessened the risk of total loss even if crows ate one or two (Larson  ,  ). The Narragansett planted corn seeds deeply to discourage crows (Williams [  ]  ,  ).  An ingenious, though apparently uncommon, strategy was to soak corn seed in a decoction of false hellebore ( Veratrum viride ) before planting. As Pehr Kalm described it among the Iroquois, crows that ate the treated seed, became dizzy, fluttered out of control around the field, which frightened the rest so they never ventured there again, and expired on the spot (  ,  :  - ). Rather than poison large numbers of crows, the intent was to convey an object lesson to the assembled flock so the other birds would fly away without feeding.

## Euro-Americans and Crows

European settlers in eastern North America not only adapted for their own survival the Indian's main crop, they also imitated some of the indigenous ways to protect it from pests. By dropping four or five kernels in a single hole, John Winthrop reasoned, as native people had before him, that 'some of them are usually destroyed by birds or mouse-squirrels [chipmunks]' (  ,  ).  After  sowing, vigilance was required. John Godman ruefully admonished 'woe betide the corn-field which is not closely watched!' (  ,  ). 'Corn thief' became a folk name for the crow. Dilemmas emerged between protection and production. Settlers learned that moist and friable floodplain soils produced high maize yields, but they also invited greater than usual crow depredations when newly planted (Eliot  ,  ). These low-lying parcels were also those most distant from the farmstead, making it difficult to keep the 'wicked black-feathered bandits' at bay. Crows were only one of a number of animal and plant pests with which colonists had to cope, although none of the others had such pertinacity and impudence. Perhaps crows have been so unnerving to farmers because they remind humans who we have become as a species.

## european parallels

Some diffusionary knowledge can be implied about dealing with crows, for the ornithological phenomenon was not new to seventeenth-century settlers of rural European origin. The rook of western Europe, Corvus frugilegus, approached its transatlantic congener in its affinity for human-modified habitats. Nicolas Denys, who knew the same bird in France, noted that the North American version was all black, whereas the European congener had a white bill and a different tonality ([  ]  ). The resemblance was strong enough, however, to adopt the European terms: 'crow' as a synonym for 'rook,' and 'corneille' in New France. Both the Old and New World species played havoc with agriculturalists. When given the chance, the rook of Europe consumed wheat and other small grains. In sixteenth-century England, Anthony Fitzherbert proclaimed the necessity of securing the harvest, otherwise 'croues, doues, and other Byrdes wyll eate and beare away the cornes' ([  ]

 ,  ). When depredations reached an intolerable level, a rural community set up a committee to destroy the birds. To thwart these feathered thieves, Thomas Tusser advised that boys with slings, arrows, and bows, 'kepe the corne from the crowes' ([  ]  ,  ). Individual farmers also hired boys as 'crow scarers' who sang, yelled, and rattled to keep the birds away from the maturing grain (E. L. Jones  ,  - ). 6

In New England, farmers stationed their own young children in the fields to frighten away these plumed marauders. If the family could not be enlisted, others would be hired to do the job. William Emerson expressed the need to pay a boy a small sum for 'watching the fields one or two weeks till the corn gets too strong for these depredations' (  ,  ).  Settlers  from England introduced the idea of the scarecrow, a forlorn humanoid representation often made of straw and dressed in discarded clothing. Letters published in New England agricultural magazines of the nineteenth century frequently dismissed these effigies as useless. Indeed, farmers claimed that crows learned to use scarecrows as places to look for buried seed. In one recorded case, cloth from a scarecrow was used as a nesting material (Burns  ,  ). A scarecrow placed in the middle of a large field scarcely impressed a crow lurking at its margins. In spite of many derisive critics, the annual erection of these folk figures persisted. Scarecrows might in some cases keep a wary flock at bay during the critical period until the young corn plant developed enough of a lateral root system that a crow could not pull it out of the ground. In other places, a scarecrow may not have scared away crows but could have inhibited squirrels, raccoons, or bears.

Some ethnic variations in the protection from crows occurred. Pennsylvania Germans had their boetzemann, scarecrows that included an implication of hex. A quite different measure in French Canada had a supernatural dimension: The village priest blessed the crop as a way of invoking divine intervention against pests that might destroy it.

## outwitting the feathered foe

Other anti-crow measures had their defenders and disparagers. Farmers strung twine around the crop perimeter or attached shiny reflective material, such as tin sheets, to poles erected in the field. Another method was to keep fires smoldering in the field (De Kay  ,  ). For the French American gentleman farmer Hector St. John de Crèvecoeur, the most effective means of discouraging crows was to dip rags in sulfur, put them on sticks, and set them up along fences (  ,  ). He opined that the sulfur smell reminded crows of gunpowder and kept them from feeding on the germinated seeds. Others insisted that a dead crow mounted on a stick in the field intimidated their conspecifics to stay away (Towle  ). Thomas Nuttall described the practice of pinning a live crow to the ground by the wings and letting its loud cries warn away other crows (  ,  ). Many rural respondents concluded that the crow was simply too intelligent to be fooled by any kind of ruse  a view, however, that assumes that all crows are alike.

F .  An enlargement of part of Theodore de Bry's  engraving of John White's  painting of the Indian village of Secota, on the Pamlico River in northern North Carolina. The caption noted that 'in their corne fields they builde as yt weare a scaffolde wher on they sett a cottage like to a rownde chaire, signified by F. wherin they place one to watche for ther are suche nombre of fowles and beasts, that unless they keepe the better watche, they would soone devoure all their corne. For which cause the watcheman maketh continual cryes and noyse.' Source: Reproduced from Bry [  ]  .

<!-- image -->

Near the end of the colonial period farmers began to focus their efforts on making planted maize seeds repulsive to crows. Some adopted the indigenous seed treatment with roots of false hellebore, also called 'Indian poke.' 7 These were boiled 'for  hours' and the kernels soaked in the concoction before planting (Eliot  ,  ). Sprinkling the soil with the liquid after the corn had been sowed was sometimes part of the operation. Manasseh Cutler, Hector St. John de Crèvecoeur, Samuel Deane, and Alexander Wilson all remarked that this botanical brew kept crows from digging up corn seeds (Cutler  ,  ; Deane  ,  ; Wilson  - ,  :  ; St. John de Crèvecoeur  ,  ). Other farmers sought more readily available and easily processed crow repellents. Coating maize with coal tar, often mixed with train oil or grease, soon became popular. Wood ashes or gypsum prevented the seeds from sticking together. A three-day delay in germination was the disadvantage of this coating. Those who knew chemicals came up with a number of other seed treatments that included saltpeter, copperas, ammonium nitrate, and lime chloride (Drown and Drown  ,  ; Enfield  ,  ). A strychnine treatment developed at

the Massachusetts State Agricultural Experiment Station was expensive but effective. Various commercial crow repellents, some with a strychnine base, came on the market in the early twentieth century.

Outfoxed by the treated corn kernel, crows redirected their foraging on farms to other edibles, including seed potatoes and phaseolus beans, whose pods crows learned to strip open in order to reach the seeds. In the South, crows figured out how to excavate peanuts, a legume that develops underground. Cherries, berries, pecans, and grapes have attracted crows, too. Chicks and eggs are part of their buffet, but to obtain those morsels involved flying dangerously close to the farmstead. An early motive for keeping guinea fowl, known for their raucous shrieks, on American farms was as barnyard sentinels against such incursions (De Kay  ,  ). Effective but not to be counted upon, farmers found that a breeding pair of eastern kingbirds ( Tyrannus tyrannus )  nesting  nearby  effectively  kept  crows  at  bay  (St.  John  de Crèvecoeur [  ]  ,  - );  Wilson  - ,  :  ;  Nuttall  ,  ).  The kingbird pursues with impetuosity any bird of whatever size that enters its territory.

## to kill or not to kill

From the Euro-American perspective, firearms seemed to offer the immediate solution to the crow threat. In Captain John Smith's Virginia colony, the fact 'the very many crowes . . . are kld [killed]' indicates the use of that method ([  ]  ,  ). Destroying crows was framed as a civic duty, as exemplified by a  North Carolina law covering eight counties that required 'each taxable he or she' to yearly kill seven crows or squirrels (Clark  ,  ). That may have been prompted by a legal requirement in Maryland implemented in  and in place for thirty years that every taxable person deliver yearly 'three squirrel scalps or crow heads' (Edwards  ,  ). When, in the early eighteenth century, land use in eastern Virginia shifted from tobacco to corn and other grains, exterminating crows and squirrels became imperative (Hening [  ]  ,  :  ;  :  - ). Periodic deliveries of crow heads to the county courthouse demonstrated concern for the common good as it was then interpreted. Citizen responsibility, however, could not match the incentive of monetary reward for destroying crows. Most eastern states instituted a bounty for killing these unloved birds. In  Pennsylvania started such a reward system (Jones  ,  ). The Maryland one, started in  , paid the reward in tobacco. To finance the  bounty, some states instituted a crow tax; the one in Maine, for example, amounted to  .  a year (C. A. Day  ,  ). In the colonial period counties and townships, aware that failure of the corn crop was a public disaster, sometimes set their own stipulations. In Deerfield, Massachusetts, a  town vote proclaimed that 'whosoever shall kill crows this summer shall have four pence apiece peayed them by ye Town' (Sheldon  ,  :  ). In Buckfield, Maine, proof of each crow killed before the first of July received a reward of one shilling (Cole and Whitman  ,  ). Generous bounties on crows depended upon using unreliable muskets. The shotgun, as it improved through the nineteenth century, made it possible to kill many crows with one pull of the trigger. Funds to pay crow bounties became so

oversubscribed in New York, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey that compensation had to cease.

Technology aside, killing crows has always been the challenge presented by a species prescient about human intent. Individual wariness extends to group strategy. When a small flock lands on the ground, one bird serves as a designated sentinel and stands guard as its conspecifics feed. Many farmers alluded to the automatic flight response that the mere appearance of a man with a gun elicited. Alexander Wilson wrote of the 'jealous sagacity' of the crow in distinguishing a person with a firearm and reacting accordingly (  - ,  :  ). Crow hunters confirm that reaction, although assertions that crows learn to recognize the difference between a rifle, which kills at a distance, and a shotgun, which requires a closer quarry, stretch credulity (see, for example, Mermon  ). John Marzluff's research, however, suggests that crows recognize and remember human faces (Nijhuis  ).

Farmers killed crows as vermin on the assumption that they had no or little larger value. Edward Samuels's remark that crows were 'not only worthless, but ruinously destructive' and that they were 'not deserving of a moment's indulgence or protection at the hands of the ruralist' summarized a prevailing nineteenthcentury attitude (  ,  ). Countering views like that of M. W. Davis, who saw the crow as a 'friend to the agriculturalist' who lived in 'copartnership' with it, were exceptions (  ,  ). In that same vein was St. John de Crèvecoeur, who wavered between philosophy and practicality when he asked, 'Are they not the children of the great Creator as well as we? They are entitled to live and to get their food wherever they can get it. We can better afford to lose a little corn than any other grain because it yields above seventy for one' ([  ]  ,  ).

Beginning late in the nineteenth century, ecologically minded individuals called 'agricultural reformers' began to contest the negative view of crows by providing stark evidence of what they ate. Analysis of stomach contents of dead birds showed that crows consumed larger amounts of harmful insects than they did crops (Bendire  ;  Barrows  ;  Judd  ,  - ).  Most widely disseminated of these studies were Edwin Kalmbach's reports based on stomach analysis of  ,  dead crows (  ,  ).  Kalmbach found that their intake consisted of  percent vegetable matter and  percent food of animal origin and that one-half of the plant-food category came from corn. Sixty-one percent of the analyzed crows had eaten corn. Kalmbach distinguished the spring planting period of April-May, when one-third of the crow diet was corn, from the October harvest period, when that dietary proportion rose to one-half. These researchers did not deny the damage crows wrought on crops but emphasized the important summertime consumption of harmful insects, which made it difficult to simplistically categorize crows as noxious.

Notwithstanding the more balanced information about what crows ingested, laws that emerged in the late nineteenth century protecting wild bird species exempted crows (Palmer  ). Rural attitudes still held strongly against crows, so it is not surprising that the Federal Migratory Species Treaty Act of  excluded crows from any protection. In the  s  rising  concern about food production and the

army of pests depressing it hardened attitudes. Several states reinstated bounties. Sporting groups and so-called conservation clubs organized crow shoots. Dynamite bombs became an acceptable way to destroy them. In a highly publicized case in  near Rockford, an inspector from the Illinois State Department of Conservation killed  ,  roosting crows with dynamite (Bent [  ]  ,  :  ). That crows are vermin was an accepted idea through the  s. The bounty in Michigan, implemented in  , paid  cents for each crow head and is still on the books.

The earlier two-decade spurt of anti-crow sentiment dissipated in the  s as the rural vision changed. North American agriculture, with its transformed scale of operation through consolidation and mechanization and the generalized use of pesticides, fertilizers, and hybrid seeds, created food surpluses. Losses due to crows were simply written off as the cost of doing business. The chemical coating applied to maize seed was meant not to discourage crows but to prevent seed rot and disease. Bounties were once again removed. The  Migratory Species Act included crows on its list of protected species. However, to satisfy anti-crow sentiment, hunting them was permitted for part of the year. The state of Wisconsin, for example, which has had a crow-hunting season since  , harvests about  ,  birds a year.

## Crows in Cities

The creation of a particular kind of residential landscape in North American cities encouraged crows to nest and feed there. In the  s  an  urban model adopted from western Europe favored the establishment of city parks and tree belts along most streets (Lawrence  ). Single-family dwellings surrounded by grassy swards and trees emerged as the preferred urban residential pattern in North America. Such artfully constructed habitats provide crows with open ground to feed on and treetops to nest in. Unlike the rock dove ( Columba livia ),  introduced from Europe in the early  s, crows rarely raise their young on human-made structures. Cities offer diverse food sources. Lawns have worms, often near the surface because of irrigation. Eggs and nestlings of song birds, especially robins, are abundant. Streams, ponds, or lakes offer other edibles. More recently crows have learned to take advantage of trash bins and dumpsters. Food wastes from these and other points receive daily replenishment, which enables crows to count on them as a reliable source of edibles. In addition, food litter from the American habit of eating snacks on the run has created a nutrient bonanza for commensal birds of several species.

Habituation to an urban food supply explains why resident crow populations in North American cities increased until the year  .  The annual Christmas Bird Count in New York City enumerated  ,  crow sightings in  , but  ,  in  (Martin  ). 8 Food supply, however, can not explain why, beginning in the midtwentieth century, towns and cities began to harbor large winter roosts of crows. Huge flocks now descend regularly to roost, tightly packed, in trees over an entire neighborhood. No nineteenth-century writer mentioned large winter concentra-

tions. The best explanation of this major development in crow synanthropy is that cities provide protection from being shot, safety from hawks and owls  their major predators  and greater ambient warmth. The pattern is for crows to congregate at staging areas and from there fly to an urban roosting locale for the night. Crows that winter in these roosts are a combination of flocks that summer in the surrounding countrysides and flocks that have migrated from more northern locales. The occupants of these roosts sleep in town at night and commute to the countryside to forage early in the morning.

Certain cities acquired a measure of notoriety for the large crow roosts they have harbored year after year (see Figure  ).  Since  especially  ,  Auburn, New York (population  ,  ), has had winter roosts comprising  ,  - ,  crows. Kalmbach indicated, however, that a winter roost was there as early as  (  ), and Emlen identified a large rural roost  kilometers south of Auburn in  - (  ).  The  notoriety of the recent Auburn roost generated National Geographic coverage, a Web site, a state bill, protests, and a controversial crow shoot in  . A cemetery provides a staging area for crows before they move downtown to sleep in an area around City Hall. A small river and the bright lights of the nearby large prison that may make crows feel more secure are other possible attractions to explain their concentrations there. Another small eastern city, Hagerstown (population  ,  ) in the Maryland Piedmont, shelters a winter roost of  ,  crows. As in Auburn, each morning the birds fly out to forage in the surrounding farm country (Gilbert  ).

Other major concentrations are Lancaster, Pennsylvania, with an estimated crow roost of  ,  crows; Springfield, Ohio (  ,  crows), Terre Haute, Indiana (  ,  crows), and Danville, Illinois (  ,  crows). Rich agricultural land is within foraging range of all four cities. The largest urban roost in North America may be in  Chatham, Ontario, where wildlife officials estimated the presence of  ,  crows in  ,  ,  in  , and  ,  by the fall of  (Riverdeep  ). Substantial sums of city money have gone to disperse or kill them, but this small city (population  ,  ) also hired a falconer and discussed a household requirement of crow-proof trash cans. Chatham, located in the cornbelt of southeastern Ontario, has abundant food in the surrounding rural area for crow foraging. Similar rich foraging possibilities seem to occur near most winter roosts. Why a particular area is chosen for a roost presents another question. In Chatham crows gather around industrial plants, where they are not bothered at night. Winter temperatures in town would be higher than in the surrounding rural areas. However, global warming since  may be a more significant temperature factor than the urban heat island to explain the broad North American pattern of winter crow roosts centered in areas where the winter average nighttime temperature is well below freezing.

Seasonal residency of mass concentrations of roosting crows creates a vexing problem for a municipality. The din of intense avian sociability during their lateafternoon arrival reaches a decibel level that aggravates most humans. Accumula-

tions of crow excrement are judged to be unaesthetic, odoriferous, and a potential source of histoplasmosis. In some places crows damage lawns in search of grubs. Residents in the affected neighborhoods typically unite to persuade the city to drive away the cawing and defecating hordes in their midst. Efforts to drive crows back to a rural habitat involve various hazing methods: pyrotechnics, firecrackers, sirens, amplified distress calls, spotlights, and laser beams. None has been successful in permanently dispersing roosts. In some cases the crows return to the site they left; in other cases they simply move elsewhere. Two constraints make lethal control measures a last resort. Many municipalities maintain a prohibition against firing guns within city limits. More recently, animal protectionists have organized to protest planned elimination of city roosts.

## Perturbation in Numbers

The ornithological literature, together with the record of long-term landscape change, propels a series of thoughts about the crow population in eastern North America. More than any other process, the human imprint on the land has created the fragmented habitat that crows need to satisfy the high demands of their food quest. Daily food intake approximates half the bird's weight, and that requirement cannot be met by foraging in the forest. By my extrapolations, Euro-American farmers and loggers had by  cleared more than  million hectares of land in the eastern United States and Canada. Indians had earlier modified considerable expanses through fire, although they actually farmed less than  percent of that extent at  any one time. Farms provided more sources for crow sustenance than would simply burning the land to change the vegetation from closed to open. Each farm carved out of the forest formed a nutrient focus for crows: the crops themselves, insects feeding on the crops, and food wastes (see Figure  ). Densities of crows have often been a measure of how much food is available and may vary from five to sixty crows per square kilometer (Emlen  ). By my estimate, a conservative crow density of  per square kilometer of open land would have translated into a population of  ,  ,  crows in eastern North America in  .  Forty million more crows would have been added between  and  , when at least  million square kilometers of forestland were cleared.

Since then, two opposite land-use trends have occurred that probably canceled out further increases and decreases in numbers of crows. Agricultural abandonment has allowed forests to reclaim much land, especially in New England, eastern Canada, and Appalachia. Expansion of suburban and exurban landscapes around large and small cities everywhere in North America creates conditions for crow survival. Within them, housing developments, parks, cemeteries, campuses, golf courses, and strip malls offer crows either the kind of habitat they like or the availability of food. Kevin McGowan found that suburban crows have higher rates of nest survival than do rural crows (  ). One study, using Christmas Bird Counts, argued that American crow populations are increasing most rapidly in urban areas (Marzluff and others.  ). Meanwhile, the large rural roosts historically de-

scribed between New Jersey and Virginia have disappeared. Over the course of the nineteenth century four uninhabited islands in the Delaware River once harbored more than a million crows (Wilson  - , vol.  ; Rhoads  ,  ; Nuttall  ,  ). Rural crows have moved into cities. As northern areas have become warmer, fewer crows may have migrated southward. On the other hand, the decline in agriculture in some places has also caused a diminution in wintertime crow populations.

Some regional difference in crow numbers is systemic. Crows have always been more common from Virginia northward than in the Deep South. Two efficient scavengers, the black vulture ( Corgyps atratus ) and the turkey vulture ( Cathartes aura ) are abundant in the latter region, and the former species has in recent decades also competed with crows in urban areas. As one moves north, vultures become scarce, and beyond latitude  °  they drop out, thus allowing crows to occupy a full  scavenger niche. An early colonial reference to crow scavenging on human corpses during the  - epidemic in Massachusetts puts the bird's gravitation to roadkill in wider perspective (Adams [  ]  ,  :  ). Their incompatibility with wilderness is another systemic difference that affects crows. Both the forested mountainous areas and the subarctic taiga of eastern North America have small crow populations (Gauthier and Aubry  ).  In  New Y ork State, for example, the crow is notably absent only in the largely wilderness area of the Adirondacks (Bonney  ).

Regional decreases and increases in crow populations have always occurred. In central Ohio in the late nineteenth century, John Wheaton found few crows (  ,  ). He attributed the small number to the decimations of a cholera-like disease and the cutting of trees along streams that had been their nesting and roosting sites. Elon Eaton noted an epidemic of mortal blindness ('roup') that resembles what John Emlen had described in New York State in  - (Eaton  ; Emlen  ). Heavy persecution of crows reduced their numbers. Between circa  and  , official vilification of crows had its effect in the agricultural Midwest. Richard Graber and Jean Graber argued for a major decline in the crow population in Illinois, from  ,  ,  in January  to  ,  in February  (  ,  ).

Most recently, crow populations have fallen with the spread of West Nile virus, a disease introduced in  from Africa to New York City. Substantial die-offs of crows began in  , when researchers identified the species as the prime reservoir for the virus spread by infected Culex mosquitoes. Diagnosis of thousands of dead crows throughout North America implicated the virus over the ensuing five years (Caffrey, Smith, and Weston  ). The American crow soon became the sentinel organism for the spread of the disease. Its decline in some places was as much as  percent from  levels (LaDeau, Kilpatrick, and Marra  ,  ). For a time the disease wiped out virtually the entire crow population in the Chicago metropolitan area. By  crow die-off had subsided, suggesting the emergence of immunity of Corvus brachyrhynchos from the virus.

## The Crow in Context

The crow is part of a larger synanthropic phenomenon that merits attention on an increasingly humanized earth. Certain animals, to enhance their survival, attached themselves to the human presence at some point in the past without undergoing domestication. Vertebrates, especially mammals and birds, capture most of this attention, although synanthropy also applies to a host of invertebrates such as the bedbug and clothes moth. Every continent has representatives of this broad category of synanthropic organisms, some of which are pests and some of which are not. Some species have established a quasi-obligate relationship with humans; others, like crows, are facultative in their response. For North America, Richard Johnson classified  native bird species in a continuum of mutualistic intensity (  ). One well-known avian in this category is the eastern robin ( Turdus migratorius ),  which extended its numbers and range enormously as lawns and shade trees graced North American towns and cities. At some time in history the chimney swift ( Chaetura pelagica ) found the benefits of making its nests on human-made structures. Harvesting insects on the wing around farms was so rewarding that nesting in nonhumanized settings was abandoned. The purple martin ( Progne subis )  has carried an implicit quid pro quo one step further by accepting colonial birdhouses, many of which are predator proof, in exchange for snaring large daily allotments of mosquitoes. A sizable raptor, the barn owl ( Tyto alba ), brokered its own ancient bargain with people when it moved into buildings in exchange for destroying harmful vermin. Because this species occurs throughout the world, its synanthropy must have emerged in Eurasia.

The crow-human relationship, in which the food intake of the former overlaps with that of the latter, historically presented a good deal more conflict than has the human relationship with most other bird species. Antagonism would have been less if farmers had recognized the full value of crows, not only in destroying harmful insects but also as a source of nutrition. History suggests that the crow once had a role as a game bird. Four seventeenth-century observers found crows to be perfectly acceptable to eat. Gabriel Sagard wrote of catching crows in cornfields and eating them ([  ]  ,  ); Nicolas Denys made the analogy that crow meat was as good to eat as chicken ([  ]  ). Thomas Morton announced that 'the crows (which I have much admired, what should be the cause) both smell and taste of muske in summer, but not in winter' ([  ]  ). In Virginia, William Byrd proclaimed crows 'as good to eat as doves' ([  ]  ,  ). By the nineteenth century positive assessments of the flesh of crows were rarely noted. Among the failed twentieth-century efforts to popularize crow meat as food was its presence on Chicago restaurant menus disguised under the name of 'Italian woodcock' (Brennan  ). During World War II a food purveyor at the Illinois State Fair tested the idea of crowburgers to find some use for the dead crows hunted in large numbers at that time. Gourmets who partake of crow breasts roasted in wine may concur on culinary value, but for the larger North American society an unconscious food prejudice has trumped nutritional acceptance and ecological benefit.

Notwithstanding that gap, the relationship of this black-plumed avian and us the talking primate has increasingly intertwined. Acceptable crow nourishment has expanded from the  items that Kalmbach catalogued in the early twentieth century. The processed snack foods of North American culture, including beef jerky, cheese puffs, tortilla chips, and bagels, suit corvine palates as well. Among the commensals that now converge on places where waste food of humans accumulates, crows manage to acquire their share. Crows may dominate the fauna around landfills, especially if modern management techniques are not used. Garbage in plastic bags does not deter crows, and anecdotal reports of crows memorizing the schedule of garbage pickups now abound. Observations suggest that crows position themselves near interstate highways to retrieve roadkill. Adaptability goes beyond scavenging. Lawrence Kilham documented crows feeding on lice and ticks found on the hide of hogs and cows (  ). Nesting components of rural crows also reflect changing technology and culture. In the nineteenth century, many nests had linings of horse hair from the time when animal power prevailed on farms. In the late twentieth century, pieces of plastic began to line nests. Eastern cities demonstrate a gradual shift away from total dependence of crows on trees as nesting sites to bridges, powerline platforms, chimney tops, building ledges, and even neon signs.

In less than a century the advance of urbanization and large commercial farming have made humans more tolerant of crows. Reduction in crows' classic wariness, especially apparent in cities where guns are disallowed, forms a behavioral response to that change. The future of American crow demeanor as a species is suggested by intercontinental analogy of a congener. In India the house crow ( Corvus splendens ) has lived for many centuries in an essentially unarmed, animal-friendly, and densely populated culture. Its audacity extends to stealing food from street vendors and entering dwellings to remove food from the table (Kilham  ,  ). The extreme watchfulness of the American crow has grown out of a long history of persecution. As people treat crows with insouciance rather than aggression, less wariness results in reproductive success, and another kind of corvine conduct asserts itself. Unlike the now-extinct dodo, the crow's innate intelligence has enabled it to adapt its behavior to anthropogenic changes in the environment (Marzluff and Angell  ,  ).

Around the middle of the nineteenth century George Perkins Marsh, noting that crows 'no longer respected' the presence of a scarecrow in the field, opined that 'it is commonly said in New England, and I believe with reason, that the crows of this generation are wiser than their ancestors' ([  ]  ,  ). Marsh's proposition that a behavioral change could have occurred within a period of approximately  years  was  not  put  into  a  Darwinian framework of natural selection. Individual crows able to outwit humans passed on their genes to offspring, which, in turn, made humans even more valuable as a source of nutriments. Worthy of speculation is how human-crow interaction had hereditary consequences on maize as it diffused through the eastern half of the continent. Subtle anatomical changes in seedlings and husks may have occurred in the plant as native farmers planted the

seed deeply in the ground and selected the ears for thick husks to protect their crop from corvine depredation (Hart  ).

Both intelligence and sociality explain the malleability of crow behavior. Nikolaas Tinbergen and Konrad Lorenz conceptualized an innate releasing mechanism in the brain that enables birds in the whole corvid family to react creatively to new situations (Lehrman  ).  A  hereditarily  determined neural capacity plausibly emerged in their evolution as highly social creatures keenly attentive to their conspecifics. Crows applied that sensitivity to social information about their fellow crows to information about unrelated organisms from which they could derive food. As part of their cognitive tool kit, crows honed traits of ruse and deception facilitated by their brain, which is proportionately larger than that of most other birds. The crow manifests causal reasoning, imagination, flexibility, and prospection in advance of most other vertebrate species (Emery and Clayton  ; Lefebvre  ). Transmission of new knowledge to kin and then to the flock makes a crow a culture-bearing organism overqualified for the ecological niche it occupies. Cognitive complexity has enabled crows to adapt to changes in human technology that have enhanced their survival.

## Bridging Ontological Divides

A broad perspective on the crow raises procacious questions about how the traditional organization of knowledge has failed to fully address synanthropy as a category. Neither historical geography, which employs the methods of the academic discipline of history, nor biogeography, which follows the canon of the biological sciences, has creatively engaged the realm of the other. Historical geographers, who by inclination or training subconsciously label phenomena as either 'historical' or 'unhistorical,' view the nonhuman as an immutable backdrop to changing human circumstances. Yet many animals have their own time-space tapestry, in which social intelligence has evolved over centuries to change collective behavior. Configuring the animal over the long term  an exercise that always requires inference and supposition  opens another window into understanding biotic change and geographical context. Seen in that way, a synanthropic organism becomes a useful indicator of change and, as such, a way to further probe the myth of virgin nature. Synanthropic organisms, like people, are in the process of becoming ( natura naturans ) and never a finished product ( natura naturata ). Anthropocentrism crumbles when humans perceive animals as more like, rather than unlike, themselves. If humans have an innate potential for personal development, how can we know that the crow is not self-powered to do the same?

Biogeographical assumptions fall in an opposite direction. Studies of fauna and flora have typically marginalized anthropogenic influences as inconvenient intruders into nature's exquisite web. That view becomes unsustainable for those who want to understand the earth as it really is. Biogeography cannot ignore the stark fact that less than one-fifth of the world's land area has escaped direct human impact and that creative assessment of the world's biodiversity cannot disregard the

manifold anthropogenic interventions in biotic patterns and processes. The classic procedures of mainstream science are not the privileged path to knowledge in melding the biotic and anthropic with insight and discernment. A delicate empiricism is required to see comprehensively rather than selectively and to think not about crows but with them. The biggest hindrance to an alternative way of thinking is the false assumption that nature and culture are separate ontological entities. Crows in their relationship to humans offer a compelling narrative to ponder the need to reevaluate the presumptions that animals are without history or culture.

## Notes

-  . An extensive literature on crows provides abundant evidence of their intelligence and adaptability (Verbeek and Caffrey  ). People who have kept crows as pets are astonished by their capacity  to  learn  and  their  reasoning power (Bendire  ,  - ;  Bent  [  ]  ,  - ;  Kilham  ). William Bartram, one of America's earliest writers on natural history, wrote that 'it would be endless . . . to recount instances of this bird's understanding, cunning, and operations, which certainly exhibited incontestable demonstrations of a regular combination of ideas, premeditation, reflection and contrivance, which influenced his operations' (  ,  ).
-  . European entomologists introduced the word 'synanthropy' into scientific usage in the  s. Dalibor Povolny, in particular, gave the term precise meaning and its English-language forms (  ,  ).  Scientists  extended the use of 'synanthropy,' which had initially been applied to insects that were attracted to humans and their places, to encompass avifauna (Tomialojc  ). Other vertebrates are now included in this term, but, contrary to its usage by Gordon Whitney (  ,  ), synanthropy is not limited to introduced exotic commensals such as the rock dove, European starling, or Norway rat. Three forms of the word are in use: 'synanthropy,' as the condition; 'synanthrope,' as the organism; and 'synanthropic,' as the adjective. This cluster of neologisms has not yet entered the unabridged dictionaries of the English language.
-  . Inspiration for a holistic view of biological phenomena comes from the delicate empiricism of Johann Wolfgang Goethe (  - ). Though better known for belles lettres and philosophy, Goethe formulated a style of inquiry that employed careful description, avoided mechanistic explanation, and sought to discover the unity of the thing studied (Seamon and Zajonc  ).
-  . Historic Indian maize cultivation extended as far north as  °  ´  N  near  Lake Winnipeg in Manitoba (Moodie and Kay  ).
-  . References to 'blackbirds' in historical sources raise the question about which species was being addressed: the crow, in the Corvidae family; the red-winged blackbird ( Agelaius phoeniceus ) and the common grackle ( Quiscalus quiscula ), both in the Icteridae family; or the European starling ( Sturnus vulgar is), in the Sturnidae family, introduced from England in  . References to the blackbird in the remarks of Adriaen van der Donck and Izaak De Rasieres about the island of Manhattan in the seventeenth century and those of Luigi Castiglioni about Maryland in the eighteenth century could have applied to any of the three native species (De Rasieres [  ]  ,  ; Donck [  ]  ,  - ;  Castiglioni [  ]  ,  - ).  However, Pehr Kalm provided the necessary ornithological detail to distinguish grackles and red-winged blackbirds as separate species, both of which he described as 'maize-thieves' (  ,  :  - ).
-  . Originally a scarecrow was a person employed in scaring birds by shouting, banging pans, waving sticks, or moving clappers. Only in the sixteenth century did it acquire its current meaning of an immobile effigy meant to frighten birds from growing crops ( Oxford English Dictionary  ,  :  ).
-  . David Jones inventoried the American Indian groups who knew false hellebore and its effects (  ,  - ). When ingested, the many steroidal alkaloids found especially in the roots, which are five to ten times more poisonous than the leaves or stems, cause convulsions. Manasseh Cutler described the root as a 'most drastic cathartic' and poisonous to swine (  ,  ).
-  . The Christmas Bird Count started in  , when the American ornithologist Frank Chapman proposed counting birds around the holiday season (officially between  December and  January)

rather than hunting them as had been the custom. Collected mainly by amateur bird-watchers, this information is useful not only to document the presence of bird species in a place at that time of year but also to make temporal comparisons within any one species.

## References

- Adair, J. [  ]  . Adair's History of the American Indians . Edited by S. Johnson. New York: Promontory Press.
- Adams, C. F. [  ]  . Three Episodes of Massachusetts History .  vols. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
- Barrows, W. B.  . The Food of Crows. In Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for  ,  - . Washington, D.C.: General Printing Office.
- Barrows, W. B., and E. A. Schwarz.  . The Common Crow of the United States. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Division of Ornithology and Mammalogy, Bulletin  .  Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
- Bartram, W.  . Anecdotes of an American Crow. Philadelphia Medical and Physical Journal  (  ):  - .
- Bendire, C. E.  . Life Histories of North American Birds. U.S. National Museum, Bulletin  . Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
- Bent, A. C. [  ]  . Life Histories of North American Jays, Crows, and Titmice .  vols. New York: Dover Publications.
- Bonney, R. E., Jr.  . American Crow. In The Atlas of Breeding Birds in New York State, edited by R. F. Andrle and J. R. Carroll,  - . Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
- Brennan, G. A.  . The Wonders of the Dunes . Indianapolis, Ind.: Bobbs-Merrill.
- Brewer, R.  . Original Avifauna and Postsettlement Changes. In The Atlas of Breeding Birds of Michigan, edited by R. Brewer, G. A. McPeek, and R. J. Adams Jr.,  - . East Lansing: Michigan State University Press.
- Bry, Theodore de. [  ]  . Thomas Hariot's Virginia . Ann Arbor, Mich.: University Microfilms.
- Burns, F. L.  . The American Crow ( Corvus americanus ), with Special Reference to Its Nest and Eggs. Wilson Bulletin, No.  :  - .
- Byrd, W. [  ]  . William Byrd's Natural History of Virginia: or, the Newly Discovered Eden. Edited by R. C. Beatty and W. J . Mulloy. Richmond, Va.: Dietz Press.
- Caffrey, C., S. C. R. Smith, and T. J. Weston.  . West Nile Virus Devastates an American Crow Population. Condor  :  - .
- Castiglioni, L. [  ]  . Luigi Castiglioni's Viaggio: Travels in the United States of America,  - . Translated and edited by A. Pace; sections also edited by J. and N. Ewan. Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse University Press.
- Champlain, S. de.  . The Works of Samuel de Champlain .  vols. Translated and edited by H. H. Langton and W. F. Ganong. Toronto: Champlain Society.
- Clark, W., comp. and ed.  . Laws of North Carolina  . In The State Records of North Carolina, vol.  , Laws  - . . . ,  - . Goldsboro, N.C.: Nash Brothers. [http://books.google.com /books?id=SEN  AAAAMAAJ].
- Cole, A., and C. F. Whitman.  . A History of Buckfield, Oxford County, Maine from the Earliest Exploitations to the Close of the Year  . Buckfield, Me.: Privately printed.
- Cutler, M.  . An Account of Some of the Vegetable Productions Naturally Growing in This Part of America, Botanically Arranged. Memoirs of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences  :  - .
- Davis, M. W.  . Indian Corn. Ninth Vermont Agricultural Report . . . , for the Years  - ,  - .
- Day, C. A.  . A History of Maine Agriculture,  - . Orono, Me.: University Press.
- Day, G. M.  . The Indian as an Ecological Factor in the Northeastern Forest. Ecology  (  ):  - .
- De Kay, J. E.  . Zoology of New York, or the New-York Fauna, part  , Birds. Albany, N.Y.: Carroll and Cook.
- De Rasieres, I. [  ]  . Letter of Isaack de Rasieres to Samuel Blommaert. In Narratives of New Netherland  - , edited by J. F. Jameston,  - . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.
- Deane, S.  . The New-England Farmer; or, Georgical Dictionary .  nd ed. Worcester, Mass.: Isaiah Turner.
- Denevan, W. M.  . The Pristine Myth. Annals of the Association of American Geographers  (  ):  - .

- Denys, N. [  ]  . Description and Natural History of the Coasts of North America (Acadia). Translated and edited by W. F. Ganong. Toronto: Champlain Society.
- Donck, A. van der. [  ]  . A Description of the New Netherlands. Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse University Press.
- Drown, W., and S. Drown.  . Compendium of Agriculture: or, the Farmer's Guide . Providence, R.I.: Field and Maxey.
- Eaton, E. H.  . An Epidemic of Roup in the Canandaigua Crow Roost. The Auk, n.s.,  :  - . ---.  - . Birds of New York.  vols. Albany: University of the State of New York.
- Edwards, C. L.  . Winter Roosting Colonies of Crows. American Journal of Psychology  (  ):  - . Eliot, J.  . Essays upon Field-Husbandry in New England . Boston: Edes and Gill.
- Emerson, W. D.  . History and Incidents of Indian Corn and Its Culture . Cincinnati, Ohio: Wrightson. Emery, N. J., and N. S. Clayton.  . The Mentality of Crows: Convergent Evolution of Intelligence in Corvids and Apes. Science  (  ):  - .
- Emlen, J. T., Jr.  . Midwinter Distribution of the American Crow in New York State. Ecology  (  ):  - .
- Enfield, E.  . Indian Corn; Its Value, Culture, and Uses . New York: Appleton.
- Feduccia, A., ed.  . Catesby's Birds of Colonial America . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
- Fitzherbert, A., and W. Skeat. [  ]  . The Book of Husbandry. English Dialect Society Publications,  . London: Trübner &amp; Co.
- Gauthier, J., and Y. Aubry.  . The Breeding Birds of Quebec . Montreal: Association Québécoise des Groupes d'Ornithologie.
- Gilbert, B.  . Crows Fly Far and Wide, but There's No Place Like Home. Smithsonian, August,  - . Godman, J. D.  . Rambles of a Naturalist . Philadelphia: Association of Friends.
- Graber, R. R., and J. W. Graber.  . A Comparative Study of Bird Populations in Illinois,  - and  - . Illinois Natural History Bulletin  (  ):  - .
- Hart, J. P .  . Maize Agriculture Evolution in the Eastern Woodlands of North America: A Darwinian Perspective. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory  (  ):  - .
- Hening, W. W. [  ]  . The Statutes at Large: Being a Collection of All the Laws of Virginia from the First Session of the Legislature, in the Year  .  vols. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia for the Jamestown Foundation of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
- Hering, P. E.  . The Food of the American Crow in Central New York State. The Auk, n.s.,  (  ):  - .
- Johnson, R. F.  . Synanthropic Birds of North America. In Avian Ecology in an Urbanizing World, edited by J. M. Marzluff, R. Bowman, and R. Donnelly,  - . Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
- Jones, D. E.  . Poison Arrows: North American Hunting and Warfare . Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Jones, E. L.  . The Bird Pests of British Agriculture in Recent Centuries. Agricultural History Review  (  ):  - .
- ---.  . Creative Disruptions in American Agriculture,  - . Agricultural History  (  ):  - .
- Judd, R. W.  . Common Lands, Common People . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
- Kalm, P.  . Travels into North America. Translated by J. R. Forster.  nd ed.  vols. London: T. Lowndes.
- Kalmbach, E. R.  . Winter Crow Roosts. Yearbook of the Department of Agriculture for  ,  - . Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
- ---.  . The Crow and Its Relation to Man. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Biological Survey, Bulletin  . Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
- ---.  . The Crow in Its Relation to Agriculture: Is It a Farm Pest? U. S. Department of Agriculture, Farmer's Bulletin  . Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
- Kilham, L.  . Cleaning/Feeding Symbioses of Common Crows with Cattle and Feral Hogs. Journal of Field Ornithology  (  ):  - .
- ---.  . The American Crow and the Common Raven . College Station: Texas A&amp;M University Press.
- LaDeau, S., A. M. Kilpatrick, and P. P . Marra.  . West Nile Virus Emergence and Large-Scale Declines of North American Bird Populations. Nature,  June,  - .

- Larson, L., trans.  . Peter Kalm's Description of Maize. Agricultural History  (  ):  - .
- Lawrence, H. W.  . City Trees: A Historical Geography from the Renaissance to the Nineteenth Century . Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
- Lawson, J. [  ]  . A New Voyage to Carolina. Edited by H. T. Lefler. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
- Lefebvre, L.  . Forebrain Size and Social Intelligence in Birds. In The Evolution of Nervous Systems: A Comprehensive Reference, edited by J. Kaas,  :  - . Boston: Elsevier / Academic Press.
- Lehrman, D. S.  . A Critique of Konrad Lorenz's Theory of Instinctive Behavior. Quarterly Review of Biology  (  ):  - .
- Marsh, G. P. [  ]  . Man and Nature. Edited by D. Lowenthal. Cambridge. Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
- Martin, D.  . Look Who's Flocking to the City Now. New York Times,  September, §A,  , §B,  .

Marzluff, J. M., and T. Angell.

University Press.

- Marzluff, J. M., K. J. McGowan, R. Donnelly, and R. L. Knight.  . Causes and Consequences of Expanding American Crow Populations. In Avian Ecology and Conservation in an Urbanizing World, edited by J. M. Marzluff, R. Bowman, and R. Donnelly,  - . Boston, Mass.: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
- Maxwell, H.  . The Use and Abuse of Forest by the Virginia Indians. William and Mary College Quarterly Historical Magazine  (  ):  - .
- McDermott, J. F.  . Seth Eastman: Pictorial Historian of the Indian . Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
- McGowan, K. J.  . Demographic and Behavioral Comparisons of Suburban and Rural American Crows. In Avian Ecology in an Urbanizing World, edited  by  J.  M.  Marzluff,  R.  Bowman, and R. Donnelly,  - . Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
- Mermon, D.  . Crow Shooting Secrets . New York: Winchester Press.
- Michaux, F. A.  . Travels to the Westward of the Allegany Mountains .  Translated by B. Lambert. London: J. Mawman.
- Moodie, D. W., and B. Kaye.  . The Northern Limit of Indian Agriculture in North America. Geographical Review  (  ):  - .
- Morton, T. [  ]  . New English Canaan . New York: De Capo Press.
- Nijhuis, M.  . Friend or Foe? Crows Never Forget a Face, It Seems. New York Times,  August, §D,  .
- Nuttall, T.  . A Manual of the Ornithology of the United States and of Canada. Cambridge, Mass.: Hilliard and Brown.
- Oberg, M. L.  . Uncas: First of the Mohegans . Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
- Onion, D. K.  . Corn in the Culture of the Mohawk Indians. Economic Botany  (  ):  - .
- Oxford English Dictionary .  .  vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
- Palmer, T. S.  . Legislation for the Protection of Birds Other Than Game Birds. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Biological Survey, Bulletin  .  Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
- Parker, A. C.  . Iroquois Uses of Maize and Other Food Plants. New York State Museum, Bulletin  . Albany: University of the State of New York.
- Peterjohn, B. G.  . The Birds of Ohio . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- Povolny, D.  . Eine Erwägungen über die Beziehungen zwischen den Begriffen 'Synanthrop' und 'Kulturfolger.' Beiträge zur Entomologie  (  /  ):  - .
- ---.  . Synanthropy. In Flies and Diseases, edited by B. Greenberg,  - . V ol.  of Biology and Disease Transmission . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
- Relation . . . . [  ]  . Relation of the English Plantation at New Plimoth. Amsterdam: Theatrum Orbis Terrarum.
- Rhoads, S. W.  . Crow Roosts and Roosting Crows. American Naturalist  (  ):  - ;  (  ):  - .
- Riverdeep.  . Scaring Crows. Stories for Students  Geography. Riverdeep, Inc. [http://web.riverdeep .net/current/2001/02/020201\_crows.jhtml].
- Robbins, S. D., Jr.  . Wisconsin Birdlife: Populations and Distribution Past and Present .  Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

.



In the Company of Crows and Ravens

. New Haven, Conn.: Yale

Sagard, G. [  ]  . Histoire du Canada et voyages . . . . Paris: Librarie Truss.

- ---. [  ]  . The Long Journey to the Country of the Hurons .  T ranslated by H. H. Langton, edited by G. M. Wrong. Toronto: Champlain Society.

Samuels, E. A.  . The Birds of New England . Boston: Noyes, Holmes.

Schoolcraft, H. R.  - . Historical and Statistical Information respecting the History, Conditions, and Prospects of Indian Tribes of the United States .  vols. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Grambo.

- Schorger, A. W.  . The Crow and the Raven in Early Wisconsin. Wilson Bulletin  (  ):  - .

Seamon, D., and A. Zajonc, eds.  . Goethe's Way of Science: A Phenomenology of Nature . Albany: State University of New York Press.

- Sheldon, G.  . History of Deerfield, Massachusetts .  vols. Deerfield, Mass.: Privately printed.

Smith, J. [  ]  . The Complete Works of Captain John Smith (  - ). Edited by P. L. Barbour.  vols. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

- St.  John de Crèvecoeur, J. H. [  ]  . Letters  from an American Farmer; and, Sketches of Eighteenth-Century America . Edited by A. E. Stone. New York: Penguin Books.
- ---.  . More Letters from the American Farmer: An Edition of the Essays in English Left Unpublished by Crèvecoeur. Edited by D. D. Moore. Athens: University of Georgia Press.
- Thomas, P. A.  . Contrastive Subsistence Strategies and Land Use as Factors for Understanding Indian-White Relations in New England. Ethnohistory  (  ):  - .
- Tomialojc, L.  . Quantitative Studies on the Synanthropic Avifauna of Legnica and Its Environs. Acta Ornithologica  (  ):  - .
- Towle, E. R.  . Raising Corn in Northern Vermont. Eighth Vermont Agricultural Report . . . , for the Years  - ,  - .
- Turner, O.  . Pioneer History of the Holland Purchase of Western New York .  Buffalo, N.Y.: Jewett Thomas.
- Tusser, T. [  ]  . A Hundreth Good Pointes of Husbandrie. Amsterdam: Theatrum Orbis Terrarum. Verbeek, N. A. M., and C. Caffrey.  . American Crow (Corvus brachyrhynchos). The Birds of North America, No.  . Philadelphia: Birds of North America.
- Wheaton, J. M.  . Report on the Birds of Ohio. In Report of the Geological Survey of Ohio, vol.  , part  , Zoology,  - . Columbus, Ohio: Nevins &amp; Myers.
- Whitney, G. G.  . From Coastal Wilderness to Fruited Plain: A History of Environmental Change in Temperate North America,  to the Present . New York: Cambridge University Press.
- Williams, R. [  ]  . A Key into the Language of America .  Providence: Rhode Island and Providence Plantations Tercentenary Committee.
- Wilson, A.  - . American Ornithology; or, the Natural History of the Birds of the United States .  vols. Philadelphia: Bradford and Inskeep.
- Winthrop, J.  . The Description, Culture, and Use of Maiz. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London  (  ):  - .
- Woods, W. I.  . Maize Agriculture and the Late Prehistoric: A Characterization of Settlement Location Strategies. In Emergent Horticultural Economies of the Eastern Woodlands, edited by W. F. Keegan,  - . Center for Archaeological Investigations, Occasional Paper No.  . Carbondale: Southern Illinois University.
- ---.  . Population Nucleation, Intensive Agriculture, and Environmental Degradation: The Cahokia Example. Agriculture and Human Values  (  /  ):  - .