## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## The Grass Beneath: Conservation, AgroIndustrialization, and Land-Water Enclosures in Postcolonial Tanzania

Youjin B. Chung

To cite this article: Youjin B. Chung (2018): The Grass Beneath: Conservation, AgroIndustrialization, and Land-Water Enclosures in Postcolonial Tanzania, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2018.1484685

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2018.1484685

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 25 Oct 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## The Grass Beneath: Conservation, Agro-Industrialization, and Land -Water Enclosures in Postcolonial Tanzania

Youjin B. Chung

<!-- image -->

Department of Development Sociology, Cornell University

This article examines a long-standing conflict over resource control between a rural village, a national park, and an agro-industrial investment project in Bagamoyo District, Coast Region of Tanzania. Taking a historical political -ecological approach to analyzing the new enclosures and postcolonial nation-building in Africa, the article advances two interrelated arguments. First, it argues that there is an analytical and empirical need to consider ' land -water ' as a coupled resource, particularly in coastal riverine landscapes. In coastal Tanzania, this bundling has occurred through the everyday agro-ecological practices of local resource users, as well as their historical struggles against postcolonial state policies. Second, it argues that the contentious land -water politics in Bagamoyo illustrate the dialectic of nation-building in postcolonial Africa, namely, the contradiction between the state ' s need for capital accumulation in the global economy via resource extraction on the one hand and political legitimation in the nation-state among the rural majority on the other. Key Words: agrarian political economy, enclosure, historical political ecology, land -water, Tanzania.

本 文 检 视 坦 桑 尼 亚 沿 海 地 区 的 巴 加 莫 约 地 区 中 , 一个乡 村 聚 落 、 国 家 公 园 、 以 及 农 工 投 资 计 画 之 间 有 关 控 制 资 源 的 长 期 冲 突 。 本 文 运 用 历史 政 治 生 态 学 方 法 , 分 析 非 洲 的 崭 新 圈地 和后 殖 民 国 族 建 构 , 并 推 进 两个 相 关 的 论 述 。 首 先 , 本 文 主 张 , 在 分 析 与 经 验 上 必 须 将 ' 水 与 土 ' 视 为一 对 资 源 , 特 别 是 在 沿 海 的 河 岸 地 景 之中 。 在坦 桑 尼 亚 沿 岸 , 此 一 结 合 通 过 在地 资 源 使 用 者 的 每 日 农 业 生 态 实 践 、 及 其 对 抗 后 殖 民 国 家 政 策 的 历史 斗 争中 发 生 。 再 者 , 本 文 主 张 , 巴 加 莫 约 充 满 冲 突 的 水 -土 政 治 , 描 绘 出 非 洲 后 殖 民 国 族 建 构 的 辩 证 性 , 亦 即 国 家 一 方 面 在 全 球 经 济 中 必 须 通 过 资 源 搾 取 进 行 资 本 积 累 、 另 一 方 面 必 须 在 主 流 乡 村 人 口 中 取 得 国 族 国 家 政 治 合 法 化 之 间 的 矛 盾 。 关 键 词 ： 农 业 政 治 经 济 , 圈地 , 历史 政 治 生 态 学 , 水 -土 , 坦 桑 尼 亚 。

Este art  ı culo examina el conflicto de vieja data sobre el control del recurso entre una aldea rural, un parque nacional y un Proyecto de inversi  on agro-industrial en el Distrito Bagamoyo, Regi  on Costera de Tanzania. Adoptando un enfoque hist  orico pol  ı tico -ecol  ogico para analizar los nuevos cerramientos y la construcci  on de naci  on en  Africa poscolonial, el art  ı culo promueve dos argumentos interrelacionados. Primero, se arguye que existe una necesidad anal  ı tica y emp  ı rica de considerar la ' tierra -agua ' como un recurso acoplado, particularmente en los paisajes fluviales costeros. En la Tanzania costera esta ligaz  on se ha presentado a trav  es de las pr  acticas agro-ecol  ogicas cotidianas de los usuarios locales, lo mismo que en sus luchas hist  oricas contra las pol  ı ticas estatales poscoloniales. Segundo, se arguye que la pol  emica pol  ı tica de tierra -agua en Bagamoyo ilustra la dial  ectica de construcci  on de naci  on en  Africa poscolonial, es decir, la contradicci  on entre la necesidad del estado por acumulaci  on de capital en la econom  ı a global mediante extracci  on de recursos, por una parte, y la legitimaci  on pol  ı tica en la naci  on -estado entre la mayor  ı a rural, por la otra. Palabras clave: econom  ı a pol  ı tica agraria, ecolog  ı a pol  ı tica hist  orica, cerramiento, tierra -agua, Tanzania.

Tembo wawili wapiganapo ziumizo nyasi [When two elephants jostle, it is the grass beneath that gets trampled.]

-Swahili proverb

A griculture and conservation are two of the most important sectors in Tanzania. Although agriculture is the mainstay of its economy, employing approximately 70 percent of the total labor force and contributing over 30 percent of the gross domestic product, conservation -namely, conservation-based tourism -is the largest foreign exchange earner, bringing in on average US$1.28 billion annually (World Bank 2015a, 2015b). These two sectors have gained public attention in recent years not only because of their

significance to the Tanzanian economy but also because of their role in driving large-scale land acquisitions, or ' land grabbing, ' in the countryside (Oakland Institute 2011; Actionaid International 2015; Songa 2015; Ismail 2018). Yet, the expropriation of rural resources for agriculture and conservation has been key to the project of nation-building and consolidation of state power in Tanzania, whether under colonialism, postcolonial socialism, or postsocialist neoliberalism (see Neumann 1998; Shivji 1998; Benjaminsen et al. 2013). As Tenga and Kakoti (1993) reminded us, ' Land grabbing organised by the state for its own gain is by no means uncommon in the history of Tanzania ' (39).

Under current national land laws, transforming rural landscapes into protected areas and agricultural investment zones requires compulsory acquisition of village lands by the state and their reclassification into two other categories of public land: general land and reserved land (United Republic of Tanzania [URT] 1999a, 1999b). 1 According to official national statistics, village land constitutes approximately 70 percent of all public land in Tanzania, whereas reserved land comprises 28 percent and general land the remaining 2 percent (URT 1995). These figures, however, have not been updated since 1995, and recent studies show that as much as 40 percent of all land in the nation could be categorized as reserved land if all new terrestrial and marine conservation areas were taken into account (Benjaminsen and Bryceson 2012; United Nations Environment Program-World Conservation Monitoring Centre 2017). Others suggest that the total proportion of village land might have decreased over time not only due to the expansion of protected areas but also due to other forms of land grabbing led by the state for large-scale investments, as well as by politicians and government officials for private gain (Askew, Maganga, and Odgaard 2013; Greco 2015). In short, these studies indicate that the state and its varied actors have been at the forefront of appropriating village resources for different purposes over the past two decades, raising concerns about the future of agrarian life and livelihoods. They further highlight that any act of ' resource grabbing, ' or seeking access to resources by a few in ways that cause injury to many, is ultimately about control. In other words, it is a question about who has the power to decide which actors are allowed or not allowed to derive benefits from resources and with what socioecological consequences (see Ribot and Peluso 2003; Peluso and Lund 2011).

In this article, I analyze a long-standing conflict over resource control between a rural village, a national park, and an agro-industrial investment project in Bagamoyo District in the Coast Region of Tanzania. Inspired by historical political -ecological approaches to examining the new enclosures and postcolonial nation-building in Africa, the article advances two interrelated arguments. First, I argue that there is an analytical and empirical need to consider land and water, or what I am calling land -water , as a coupled resource, particularly in coastal riverine environments. Critical studies of the global land rush over the past decade have highlighted the centrality of water as both a driver and target of contemporary global land rush, but there has been what I see as a tendency to consider land and water as related but nonetheless distinct resources for analysis (see Borras, Fig, and Su  arez 2011; Skinner and Cotula 2011; Mehta, Veldwisch, and Francis 2012; Woodhouse 2012; Johansson et al. 2016). The concept of land -water builds on political ecological approaches to understanding how humans, non-humans, and aquatic landscapes are co-produced through material and semiotic processes (see Raffles 2002; Oslender 2004; Ogden 2011). In choosing to think with the concept of land -water, my aim is to privilege the lived histories of local people on their fluvial environments and thereby to challenge the dichotomous, ahistorical, and productivist view often taken by governments and investors of how land and water are separate biophysical resources for extraction and exploitation. For generations of family farmers living in Matipwili, a riverine village in coastal Bagamoyo, this bundling of land -water has been shaped not only by their everyday ecological knowledges and practices of floodplain agriculture but also by their historical struggles against postcolonial policies that attempted to manipulate their intra-active relationship with the environment.

Second, I argue that the contentious politics of land -water control in Bagamoyo between Matipwili village, a coastal national park, and an agro-industrial investment project (part-owned by the state) illustrates what Aminzade (2013) called ' the dialectic nation-building ' (335) in postcolonial states in Africa. That is, they highlight the underlying contradiction between the state ' s need to foster

economic development from a peripheral position in the global economy (often via the appropriation and extraction of rural resources) on the one hand and to foster political legitimation in the nation-state among the rural poor majority on the other. The state ' s repeated expropriations of the same land -water resources from the village throughout the postcolonial period for conservation and agro-industrialization were necessitated by the imperatives of capital accumulation and were authorized using various formal legal tools. However, the state thus far has not been able to effectively dispossess the rural villagers and fully commodify their land -water and labor. As I show, this is because the landscape in Bagamoyo has been and continues to be shaped by the lived histories and contending memories of dispossession and resistance ' from below. ' Echoing others, I suggest that the enduring legacies and embodiment of previous (and ongoing) conflicts over resource access are important material and symbolic forces that impinge on the processes, outcomes, and trajectories of contemporary agrarian transformation (see Edelman and Le  on 2013; Alonso-Fradejas 2015). On the whole, the article underscores the importance of bringing a historical political -ecological approach to the study of agrarian change to illuminate how the relationships between rural peoples and their environments are forged not only through their everyday practices but also through their lived experiences of shifting political economic conjunctures, as well as their memories of the ' ongoing, contested past ' (see Offen 2004, 20; Davis 2015; Mathevet et al. 2015).

Methodologically, the article draws on ethnographic fieldwork conducted over 18 months from 2013 and 2016 in Bagamoyo District. The analysis is triangulated from multiple data sources, including oral histories with local elders; semistructured and unstructured interviews with local villagers, state officials, corporate actors, and other key informants; direct and participant observations in people ' s farms, village meetings, and other local events; participatory photography (photovoice and photoelicitation); participatory community mapping; archival materials; and secondary documents. The use of diverse methods and meticulous cross-checking of data was made necessary by the sheer amount of confusions, irregularities, and contradictions I encountered throughout my fieldwork. Yet, as this article demonstrates, the disjuncture between people ' s understandings of land -water vis- a-vis those of the state and investors is not to be seen as a flaw or obstacle that paralyzes analysis but as a fruitful starting point for engaging with how collective memory, as a dynamic ' field of activity ' (Said [1994] 2002, 251), shapes the relationship between nature and society. The lines where different memories and knowledges from below and above intersect, slip, and collide with one another are the very grounds from which I examine the politics of history and the history of politics of postcolonial enclosures in Tanzania. 2

The article is organized as follows. In the first section, I provide a brief social history of Matipwili village, which lies at the heart of the contestation over land -water control in Bagamoyo. I describe key features of its landscape, highlighting in particular the role of the Wami River in shaping the identities, livelihoods, and the struggles for social reproduction for the generations of family farmers in the area. Next, I examine the two interconnected cases of state-led enclosures in which Matipwili has been deeply embroiled: first, a coastal wildlife conservation effort through the establishment of Saadani Game Reserve in the late 1960s and its later upgrading to Saadani National Park in the early 2000s and, second, a large-scale agricultural land deal signed between the Tanzanian government and a Swedish investor, known as the EcoEnergy Sugar Project, which took shape around the mid- to late 2000s (see Figure 1). Finally, the article concludes with a reflection on what these overlapping enclosures in Bagamoyo and the local resistances against them can tell us about the role of history and the challenges of postcolonial nation-building in Tanzania and Africa more broadly.

## Historical Political Ecology of Land -Water in Matipwili

## Memories of Ujamaa

Matipwili is located approximately 50km northwest of Bagamoyo Town and 10 km inland from the Indian Ocean. It became formally organized and registered as a village during the late 1960s and early 1970s under the socialist policy of ujamaa (familyhood in Swahili), which symbolized the nation-building vision of the independent Tanzanian state (see Nyerere 1968). According to folklore told by local elders, however, the coastal areas

Figure 1. Map of the contested area in Bagamoyo District. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

surrounding the present-day Matipwili and the vicinities had been inhabited by people much earlier than this, dating back to the late 1700s and early 1800s. Yet, it was not until the early nineteenth century that population expanded rapidly with the development of long-distance caravan trade in slaves and ivory from the African interior to the Swahili coast to the Arab world (see Brown 1970). Under German and British colonial rule from the late nineteenth century to the mid-twentieth century, some areas of the current village were annexed and transformed into a sisal plantation, which continued to operate until independence in 1961.

In their oral histories, village elders often referred to Matipwili as ' Wami, ' or what they used to call their place of dwelling during the colonial period. The name derived from the Wami River, one of the major river basins in Tanzania that drains into the Indian Ocean and that flows in winding channels across the village landscape. Wami once was composed of a vast area encompassing a number of small settlements and cultivated areas along the river valleys and floodplains, such as Biga, Kaloleni, Gobole, and Gama, which are historically recognized as the original food basket of the village (see Figure 1). For the people of Wami, their place of dwelling was so named because of their intergenerational dependence on the river and the wetland ecosystem for their livelihoods. In the wake of independence, the Tanzanian government inaugurated a railway line that connected Dar es Salaam to the rural hinterlands in the northern regions across several coastal river basins, including the Wami. Wami was soon adopted as the name of the station that was established on the escarpment on the north side of the river. 3

If Wami symbolized social reproduction for local villagers, it arguably signified progress and development for the postcolonial Tanzanian state. This signification occurred not only through the opening of the railway line that rendered the coastal hinterlands, its people, and its products more easily accessible and ' legible ' to the state (Scott 1998) but also through the creation of so-called rationally organized village settlements. In Wami, this found expression in the forced resettlement of local populations under the nationwide campaign for compulsory villagization launched in 1973, the coastal version of which became known as Operesheni Pwani (Operation Coast). 4 During the campaign, families dwelling on the low-lying floodplains on the south side of the Wami River were coerced to move to higher grounds on the north. Each family was required to build modern brick houses in concentrated settlements near the Wami train depot and engage in communal block farming using pumped river water for irrigation. The state ' s rationale for this massive population resettlement to nucleated villages was not only to facilitate a more targeted delivery of agricultural and social services in the countryside but also to boost agricultural productivity among the peasantry through cooperative farming (von Freyhold 1979; Havnevik 1993). In short, the formation of a socialist village society meant that people had to forge a different way of living and working on the land. Across the nation, forced villagization was conducted as a military exercise with considerable use of force; the state mobilized thousands of civil servants, police, armed forces, civilian militia, and politicized male youth to move people (McHenry 1979; Lal 2010). When people refused, government forces harassed and intimidated them by demolishing and burning their houses and looting or destroying their properties.

Although interpretations vary, observers agree that compulsory villagization failed on the whole because it was enacted with a total disregard for preexisting land use practices and because there was no legislation in place to govern land rights in the newly established ujamaa villages (see Brain 1967; Caplan 1981; URT 1994; Scott 1998). Although intended to be a flagship nation-building exercise, it ultimately replicated the colonial-style enclosure of rural resources and created a significant confusion over land tenure in the countryside. Few historical records exist on the processes and outcomes of villagization in Bagamoyo, but oral histories of the floodplain farmers who had lived through the socialist period reveal that collective agriculture, or any idea of a new farming system, let alone moving away from the river, hardly appealed to them. This was primarily because they had already adopted, through generations of knowledge and practice, a farming system that was specifically tailored to the local ecologies of the Wami. Throughout the implementation of Operesheni Pwani , most of them kept their options open for going back to the floodplains and ultimately did so when the campaign came to a close in the late 1970s, although some families decided to maintain their permanent residence in the village center on the north and commute to their farms in

the south on a daily basis. In short, they resisted the imposition of villagization and collective farming by not doing what they were ' supposed to do ' as members of a village society; that is, by repossessing their land -water in the floodplains.

## Becoming with Weeds and Floods

A close examination of the Wami ecosystem helps elucidate why the floodplain farmers had resisted the imposition of socialist policies. Two agroecological practices are particularly worth considering. First, generations of family farmers along the Wami floodplains engage in a particular style of shifting cultivation ( kilimo cha kuhama kuhama ), not necessarily to lay the land fallow for a few years to restore its fertility but to cope with an invasive weed species that thrives in the wetlands. The species is locally known as ndago , or nut grass or yellow nutsedge ( Cyperus esculentus L.); agronomically, it is considered to be one of the worst weeds in the world, particularly for crops like maize, sugarcane, and cotton (see Stoller and Sweet 1987; Defelice 2002). It grows up to a maximum of ninety centimeters tall and produces an extensive system of fibrous underground roots, which can survive extreme conditions and from which the species reproduces itself.

Ndago growth is promoted by tillage and, once established, it is difficult to control unless the entire network of basal bulbs, tubers, and rhizomes is completely removed from the soil (Stoller and Sweet 1987; Defelice 2002). Some farmers engage in this physically demanding task if and when there is sufficient labor power. In most cases, however, they tend to shift to another place along the floodplains to farm and then return later, with the recognition that ndago tubers, including those that lay dormant deep in the soil, typically have a life span of up to three years, although they might be viable up to ten years (see also Stoller and Wax 1973; Wilen, McGiffen, and Elmore 2010). As one forty-eight-year-old male farmer who was born and raised in the Wami floodplains explained:

Here, the more you farm, the more ndago grows. The land hides a lot of things. You have to experience and learn from the habits of the soil. And when it is time, you must shift. It is something that we became used to, crossing the river back and forth. For a few years we would farm here on this side of the river; then we would move to the opposite site, and then back here again. We would plant trees, such as mango, wild grape, banana, guava, and coconut to mark our place. If my family shifts to another place, and if someone else comes to my land, they can use it for the time being, but they must respect my trees. That way I can still enjoy the fruits of my land. 5

Although most people expressed how cumbersome dealing with ndago was, they acknowledged that there were certain benefits like protection from wildlife intrusion. They noted that because wetlanddependent wildlife such as elephants and hippopotamus ' do not like ndago , ' they tend to graze around the dense patches of weed, leaving the cultivated fields mostly intact. If people ' s farms were less protected by ndago , they would have to find other means of deterring wildlife intrusion and crop damage, such as shouting, banging loudly on corrugated iron sheets, lighting torches, and taking turns with family members and neighbors to stay awake at night to guard the fields.

The second and equally important reason people resisted resettling to and engaging in collective agriculture on the northern plateaus was their dependence on floods and the low-lying floodplains for year-round farming. Whereas most farmers in the district plant twice a year -that is, during the short and long rainy seasons from October to December ( vuli ) and from March to May ( masika ) -floodplain farmers plant three times a year, including between June and September, which is typically known as the dry season ( kiangazi ) when there is hardly any rain. Matipwili farmers have an alternative name for kiangazi ; they call it kitopeni , or the moist and muddy season. They make productive use of this period when soil retains high levels of residual moisture in the subsurface after the recession of the annual inundations of the floodplains during masika (Figure 2). The annual floods bring fertile sediments of alluvial soil from the upper catchment of the Wami River. The organic matter deposited in the floodplains acts as a natural fertilizer, precluding the need for farmers to ever rely on manure and agrochemicals. It is these characteristics that allow floodplain farmers to continue their agricultural activities during the otherwise ' dry ' season. During kitopeni , they also take advantage of the seasonal ponds and channels created by the floods by intensifying their fishing activities and introducing paddy rice to their crop mix, both of which provide them with important sources of protein, calories, and income. For

Figure 2. Inundation of the Wami floodplains, Matipwili village, March 2016. Photo by author. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 3. A typical agricultural landscape in Matipwili in Kitopeni, September 2016. Photo by P. Njuila. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

comparison, consider Figures 3 and 4, photographs of typical agricultural landscapes taken in September 2016 by two female farmers in Matipwili and a nearby hamlet approximately 15 km to the south. 6

People ' s generations of experimentation, learning, and ' becoming with ' (Haraway 2008, 244) the soil, river, weeds, and floods were entwined with their embodiment of an ontology of nature that viewed land and water as being inseparably coupled.

To use Raffles ' s (2002) wonderful metaphor from the Amazonia, the coastal riverine landscape of Matipwili signified ' an amphibious world of mobile porosities ' (182) where land and water and humans and nonhumans became one another through everyday practice. As a fifty-six-year-old female farmer and the photographer of Figure 3 highlights, land and water are one and the same; neither has meaning without the other. In her view, it was this land -water assemblage -the collapsing and transgressing of the biophysical

Figure 4. A typical agricultural landscape in Bozi in Kiangazi (a hamlet, south of Matipwili), September 2016. Photo by A. Ramadhani. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

boundaries of land and water -that defined the identities, memories, and livelihoods of coastal farmers: ' We are coastal people. We live here in the river basin where there is a lot of water. Water is land, and land is water. Water brings fertility; we can plant almost anything on our land [because of water]. '

This material and semiotic coupling of land and water was also a key theme that emerged during an oral history and community mapping workshop I facilitated with village elders in March 2016. At the workshop, I asked the elders about how the name Matipwili came to replace Wami during the 1970s. Consider the following exchange among four elders:

Elder 1: In the past, there were people living in places, called Manungu, Kongowe, KwaMwande, Mchiwa north and south of the river. They came to Wami during ujamaa . They were strangers. We greeted them when they arrived and asked them what they were doing in our waters. Then they replied: ' tunatipwilika tu. ' In their vernacular ' -kutipwilika ' meant to splash and play with water. They were happy to see so much wet soil that they were determined to stay and grow food here. That ' s how the name Matipwili came to be.

Elder 2: Yes, and when the children play with sand along the riverbanks, we call the muddy mixture they make matipwi or matibwitibwi.

Elder 3: I agree, but I thought it [Matipwili] was named because we were told to move in a rush ( pilikapilika ) during Operesheni Pwani ?

Elder 4: No, it is because we were told by the government to build better houses ( nyumba tipwatipwa ) away from our waters. 7

[A clamor of laughter and consenting and dissenting voices from the crowd]

The elders ' recollections of the origins of the name Matipwili were subjective, patchy, and at times contradictory. Yet, their memories coalesced around an ' aquatic logic ' (Oslender 2004, 962); they called on the river and their fluvial experiences to anchor their sense of place and belonging in Matipwili. When considered as a whole, their accounts, together with the animated reactions from the crowd, illuminate how the relational ontology of land -water has become deeply embedded in people ' s consciousness not only through their everyday material practices but also through their symbolic struggles to ' re-member ' their lived histories, which the state has continuously attempted to ' dismember ' (N ~ ug  ı wa Thiong ' o 2009) through villagization and other kinds of postcolonial enclosures, which I describe now.

## Land -Water Enclosure for Conservation: Saadani National Park

Housed under the Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism (MNRT), Tanzania National Parks Authority (TANAPA) is a parastatal agency

responsible for the management of Tanzania ' s national parks and protected areas, including Saadani National Park (SNP), which has been mired in a land dispute with Matipwili and other neighboring villages for decades. SNP is one of the newest and the only coastal national park in Tanzania, known for its diverse mix of terrestrial, littoral, and marine resources and wildlife (TANAPA 2003). Prior to gaining national park status in 2005, it operated as Saadani Game Reserve since the late 1960s, at around the same time Matipwili became formalized into an ujamaa village. 8

According to oral histories told by local elders, a number of families in a settlement north of Wami, known as Tengwe, were evicted from their land without any compensation when the game reserve was created and were eventually absorbed by Matipwili. Although many of the then-displaced people are no longer alive or no longer residing in the village, their stories of injustice have been passed on from generation to generation. Arguably, their stories, together with the elders ' living memories of villagization, have played a role in shaping the villagers ' collective habitus, or ' systems of durable, transposable dispositions ' (Bourdieu 1977, 72), of suspicion toward the state and state-led enclosures. In fact, the most common refrain among Matipwili villagers was the saying ' government is government, ' which epitomized their belief that the state -whether colonial, postcolonial socialist, or postsocialist neoliberal -could at any moment exercise its sovereign power to expropriate rural resources for its own gain. Some farmers even casually joked that they should probably sell their land ' before the state took it away. '

In 1996, the MNRT began the process of rehabilitating and upgrading Saadani Game Reserve into a national park with the technical assistance of the German government (Booth 2000). At the time, not only was the infrastructure of the game reserve dilapidated but its financial viability was coming increasingly under threat. Transforming it into a national park was expected to contribute to the conservation of coastal resources and wetland-dependent wildlife, including endemic, rare, and endangered species, such as mangroves and green turtles. More important, it was anticipated that the new park would bring enormous opportunities for tourism and, in turn, much-needed foreign currency for the nation-state. Between 1996 and 2003, the German Technical Cooperation Agency (GTZ, now GIZ) commissioned a series of studies on the coastal ecosystem and produced a management plan for the proposed SNP (see, e.g., Booth 2000; Bloesch and Kl € otzli 2002). To what extent the local communities were involved in the planning process is unclear from the GTZ documents I reviewed. None of the elders and former village leaders I interviewed recalled having been consulted by foreign researchers and consultants, although a few raised curious suspicions that the SNP was likely to be ' owned by the Germans. '

Archival records obtained from the village office reveal, however, that a reconnaissance exercise had been conducted in Matipwili in 1999 by a technical team of seven officials from Bagamoyo District and TANAPA, with the assistance of two local male elders, one of whom was alive at the time of my fieldwork. The aim of the exercise was to recover the original boundaries of the game reserve vis- a-vis the village, to produce a baseline from which to propose a new boundary for the national park. 9 At the end of the mission, the team proposed that the boundary of the game reserve be extended southward to include one of the oldest subvillages of Matipwili, known as Kisauke, which used to be a sisal estate during the colonial period but was later repossessed by the villagers upon independence. According to village elders, approximately 100 people from Kisauke were promised compensation and resettlement land by TANAPA. Despite the lingering bitter memories from forty years ago when their neighbors from Tengwe were dispossessed by the game reserve without any compensation, the affected Kisauke villagers agreed to the proposal, with the understanding that their access to the Wami would not be restricted by the annexation.

It is important to highlight that this boundary expansion was proposed not using precise geographical coordinates per se but rather general place descriptions, the repercussions of which will soon become clear. Consider the following recommendation outlined in TANAPA ' s 1999 proposal, which reads abstruse to an average outside person especially in the absence of contextual detail: ' Boundary extension is proposed on the Southern part [of the reserve] from Mtoa Ngoma [ sic ] to Kaburi Wazi and Wami River confluence, leaving Matipwili village on the Western side. ' 10 According to the male elder who had taken part in the reconnaissance mission, the place that is referred to in the proposal as Mtoa Ngoma or, rather, correctly known as Mto wa Ngoma and directly translated as a ' stream of drum and dance

celebrations ' is a stream that joins into the Wami River from the north. Yet he emphasized that the agreement was that TANAPA would acquire a small portion of the stream, excluding the surrounding common property resources that the villagers required access to for cultural and religious ceremonies, especially initiation rites for adolescent girls (Chung 2018). On the other hand, Kaburi Wazi , directly translated as ' an open graveyard, ' referred to a semiarid area on the northwestern part of the village, characterized by distinct soil erosions and incised gullies, which were formed many decades ago when surface water flow became trapped in small concentrated streams and began eroding the channels in the ground surface. According to the elder, conceding this area to TANAPA was relatively easy at the time, given that it was only marginally used by the villagers.

Despite the agreement made in 1999, Matipwili villagers did not receive any further updates on its implementation until 2003, when they discovered, to their surprise, that TANAPA had secretly paid compensation to a handful of Kisauke residents in the middle of the night. 11 No official record of this payment exists at the village, district, or national level. 12 My interview with the wife of the former Kisauke subvillage chairman and other villagers familiar with this event revealed that only a few people were selected for compensation, namely, male village elders and political elites. They were said to have been paid several million Tanzanian shillings under the condition that they vacate the land immediately and compel others to do the same. The combined secrecy and urgency of this eviction meant that there was a great deal of room for error and manipulation. For example, it is alleged that the majority of the 100 or so people who required compensation were never paid, whereas those who were not eligible for compensation were paid by mistake. Moreover, contrary to what TANAPA had promised, the displaced Kisauke villagers never received resettlement land. As a result, some were forced to move to other areas within Matipwili, and others migrated to other areas outside the village but still within the floodplains of the lower Wami.

More fuel was added to the fire throughout the 2000s, however, when the villagers discovered that TANAPA had been expropriating more areas (on paper) along the Wami River beyond what they had agreed to in 1999. Indeed, both the SNP Management Plan and the official tourist map depict a large proportion of the north and south banks of the river, the original food basket of the village, as being part of the national park (see TANAPA 2003; Halsdorf and Gerber 2006). Of analytical significance here is not only how and in what ways village lands were expropriated but also why. For TANAPA, the acquisition of the river banks was imperative given the lack of availability of freshwater sources in the former game reserve. In addition to several dozens of artificial reservoirs, the Wami River was expected to provide ' important water sources ' for the new park and its wetland-dependent wildlife (TANAPA 2003, 10 -11). In short, the fulcrum of TANAPA ' s quest for land was water. Yet, none of the villagers I interviewed recalled ever having agreed to this additional land --water take. TANAPA, too, acknowledged that there were various ' problems and issues facing the national park, ' including ' villager resettlement ' and that the park boundary was ' not acceptable in some cases ' (TANAPA 2003, 25), although it failed to provide how these questions would be addressed.

Notwithstanding these contestations, SNP was officially declared a national park in September 2005 through Government Notice (GN) No. 281, approved by the parliament and signed by the president. Whereas the 1999 proposal had used general place descriptions like Mtoa Ngoma and Kaburi Wazi to indicate the proposed park boundaries, the GN relied on references to a series of property beacons with corresponding geographical coordinates, which were never discussed with the wider village to see whether they corresponded with the general place markers described in the 1999 proposal. In the eyes of the state, the villagers ' sense of belonging and their customary rights to their land -water through long-term occupation and use and their intimate knowledges of the local ecology were considered illegible (and hence of no pragmatic value) vis- a-vis government plans, maps, Cartesian coordinates, the GN, and other technolegal renderings of the landscape, most of which were produced by foreign ' experts. '

The contention between Matipwili and SNP continued to escalate in subsequent years, when TANAPA established a gate at the south side of the Wami in 2011 to facilitate tourist access but which ultimately had the effect of regulating the mobility of the local villagers. The confrontation between the two erupted once again in 2013 when the villagers faced sudden threats of eviction by armed forces deployed by former President Jakaya Kikwete as part of a nationwide

antipoaching campaign, Operesheni Tokomeza Ujangili . 13 This campaign was conducted as a military exercise, reminiscent of Operesheni Pwani of forty years ago, involving more than 2,300 soldiers, policemen, game rangers, and other officers across multiple state institutions and law enforcement agencies (Legal &amp; Human Rights Centre 2015). The campaign was suspended within a month, however, after numerous reports of serious human rights violations; cases of rape, murder, torture, humiliation, theft, and destruction of property were reported throughout a number of districts. Although such serious acts of physical violence were not reported in Bagamoyo District, those affected in Matipwili and other surrounding areas testified that soldiers ordered them to vacate the land within twentyfour hours, despite the fact that they were not taking part in any poaching activities and that they were not (in their perspective) encroaching on protected areas. They recounted how soldiers arrived with weapons and containers full of diesel and kerosene and threatened to burn their houses down if they were still found on the land the next day. In the remainder of the article, I examine how this historical contention between Matipwili and SNP became even more convoluted by the (re)enclosure of the disputed area by the state for an agro-industrial investment project.

## Land -Water Enclosure for Agro-Industrialization: EcoEnergy Sugar Project

The mid-2000s saw a dramatic surge in the global demand for biofuels as northern governments incentivized the production and consumption of renewable energy due to concerns about peak oil and climate change (Borras, McMichael, and Scoones 2010). As with many other prospecting foreign investors at the time, Swedish Ethanol Chemistry AB (SEKAB), one of the largest importers of biofuels into the European market, began exploring areas in which it could establish brand new, or ' greenfield, ' biofuel projects. Sub-Saharan Africa appealed to many investors like SEKAB for its favorable climate and the perceived availability of large swaths of ' empty ' arable land for the production of first-generation ethanol from agricultural feedstock like sugarcane (Cotula et al. 2009; Sulle and Nelson 2009; White et al. 2012). For SEKAB, Tanzania was considered particularly ideal not only for these reasons but because of its historical aid relationships with Nordic governments dating back to the nation ' s struggles for independence (Havnevik and Haaland 2011). On the part of the Tanzanian government, investors like SEKAB were welcome, because they were perceived to have the necessary capital and expertise required to propel agricultural modernization in the nation (URT 2014).

In June 2006, SEKAB signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the Tanzanian government outlining their mutual interests in kick-starting the development of a national biofuel industry with initial investments in the Coast Region (Kamanga 2008). On signing the MoU, SEKAB created its Tanzanian subsidiary, SEKAB Bioenergy Tanzania (BT), and, in turn, the Tanzanian government promised to grant the company a large tract of ' unused ' land in the Coast Region for a pilot project on sugarcane ethanol production. SEKAB BT failed to take off, however, in the wake of the global financial crisis and the plummeting oil prices in 2009 that dampened investor interests in biofuels worldwide. 14

Acknowledging the bust in the biofuel bubble, SEKAB BT had to go back to the drawing board and reassess its investment plans. In 2010, the company rebranded itself as Agro EcoEnergy Tanzania (hereinafter EcoEnergy) and proposed a ' new ' project that would no longer be about producing sugarcane ethanol for export to Europe but rather about producing sugar, electricity, and ethanol for the home market in Tanzania. The spatial imaginary of the project included not only a plantation but also an outgrower scheme that would involve the neighboring villagers to promote ' sustainable ' community development. Repackaged as an investment project that would provide ' win -win -win ' benefits to the Tanzanian state, the local communities, and the foreign investor, EcoEnergy gained political support from the former minister of lands, prime minister, and President Jakaya Kikwete, who had just launched in late 2009 the Kilimo Kwanza (Agriculture First) initiative, aimed at promoting agriculture-led industrialization across the nation. Framed as a public -private partnership for agricultural and rural development, the company further gained financial support from the African Development Bank (AfDB), the International Fund for Agriculture and Development (IFAD), and the Swedish International Development Agency. The

total investment cost for the project was estimated to be over half a billion U.S. dollars, and it was envisioned to be one of the largest public -private agricultural investments in East Africa (Agro EcoEnergy Tanzania 2017).

To enable the project, the Tanzanian government agreed to provide land free of encumbrance to EcoEnergy, in return for a 25 percent equity share in the investment. 15 The concession area was to be located in Bagamoyo District on 20,373.56 hectares of ' unused ' public land, which was officially transferred to EcoEnergy in May 2013 by the Ministry of Lands, Housing, and Human Settlements Development (MLHHSD) as a ninety-nine-year lease. 16 According to my interviews with an EcoEnergy executive and several employees, the location of the project area had allegedly been handpicked by President Kikwete, a native of Bagamoyo District. Paradoxically, however, the concession area was not ' empty ' and ready for use. It had been occupied by at least 1,500 people for generations, including several hundred in Matipwili. To further confound the matter, at least 3,000 hectares of the total EcoEnergy concession area was claimed by SNP as per GN No. 281 of 2005, which had been published without the villagers ' knowledge or consent (see Figure 1; Kisanga 2015). 17

At any rate, EcoEnergy moved forward with its investment plans. Yet, after commissioning a series of baseline studies including soil surveys, it became apparent to them that only about 7,800 hectares, or less than 40 percent of the total acquired land, was suitable for irrigated sugarcane production. Although precise measurements are hard to come by given the absence of cadastral surveys at the village level, Matipwili farmers claim that approximately 2,500 of the total 7,800 hectares belong to their village. An EcoEnergy irrigation layout plan that I obtained from an anonymous source, however, suggests that the area belonging to Matipwili might in fact be closer to 4,000 hectares, because the plan had included village areas along the south bank of the Wami River outside the project boundary, which had not (yet) been transferred. 18 Just as access to water had been critical for the creation of the SNP, it was imperative for EcoEnergy to acquire (or plan to acquire) all of the irrigable areas in the floodplains, considering that the Wami River was ' the only practical source of water for the 7,800 ha main plantation ' (AfDB 2012, 7).

Arguably, the most important question for the Tanzanian government and EcoEnergy was how to maximize their returns from the limited irrigable areas or how to render them ' investible ' (Goldstein and Yates 2017; Li 2017). The answer lay in flood control. Contrary to the cultural and agroecological significance of floods for Matipwili farmers, the project planners considered them mainly an infrastructural nuisance or hindrance that made ' much of the area impassable ' during the rainy season (AfDB 2012, 17). To fix this problem, they planned to construct a series of dykes, measuring 23 km in total, along the south and north banks of the Wami River to divert the flood water flows (URT 2015). At the same time, they planned to build an off-river reservoir to capture and exploit the surplus water, so that they could use it during the dry season and in places where access to water was relatively limited, especially in the southern part of the project site (Agro EcoEnergy Tanzania 2012).

Yet, these flood protection dykes, water storage facilities, and other water-related infrastructure were technologies that were designed to reconfigure and disrupt the ecology of the river basin and restrict access for local villagers. The way they were conceptualized further ignored the intra-active relationship between the local people and the river, the weeds, the wetlands, and the hydrological cycle that rendered possible the continuation of their agricultural practices over multiple generations. The undermining of the local cultural ecology and the decoupling of water from land was thus a prerequisite to agro-industrialization in Bagamoyo. When I asked an EcoEnergy spokesperson about the potential adverse social -ecological consequences of such major infrastructure projects, he responded:

The project and its Environmental and Social Impact Assessment have all been approved by the National Economic Management Council (NEMC), which is under the Vice President ' s Office, the second highest office in this country. Our reports and assessments have been supported by AfDB and IFAD. … They were put on the AfDB website and our website for six months, and yet nobody challenged them. … You know, we are basically the last downstream users [of the Wami River]. If you don ' t use the water, it just goes into the ocean. We are like taking waste water, if you are taking it from a processing point of view.

On the one hand, his quote highlights the jarring gap between the project ' s dichotomous and productivist vision of land and water and the local people ' s relational ontology of land -water as being critical to

their identities, livelihoods, and social reproduction. On the other hand, it demonstrates the significance of the role of the state (and its varied agencies) in enabling, sanctioning, and legitimizing such reality disjunctures. Yet, despite the project ' s grand vision of transforming the coastal riverine landscape into a capitalist frontier, it remains stalled to date, precisely because of the persistence of floodplain farmers in occupying the land -water and also because of the unresolved boundary dispute between Matipwili, SNP, and EcoEnergy.

## Conclusion

The politics of land -water control in Bagamoyo are deeply rooted in history. As I have illustrated in this article, the co-constitutive and co-evolving nature of the resource conflict between Matipwili, SNP, and EcoEnergy Sugar Project has produced a highly contested landscape that is fraught with confusions and contradictions. Between 2013 and 2016, I received conflicting answers as to how the Tanzanian government might begin to address this knotty predicament. On the one hand, EcoEnergy alleges it was assured by the Ministry of Lands that the GN which had established the SNP back in 2005 would be revoked and that the land would be returned to the company. On the other hand, government officials I interviewed at the Ministry noted that revoking the GN would be very difficult, because it would require a lengthy legislative and consultative processes with all of the neighboring villages. Instead, I was told that the relevant state entities -MLHHSD; MNRT; Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Livestock; and the Prime Minister ' s Office -were in the process of resolving the issue ' internally. '

The local people, on the other hand, have not been consulted on the possible ways of cutting this Gordian knot. During my time in the field, I heard variations of this Swahili proverb repeated over and over by village elders: Tembo wawili wapiganapo ziumizo nyasi (when two elephants jostle, it is the grass beneath that gets trampled). Matipwili people are at the grass roots or at the very heart of the contestation over land -water control in Bagamoyo, but they have been marginalized to the sidelines and silenced to the extent that they have become invisible or redundant to the state. People often asked one another, ' What ' s important to our government? Humans, animals, or sugarcane? ' In the eyes of the state, the land -water enclosures for the EcoEnergy Sugar Project and SNP were both considered legitimate -despite their overlapping boundaries -because they were supported by technical management plans, surveys, maps, GN, title deed, property beacons, geographical coordinates, and other formal legal tools of the state. Although these diverse forms of evidence have provided the state with a cloak of legality, the ahistorical and depoliticized ways in which they were created pose serious questions of justice and fairness.

Yet, there is hope in that the villagers are resisting the complete enclosure of their lives and livelihoods by persistently refusing to leave their land -water and by engaging in various political acts of defiance. For instance, in July 2015, protesting against a road paved by SNP ' s bulldozers on their commons, more than 300 farmers grabbed their shovels and machetes to clear the bushes to demarcate their own perceived village boundary. In April 2016, they also wrote a letter to their member of parliament (Ridhiwani Kikwete, the son of former President Kikwete, who had backed the EcoEnergy project) requesting that he raise their concerns to other policymakers at the next parliamentary session, something he had promised during the election campaigns the previous year. 19

As long as agriculture, conservation, and other extractive sectors remain critical to the economy of Tanzania and that of other postcolonial states in Africa, the demand for land -water access -and the contestations over it -will likely intensify in the coming years. Tracing the unfolding of the current debacle in Bagamoyo from a historical perspective will be important not only to support the struggles for agrarian justice but also to shed light on how the postcolonial state reconciles its competing demands for capital accumulation in the global economy and political legitimation in the nation-state, particularly among the vast majority of its rural populations.

## Acknowledgements

As part of a broader study on gender, development, and the new enclosures in Tanzania, the research for this article was supported by the Social Science Research Council and various institutions at Cornell University: the Institute for the Social Sciences, International Programs -College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, the Mario Einaudi

Center for International Studies, the Department of Development Sociology, the Graduate School, and the Center for the Study of Inequality. I thank the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology for permission to conduct this research, Christine Noe and the Department of Geography at the University of Dar es Salaam for research affiliation, and Francis Shang'a for research assistance. I am grateful to Wendy Wolford, Emmanuel Sulle, Linda Engstr € om, Hilary Faxon, Ryan Nehring, and Ross Doll for their thoughtful suggestions on earlier drafts of this article. I would also like to acknowledge the two anonymous reviewers, who offered insightful comments on the article.

## Notes

1. All land in Tanzania is owned by the state. Reserved land includes forest reserves, national parks, game reserves, land reserved for public utilities, infrastructure, and other areas declared by the state as hazardous (URT 1999a). The definition of general land is more ambiguous. Although it includes all public land that is not reserved land or village land, including urban and periurban land, the Land Act of 1999 states that it also includes ' un occupied [ sic ] or unused village land, ' which is open to competing interpretations.
2. Memory and the act of remembering are also fragmented along the lines of gender, generation, class, race, ethnicity, location, and other forms of social difference (see Pitcher 2006; Edelman and Le  on 2013). Although I do not explore these differences in this article, I do so elsewhere (Chung 2018)
3. Although the elders ' memories diverged on whether the railway line once carried passengers, at present, it is solely used for the purpose of transporting freight, namely, fuel, grains, and timber, to and from the northern coastal regions.
4. The campaign for compulsory villagization was launched as a response to the slow progress made during the voluntary phase of the program during the late 1960s.
5. All direct quotes are taken from interviews conducted by the author between 2013 and 2016. Interviews were audio recorded and transcribed later or written down as much as possible on site, especially in circumstances where recording was not possible or if the interviewees declined to be taped. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board for Human Participants at Cornell University (Protocol No. 1304003795R004).
6. These two women were among the eighteen people (from fourteen households) who participated in PhotoVoice between December 2015 and September 2016.
7. Tipwatipwa (adj.) means soft, plump, and healthy; it is typically used in reference to people, not things, like a house, which was part of the reason why the crowd responded with laughter.
8. Although the game reserve became operationalized in 1969, it was only officially gazetted in 1974 under the Wildlife Conservation (Game Reserves) Order (GN Nos. 265 and 275). For a spatial analysis of the creation of the game reserve, see Orozco-Quintero (2014).
9. Unpublished letter from the Office of the District Executive Director (Department of Natural Resources) to the Ward Executive Director, dated 2 July 1999, Re: the Recovery of the Saadani Game Reserve Boundary ( Taarifa ya Ufuatiliaji Mpaka wa Pori la Akiba la Wanyama Pori Saadani, Kumb. Na. CD . 80/DC/BG/13 … /SM). Attached to the letter is the Report of Saadani Game Reserve Boundary Recovery, dated 16 -29 June 1999.
10. Ibid.
11. Unpublished letter from the former Bagamoyo District Commissioner, Hawa S. Ngulume, to the TANAPA Director General, dated 12 March 2005, Re: Conflict between TANAPA and citizens in the villages of Saadani, Matipwili, and Mkange, in the Mkange Ward of Miono Division ( Mgogoro kati ya TANAPA na Wananchi Tarafa ya Miono Kata ta Mkange, Vijiji vya Saadani, Matipwili-Java na Mkange, Kumb. Na . BG/G.10/2/9).
12. Unpublished report, Statement of the Special Committee on the Resolution of the Boundary Conflict between Saadani National Park and Some of its Neighbouring Villages in Bagamoyo District ( Taarifa ya Kamati ya Utatuzi wa Migogoro ya Mipaka Baina ya Hifadhi ya Taifa Saadani na Baadhi ya Vijiji Vinavyopakana na Hifadhi Hiyo Katika Wilaya ya Bagamoyo ), dated August 2011.
13. In Swahili, -tokomeza means to terminate and ujangili means poaching.
14. Eventually, SEKAB BT was sold in October 2009 to SEKAB ' s minority owner, EcoDevelopment, in Europe AB. Yet, there were several other factors beyond the financial crisis, including legal, social, and environmental reasons, that contributed to SEKAB BT ' s collapse. See Havnevik and Haaland (2011), Abdallah et al. (2014), and Bergius, Benjaminsen, and Widgren (2018).
15. Letter from the Minister of Lands (Anna Tibaijuka) to Per Carstedt, Executive Chairman of EcoEnergy, Re: Exchange of Land for Equity in Expansive Land Based Investments, dated 23 February 2012.
16. Certificate of Title No. 123097 granted to Bagamoyo EcoEnergy Limited (a special-purpose project company created by Agro EcoEnergy Tanzania) signed by the Assistant Commissioner for Lands, dated 8 May 2013.
17. As depicted in Figure 1, the EcoEnergy project site encompassed numerous settlements. My fieldwork was conducted across all of these areas, but for the purposes of this article, I focus on Matipwili.
18. Unpublished map, ' Irrigable Areas -Gross (ha), ' prepared by Agricane for EcoEnergy, dated March 2011.

19. Letter from the Matipwili Village Executive Officer to the Member of Parliament for Chalinze, dated 4 April 2016.

## ORCID

Youjin B. Chung http://orcid.org/0000-00019236-3850

## References

- Abdallah, J., L. Engstr € om, K. Havnevik, and L. Salomonsson. 2014. Large-scale land acquisitions in Tanzania: A critical analysis of practices and dynamics. In The global land grab: Beyond the hype , ed. M. Kaag and A. Zoomers, 36 -53. Halifax, Canada: Fernwood.
- Actionaid International. 2015. Take action: Stop EcoEnergy ' s land grab in Bagamoyo, Tanzania . Johannesburg, South Africa: ActionAid International.
- African Development Bank. 2012. Bagamoyo sugar project: Executive summary of environmental and social impact assessment . Tunis, Tunisia: African Development Bank.
- Agro EcoEnergy Tanzania. 2012. Environmental and social impact statement of the proposed bioethanol production on the former Razaba Ranch, Bagamoyo District, Tanzania . Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: Agro EcoEnergy Tanzania.
- ---. 2017. White paper on the Bagamoyo EcoEnergy project in Tanzania . Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: Agro EcoEnergy Tanzania.
- Alonso-Fradejas, A. 2015. Anything but a story foretold: Multiple politics of resistance to the agrarian extractivist project in Guatemala. The Journal of Peasant Studies 42 (3 -4):489 -515.
- Aminzade, R. 2013. The dialectic of nation building in postcolonial Tanzania. The Sociological Quarterly 54 (3):335 -66.
- Askew, K., F. Maganga, and R. Odgaard. 2013. Of land and legitimacy: A tale of two lawsuits. Africa 83 (1):120 -41.
- Benjaminsen, T. A., and I. Bryceson. 2012. Conservation, green/blue grabbing and accumulation by dispossession in Tanzania. Journal of Peasant Studies 39 (2):335 -55.
- Benjaminsen, T. A., M. J. Goldman, M. Y. Minwary, and F. P. Maganga. 2013. Wildlife management in Tanzania: State control, rent seeking and community resistance. Development and Change 44 (5):1087 -1109.
- Bergius, M., T. A. Benjaminsen, and M. Widgren. 2018. Green economy, Scandinavian investments and agricultural modernization in Tanzania. Journal of Peasant Studies 45 (4):825 -52.
- Bloesch, U., and F. Kl € otzli. 2002. The vegetation of the Saadani National Park and possible conservation and management strategies. Tanzania Wildlife Discussion Paper 33, Deutsche Gesellschaft fu € r Technische
- Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) Community Based Wildlife Conservation Programme, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
- Booth, V. 2000. Options and the future status and use of Saadani/Mkwaja Game Reserve . Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: Saadani Conservation and Development Programme.
- Borras, S. M. J., D. Fig, and S. M. Su  arez. 2011. The politics of agrofuels and mega-land and water deals: Insights from the ProCana case, Mozambique. Review of African Political Economy 38 (128):215 -34.
- Borras, S. M. J., P. McMichael, and I. Scoones. 2010. The politics of biofuels, land and agrarian change: Editors ' introduction. Journal of Peasant Studies 37 (4):575 -92.
- Bourdieu, P. 1977. Outline of a theory of practice . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Brain, J. L. 1967. Less than second-class: Women in rural settlement schemes in Tanzania. In Women in Africa: Studies in social and economic change , ed. N. J. Hafkin and E. G. Bay, 256 -82. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Brown, W. T. 1970. Bagamoyo: An historical introduction. Tanzania Notes and Records 71 (1970):69 -83.
- Caplan, P. 1981. Development policies in Tanzania -Some implications for women. Journal of Development Studies 17 (3):98 -108.
- Chung, Y. B. 2018. Sweet deal, bitter landscape: Intersectional politics of liminality in Tanzania ' s new enclosures . PhD dissertation, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.
- Cotula, L., S. Vemeulen, R. Leonard, and J. Keeley. 2009. Land grab or develop opportunity? Agricultural investment and international land deals in Africa . London and Rome: International Institute for Environment and Development, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, International Fund for Agricultural Development.
- Davis, D. K. 2015. Historical approaches to political ecology. In The Routledge handbook of political ecology , ed. T. Perreault, G. Bridge, and J. McCarthy, 263 -75. London and New York: Routledge.
- Defelice, M. S. 2002. Yellow nutsedge Cyperus esculentus L.: Snack food of the gods. Weed Technology 16 (4):901 -07.
- Edelman, M., and A. Le  on. 2013. Cycles of land grabbing in Central America: An argument for history and a case study in the Bajo Agu  an, Honduras. Third World Quarterly 34 (9):1697 -1722.
- Goldstein, J. E., and J. S. Yates. 2017. Introduction: Rendering land investable. Geoforum 82:209 -11.
- Greco, E. 2015. Landlords in the making: Class dynamics of the land grab in Mbarali, Tanzania. Review of African Political Economy 42 (144):225 -44.
- Halsdorf, S., and J.-D. Gerber. 2006. Map of Saadani National Park. Accessed September 1, 2014. http:// www.saadanipark.org/images/saadanimap.pdf.
- Haraway, D. 2008. When species meet . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Havnevik, K. 1993. Tanzania: The limits to development from above . Uppsala, Sweden: Nordic Africa Institute in cooperation with Mkuki na Nyota Publishers.
- Havnevik, K., and H. Haaland. 2011. Biofuel, land and environmental issues -The case of SEKAB ' s biofuel

- plans in Tanzania. In Biofuels, land grabbing and food security in Africa , ed. P. B. Matondi, K. Havnevik, and A. Beyene, 106 -33. London: Zed.
- Ismail, B. 2018. Tanzania: TANAPA plays down claims of land grabbing. Accessed April 2, 2018. http://allafrica.com/stories/201804020261.html.
- Johansson, E. L., M. Fader, J. W. Seaquist, and K. A. Nicholas. 2016. Green and blue water demand from large-scale land acquisitions in Africa. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 (41):11471 -76.
- Kamanga, K. C. 2008. The agrofuel industry in Tanzania: A critical enquiry into challenge and opportunities . Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: Land Rights Research and Resources Institute.
- Kisanga, D. 2015. Ministry ordered to recover 3,000 ha at Saadani Park. Accessed January 20, 2015. https:// www.farmlandgrab.org/post/view/24442-tanzania-ministryordered-to-recover-3-000ha-at-saadani-park.
- Lal, P. 2010. Militants, mothers, and the national family: Ujamaa, gender, and rural development in postcolonial Tanzania. The Journal of African History 51 (1):1 -20.
- Legal and Human Rights Centre. 2015. Operesheni Tokomeza Ujangili Report 2014 . Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: Legal and Human Rights Centre.
- Li, T. M. 2017. Rendering land investible: Five notes on time. Geoforum 82:276 -278.
- Mathevet, R., N. Peluso, A. Couespel, and P. Robbins. 2015. Using historical political ecology to understand the present: Water, reeds, and biodiversity in the Camargue Biosphere Reserve, southern France. Ecology and Society 20 (4):17.
- McHenry, D. E. 1979. Tanzania ' s Ujamaa villages: The implementation of a rural development strategy . Berkeley: University of California.
- Mehta, L., G. J. Veldwisch, and M. J. Francis. 2012. Introduction to the special issue: Water grabbing? Focus on the (re)appropriation of finite water resources. Water Alternatives 5 (2):193 -207.
- Neumann, R. P. 1998. Imposing wilderness: Struggles over livelihood and nature preservation in Africa . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Nyerere, J. 1968. Ujamaa: Essays on socialism . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Oakland Institute. 2011. Understanding land investment deals in Africa: Country report. Tanzania . Oakland, CA: Oakland Institute.
- Offen, K. H. 2004. Historical political ecology: An introduction. Historical Geography 32:19 -42.
- Ogden, L. A. 2011. Swamplife: People, gators, and mangroves entangled in the Everglades . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Orozco-Quintero, A. 2014. A spatial analysis of land expropriation in the name of conservation: The case of Saadani village and Saadani National Park in Tanzania . Winnipeg, Canada: Center for World Indigenous Studies.
- Oslender, U. 2004. Fleshing out the geographies of social movements: Colombia ' s Pacific Coast black communities and the ' aquatic space. ' Political Geography 23 (8):957 -85.
- Peluso, N. L., and C. Lund. 2011. New frontiers of land control: Introduction. Journal of Peasant Studies 38 (4):667 -81.
- Pitcher, M. A. 2006. Forgetting from above and memory from below: Strategies of legitimation and struggle in postsocialist Mozambique. Africa 76 (1):88 -112.
- Raffles, H. 2002. In Amazonia: A natural history . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Ribot, J. C., and N. Peluso. 2003. A theory of access. Rural Sociology 68 (2):153 -81.
- Said, E. [1994] 2002. Invention, memory, and place. In Landscape and power , ed. W. J. T. Mitchell, 241 -59. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Scott, J. C. 1998. Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Shivji, I. G. 1998. Not yet democracy: Reforming land tenure in Tanzania . London: International Institute for Environment and Development.
- Skinner, J., and L. Cotula. 2011. Are land deals driving ' water grabs ' ? Briefing: The global land rush . London: International Institute for Environment and Development.
- Songa, S. W. 2015. Special report: Land grabbing in Tanzania: The truth, fallacies and fights -Part 1. Accessed March 24, 2015. http://www.thecitizen.co.tz/ News/national/SPECIAL-REPORT -Land-grabbing-inTanzania -The-truth -/1840392-2663804-117w90xz/index. html.
- Stoller, E. W., and L. M. Wax. 1973. Yellow nutsedge shoot emergence and tuber longevity. Weed Science 21 (1):76 -81.
- Stoller, E. W., and R. D. Sweet. 1987. Biology and life cycle of purple and yellow nutsedge ( Cyperus rotundus and esculentus ). Weed Technology 1 (1):66 -73.
- Sulle, E., and F. Nelson. 2009. Biofuels, land access and rural livelihoods in Tanzania . London: International Institute for Environment and Development.
- Tanzania National Parks Authority (TANAPA). 2003. Saadani National Park Management Zone plan environmental impact assessment . Arusha, Tanzania: Tanzania National Parks Authority.
- Tenga, R. W., and G. Kakoti. 1993. The Barabaig land case: Mechanics of state-organised land-grabbing in Tanzanisa. Centre for Development Research/the International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs Document 74 (1993):74, 39 -51, Centre for Development Research/the International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs.
- Thiong ' o, N. W. 2009. Re-membering Africa . Nairobi, Kenya: East African Educational Publishers.
- United Nations Environment Program World Conservation Monitoring Centre (UNEP-WCMC). 2017. Protected area profile for United Republic of Tanzania from the world database of protected areas . Cambridge, UK: United Nations Environment Program World Conservation Monitoring Centre.
- United Republic of Tanzania (URT). 1994. Report of the Presidential Commission of Inquiry into Land Matters . Dar es Salaam: United Republic of Tanzania.
- \_\_\_\_\_\_. 1995. National land policy . Dar es Salaam: United Republic of Tanzania.
- ---. 1999a. The Land Act, 1999 . Dar es Salaam: United Republic of Tanzania.

---. 1999b. The Village Land Act, 1999 . Dar es Salaam: United Republic of Tanzania.

- ---. 2014. Tanzania development vision 2025: Big results now . Dar es Salaam: United Republic of Tanzania, Agriculture Lab.
- ---. 2015. Environmental and social management framework for the Bagamoyo Sugar Infrastructure and Sustainable Community (BASIC) programme . Dar es Salaam: United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Agriculture, Food Security, and Cooperatives.
- von Freyhold, M. 1979. Ujamaa villages in Tanzania: Analysis of a social experiment . New York: Monthly Review Press.
- White, B., S. M. J. Borras, R. Hall, I. Scoones, and W. Wolford. 2012. The new enclosures: Critical perspectives on corporate land deals. Journal of Peasant Studies 39 (3 -4):619 -47.
- Wilen, C. A., M. E. McGiffen, and C. L. Elmore. 2010. Nutsedge: Pest notes. Agriculture and natural resources program . Davis: University of California.
- Woodhouse, P. 2012. New investment, old challenges: Land deals and the water constraint in African agriculture. The Journal of Peasant Studies 39 (3 -4): 777 -94.
- World Bank. 2015a. Tanzania. Accessed February 6, 2017. http://data.worldbank.org/country/tanzania.
- ---. 2015b. Tanzania ' s tourism futures: Harnessing natural assets. Environment and Natural Resources Global Practice Policy Note 96150-TZ. World Bank, Washington, DC.

YOUJIN B CHUNG is Assistant Professor in the Graduate School of Geography at Clark University, Worcester, MA 01610. E-mail: ychung@clarku.edu. Her research interests include the political economy of development, historical and feminist political ecology, food and agrarian studies, critical social/feminist theory, and African studies.