<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Challenges and Opportunities for Coping with the Smart Divide in Rural America

Ruopu Li, Kang Chen &amp; Di Wu

To cite this article: Ruopu Li, Kang Chen &amp; Di Wu (2020): Challenges and Opportunities for Coping with the Smart Divide in Rural America, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2019.1694402

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2019.1694402

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 08 Jan 2020.

Submit your article to this journal C

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Challenges and Opportunities for Coping with the Smart Divide in Rural America

Ruopu Li,  Kang Chen, † and Di Wu ‡

 Geography and Environmental Resources, School of Earth Systems and Sustainability, Southern Illinois University Carbondale † Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Southern Illinois University Carbondale ‡ Environmental Resources and Policy, School of Earth Systems and Sustainability, Southern Illinois University Carbondale

Recent success in the many applications of information and communications technologies (ICTs) in urban settings largely defines our understanding of sustainable development in the context of smart societies and communities. The footprints of such smart transformation barely imprint in the countryside, however, where rural communities face tremendous barriers, such as the absence of ICT infrastructure, geographic isolation from technological advances, and various social inequalities. The conventional wisdom of smart societies and communities built on well-established broadband access and ICT applications in urban hubs might not be suitable for decentralized rural regions. We contend that a new form of digital divide in the context of recent ICT advancement -a smart divide -is evolving into a new challenge to smart societies and communities. This study aims to characterize the smart divide, an emerging type of social inequality. To address this aim, we conduct a literature review with a focus on the technological aspects of the smart divide in rural regions and identify potential gaps in smart infrastructure and smart applications and services between urban and rural America. The article culminates in a synthesis of potential strategies for bridging the smart divide in rural America. The study is expected to benefit scientists, planners, entrepreneurs, and policymakers interested in smart rural development. Key Words: broadband, digital divide, ICT, rural, smart divide.

近 年 来 ， 信 息 和 通 信 技 术 （ ICT ） 在城 市 环 境 中 的 广 泛 成 功 应 用 ， 在 很 大 程 度 上 决 定 了 我 们 对 智 能 社 会 和 社 区 背 景 中 可 持 续 发 展 的 认识 。 但 这 种 智 能 化 转 型 几 乎 没 有 在 农 村 地 区 留 下任 何 足 迹 ， 因 为 农 村 社 区 面 临 着 巨 大 的 发 展 障 碍 ， 比 如 缺 少 ICT 基 础 设 施 、 与 技 术 进 步 的 地 理 隔 离 以 及 各 种社 会 不 平 等 现 象 。 一 直 以 来 ， 智 能 城 市 和 社 区 的 理 念 都 基 于 完 善 的 宽 带 接 入 以 及 ICT 在 都 市 中 心 的 应 用 ， 这 样 的 概 念 可 能 并 不 适 合 分 散 的 农 村 地 区 。 我 们 认 为 ， 近 年 来 的 ICT 发 展 开 始 出 现 一 种 新 型 数 字 鸿 沟 --智 能 鸿 沟 ， 正 在 逐 步 发 展 成 智 能 社 会 和 社 区 的 新 挑 战 。 本 研 究 旨 在 分 析 智 能 鸿 沟 这 种 新 兴 社 会 不 平 等 现 象 的 特 征 。 为 此 我 们 进 行 了 文 献 回 顾 ， 重 点 关 注 农 村 地 区 智 能 鸿 沟 的 技 术 层 面 ， 找 出 美 国 城 市 和 乡 村 在 智 能 基 础 设 施 以 及 智 能 应 用 和 服 务 之 间 的 潜 在 差 距 。 本 文 在 结 尾 还 提 出 了 弥 合 美 国 农 村 地 区 智 能 鸿 沟 的 潜 在 综 合 性 策 略 。 该 研 究 尤 其 适 合 关 注 智 能 农 村 发 展 的 科 学家 、 规 划 人 士 、 企 业 家 和 决 策 者 。 关 键 词 ： 宽 带 ， 数 字 鸿 沟 ， ICT ， 农 村 ， 智 能 鸿 沟 。

El reciente  exito que registran las numerosas aplicaciones de tecnolog  ı as de la informaci  on y las comunicaciones (TIC) en escenarios urbanos define en gran medida nuestro entendimiento del desarrollo sustentable en el contexto de sociedades y comunidades inteligentes. Sin embargo, las huellas de tal transformaci  on inteligente escasamente se notan en el entorno rural, donde las comunidades enfrentan tremendas barreras, tales como la ausencia de infraestructura de las TIC, el aislamiento geogr  afico de los avances tecnol  ogicos y varias desigualdades sociales. La sabidur  ı a convencional de las sociedades y comunidades inteligentes, construida sobre un bien establecido acceso de banda ancha y aplicaciones de las TIC en n  ucleos urbanos, podr  ı a no ser apropiada para las regiones rurales descentralizadas. Nuestra opini  on es que est  a evolucionando una nueva forma de divisoria digital en el contexto del reciente avance de las TIC -una divisoria inteligente -en la forma de un nuevo reto para las sociedades y comunidades inteligentes. Este estudio se propone caracterizar la divisoria inteligente, un tipo emergente de desigualdad social. Para abocar este prop  osito, llevamos a cabo una revisi  on de literatura enfocada en los aspectos tecnol  ogicos de la divisoria inteligente en regiones rurales, e identificamos brechas potenciales entre la Am  erica urbana y la rural en t  erminos de infraestructura inteligente y aplicaciones y servicios inteligentes. El art  ı culo culmina con una s  ı ntesis de estrategias potenciales para tender un puente en la divisoria inteligente de la Am  erica rural. Se espera que el estudio sea ben  efico para cient  ı ficos, planificadores, empresarios y legisladores interesados en un desarrollo rural inteligente. Palabras clave: banda ancha, divisoria digital, divisoria inteligente, rural, TIC.

W ith the growing availability of information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure and affordable smart devices and services, our society and communities have been progressing toward being ' smart. ' Without consensus on the definitions of smart cities and smart communities, the meanings of the term smart range from ideological and strategic (e.g., place branding) to practical and instrumented (e.g., city operation) with explicit or implicit intentions to address sustainable development and other pressing problems (Cocchia 2014; Albino, Berardi, and Dangelico 2015; Visvizi and Lytras 2018; Zavratnik, Kos, and Stojmenova Duh 2018). The concepts, however, commonly include technological and social factors (Schaffers et al. 2011; Kitchin 2014; Kitchin, Cardullo, and Feliciantonio 2019). For example, Levy and Wong (2014) defined smartness as the potential for using ICT infrastructure, connected devices, and digital networks to improve people ' s lives. Smart innovations are expected by urban technocrats to provide convenience in daily life and deliver targeted public services, although concerns have arisen about how the public, instead of corporate interests, benefits from ' actually existing smart cities ' (Shelton, Zook, and Wiig 2015; Kitchin et al. 2017).

There are still communities and individuals, though, who might largely be isolated from future smart cities and communities (SCCs). For example, the imbalanced capacity and penetration of ICT infrastructure could create a prominent division among regions and communities (Grubesic 2003; Warf 2013; Riddlesden and Singleton 2014). This problem is especially acute in rural America with aging and decentralized populations, low-density user markets, and a general shortage of information and other resources (Malecki 2003). ICT infrastructure resources pivotal to the transformation of SCCs tend to focus on urban centers or are largely developed in urban contexts. Although the development of SCCs is still in its infancy, the potential divide of this smart transformation is likely to widen in the foreseeable future as SCCs mature. In this study, we investigate the dire prospect that the advancement of SCCs could lead to a new form of digital divide among geographic areas and our citizens; that is, a smart divide. A review of the literature is necessary to assess the concept and context of the smart divide in the age of SCCs. In this article, we review the conceptual differences between the smart divide and the digital divide and focus on the gaps in smart infrastructure and smart applications and services (SASs) between urban and rural America, as well as potential strategies for bridging the smart divide. We broadly review multidisciplinary literature in geography, electrical engineering, and rural studies in support of these research perspectives.

This article is structured as follows. In the next section, we introduce the redefined concept of the smart divide in a broader context of SCCs. We then review the technological origins of the smart divide and clarify how it differs from the digital divide. After that, we further elaborate on the vulnerability of rural America to the smart divide and then synthesize strategies that could mitigate the looming divide in rural regions. Finally, we summarize the research findings and envision future directions in this field.

## What Is the Smart Divide?

The term smart divide was coined by Lee (2016), who defined the term as a qualitative divide determined by the intellectual and skill gap within groups of smart device users. In this context, varying levels of adoption of smart devices contribute to the division among people. A subsequent paper (Nam and Park 2017) used a similar concept and definition with case studies to examine adoption differences among disadvantaged individuals. The authors viewed the smart divide as the latest evolvement from the digital divide with close ties to the digital literacy of people in association with variable income, race, gender, age, and geographic locations (Nam and Park 2017). We found that this definition of the smart divide largely aligns with similar demographic and socioeconomic dimensions of the digital divide; that is, digital inequalities, which have been well elaborated in the literature (Van Deursen and Van Dijk 2014; Shelton, Zook, and Wiig 2015; Friemel 2016; Leszczynski 2016; Kitchin, Cardullo, and Feliciantonio 2019). The rise of SCCs, however, requires the deployment of more advanced, networked, and functional ICT infrastructure, as well as the associated SASs, which are beyond the traditional technological domain of the digital divide. This profound smart ICT advancement could potentially bring the smart divide to our communities. The traditional definition of the digital divide does not fully reflect the technological contexts of

progressing ICT in the age of SCCs. Our discussion of the smart divide focuses on its technological dimension, which, we contend, largely defines the smart divide as a new concept emerging from the traditional digital divide.

Departing from Lee (2016), we redefine the term smart divide in the broader context of SCCs. The smart divide is the type of social inequalities that are associated with imbalanced penetration and matureness of smart infrastructure and SASs, as well as the intellectual and skill gap among communities and regions in the age of smart cities and communities. The smart divide can be regarded as a progressive evolution of the digital divide in the age of SCCs. In this article, we name the period preceding SCCs ' the digital age ' and the period of SCCs ' the SCCs age. ' Such a smart disparity is not a surprise; Shelton, Zook, and Wiig (2015) contended that SCCs are ' internally differentiated ' and ' geographically uneven at a variety of scales ' (15). Hosseini et al. (2018) were concerned about the general negligence of smart rural towns in the research on smart cities and smart solutions. Despite a strong research agenda focusing on the critical social dimension of SCCs (Kitchin 2014; Shelton, Zook, and Wiig 2015; Kitchin 2019; Shelton and Lodato 2019), research on the technological foundations of the smart divide and its prospects in rural America is scant.

## Technological Foundation of the Smart Divide

SCCs have evolved during the development of mutually reinforcing ICT infrastructure (Damiani, Kowalczyk, and Parr 2017) and SASs (Neirotti et al. 2014; Alaa et al. 2017). The advances in ICT infrastructure enable new SASs to be adopted and applied. Our need for SASs drives further deployment and expansion of ICT infrastructure. Figure 1 shows the overall architecture of smart ICT infrastructure and SASs in SCCs. Although both foundations (particularly the ICT infrastructure) are not brand new in comparison with their counterparts in the digital age, they present new challenges in terms of capability and penetration issues. In the following subsections, we detail the foundations and then present their link to the smart divide.

## Cornerstone Smart ICT Infrastructure

The ICT infrastructure translates modern computing and communication technologies into powerful capabilities of collecting, transferring, and processing information related to our lives (termed data capability hereafter), which can be further classified into computing, networking, and software infrastructure. Different from the digital age, SCCs substantially raise the scale of the demands on data capability, especially with the emergence of big data (Song, Zhou, and Zhu 2013; Wolfert et al. 2017). As a result, the ICT infrastructure developed decades ago cannot offer the full capability of enabling SCCs. Compared with conventional ICT infrastructure, its SCC-oriented counterpart differs regarding not only the evolution of technologies (e.g., from 4G to 5G) but also the approaches for scaling data capability. Table 1 summarizes the major differences in ICT infrastructure in the digital and SCCs ages in terms of computing, networking, and software infrastructure.

Computing Infrastructure. The computing infrastructure directly supports the collection and storage of data and associated computing. The state-of-the-art computing infrastructure aims to provide high computing capability and ubiquitous availability. Such goals are typically achieved through three layers of infrastructure: a centralized computing infrastructure (CCI), an edge computing infrastructure (ECI), and a device-side computing infrastructure (DCI). The CCI brings a highly powerful computing capability by pooling and virtualizing a large quantity of servers and making them remotely and easily accessible through the Internet. Cloud computing (Fox et al. 2009) is a representative form of the CCI. Because physical distance and network bandwidth often constrain access to the CCI, the ECI arises to push computing close to end users (Reis et al. 2014; Taleb et al. 2017). Finally, the DCI provides on-site data collection and preprocessing capability, which mostly refers to individual computing devices, such as sensors and vehicles.

Compared with ICT infrastructures in the digital age, SCCs have three unique characteristics in the contemporary computing infrastructure. First, the capability of a single central processing unit (CPU) has increased by orders of magnitude (i.e., Moore ' s Law; Schaller 1997). Second, parallelism and aggregation have been widely adopted to boost data processing beyond the capacities of individual CPUs and hard disks (Kumar 2002; Dean and Ghemawat

Figure 1. Information and communications technology infrastructure and supporting smart applications and services for smart cities and communities. Note: IoT ¼ Internet of Things; OS ¼ operating systems.

<!-- image -->

Table 1. Major differences in information and communication technology infrastructure between the digital and SCC ages

|                                                                            | Digital age                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | SCC age                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Computing infrastructure Networking infrastructure Software infrastructure | Mainly in the form of either personal computing devices or privately owned computing clusters The availability mostly applies to developed areas, and the bandwidth is very limited The functioning scope of the software mostly is limited to individual computing and networking equipment | Three-layer computing resources that have ubiquitous availability and high-performance capability The availability is much more pervasive, and the bandwidth has evolved into broadband The functioning scope of the software has been substantially expanded in accordance with the development of the scale of computing and networking infrastructures |

Note: SCC ¼ smart city and community.

2008). Third, virtualization technologies and networking infrastructure make computing resources readily sharable and accessible and lower the costs of obtaining high-capability computing resources (Joseph et al. 2010).

Networking Infrastructure. The networking infrastructure interconnects end devices with servers as well as storage and computing resources by providing high-bandwidth and universally accessible networking services. This infrastructure consists of a high-throughput, globally deployed wired core network and various access networks (Kurose 2005). Access networks are deployed on the edge of the core network to Internet connectivity to end devices or servers. The access network might be implemented by different technologies, such as Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (Goralski 2000), Fiber to the Home (Koonen 2006), Wi-Fi (Gast 2005), and 4G Long Term Evolution (Dahlman, Parkvall, and Skold 2013).

Core networks and access networks that support SCCs require significant upgrades compared to those established during the digital age. The advancement of technologies has greatly enhanced the bandwidth of the core network (e.g., switch/routing devices and transmitting media) and the access network (e.g., cable-based broadband and 4G Long Term Evolution wireless broadband). Meanwhile, because of

continuous public and private investment, the networking infrastructure has been broadly established to provide ubiquitous network services. The bandwidth and accessibility of the networking infrastructure are expected to further coevolve with other new technologies, such as optical fiber and 5G.

Software Infrastructure. The software infrastructure serves as the interface between SASs and computing and networking infrastructures. In the lower layer of the computer system, the software infrastructure provides an interface for managing and accessing raw computing and networking resources, such as operating systems running on servers and sensors and OpenFlow for software-defined networking (Kreutz et al. 2015). In the upper layer of the computer systems, which is built on the lower layer, the software infrastructure anchors frameworks that turn the raw computing or networking resources into the powerful capabilities needed by SASs. Example frameworks include cloud resource management frameworks (e.g., OpenStack; Beloglazov and Buyya 2015), big data cloud frameworks (e.g., Hadoop and Spark; K. Li and Qin 2017), artificial intelligence frameworks (e.g., TensorFlow; Abadi et al. 2016), and Internet of Things (IoT) application development platforms (e.g., Amazon Web Service; Guth et al. 2016).

The evolution of the software infrastructure is often synchronized with that of computing and networking infrastructures. It aims to converge a largescale computing infrastructure (i.e., CCI, ECI, and DCI) and a network infrastructure (i.e., core and access networks) into easily accessible resources for SASs. Thus, the service scope and capability of the software infrastructure have been substantially expanded in the SCC age. For example, in the lower layer, customized operating systems have been developed to support emerging computing devices, such as autonomous vehicles and specialized sensors. In the upper layer, the software frameworks and systems have been developed to aggregate computing resources and offer powerful data capabilities.

## Smart Applications and Services

The high data capability demonstrated by an advanced ICT infrastructure stimulates the development of SASs. Based on the application domains, SASs can be classified into twelve categories (see Lim, Kim, and Maglio 2018) that are integral to the economy and livelihood of SCCs, such as smart transportation (Golub et al. 2018), smart agriculture (Fan 2013), and smart homes (X. Li et al. 2011). For example, smart transportation applications target transportation efficiency and safety through timely scheduling of road traffic and intelligent technologies like autonomous vehicles. Smart agriculture aims to more precisely control the inputs and environmental conditions in various phenology stages of cropping. Compared with the digital age, the SAS age presents two peculiarities. First, to achieve the desired level of smartness, SASs require a higher data capacity for timely collecting, transferring, and processing massive amounts of data on resource consumption and traffic, which requires the development of matching ICT infrastructure. Second, SASs are often achieved through a closed loop involving tremendous distributed end devices for collecting, transferring, and processing the data.

## Technological Links to the Smart Divide

A smart ICT infrastructure and SASs, which are largely established in the urban context, could contribute to the smart divide. The disparity in data capability directly affects the varying abilities to develop and offer SASs, leading to the emergence of the smart divide.

ICT Infrastructure for the Smart Divide. Although the digital divide has been largely resolved through continuous investments in ICT infrastructure, the evolution of smart infrastructure and SASs creates new challenges to the accessibility and affordability of SCCs. We elaborate on the smart divide related to ICT infrastructure in terms of investment and maintenance.

First, the smart ICT infrastructure demanded by SCCs requires intensive investment in construction and technology adoption, which creates division among areas with different economic and market capacities. The economic returns for such investment are naturally higher in urban centers with dense user bases. In addition, the deployment of smart infrastructure involves not only the construction investment but also, more critically, the adoption of advanced ICT technologies. For example, 5G cellular communication systems rely on new wireless ICT, such as massive multiple-input and multipleoutput and mmWave communications, to provide gigabit wireless broadband capability (Agiwal, Roy, and Saxena 2016). These technologies, such as the

mmWave communication technology that limits a single 5G base station ' s coverage range to only hundreds of meters (Roh et al. 2014), are naturally more suited to urban scenarios.

Second, the maintenance of an advanced ICT infrastructure poses challenges to the long-term economic sustainability of SCCs in remote rural regions with limited economic capacities and a qualified technical workforce. In addition to the initial setup investment, the ICT infrastructure for SCCs involves other operational costs for long-term professional maintenance and periodic replacement (Kozma and Vota 2014). One example is the sensors deployed to support SCCs in the context of the IoT (Saxe 2019). When millions of sensors are deployed, the potential replacement cost is formidable, even for large cities. On this point, a contemporary smart ICT infrastructure is not necessarily sustainable (L € ovehagen and Bondesson 2013). Without longer term maintenance, ICT infrastructure tends to be unstable or perform poorly in support of SCCs.

SASs for the Smart Divide. Based on the work by Stratigea (2011), we summarize three SAS-related barriers that potentially contribute to the smart divide. First, the smartness enabled by SASs requires the deployment of high-performance data capability. Thus, although SASs are mostly implemented as scalable software, the availability, affordability, and quality of certain SASs might vary due to regional disparities in the capacity and penetration of the ICT infrastructure. Second, the deployment of SASs, the development of their content, and maintenance of services are discouraged by the limited rural market scale. Some SASs (e.g., ride-sharing apps) might be financially unsustainable in the first place from the perspectives of business models. Therefore, SAS providers are incentivized to provide services first in urban centers. Third, the adoption and effective use of certain SASs are deterred by a lack of end users, including the public, businesses, and agencies. The success of SASs relies on appropriate service consumption by public users (for smart transportation), entrepreneurial activities (for virtual meetings), and training opportunities (for smart education).

## The Smart Divide for Rural America

The contemporary paradigm of SCCs was largely invented as a strategy in response to the foreseeable intensified urbanization. Smart technologies are designed to address the chronic urban symptom, the overscale problem as urban complexities agglomerate (Batty 2008; Trindade et al. 2017), which strikes a profound contrast with the rurality that commonly suffers from a lack of scale (Naldi et al. 2015) and, in many cases, remoteness (Roberts et al. 2017). The lack of scale problem in rural regions, represented by aging and decentralized populations, low-density user markets, and a general shortage of information and other resources, contradicts the essential socioeconomic contexts of deploying smart infrastructure and SASs and suggests an intrinsic tendency for smart exclusion in the SCC age. Geographic remoteness further complicates the accessibility and provision of smart technologies (Roberts et al. 2017).

Of course, the preceding characterization of rural regions exhibits geographic variability. As noted by Naldi et al. (2015) and Porter et al. (2004), the term rural should not be treated as a homogeneous unit; instead, suburban or peri-urban areas do not exhibit the same profiles as remote rural regions but often benefit from ' the size advantage and spillover advantages of nearby cities ' (Naldi et al. 2015, 95). The proximity to urban core areas, along with lower living costs, allows these areas to gain access to the same or additional technologies, markets, and qualified workforces. Incorporated as a critical metropolitan component, these suburban areas have been found to dominate the urban development in terms of investment (Short, Hanlon, and Vicino 2007). Porter et al. (2004) defined rural regions as a counterpart to metropolitan regions and recognized the internal heterogeneity of rural regions based on their proximity to metropolitan areas. This definition of rural encompasses those micropolitan areas and other remote rural towns and villages. Accordingly, our concerns about the rural smart divide focus on those remote areas, which experience a shortage of scale and geographic links to urban centers. From a technological perspective, these areas face two major challenges for potential transformation into SCCs: (1) fragile capabilities and penetration of existing infrastructure and (2) low capacities for establishing an advanced ICT infrastructure and peripheral SASs.

First, most remote rural regions have only a legacy ICT infrastructure that was developed mainly to address digital coverage. For example, despite recent development efforts to bridge the urban -rural gap in broadband coverage, many rural communities are

still left with a limited number of broadband providers according to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC 2018). A similar situation applies to cellular communication networks that support mobile Internet access. More critical, the availability, affordability, and quality of the ICT infrastructure vary widely in rural regions (Warf 2013; Pant and Odame 2017). As the evolution of ICT drives SCCs at an accelerated pace, remote rural regions are expected to be further isolated from SCCs.

Second, remote rural regions generally have a limited economy, market capacity, and workforce to establish, maintain, and update the smart infrastructure, preventing sustainable SCC operations. Thus, it is likely that an advanced ICT infrastructure would be deployed in populated or affluent urban centers first (van Winden and van den Buuse 2017). Early signs have indicated that this divisive trend exists. For example, according to the 2018 Smart Cities Survey (United States Conference of Mayors 2018), 100 percent of large cities and 35 percent of midsized cities have at least one smart city project, whereas only 7.5 percent of small towns have at least one smart city project. Consequently, remote rural regions are not as ready as their urban counterparts to establish, maintain, and update smart infrastructure.

For SASs, remote rural regions are also subject to numerous inherent obstacles when shifting to SCCs. These obstacles could delay the research and development of smart services for these areas and aggravate smart division. For example, a limited rural customer base makes it not financially viable to deploy ride-sharing apps and improve availability (e.g., incentives to recruit ride-sharing drivers), affordability (e.g., attractive service rate), and quality (e.g., optimization of vehicle scheduling). Numerous studies have indicated that rural populations are not as active as urban populations in terms of adopting SASs in daily life (Gilbert, Karahalios, and Sandvig 2008; Hecht and Stephens 2014; Johnson et al. 2016). Another important obstacle lies in potential infrastructure capacity and penetration issues. Although the establishment of ICT infrastructure to solve the digital divide has been successful (e.g., the broadband coverage ratio has surpassed 95 percent; Brogan 2018), the capability level and penetration rate often vary dramatically between urban and rural regions, as witnessed by highly variable broadband providers and speeds in different regions (FCC 2018). For example, real-time video-based remote medical services are easier to deploy in cities than in rural regions due to the disparate conditions of ICT infrastructures (Khan and Driessen 2018).

## Strategies for Coping with the Rural Smart Divide

Although the smart divide has not yet materialized, it is helpful to extend the discussion to potential coping strategies. As argued, ICT-based smart solutions formulated in the context of smart cities do not necessarily fit the rural reality. Thus, we discuss only potential strategies that are relevant for technology and rural regions.

## Enhancing the ICT Infrastructure for Rural Contexts

Considering the critical roles of smart infrastructure in enabling SCCs, enhancing the ICT infrastructures in rural contexts can effectively address the smart divide. Specific ICT enhancement strategies can be developed in multiple ways. First, the ICT could be innovated to match particular rural contexts. Although seemingly technocentric and ideal, there have been emerging efforts in developing low-cost but efficient smart solutions, such as the IoT and cloud computing, to achieve the goal of ubiquitous accessibility of data capabilities in support of SASs. There are also countless emerging efforts to promote affordable wireless broadband service in rural regions through hot air balloons, drones, and low-earth orbit satellites (see del Portillo, Cameron, and Crawley 2019). The emerging network virtualization technologies are expected to reduce the operational costs of network operation by 40 percent to 50 percent (Moore 2017). Second, enhancing the data capacity of the network infrastructure in remote rural communities is worthwhile. As rural sparseness continues to haunt rural smart development, it is important to bridge the geographic remoteness to improve broadband connections (Naldi et al. 2015). The full spectrum of socioeconomic benefits from broadband access has been documented by Prieger (2013) and Pant and Odame (2017). In future SCCs, broadband service is expected to connect local needs virtually via computing and software resources accessible over the Internet, which partially alleviates the need to establish smart computing and software infrastructures in rural regions.

Third, policies and techniques could be developed to encourage better utilization of existing resources by promoting ICT resource sharing in rural regions. The FCC ' s recent release of the 3.65 GHz Citizens Broadband Radio Service spectrum could greatly lower the cost of providing broadband service in rural regions (see CairoNet 2017; FCC 2019). The development of a volunteer cloud (Mengistu et al. 2018) and spectrum-sharing technologies (Kang, Liang, and Yang 2018) would allow more efficient multiplexing of computing and wireless networking resources to support SCCs.

## Developing SASs to Meet Rural Needs

Developing SASs suitable for remote rural regions is another important direction to constrain the smart divide, envisioning no quick solution to address a long-lasting infrastructure gap between rural and urban areas. SASs that do not require a high-performance networking and computing infrastructure can be promoted in these areas. There have been emerging efforts in developing SASs, which satisfy practical needs but are compatible with low-bandwidth wireless or wired networks and intermittent connectivity in remote rural regions. Typical applications include lastmile transportation scheduling and dispatch, intelligent farming, and smart education. Furthermore, despite the envisioned division in accessibility to SASs, SASs designed for rural consumers suggest new opportunities. For example, smart health technologies, such as telemedicine and remote monitoring, will enable patients living in rural regions to gain access to quality health care and effective treatment (Deloitte Luxembourg 2018). It is foreseeable that such SASs are more likely to be established before smart ICT infrastructure in rural areas.

## Improving Smart Planning and Development

In addition to technological perspectives, solutions for the smart divide should be anchored in a holistic, integrated (instead of piecemeal) rural development plan (Stratigea 2011) that focuses on strengthening intrarural and rural -urban links for positive synergies. First, considering the imbalanced dependencies between urban and rural areas regarding access to resources (Naldi et al. 2015), it is important to enhance the virtual connectivity of rural regions to metropolitan areas (Stauber 2001;

Porter et al. 2004; Roberts et al. 2017). We envision the ideal mode of future SCCs to be an urban -rural continuum instead of a binary dichotomy. Second, rural regions with the potential for matching ICT resources and sharing markets should be connected into competitive conglomerates as cross-sectoral networks, regional clusters, or other coordinated partners in an integrated development framework. To enable internal connectivity, physical and virtual connections could be innovatively strengthened among towns and villages in the same regions (van Gevelt et al. 2018). Third, new initiatives for smart rurality could be developed and promoted as demonstrative projects to break cultural lock-in and facilitate the introduction of innovation. A plethora of literature shows that place-based, rather than topdown prescribed, innovation is vital to the development of rural smart towns (Porter et al. 2004; Naldi et al. 2015; Roberts et al. 2017, Hosseini et al. 2018; Zavratnik, Kos, and Stojmenova Duh 2018), given the heterogeneous resources and amenities of rural regions. A new initiative, Smart Villages, was recently proposed by the European Union as a catalyst for innovating rural services in support of smart rural development (European Network for Rural Development 2018; van Gevelt et al. 2018; Zavratnik, Kos, and Stojmenova Duh 2018). Such an effort seems to be gaining momentum worldwide (Holmes, Jones, and Heap 2015; Visvizi and Lytras 2018). Similar initiatives seem to be largely absent on paths to smart rural America, however.

## Conclusions

This research concerns the existing digital divide and inequalities in our disadvantaged rural communities that might evolve into a new form of divide, the smart divide, as ICTs continue to progress, which will affect the sustainable and smart growth of our cities and communities. This article characterizes the smart divide, an emerging sociotechnical concept in SCCs, by focusing on its technological dimension and urban -rural differences. We discuss the implications of the ICT infrastructure and SASs for the smart divide in the context of rural America. To cope with the impending smart divide, we propose technological and planning strategies. With this study, we aim to inform government decision makers and other stakeholders to avoid pitfalls similar to the historic digital divide as we progress toward

SCCs. Although we focus on the smart divide occurring in rural America, we argue that the concept and implications of the smart divide extend beyond the urban -rural geographic divide and possibly to disadvantaged and socially segregated urban neighborhoods (which should be investigated further).

Although we focus on the technological dimension of the smart divide, its human dimension is worthy of further research. The technological dimension of the smart divide represents the imbalanced availability, affordability, and quality of smart infrastructure and SASs, and the human dimension is concerned with the unequal access to smart infrastructure and SASs partially arising from existing social inequalities. As argued by Hindman (2000), creating the ICT infrastructure does not automatically erase the economic disadvantages of certain citizens. The expansion of smart infrastructure and SASs could exacerbate the accessibility to smart technologies for certain groups of individuals, communities, and regions. Despite the seemingly evolutional successive link to the digital divide, researchers might further examine whether the smart divide has the same social characteristics as the digital divide. A plethora of recent critical studies (Kitchin et al. 2017; Kitchin 2019; Shelton and Lodato 2019) have suggested that the complexity of human dimension factors associated with the smart divide warrants more research.

## Acknowledgments

We thank the editor and two anonymous reviewers for constructive comments and suggestions on the structure and various details of this article.

## ORCID

Ruopu Li http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3500-0273

Kang Chen https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2376-2898

## References

- Abadi, M., P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Isard, et al. 2016. Tensorflow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In 12th Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI) , 265 -83. Savannah, GA: USENIX.
- Agiwal, M., A. Roy, and N. Saxena. 2016. Next generation 5G wireless networks: A comprehensive survey.
- IEEE Communications Surveys &amp; Tutorials 18 (3):1617 -55.
- Alaa, M., A. A. Zaidan, B. B. Zaidan, M. Talal, and M. L. M. Kiah. 2017. A review of smart home applications based on Internet of Things. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 97:48 -65. doi: 10. 1016/j.jnca.2017.08.017.
- Albino, V., U. Berardi, and R. M. Dangelico. 2015. Smart cities: Definitions, dimensions, performance, and initiatives. Journal of Urban Technology 22 (1):3 -21. doi: 10.1080/10630732.2014.942092.
- Batty, M. 2008. The size, scale, and shape of cities. Science 319 (5864):769 -71. doi: 10.1126/science.1151419.
- Beloglazov, A., and R. Buyya. 2015. OpenStack Neat: A framework for dynamic and energy-efficient consolidation of virtual machines in OpenStack clouds. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 27 (5):1310 -33. doi: 10.1002/cpe.3314.
- Brogan, P. 2018. U.S. broadband availability year-end 2016. Accessed December 20, 2018. https://www.ustelecom.org/sites/default/files/USTelecom%20Research% 20Brief%202.22.18.pdf.
- CairoNet. 2017. Home page. Accessed September 3, 2019. http://caironet.net/.
- Cocchia, A. 2014. Smart and digital city: A systematic literature review. In Smart city , ed. R. P. Dameri and C. Rosenthal-Sabroux, 13 -43. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International. Accessed April 29, 2019. http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-06160-3\_2.
- Dahlman, E., S. Parkvall, and J. Skold. 2013. 4G: LTE/ LTE-Advanced for Mobile Broadband . Cambridge, MA: Academic.
- Damiani, E., R. Kowalczyk, and G. Parr. 2017. Extending the outreach: From smart cities to connected communities. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology 18 (1):1 -7. doi: 10.1145/3140543.
- Dean, J., and S. Ghemawat. 2008. MapReduce: Simplified data processing on large clusters. Communications of the ACM 51 (1):107 -13. doi: 10.1145/1327452.1327492.
- Deloitte Luxembourg. 2018. A journey towards smart health. Accessed April 28, 2019. https://www2. deloitte.com/lu/en/pages/life-sciences-and-healthcare/ articles/journey-towards-smart-health.html.
- del Portillo, I., B. G. Cameron, and E. F. Crawley. 2019. A technical comparison of three low earth orbit satellite constellation systems to provide global broadband. Acta Astronautica 159:123 -35. doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2019.03.040.
- European Network for Rural Development. 2018. Smart villages: Revitalising rural services. EU Rural Review . Accessed July 9, 2019. https://enrd.ec.europa.eu/sites/ enrd/files/enrd\_publications/publi-enrd-rr-26-2018-en.pdf.
- Fan, T. 2013. Smart agriculture based on cloud computing and IOT. Journal of Convergence Information Technology 8 (2):210 -16. doi: 10.4156/jcit.vol8.issue2.26.
- Federal Communications Commission. 2018. Fixed broadband deployment. Accessed December 10, 2018. https://broadbandmap.fcc.gov/#/.
- Federal Communications Commission. 2019. 36503700 MHz radio service. Accessed September 9, 2019. https://www.fcc.gov/wireless/bureau-divisions/broadbanddivision/3650-3700-mhz-radio-service.

- Fox, A., R. Griffith, A. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski, G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, and I. Stoica. 2009. Above the clouds: A Berkeley view of cloud computing. Report No. UCB/EECS 28, No. 13, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley.
- Friemel, T. N. 2016. The digital divide has grown old: Determinants of a digital divide among seniors. New Media &amp; Society 18 (2):313 -31. doi: 10.1177/ 1461444814538648.
- Gast, M. 2005. 802.11 wireless networks: The definitive guide . Newton, MA: O ' Reilly.
- Gilbert, E., K. Karahalios, and C. Sandvig. 2008. The network in the garden: An empirical analysis of social media in rural life. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems -CHI ' 08 . Florence, Italy: ACM Press. Accessed June 17, 2019. http://portal.acm.org/ citation.cfm?doid=1357054.1357304.
- Golub, A., M. Serritella, V. Satterfield, and J. Singh. 2018. Community-based assessment of smart transportation needs in the city of Portland. NITC-RR1163, Transportation Research and Education Center (TREC), Portland, OR.
- Goralski, W. J. 2000. ADSL and DSL technologies . New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
- Grubesic, T. H. 2003. Inequities in the broadband revolution. The Annals of Regional Science 37 (2):263 -89. doi: 10.1007/s001680300123.
- Guth, J., U. Breitenb € ucher, M. Falkenthal, F. Leymann, and L. Reinfurt. 2016. Comparison of IoT platform architectures: A field study based on a reference architecture. In 2016 Cloudification of the Internet of Things (CIoT) , 1 -6. Paris: IEEE.
- Hecht, B., and M. Stephens. 2014. A tale of cities: Urban biases in volunteered geographic information. In Proceedings of the Eighth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media , 197 -205. Palo Alto, CA: The AAAI Press.
- Hindman, D. B. 2000. The rural -urban digital divide. Journalism &amp; Mass Communication Quarterly 77 (3):549 -60. doi: 10.1177/107769900007700306.
- Holmes, J., B. Jones, and B. Heap. 2015. Smart villages. Science 350 (6259):359. doi: 10.1126/science.aad6521.
- Hosseini, S., L. Frank, G. Fridgen, and S. Heger. 2018. Do not forget about smart towns: How to bring customized digital innovation to rural areas. Business &amp; Information Systems Engineering 60 (3):243 -57. doi: 10.1007/s12599-018-0536-2.
- Johnson, I. L., Y. Lin, T. J.-J. Li, A. Hall, A. Halfaker, J. Sch € oning, and B. Hecht. 2016. Not at home on the range: Peer production and the urban/rural divide. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 13 -25. Santa Clara, CA: ACM Press. Accessed June 17, 2019. http://dl. acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2858036.2858123.
- Joseph, A. D., R. Katz, A. Konwinski, L. E. E. Gunho, D. Patterson, and A. Rabkin. 2010. A view of cloud computing. Communications of the ACM 53 (4):50 -58. doi: 10.1145/1721654.1721672.
- Kang, X., Y. Liang, and J. Yang. 2018. Riding on the primary: A new spectrum sharing paradigm for wireless-
- powered IoT devices. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications 17 (9):6335 -47. doi: 10.1109/TWC. 2018.2859389.
- Khan, F., and J. Driessen. 2018. Bridging the telemedicine infrastructure gap: Implications for long-term care in rural America. Public Policy &amp; Aging Report 28 (3):80 -84. doi: 10.1093/ppar/pry027.
- Kitchin, R. 2014. The real-time city? Big data and smart urbanism. GeoJournal 79 (1):1 -14. doi: 10.1007/ s10708-013-9516-8.
- Kitchin, R. 2019. The timescape of smart cities. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 109 (3):775 -90. doi: 10.1080/24694452.2018.1497475.
- Kitchin, R., P. Cardullo, and C. D. Feliciantonio. 2019. Citizenship, justice and the right to the smart city. In The right to the smart city , ed. P. Cardullo, C. D. Feliciantonio, and R. Kitchin, 1 -28. Bingley, UK: Emerald.
- Kitchin, R., C. Coletta, L. Evans, L. Heaphy, and D. MacDonncha. 2017. Smart cities, epistemic communities, advocacy coalitions and the ' last mile ' problem. IT Information Technology 59 (6):275 -84. doi: 10.1515/itit-2017-0004.
- Koonen, T. 2006. Fiber to the home/fiber to the premises: What, where, and when? Proceedings of the IEEE 94 (5):911 -34.
- Kozma, R. B., and W. S. Vota. 2014. ICT in developing countries: Policies, implementation, and impact. In Handbook of research on educational communications and technology , ed. M. Spector, M. D. Merrill, J. Elen, and M. J. Bishop, 885 -94. New York: Springer.
- Kreutz, D., F. M. V. Ramos, P. Verissimo, C. E. Rothenberg, S. Azodolmolky, and S. Uhlig. 2015. Software-defined networking: A comprehensive survey. Proceedings of the IEEE 103 (1):14 -76. doi: 10. 1109/JPROC.2014.2371999.
- Kumar, V. 2002. Introduction to parallel computing . Boston: Addison-Wesley Longman.
- Kurose, J. F. 2005. Computer networking: A top-down approach featuring the Internet. 3rd ed. Delhi: Pearson Education.
- Lee, S. 2016. Smart divide: Paradigm shift in digital divide in South Korea. Journal of Librarianship and Information Science 48 (3):260 -68. doi: 10.1177/ 0961000614558079.
- Leszczynski, A. 2016. Speculative futures: Cities, data, and governance beyond smart urbanism. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 48 (9):1691 -1708. doi: 10.1177/0308518X16651445.
- Levy, C., and D. Wong. 2014. How smarter healthcare and smarter cities are changing our world. Accessed December 23, 2018. https://www.techradar.com/news/ world-of-tech/future-tech/how-smarter-healthcare-andsmarter-cities-are-changing-our-world-1256940.
- Li, K., and X. Qin. 2017. One platform rules all: From Hadoop 1.0 to Hadoop 2.0 and Spark. In Big data management and processing , ed. K. Li, H. Jiang, and A. Y. Zomaya, 191 -214. New York: Chapman and Hall/ CRC.
- Li, X., R. Lu, X. Liang, X. Shen, J. Chen, and X. Lin. 2011. Smart community: An Internet of things application. IEEE Communications Magazine 49 (11):68 -75.

- Lim, C., K. J. Kim, and P. P. Maglio. 2018. Smart cities with big data: Reference models, challenges, and considerations. Cities 82:86 -99. doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2018. 04.011.
- L € ovehagen, N., and A. Bondesson. 2013. Evaluating sustainability of using ICT solutions in smart cities -Methodology requirements. In International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies for Sustainability , 175 -82. Z € urich: ETH E-Collection.
- Malecki, E. J. 2003. Digital development in rural areas: Potentials and pitfalls. Journal of Rural Studies 19 (2):201 -14. doi: 10.1016/S0743-0167(02)00068-2.
- Mengistu, T. M., A. M. Alahmadi, Y. Alsenani, A. Albuali, and D. Che. 2018. Cucloud: Volunteer computing as a service (VCAAS) system. In International Conference on Cloud Computing , ed. M. Luo and L. Zhang, 251 -64. New York: Springer.
- Moore, G. 2017. NFV and SDN: The future of service delivery. Accessed December 5, 2018. http://www.telcoprofessionals.com/blogs/35443/1187/nfv-and-sdn-thefuture-of-service-delivery.
- Naldi, L., P. Nilsson, H. Westlund, and S. Wixe. 2015. What is smart rural development? Journal of Rural Studies 40:90 -101. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2015.06.006.
- Nam, S. J., and E. Y. Park. 2017. The effects of the smart environment on the information divide experienced by people with disabilities. Disability and Health Journal 10 (2):257 -63. doi: 10.1016/j.dhjo.2016.11. 001.
- Neirotti, P., A. De Marco, A. C. Cagliano, G. Mangano, and F. Scorrano. 2014. Current trends in smart city initiatives: Some stylised facts. Cities 38:25 -36. doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2013.12.010.
- Pant, L. P., and H. H. Odame. 2017. Broadband for a sustainable digital future of rural communities: A reflexive interactive assessment. Journal of Rural Studies 54:435 -50. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2016.09.003.
- Porter, M. E., C. H. M. Ketels, K. Miller, and R. Bryden. 2004. Competitiveness in rural U.S. regions: Learning and research agenda . Washington, DC: U.S. Economic Development Administration.
- Prieger, J. E. 2013. The broadband digital divide and the economic benefits of mobile broadband for rural areas. Telecommunications Policy 37 (6 -7):483 -502. doi: 10.1016/j.telpol.2012.11.003.
- Reis, A. B., S. Sargento, F. Neves, and O. K. Tonguz. 2014. Deploying roadside units in sparse vehicular networks: What really works and what does not. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 63 (6):2794 -2806. doi: 10.1109/TVT.2013.2292519.
- Riddlesden, D., and A. D. Singleton. 2014. Broadband speed equity: A new digital divide? Applied Geography 52:25 -33. doi: 10.1016/j.apgeog.2014.04.008.
- Roberts, E., B. A. Anderson, S. Skerratt, and J. Farrington. 2017. A review of the rural-digital policy agenda from a community resilience perspective. Journal of Rural Studies 54:372 -85. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2016.03.001.
- Roh, W., J.-Y. Seol, J. Park, B. Lee, J. Lee, Y. Kim, J. Cho, K. Cheun, and F. Aryanfar. 2014. Millimeterwave beamforming as an enabling technology for 5G cellular communications: Theoretical feasibility and
- prototype results. IEEE Communications Magazine 52 (2):106 -13. doi: 10.1109/MCOM.2014.6736750.
- Saxe, S. 2019. I ' m an engineer, and I ' m not buying into ' smart ' cities. Accessed July 30, 2019. https://www. nytimes.com/2019/07/16/opinion/smart-cities.html.
- Schaffers, H., N. Komninos, M. Pallot, B. Trousse, M. Nilsson, and A. Oliveira. 2011. Smart cities and the future Internet: Towards cooperation frameworks for open innovation. Future Internet Assembly, LNCS 6656:431 -46.
- Schaller, R. R. 1997. Moore ' s law: Past, present and future. IEEE Spectrum 34 (6):52 -59. doi: 10.1109/6. 591665.
- Shelton, T., and T. Lodato. 2019. Actually existing smart citizens: Expertise and (non)participation in the making of the smart city. City 23 (1):35 -52. doi: 10.1080/ 13604813.2019.1575115.
- Shelton, T., M. Zook, and A. Wiig. 2015. The ' actually existing smart city. ' Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 8 (1):13 -25. doi: 10.1093/cjres/rsu026.
- Short, J. R., B. Hanlon, and T. J. Vicino. 2007. The decline of inner suburbs: The new suburban gothic in the United States. Geography Compass 1 (3):641 -56. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-8198.2007.00020.x.
- Song, Y., G. Zhou, and Y. Zhu. 2013. Present status and challenges of big data processing in smart grid. Power System Technology 37 (4):927 -35.
- Stauber, K. 2001. Why invest in rural America -And how? A critical public policy question for the 21st century. In Center for the study of rural America, exploring policy options for a new rural America , ed. M. Drabenstott and K. Sheaff, 57 -87. Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
- Stratigea, A. 2011. ICT for rural development: Potential applications and barriers involved. Netcom 25 (3 -4):179 -204. doi: 10.4000/netcom.144.
- Taleb, T., K. Samdanis, B. Mada, H. Flinck, S. Dutta, and D. Sabella. 2017. On multi-access edge computing: A survey of the emerging 5G network edge cloud architecture and orchestration. IEEE Communications Surveys &amp; Tutorials 19 (3):1657 -81. doi: 10.1109/ COMST.2017.2705720.
- Trindade, E. P., M. P. F. Hinnig, E. M. da Costa, J. S. Marques, R. C. Bastos, and T. Yigitcanlar. 2017. Sustainable development of smart cities: A systematic review of the literature. Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 3 (11):1 -14. doi: 10.1186/s40852-017-0063-2.
- United States Conference of Mayors. 2018. 2018 smart cities survey. Accessed December 22, 2018. http:// www.usmayors.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/2018Smart-Cities-Report.pdf.
- Van Deursen, A. J., and J. A. Van Dijk. 2014. The digital divide shifts to differences in usage. New Media &amp; Society 16 (3):507 -26. doi: 10.1177/1461444813487959.
- van Gevelt, T., C. Canales Holzeis, S. Fennell, B. Heap, J. Holmes, M. H. Depret, B. Jones, and M. T. Safdar. 2018. Achieving universal energy access and rural development through smart villages. Energy for Sustainable Development 43:139 -42. doi: 10.1016/j.esd. 2018.01.005.

- van Winden, W., and D. van den Buuse. 2017. Smart city pilot projects: Exploring the dimensions and conditions of scaling up. Journal of Urban Technology 24 (4):51 -72.
- Visvizi, A., and M. Lytras. 2018. It ' s not a fad: Smart cities and smart villages research in European and global contexts. Sustainability 10 (8):2727. doi: 10. 3390/su10082727.
- Warf, B. 2013. Contemporary digital divides in the United States. Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 104 (1):1 -17. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9663.2012.00720.x.
- Wolfert, S., L. Ge, C. Verdouw, and M. Bogaardt. 2017. Big data in smart farming -A review. Agricultural Systems 153:69 -80. doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2017.01.023.
- Zavratnik, V., A. Kos, and E. Stojmenova Duh. 2018. Smart villages: Comprehensive review of initiatives and practices. Sustainability 10 (7):2559. doi: 10.3390/ su10072559.

RUOPU LI is an Assistant Professor in the Geography and Environmental Resources program at

Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL 62901. E-mail: Ruopu.Li@siu.edu. His research interests include agricultural land use, water resources planning and management, coupled nature and human systems, and smart rurality.

KANG CHEN is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL 62901. E-mail: kchen@siu.edu. His research interests include emerging wireless networks, software-defined networking, and cloud computing.

DI WU is a PhD student in the Environmental Resources and Policy program at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL 62901. E-mail: di.wu@siu.edu. Her research interests include spatial data mining and remote sensing for water resources.