## State Hegemony in Transforming the Rural Landscapes of Eastern Germany: 1945-1 994

lngolf Vogeler

Department of Geography,  University of Wisconsin-Eau  Claire ixty years ago, Derwent  Whittlesey (1  935) discussed  the  political  impact  of  central S governments  upon the landscape as  expressed  through  various  aspects  of  security, boundaries, land surveys, and laws. Rugg (1  985) applied this approach to Eastern Europe where  he  identified  five  historical  landscape types  resulting  from  the  dominance  of  the State's central authority: German  medieval colonization, feudalism, multinationalism,  nationalism, and  socialism. More  recently,  the role of the State in transforming the economy and landscape has again been recognized,  but this  time from  political economy  and structuralist  perspectives.  Cloke  and  Goodwin  emphasize that 'some changes  have been forced by use of state  power .  . .  via programmes o f privatization  and deregulation. Other changes have been the  result of persuasion' (italics  in t he  original;  Cloke  and  Goodwin 1992:328). Although these authors refer to capitalist economies in the West,  their comments apply to  the  East  as  well.  In  eastern  Germany,  the State's  activist  intervention,  directly  and  indirectly,  has  restructured  the  economy and recomposed the  society  three  times  in the last fifty  years.  The  hegemony  of two communist states-first the occupying forces of the Soviet Union and then the GDR (German Democratic Republic or,  more commonly,  East Germany)and,  most  recently,  the  capitalist  state  of the newly reunified Germany have produced striking transformations  in rural landscapes.

This  paper  shows  how the  government  of t he Federal Republic of Germany (FRG or West Germany) privatized the socialist agriculture of the former  GDR  following German  reunification in 1990. Although the broad political and economic  changes  since  the  Cold  War  (Tuathail and Luke 1994) and for Germany in particular  (Harris 1991; Corson and Minghi 1994)

have been described,  detailed empirical  studies of this most recent transformation have not been made. To  document the rural landscape and structural manifestations of reprivatization, I use three  sources  of data: 1) questionnaires collected by a German agricultural research institute  from  a  representative  sample  of 728 farms  throughout  eastern  Germany; 2) topographic and cadastral maps;  and 3) field work at  nine farm  or village  sites.  M a p  analysis  and field  work  documented  field  patterns  (numbers,  densities, and  shapes  of  fields)  before and after  reunification at six of these sites:  Heinersdorf, Rehmsdorf, Dedelow,  and  Hasenholz. Two other sites-Uelzen in western Germany  and  Emerald, Wisconsin  (Figure 1 )-were selected to compare the eastern German field  patterns  since 1990. The  questionnaire data  provide a  regional context  for  farm  and field  changes  in the case  studies.  These  most recent  landscape changes  are  also  related to previous  political  and  economic  transformations in Eastern Europe in general and Germany  in  particular  during  the  past  fifty years.

Historically,  large estates commonly held by absentee owners (junkers) accounted for most of the  land  in northern  Germany  east  of the Elbe River. Throughout Europe,  State intervention through agrarian  reforms  had established the conditions for capitalist  agriculture  in various forms: tenant farming in England,  moderni z ed Junker estates  in  Germany,  and  restructured family farms in Denmark (Goodman, Jorj, and  Wilkinson 1987:157-I 58). In  Germany, even  in the  nineteenth  century,  these  estate landscapes differed sharply  from  the  landscapes  of  small  peasant  farmers  west  of  the Elbe and in southern Germany east of the Elbe (Rugg 1985:79). In 1939, the  average Junker estate in the eastern territories averaged

Rivers

Figure 1. Eastern Germany: Villages,  cities, L2nder, and principal rivers.

<!-- image -->

288  ha  (712  acres)  and  cultivated  areas  and fields were much larger than west of the Elbe, even where horses were used.

At the end of World War  I I ,  several military powers  occupied  Germany: the  Allies  of the United  States,  United  Kingdom,  and  France controlled  the  western  portion  of  Germany; the Soviet  Union,  the eastern  portion. During the  post-war occupation,  the Soviets initiated land  reform. They  seized  large farms,  distributed them to landless and small farmers,  and transformed  rural  landscapes  of  eastern  Germany into small farms and fields and villages to accommodate the increase in farmsteads. This phase  of  land  reform  came  to  an  end when West  Germany declared  independence in September  and  East  Germany  in October  of 1949.

The  GDR's  government  gradually  consolidated the many small farm units created during the Soviet occupation. Through several stages of  collectivization, large  field  sizes  were  re- stored, but this  time  field  length  was  determined not by the  endurance  of  plow  horses but by the imagination of policy makers. Once personal property was eliminated and property borders  and  field  boundaries  were  removed from  the  landscape  (through collectivization), fields could  be  as large  as political  leaders thought  appropriate  for  economies  of  scale and  technological  advance  as modeled  on both Soviet and US. agriculture (Rugg 1986:372).

Nearly  fifty  years  later,  the  GDR  ceased  to exist  and  in 1990 was  officially  absorbed  into the FRG. On the one hand, the FGR privatized farmland and encouraged family farms;  on the other hand,  it imposed considerable obstacles on  former  collective  farms  which  were  required  to  transform themselves  or  be  dissolved. Despite  these profound socioeconomic  changes  since  German  reunification, the GDR's  legacy of large farms and fields persists  and these units account for  most of eastern Germany's  agricultural production.

Germany's  1945  division  and  its  1990  reunification  resulted  in  major  socioeconomic and landscape transformations in eastern Germany. The  scope  of these  changes  is  shown by the  number  of farms  that  were  eliminated and created (Table 1 ).?  During  the Soviet occupation,  about  12,000  confiscated  estates and other  farms  were  divided  into  617,886  new farms. By the end of the GDR's  collectivization, however,  these  farm  numbers were  reduced t o about 4,500  vertically  and horizontally integrated agro-industrial firms. Finally, the reprivatization of farmland after 1990 again increased farm numbers to about 20,000.  The latter consisted of individual,  incorporated,  and  corporate  farms.  Corporate  farms, though  just  14 percent of the new farms, dominated the agricultural economy of eastern Germany; they accounted  for  about  69  percent  of  the  rented cropland  and they  owned 80  percent of  the region's  livestock.

The  principal  changes  in  the  countryside, most notably the number and size of farms and fields,  were  effected b y  State policies  and actions  in the  last fifty  years.  These  unfolded  in three  major  landscape  transformations:  1 )  the Soviet land  reforms of  1945-1949; 2)  the CDR's  farm  collectivization  from  1950-1 990; and 3) the German government's  reprivatization of farmland  since 1990.

Table 1. Changes in the Number of Eastern German Farms: 1940s-1990s.

| Era        | Landscape Transformations             | Final Number of Farms in Each Era                                                                          |
|------------|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1945       | Estates and farms                     | 11,697 estates and farms confiscated by Soviets 57,797 farms not confiscated by Soviets 69,494 Total Farms |
| 1945-1 949 | Soviet land reform: small-scale farms | 85,189 expanded farms 57,797 previously existing farms 6 1 7,886 Total Farms 474,900 new farms             |
| 1950-1 990 | CDR collectivized farms               | 3,969 cooperative farms (LPCs) 479 state farms (VECs) 4,448 Total Farmsa                                   |
| post-I 990 | Re-privatized farmland                | 15,083 individual farms 1,844 incorporated farms 3,170 corporate farms 20,097 Total Farms                  |

Note: ' I n addition, there were 3,558 private small agricultural plots. Sources:  Bell 19921  9,  84-85; Heuer 1973:13;  Muller 1975:31 5-6. Statistisches lahrbuch der DDR 19821  69;  and AID 1994:3,

## Soviet Land  Reforms, 1945-1 949

The  Soviet  government initially instituted land  reform  in  response  to  the  demands  of landless farm  workers and small-scale farmers for sufficient amounts of land as  economic security  (Wadekin 1982:4-13). In the census of 1939,  the  last  reliable  one before World War II, the farm  structure  in eastern Germany consisted of 391,500  farm  plots2  of 1-20  ha (2.549 acres),  48,700  farms  of 20-50 ha (49-124 acres), 8,100 farms  of  50-100 ha  (124-247 acres),  and 6,300  estates of over  100 ha (247 acres)  (Miiller  1975:13).  During their  occupation of eastern Germany, the Soviets expropriated  all  feudal-like  estates  (large  farms  over 100 ha or 247 acres) and seized the lands of war criminals and Nazis without compensation (Volgyes 1980). Between 1945 and 1949, these lands were assigned to small farm owners,  landless  farm  workers,  and  German  immigrants from east of the Oder-NeiBe rivers. Seventy-six percent of the confiscated land was taken from 7,160  estate owners  (lunker)  and  other  large farm owners (with an average of 350 ha or 865 acres); 4 percent from 4,537  farms with under 100 ha (247 acres) and owned by war  criminals and Nazis (with an average of 30 ha or 74 acres);  and  the  remaining  20  percent  came from various  kinds of state  properties. O f  the total  of  3.30 million  ha  (8.15 million  acres) confiscated,  1.96  million ha (4.84 million acres) was farmland;  50 percent cropland, 10 percent greenland,  and  30  percent forest.  Two-thirds of this confiscated land (about 2.2  million ha or 5.44 million  acres)  was  distributed  to  about 560,000  farmers,  of whom 210,000 were new farmers (with an average of 8 ha or 20 acres). The  remaining  1.1  million  ha  (2.72  million acres) remained as state property (Bell 1992:89).

Within  five  years,  the  Soviet  land  reforms fundamentally  transformed  the  regional  agricultural structure  of eastern Germany,  particularly  in the  two northern  CDR  Lander  (provinces) of Mecklenburg  and Brandenburg where Junker estates had predominated. Huge estates and large-scale family farms gave way  to  small-sized family  farms  (Auerbach 1960;  Gade  1957).  By  1950,  small farms  (110 ha or  2.25-25 acres)  in  eastern  Germany accounted for  73  percent of all farms and 43 percent  of  all  farmland; middle-sized  farms (1 0-20  ha or 25-49  acres) for another  19 and 29 percent,  respectively;  and large-sized farms (with a maximum of 100 ha or 247 acres) for only 8 and  28 percent, respectively (Bell 1992:19,  87).

## Collective Farming in the CDR, 1950-1 990

These small farms  soon  proved inadequate to  produce  sufficient  quantities  of  food  and industrial crops for  an  increasing urban population and for financing rapid industrialization.

The  GDR,  along  with  the  centrally  planned economies in Eastern Europe and China, began creating large-scale, compulsory collective farms (both  cooperative and state farms) on  the Soviet model of collectivization.  By 1952, collectivization in the GDR had been achieved on some 24,000 farms  (with an average of 29 ha or 72 acres)  and  on 700,000 ha (1,729,676 acres).  Moreover,  the  State penalized  'large' private farmers (with 20 to 100 ha or 49 to 247 acres),  subsidized  the  newly  emerging LPGs (Landwirtschaftliche Produktionsgenossenschaften or farm  cooperatives),  and increased the  compulsory  state food production quotas by 10 percent for the larger private farmers and reduced  it  by 10 percent  for  the  LPGs  (Bell 1992:20-21). From 1952 t o 1954, the number of  large farmers  declined  by 30 percent (Bell 1992:36), but the  importance of the LPGs  remained small-only 2.2 percent of the GDR's farm  population and 3.4 percent of the farrnland.

Between 1952 and 1961, when  the  GDR closed  the  border  to  the  FRG  and  built  the Berlin  Wall,  farms  were  being abandoned as owners fled to the  FRG.  These  unused  lands were subsequently incorporated into LPGs and VEGs  (Volkseigene Giiter or state farms). (On LPGs,  farmers shared in the collective  value of their production; on VEGs,  workers were paid wages  by the  State.)  By 1953, 1,802 farmers had left farming, 76 percent of them had been large-scale farmers with over 20 ha (49 acres), and they  accounted for 91 percent of the affected farmland (Bell 1992:47). In addition,  the State had established 1,906 LPGs consisting of 218,043 ha (538,777 acres) and 37,000 members.  Initially,  LPG  members consisted  mainly of farm  workers (53 percent),  'new'  farmers created  by  the  Soviet  land  reforms (37 percent),  and  'old'  farmers  who had existed before  the  Soviet  reforms (10 percent).  These groups  were generally  more willing to participate in these  LPGs than were larger-scale and older farmers who tended to resist losing control over  their  property  and decision making. Francisco (1  979:77-80) points out that collectivization in the GDR was made easier because many of the farm families who opposed collectivization had fled to the FGR before 1961 and because the GDR made countryside life attractive by providing incentives for housing,  social service,  income,  and working conditions.

At  first, the  larger-scale  farmers  had  their production rights curtailed,  but later their inde- pendence was eliminated entirely  as  the GDR created increasingly larger-scale  and more comprehensive LPGs. The degree of collectivization  resulted  in three  types  of LPGs. Type I collectivized cropland and some of the greenland;  Type I I added all livestock,  farm  machinery,  and equipment;  and Type 111 added all remaining assets of private farmers. Type 111 LPGs, always  the  largest  in  size,  averaged 663 ha (1,638 acres) in 1967. The distinction between Type  I and  II LPGs had  disappeared  by 1961, and  by 1967 the average size  of these  LPCs stood at 209 ha (516 acres) (Table 2). Type  111 LPGs were geographically  concentrated  in areas of high-quality  soils: the black-earth  region from Magdeburg to Halle, the Thuringer Basin, and Mecklenburg and Brandenburg (Figure 1) with  its  large  numbers  of  new  or  immigrant farmers from farther  east in Poland and Russia (Heuer 1973:19). By 1959, these  LPGs  accounted for over 50 percent of the farmland in the  northern  districts  of  Rostock,  Schwerin, and Neubrandenburg and in the southern districts  of  Magdeburg  and  Halle  (Kohl  et  al. 1970).

Between 1952 and 1960, the  move toward collectivization was complete;  collective farms encompassed 80 percent of the farmland  (Volgyes 1980:ll). LPCs specialized in the production  of  crops  [Planzen  LPG(P)]  or  livestock [Tiere LPG(T)] were created by combining the cultivated areas of several villages. In the south, LPGs of 600-800 ha (1,483-1,997 acres) and in  the  north of 1,000-1,500 ha (2,471  -3,706 acres) were combined into larger and centrally managed LPCs which averaged 5,000 ha (1  2,355 acres).

Table 2. Types and Sizes of GDR Agricultural  Production Units, 1967

| Type o f Farms         |   Percent in Farmland |   Average Size (ha) |
|------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|
| Type I LPCa            |                  25.7 |                 209 |
| Type 111 LPGb          |                  60.1 |                 663 |
| VEGa                   |                   6.8 |                 668 |
| GPGd                   |                   0.3 |                  51 |
| Other socialist unitsd |                   1.2 |                  41 |
| Remaining unitse       |                   5.9 |                  32 |

The  collectivization  of  farmland  and  farmsteads also resulted in  field consolidation. Rugg (1 986:378)  argues that  the consolidated  fields did not correspond in most cases to those of the old estates.  He cites the village of Stresow, south of Greifswald,  where  historical land use and  field  size  changes  have  been  mapped (Benthien 1963). In 1694,  the three-field rotational system was evident;  by 1900, this Junker estate  was  divided  into  four  large  cultivated fields.  By 1945, the Soviet land reform had created 67 fields which remained until 1952  when six  farmers  formed an  LPG  and  worked their nine  scattered  fields. In  1961,  with  the  total collectivization of the village and its land, only sixteen fields remained. Although farmland had been privatized by 1993, when I  again mapped this village, only ten  very large fields remained-fewer than  had  existed  during  the GDR era but more than during the Junker era! My field work indicates similar patterns in Jakobsdorf (Barth 1966) and Groningen (Diercke Weltatlas 1991:52-53).

During the mid-I970s, the GDR created inter-farm  cooperative  crop  production  organizations (these  KOGs, Kooperationsgerneinschafien,  included LPGs and VEGs)  and large livestock  production facilities. These  units  relied on various  kinds of consolidated  agro-ind  ustr  ial services: A  IV,  Agrar-lndustrie- Vereinin  gungen (agro-industrial combines), ACZ, Agrochernischen Zentren (agro-chemical centers),  and  KfL, Kreisbetriebe  fur  Landtechnik (district  centers for agricultural  technology) (Rugg 1986:372).  By 1989 these vertically  and horizontally integrated  agro-industrial  complexes  were  quite  large,  averaging  5,030 ha (12,429  acres) and 4,528  ha (11,189  acres) for VEGs  and  LPG(P)s,  respectively  (Roubitschek 1993:35).  For  example,  the  Kropelin  agro-industrial crop production complex (KIM,  Kombinate lndustrielle Mast or combined industrial feedlot) west of Rostock included three LPG(P)s  and  one  VEG, covering  32,000 ha (79,071 acres) (Kohl, Marcinek, and Nitz 1986:131).  Animal  production was  also  being concentrated. Many LPG(T)s  milked thousands of cows, and raised tens of thousands of cattle, pigs,  and chickens. Tens  of thousands  of pigs were  fattened  in Eberswalde  (1  57,000),  Neustadt  (1 01 ,OOO), HaRleben (93,000),  and Borna (37,000); and Hohen Wangelin fattened 15,000 bulls on 4,000 ha (9,884  acres) (see Figure 1). In addition,  the State created four egg factories with  2.5 million  laying  hens  and  two  broiler factories with  1.4 million  chickens  (Roubitschek  1993:41-42). As  farm  sizes  increased dramatically through  consolidation  between 1962-1973,  the numbers of Type 111 and Type I LPGs decreased by about 1,000  and  almost 9,000, respectively  (Muller  1975:31).  And  a decade later,  LPGs  of all types  numbered just 3,969  and VEGs just 479 (Statistisches)ahrbuch 1982:169)

Large-scale  LPGs  and  the  VEGs  had  clear advantages for the State and for many individu- als. These included:

- (1  )  reduced risks in agricultural  production from the  variabilities  of weather,  pests,
- and other physical factors;
- (2)  greater  work  schedule  flexibility-families  could  take  several  holidays  during the year,  even during the peak work cycle in the summer months;
- (3)  more opportunities for women to work
- outside of the home;
- (4)  protection from  income loss illness and accidents;
- because of
- (5)  greater variety  of work assignments;
- (6)  greater potential  for career development in training and duties;
- (7)  higher  utilization  of  buildings  and  machinery: fully using resources and replacing machinery  with  newer  versions  as they became available;
- (8)  better infrastructure  in villages (schools, playgrounds,  community centers,  social
- services, and shops) (Rugg 1971  :90-94); and
- (9)  increased  economies  of  scale  for  the production of food and industrial prod-
- ucts (Bergmann 1992b:309-310).

The LPGs and the VEGs,  of course,  had to work within the context of the centrally planned economy of the GDR. The State determined the kind,  quantity,  and price of agricultural products.  Inputs of energy, machinery, fertilizers, and  herbicides  were  regulated  by state agencies. The severity  of the constraints under  which  collectivized  agriculture  had  to operate is illustrated by the fact that LPGs were required  to  buy  their sugar-beet  harvesting equipment from  Hungary  because  it was  the sole  manufacturer  of  this  equipment  for  all COMECON countries.  Theoretically  this  high degree  of  specialization  was  efficient,  but  in practice it was a disaster because the State had no  means  for  feedback  from  the  LPGs  and

VEGs.  Before  reunification,  for  example,  200 workers on the Petersberg LPG near Hale (Figure 1  ) harvested sugar beets;  after reunification (1994),  one worker with new machines did all of the harvesting. The old equipment was  so poorly designed  that  in wet  conditions often 70 percent of the weight of the sugar-beet harvest  was dirt!  LPC  managers  and  workers knew what the production problems were,  but they  could  not effect  any  changes.  The  best they could do was to make adjustments to their equipment and local operations. To make matters worse, these large-scale agro-industrial units had reached the limits of efficiency as  soil erosion and manure disposal problems mounted (Stern 1990). But the GDR's  formal, institutionalized,  top-down,  and dictatorial decision-making processes did not allow for bottom-up information feedback,  except for those opinions that  confirmed  the  views  of central planners and policy makers.

Indeed the GDR system built in incentives to increase  farm  size  and  production  for  their own sake.  Local political leaders and LPG and VEG  managers  mobilized  local  resources  (to build new barns, roads,  irrigate more land, etc.) to impress and gain favor from their  party superiors who in turn wanted to report only success  and  growth  in  agricultural  production. Clearly, the  SED  (Sozialistische  finheitspartei Deutschlands or Socialist  Unity  Party  of Germany) looked favorably  on such projects and so they instituted similar  projects and improvements  throughout  the  country,  regardless  of the value of  these kinds of scales of production elsewhere-again ignoring local  knowledge and decision  making.

## Reprivatization Since German

## Reunification, 1990-1 994

Since the unification of the GDR and FRG in 1990,  the  German government  has  been returning private property to its previous owners without the consent of the current farm population-what Bergmann (1  992a) has called forced privatization.  Only owners of property (lands and buildings) that  was  confiscated  by the  GDR  are  eligible  to  have  their  properties returned.  Ironically,  these  property  rights  are based on the Soviet land reforms of 1945-1 949 and on the Soviet confiscation  of the  private lands owned by estate  and large  landowners and by war  criminals,  and the distribution  of these lands to small-scale farmers (who in turn lost control and ownership of their  land to the GDR state) (Feddersen 1991). Because the German  government  is  returning  land  to  earlier 'Soviet'  period owners,  this  process  is called reprivatization.  In doing so,  the German government has delegitimated property rights acquired  under the CDR  and  legitimated  those secured  during  the  Soviet  occupation.  Unofficial  reports  in  newspapers  have  indicated that the Soviet Union insisted that the FGR recognize  its  land  reforms  in return for  agreeing to  German  reunification (see, for  example, Bonn, Moskau  und  die Suche nach  der Wahrheit  1994).  Although  owners  who  had their property confiscated by the Nazis are also demanding the return of their  assets,  the current German government and the courts have not yet  acted  on these  claims.  Most experts think they never will (Bergmann 1994).

By December 31,1991,  the German government required that all former LPGs had to take on new legal forms or they would be liquidated. Financial incentives were given to establish reprivatized family farms. The  various  legal forms were of three basic types,  perhaps best translated  from  the  German  as  individual,  incorporated,  and corporate:  1  )  Newly created individual farms  established  by  previous  LPG farmers,  pre-I  945 farmers who had left eastern Germany,  or farmers from  western Germany; 2)  incorporated farms  (on these  farms,  farm owners essentially  do all the farm  work themselves and hire only seasonal labor as  needed) consisting of several  individuals  in partnership or  individual  farmers  who  incorporated their operations;  and 3)  Corporate farms (on these farms,  managers and workers perform different roles  and  have  different  responsibilities)  held usually  by members of the former LPGs or by a small number of investor-farmers from western  Germany  and  other  parts  of  Western Europe.

In the first three years after  reunification, the numbers of all legal forms of farms  increased; individual  and  incorporated farms,  the  most, corporate  farms,  the  least  (Table  3).  By  1993, about 15,000  individual farms  had been established.  O f  these,  41  percent were  run by fulltime farmers;  another  1,844  farms were incorporated  by individuals  or as  partnerships. The remainder  (3,170  farms)  consisted  mostly  of LPGs reorganized into various corporate forms.  Individual  farmers  thus  accounted  for

Table 3. Proportion of Farms by Legal Form, 1991-1993.

|                                             | Farms   | Farms   | Farms   | Farms   | Farms   | Farms   |
|---------------------------------------------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
|                                             | 1993    | 1993    | 1992    | 1992    | 1991    | 1991    |
| Legal Forms of Farms (German equivalents)   | Number  | Percent | Number  | Percent | Number  | Percent |
| Individual Farms (Einzelunternehmen)        | 15,083  | 75.0    | 14,138  | 76.7    | 12,647  | 76.1    |
| Incorporated Farms (Personengesellschaften, | 1,844   | 9.2     | 1,253   | 6.8     | 933     | 5.6     |
| (e.G., AG, GmbH, and Co.KG) Corporate Farms | 3,170   | 15.8    | 3,041   | 16.5    | 3,039   | 18.3    |
| Totals                                      | 20,097  | 100.0   | 18,432  | 100.0   | 16,619  | 100.0   |

Sources: AID 19943, 5, 6; 1993:5 7; and 19925, 6.

almost 80 percent of all new farms  in eastern Germany,  but they worked only 21 percent of the farmland in 1993. In sharp contrast, corporate farms (essentially  the former LPGs) constituted only 14 percent of new farms but these large-scale  units accounted  for 67 percent of total farmland ("AID" 1994:3, 4, and 6). Moreover, corporate farms exceeding 500 ha (1,235 acres) accounted for 68 percent of all corporate farms and 96 percent of all corporate farmland.  Conversely,  individual farms were  concentrated  in  the  smaller  than 101 ha (247 acres)  category  (Table 4). Many  experts  on German agriculture now predict that the numbers of  legal farm  types  and  the  amounts of farmland they control have stabilized and that only  minor adjustments will occur in the next few years (Fuchs 1994).

These newly formed, worker-owned corpo-

Table 4. Proportion of Farms and Farmland by Sizes and by Legal Form, 1993.

| Form               | Farm Sizes         | Farm Sizes   | Farm Sizes   | Farm Sizes   | Farm Sizes   |
|--------------------|--------------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
| Legal of Farms     | 4 0 1 ha           | 101-500 haa  | >SO0 ha      | Total        |              |
| Individual farms   | Individual farms   |              |              |              |              |
| Farms              | 80.6               | 17.5         | 1.9          | 100          |              |
| Farmland           | 27.1               | 51.4         | 21.5         | 100          |              |
| Incorporated farms | Incorporated farms |              |              |              |              |
| Farms              | 24.4               | 51.8         | 23.8         | 100          |              |
| Farmland           | 2.3                | 35.9         | 61.8         | 100          |              |
| Corporate farms    | Corporate farms    |              |              |              |              |
| Farms              | 16.1               | 15.6         | 68.3         | 100          |              |
| Farmland           | 0.4                | 3.9          | 95.7         | 100          |              |

Note: aThe equivalents in acres are 247 and 1,235. Source: AID 19943, 5, 7.

rate farms  work  less farmland now than they did as  LPGs.  In three cases that I  examined in the Fall of 1994, the decrease averaged about 30 percent  (Table 5). Yet  these  three  farms continued a s   large-scale operations (4,000 ha or 9,884 acres  to 6,000 ha  or 14,826 acres) when gauged against western German or U.S. standards.

Ideologically, the  F R G   government,  particularly  the  ruling conservative Christian Democrats before and after reunification, is committed  to  a  market  economy,  private  property, and family farming, and it opposes all socialist institutions, including collective agriculture. Consequently, FRG's  agricultural, financial, and legal policies  have discouraged the  re-emergence of the former LPGs in any form (Bergmann 1992a). Pre-reunification debts were saddled on the former LPGs. During the GDR era, this included all money borrowed for agricultural  production  and  infrastructural investments (roads,  houses,  schools,  water and sewage,  etc.)  within the areas administered by the LPGs. Most of these debts were unrelated to agriculture. Moreover,  LPG  members never made these investment decisions. Nor can the newly created corporate farms use LPG assets or  include them with their  assets ("Studie zur Altscholdenproblematik 1992:3). Note,  however,  that 38 percent of the former  LPGs were debt free because GDR state bureaucrats had manipulated their  finances  so  a s   to  demonstrate the "success" of these model  agro-industrial  complexes  (Roubitschek 1993:37). With reunification,  the  F R G   assigned  all  LPG  debt only to those legally reconstituted  former LPGs,  and required them to pay interest rates three  to  four  times  higher  than  the  original

Table 5. Transformation of Three LPGs, 1989 and 1994.

| Case Study                | 1989                    | 1994                                                                    | Percent Change   |
|---------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|
| Dedelow, Brandenburg      |                         |                                                                         |                  |
| Operational units         | 1 LPG(P) and 4 LPG(T)sa | 3 corporate farms and 5 farm-related corporations (6 individual farms)b | -                |
| Workers                   | 340                     | 188                                                                     | 4 5              |
| Farmland (ha)             | 8,500                   | 6,000                                                                   | -29              |
| Milk cows                 | 3,900                   | 2,700                                                                   | -3 1             |
| Fattening pigs            | 10,000                  | none                                                                    | -                |
| Breeding pigs             | 1,200                   | none                                                                    | -                |
| Piglets produced          | 30,000                  | none                                                                    | -                |
| Cattle                    | 1,000                   | none                                                                    | -                |
| Rehmsdorf, Sachsen        |                         |                                                                         |                  |
| Operational units         | 1 LPG(P) and 3 LPG(T)sa | 1 corporate farm (4 individual farms)b                                  | -                |
| Workers                   | 300                     | 80                                                                      | -73              |
| Farmland (ha)             | 6,000                   | 4,000                                                                   | -3 3             |
| Milk cows                 | 1,500                   | 600                                                                     | 4 0              |
| Petersberg, Sachsen-AnhaR |                         |                                                                         |                  |
| Operational units         | 1 LPG(P) and 3 LPG(T)sa | 1 corporate farm and a sausage-meat factory (3 individual farms)b       | -                |
| Workers                   | 822                     | 135 (43 + 92)                                                           | -84              |
| Farmland (ha)             | 5,690                   | 3,564                                                                   | -37              |
| Milk cows                 | 1,100                   | 600                                                                     | 4 5              |
| Fattening pigs            | 9,450                   | 5,150                                                                   | 116              |
| Breeding pigs             | 550                     | 350                                                                     | -3 6             |
| Cattle and calves         | 2,000                   | 1,700                                                                   | -1 5             |
| SheeD                     | 5,000                   | 600                                                                     | -88              |

Notes: aLPC(P) refers to a crop cooperative farm; LPG(T), to a livestock cooperative farm.

bThe individual farms that were also created are not included in the table.

Source: Author's field work,  September  1994.

rates established by the GDR ('Studie  zur  A&amp;schuldenproblematik' 1 992:9). Naturally, banks have  been  reluctant to  make  loans  to  these corporate farms,  not least because  in the event o f bankruptcy,  the  German  government  has first  call on the  remaining assets.  These farms have no land assets since they are now renting the land they cultivate; their only assets are old buildings and antiquated machinery and equipment (no longer manufactured in COMECON countries). They have,  in other words,  no collateral  and  their  potential  incomes  are  often inadequate to  pay  back  their  old  debts.  In sharp contrast,  none  of the  GDR  farm  debts are  attached to the  newly formed  individual, family, or partnership farms (Zimpelmann 1991 ) .

In  the  new  market  economy,  the  former LPGs  have  had to  restructure themselves legally  and economically in order to survive. Instead of doing everything within their districts, they  now concentrate on specific  agricultural activities.  Prior  to 1990, they  produced  crop and livestock products; maintained  and built all roads,  houses,  schools,  and other social buildings;  and staffed  all social functions. With  reunification, they focus narrowly on only those economic functions that are profitable. In 1989, the distribution of all LPGs workers was about evenly divided between direct agricultural production  and  related-farm  and  rural  services (Henrichsmeyer and Schmidt 1991). By 1991, only  35  percent of them  were  still employed in agriculture! Of  the other 550,000  rural workers, 27 percent were unemployed, 23 percent found  other jobs, 19 percent were  attending work-training  programs, 16 percent  had  received  pre-retirement  pensions,  and  15  percent were retired (BML 1992a).

Concurrently, the German government  has implemented  new  policies of its  own and  of the European Union's (EU). These policies will

reduce the levels o f   agricultural subsidies in the five new Lander (or provinces) in  eastern Germany and in the region's largest farms. Consequently,  crop  and  livestock  production  have declined markedly (Dabbert 1991 ). From 1989-1 992,  potato production  declined by 33 percent,  cattle  numbers  by  42  percent,  and pigs  by 60 percent  (BML 1992b); fallow  land meanwhile  increased  by  8 percent.  Milk  production  in  eastern  Germany also dropped by 22 percent between 1989-1 991 (Scholz 1992). The noticeable reduction in  livestock  numbers was  also  reflected  in  the  three  case  studies (Table 5). The number o f   milk  cows declined from 30 to 60 percent;  and  none o f the  pig breeding and pig and cattle feeding operations in Dedelow  in northern Brandenburg  have been continued.

The  worker-owned corporate  farms  that emerged  from  the  former  LPGs  represent  a new  form  o f collective  farms,  a  hybrid  with characteristics o f   both the past  socialist  economy and the present market economy. Despite t h e  capitalist  market and FRG  intentions at the time o f   German reunification, eastern German agriculturalists  have  used  new  western  legal forms to carry  out old  social(ist) goals.3  Ironically,  the  corporate  farms that  now  dominate agricultural production  in eastern Germany are more democratic and  accountable  than  were t h e  former LPGs, albeit with  substantially fewer agricultural workers. Decision making is democratic  because  the  shareholders  (former  LPG workers) elect their managers and decide how their  farms  should  be  operated.  Before  1990, decision  making  by  workers  was only  nominally  democratic.  Today,  these new farms are accountable to their workers who are accountable,  in  turn,  to  the  market  and  government policies  and  programs.  Workers  who  participate in  decisions are concerned about achieving levels o f   performance that will assure their farm's financial survival. This i s   particularly true of   former LPG  workers who are shareholders in  a  corporate farm  or who rent  their  land  to corporate farms. LPG  reorganization  into corporate farms has also eliminated the old  internal class conflicts between LPG  managers and workers o f   the GDR, but it simultaneously created  new  tensions  between  managers  and workers in a market economy (Szelenyi 1982).

The corporate farm  workers o f   former LPGs differ  significantly  from  the  workers on western-style  industrial farms. The  former  have more direct  incentives  to assure  the financial well-being and survival of their farms:

- (1) They  are  the  decision  makers  because they are the shareholders;
- (2) They try to employ as many former LPG workers as possible;
3. ( 3 ) They are familiar with  one another, having  worked  together  for  many  years, often  more than  20;
- (4) These former farmers  o f the  LPG  land are knowledgeable  about local  physical conditions;
- (5) Many  are  landowners  (via  the  Soviet land  reforms) and  they  rent  their  farmland to the newly recognized farms; and
- (6) They have lived  in  and cared about their communities as long-time residents.

The former-LPG-now-corporate farms o f Dedelow (Figure 1 ), one of the nine cases examined  for  this  study,  illustrate  how  social(ist) principles have persisted within a market economy, even as the number of workers declined  by  45  percent  (Table 5). Before  reunification  one LPG(P) produced the feed for the  four  LPG(T)s engaged  in  producing  milk, raising calves, breeding and fattening pigs, and fattening cattle. All five operations were separate, yet their work and sometimes their investments were coordinated.  For  example,  all five LPGs shared in  the cost o f   the extensive irrigation  system  which  also  distributed  liquid  manure to the fields. Following reunification,  eight separate  corporations  were  formed  from  the five LPGs, yet all continued  working cooperatively  on a  range o f   projects:

- (1) Fifty  workers  cultivated  4,000  ha  (9,884 acres) producing the feed for  the other corporate farms in  the group;
- (2)  Forty-five  workers  milked  2,700 cows;
3. ( 3 ) Thirty  workers raised  calves for the milk production  farm and  worked  2,000  ha (4,942  acres) in  hay  and  other  fodder crops;
- (4) Twenty-five workers  distributed  all  the manure from  the  livestock  farms  onto the cultivated areas and  maintained  the drainage ditches and hedges on all 6,000 ha (1  4,826 acres);
- (5) Twenty  workers  repaired  the  farm  machinery for the other member farms and sold farm machinery to whomever wanted to buy equipment;

- ( 6 ) Ten workers operated a retail store, once associated with the LPGs but today completely  independent;
- (7)  Five workers  ran a hotel and  restaurant in the building once  used to cook  and serve the 340 LPG workers;  and
- (8) Three  workers  operated  a  recreational airport  formerly  used  for  the  airplanes that sprayed the large fields of the LPGs.

In the past, the five LPG managers met each week  to  discuss  farm  and  village  matters;  in the  eight  managers  met once a month to talk  about and,  wherever  possible,  coordinate work for the benefit of all eight corporate

1994, entities  in a market economy.

Of Dedelow's former work force, 45 percent still work on the former LPGs; 20 percent have found new jobs, often away from Dedelow; 15 percent are  unemployed;  and 20  percent receive early retirement payments.  In the newly formed corporations, ex-LPG workers received  shares  proportional  to  their  previous assets. Major shareholders select the new managers  and  can  remove them  by  vote  of the members.  All  of  the  farmland  is  now rented from  both  private  owners  who  have  settled their  land claims with the State and the BVVG (Bodenverwertungsund -verwaltungsgesellschaft, a  branch  of the  TreuhandanstalP-the federal German trust company responsible for selling all GDR dispossessed and collectivized properties)  in  cases  where  property  claims have not been settled.

Dedelow's  LPG  farm  workers  now perform their  old jobs  as  well  a s   new ones.  Consider the tractor  drivers  who once  performed only one function,  even  if  they  waited  for  hours before they had any work to do. Today,  these workers  perform  multiple tasks  resulting  in a greater  variety  of  work, more  responsibility, and the full  utilization of their  abilities  and  of the  work  day.  These  changes  in  their  work routine have improved the welfare of employees,  shareholders,  and farmland  renters,  but it also  means that  they  work  harder and  longer hours  with  less  job  security.  The  new conditions, alas, neither restructure the  capitalist market nor eliminate  labor exploitation.

Corporate farms  and  livestock  often  go  together  in eastern Germany despite the overall decline of livestock  production.  The mix permits farmers  to utilize existing  barns  and animals and to use labor more intensively than in crop production alone.5 The  role of livestock is  apparent  in the case of the Agricola corporate farm  in  Rehmsdorf  (Figure I ) , another of the  nine  cases  examined for  this  study.  Even with  substantial reductions in the work  force, farmland cultivated,  and cows milked, the farm has  continued milk  production  and  it tries  to employ as  many former LPG members as  possible. The farm's  dairy  barns are underutilized, however, because  EU  quotas  limit  the  milk herd to 600 (Table 5). Current workers pooled their financial resources to buy the dairy cows and  barns  from  the  three  liquidated LPG(T)s, thereby  avoiding  the  old  debts  from  these farms.  Unfortunately,  they  could  not  do  the same for their own LPG(P) debts because they had to continue this farm in order to retain their EU  milk quota. On this  newly organized farm, assets  of the  LPG(P) were  divided among the former workers, 80 of whom still work.

Corporate  farms  also  have  adjusted  work schedules  in response to the smaller  number of workers on each farm.  Instead of taking vacations during the summer, the Agricola workers decided not to take their  vacations outside of the three  peak  summer  months. Everyone now performs multiple jobs and they work in the  evenings  and weekends when necessary. Although  activities  are  substantially  reduced now, Agricola continues to use the office, farm, machine buildings,  tractors,  trucks,  and equipment from the former  LPG,  and  it leases 90 percent  of the 4,000 ha (9,884 acres)  that  it cultivates. The 700 leases average just eight ha (20 acres) in size.

The BVVG rents almost 1  .I million cultivated ha (2.7 million acres); 69 percent to farm  corporations, 19 percent to former  LPG  farmers, 6 percent  to  former (1945-1949) large  farm owners, 5 percent  to  newly  arrived  farmers from the West,  and 1 percent to large farmers who had their land confiscated after 1949 (Belognen und Betrogen 1995:133). On average, three to four  leases exist for  every hectare of crop and pasture land in eastern Germany ('lm Zweifel' 1995:85-86). With so much land under lease,  hundreds of land parcels have been traded between individual owners so that parcels could be consolidated spatially to facilitate more  effective  farm  operations. Most  lease agreements  allow  one  party  to  pay  the  rent while another party actually farms the land. Because  the  number  of  land  parcels  is  so  large and the  location  of the  parcels  so  dispersed,

farmers  in an area exchange  land to consolidate  their  operations  without  necessarily  rewriting their leases.  One farmer  consequently cultivates land that another farmer pays rent on and vice versa.

Quite  different from these reorganized  LPG farms. They conduct operations on the basis of a dif- farms are investor-owned  corporate ferent set of principles.  These include:

- (1 )  Maximization of profits for shareholders (who are not the farm workers);
- (2)  Top-down  decision making  with  employee inputs only when managers deem them valuable;
- (3) Ownership  of farm  assets  by absentee investors;
- (4)  Operation of farms by managers; and
- (5)  Field work done by workers who sometimes  lack  attachment  to  the  local  villages and know little of the local physical conditions.

In  eastern  Germany, the usual  investorowned industrial farms differ from those found in the United States.  Although the former  exLPG workers have farmed and lived in  the local area  for  many  years, are  familiar  with  local physical conditions,  and  are attached  to local communities,  they  have less of a stake in the farms  than  do worker-shareholders.  M y  field work on the ABG farm in Bageritz east of Halle (Figure 1 )  illustrates the kind of western-style, investor-owned corporate  farms that have been established in eastern Germany since reunification.  In this  case,  a  large  landowner  in eastern Germany before World War II has reestablished a large-scale  farm with two new large machine  sheds  and  an  ultra-modern  office building.  The  4,600 ha (11,366 acres)-the western half of the former LPG in this area-are being  worked  much  more  extensively  than during the  GDR,  but considerably  less  intensively  than  farmland  in western  Germany.  By specializing  in only a few  crops (sugar beets, wheat,  and oil plants), labor  use is minimized and  the  use  of  newly  acquired  western  machinery  is maximized. The owner has hired a former  LPG manager to operate the new farm and he has a staff of 10 full-time workers:  two office  workers, two  machine  repair  persons, four tractor  operators,  two field foremen,  and five part-time seasonal employees. With so few workers cultivating so much acreage through- out eastern Germany, the average ratio of labor to  land  is  now less than  half of that  found  in western  Germany.  Consequently,  these  large farms have significantly  lower costs of production and higher profitability (Fuchs 1994).

## Rural Landscape Manifestations

## of Reprivatization

In this section,  I  examine  the  responses to the latest reorganization of the rural landscape in eastern Germany brought about by the social power of the State (in this case expressed through the reprivatization  of farmland).  Landscape analysis assumes that space is the container  of social power held by individuals  and by  private  and public institutions. Consequently  "the  reorganization  of space is always a  reorganization  of  the  framework  through which  social  power  is  expressed" (Harvey 1989:225). In eastern Germany, the policies of the FDR government restructured and reorganized agrarian space. These changes are reflected in the numbers,  types,  and  sizes of farms and the numbers and sizes of fields. Although FDR  policies  sought  to  return land to the persons who owned it between 1945 and 1949,  plans for the restoration of a  landscape of small-scale farms and small fields have been thwarted by fifty years of agricultural changes, by field consolidation,  and by removal of field boundaries. The persistence of large-scale corporate  farms  with  large  fields  continues  to reflect GDR collectivization.  To  document the landscape  manifestations  of  reprivatization, I have  drawn  on questionnaire  data  collected from  a  sample of farmers  throughout  eastern Germany;  analyzed topographic  and cadastral maps;  and conducted field work on nine farms or  villages.  The  questionnaires  provide  information on the number of new farms created, their field changes (smaller or larger), the reasons for  these  changes,  and  plans  for  future field changes. Field work  examined field  sizes and densities on specific  farms and villages.

## Farm and Field Changes

Although the German government has collected  detailed  information  on  each  of  the newly formed farms in  eastern  Germany

through its agricultural subsidy and adjustment programs,  these  data  are  available  neither to researchers  nor  to  German  agricultural  institutes.  In 1991, the staff at the federal research institute  for  agriculture  (Bundesforschungsanstalt f u r   Landwirtschaft,  lnstitut f u r   Betriebswirtschaft,  hereafter  called  FAL)  in  Braunschweig (Konig 1992) surveyed 250 LPGs (of a total of 3,969 or 6 percent)  within  a  representative sample of 70 administrative centers for consolidated cooperatives (Kooperation). (The sample was  selected  in conjunction with agriculturalists at universities in Berlin, Halle,  Leipzig,  and Rostock.)  In 1989, the  average  Kooperation consisted of one LPG(P)  and three LPG(T)s and it cultivated 4,500 ha (11,119 acres). The sampled LPGs were found throughout the five new eastern  Lsnder and in all ten physical  regions (Figure 2). Privatization  of this  sample  of 250 LPGs resulted in 728 farm operations;  all were interviewed in early 1991 and again a year later. In 1993, the FAL staff developed another questionnaire  (Isermeyer 1994) that  was  administered to the same farm  sample  in early 1994. The FAL  staff subsequently  entered the questionnaire  responses into a computer database that  provides the  most detailed  and  comprehensive  accounting  of  post-unification  farm and field changes in eastern Germany.

The  FAL  data  have  several  shortcomings, however. First, the FAL was interested  in post1990 microeconomic changes in the structure of  agriculture as eastern  Germany  adjusted from a centrally planned economy to a market economy.  The  institute's  agricultural  economists were not especially interested in the spatial  or  landscape  consequences  of the adjustment process. The questions of most interest to  geographers  were  incidental to  them.  M y geographical  analysis, then, was  necessarily limited in scope.  Second,  although  these data covered 728 farm  operations,  many questions were not answered by all respondents.  Third, the questionnaire failed to specify the meaning of 'field,' nor were respondents  asked  about acreage  changes  in field  sizes.  The  data  are inadequate therefore for documenting the actual field changes in the rural landscape.

Although  the questionnaire did not  ask about  the  different  kinds  of fields,  the  landscape reveals three of these,  each resulting in different patterns (Figure 3): 1 ) The most obvious field form  is delineated  by landscape features  such a s   roads or dirt trails,  rows of trees

Figure 2. The physical regions of eastern Germany and the locations of the farm sample (70) used in the questionnaire survey (Iserrneyer 1994). The last continental glaciation influenced the northern  two-thirds of the region. From the Baltic Sea to the Brandenburg Hills,  glaciers  deposited  ground  and  terminal  moraines  resulting in  a flat  to  rolling topography  with numerous  lakes.  In  the  Middle  Brandenburg Lowlands  extending to the  Elbe  River,  glacial  outwash created  sandy  uplands  with  broad  valleys  that  run east-west. In the  Flaming and  Lausitzer regions,  the erosion of sandy soil has exposed old moraines from previous  glacial  eras, creating  heatherlands.  The Northwest  Loess  Area  and  the  Thuringer  Basin  are fertile plains of loess soils,  called the Btirde, bordered by the Harz Mountains in the north and the Thuringer  Forest and Erzgebirge in the south. The Sachsen Hills  and  the  Erzgebirge  are  forested  uplands,  old mountains that have been eroded and uplifted.

<!-- image -->

or bushes, fences, and drainage ditches. These are called landscape fields. 2) Within these easily identified fields are often found smaller areas of different crops,  cultivated fields. 3) Fields in which  different  crops  are  rotated  from  one year to another in the same cultivated field are called crop rotation fields;  these only exist over time  (Stern 1990). The  most  common  and

Figure 3. Three kinds of fields. Landscape fields are bounded by permanent features such a s   roads, trails, ditches,  hedges,  forests,  and meadows that are delineated on maps. Cultivated fields are found within landscape  fields and are not discernible on GDR and FRC topographic maps and must,  therefore,  be delineated  by  fieldwork.  Crop  rotation  fields  are  set within landscape or cultivated fields,  and their characteristics  can only be determined from farm records or annual fieldwork.

<!-- image -->

most obvious field form is the cultivated field. Farmers  typically  regard  these  areas  as  fields and presumably  this  was  the case  in their  responses to the FAL questionnaire.

Despite  these  shortcomings  of  the  survey, the  data  provided useful  information on the number of new farms that emerged from the former  LPGs; on the presence or absence of field changes; on whether fields became smaller  or  larger;  and on past and future reasons for changing field sizes. In addition, l was able to examine associations between  farm and field size changes and the new legal forms of farms, cropland  acreage, and  regional  locations.

Division of   LPGs into New Farms. Given the biases  of  German  government  policy  toward and the financial incentives for establishing individual and family farms on reprivatized farm- land,  one would expect large numbers of new farms to  have been carved out of the former LPGs.  The  FAL data  show  that  the reverse  is the  case,  however.  Almost  32  percent  of  all farms continued as single operational units;  another 20 percent were divided into two farms; 13 percent were divided into three farms;  and 10 percent into four farms.  In total,  75 percent of all new farms surveyed in eastern Germany resulted from  a subdivision  into four  farms  or less (Figure 4). Farm division also affected field changes.  Generally,  the fewer the subdivisions into new farms,  the less the  number of  field changes,  and conversely  (Figure 4).

The number of new farms created from the former LPGs varied with a province's  past farm structures and environmental conditions. Generally,  LPGs were subdivided into many farms (eight or more) in the three southern Lander of Thuringen,  Sachsen-Anhalt,  and Sachsen (Figure 4). In these  mountainous  areas and in former  small-farm areas, farm divisions often reached ten or more. Fewer farm divisions occurred in the northern  glaciated areas,  which once were the sites of large Junker estates and more recently of very large LPGs. In these areas, Brandenburg had  noticeably  more  farm divisions than its northern neighbor,  Mecklenburg-Vorpommern,  but  most  of  these  were concentrated  in  the  southern  portion of  the province  where  land  and  farming  resembled Sac  hsen's.

Field Changes. The  predominance  of  corporate farms on the former LPGs suggests that cultivated  fields  would  persist  intact.  When farmers  were asked  if they  had  changed  the

Figure 4. The division of LPGs into new farms and changes  in  field  size,  by  Lander,  1990-1994.  The graph  reports the  proportion  of  respondents who changed field sizes, made them larger, or made them smaller  based on the extent of farm  subdivision of the LPGs. Generally, the fewer the farm divisions, the fewer  the changes in field  size and the  smaller the new fields. Conversely, the more the farm divisions, the more changes in the field size and the larger the new  fields.  The  results were  similar  in each of the Lander, except for the more extensive subdivision of the former  LPGs in Sachsen  and  Brandenburg. The shadings in the bargraphs are used  to  differentiate  the number of farm divisions. Sources: lsermeyer (1  994) and calculations based on survey data therein.

<!-- image -->

I

size of their fields since 1990, only 30 percent of the 628 respondents answered yes. In other words,  most farmers  in  the  sample  (and  by extension most in all of eastern Germany) did not change the sizes of their fields.  Nor were changes in field sizes more likely under any of the three legal forms of farms. After  four years of adjusting to the market economy imposed by  the  German  government, most  farmers continued to use the fields established  by the LPGs. The legal and economic restructuring by the German state since  reunification notwithstanding,  the field legacy of the GDR persists.

This  reluctance  to  change  field  sizes arises for two reasons. First almost 70 percent of the cultivated area in eastern Germany was rented. Indeed at the time of the FAL survey, the Truehandanstalt was issuing mostly one-year leases because  of  unresolved  landownership disputes.  Uncertainty thus  has  fostered  stability. Second,  GDR-era  farm  equipment  is  expensive, large,  and  most  efficient  for  cultivating large areas and  large fields.  Given uncertainty in land ownership and the need for extensive cultivation,  most large-scale farmers  continued to use the large fields  created  by collectivization.

Of those  farmers  who  responded  to  the question on field changes, field changes were most frequent in areas where both a large and small number of new farms emerged.  Farmers on either end of the size continuum were most likely  to change fields,  but in opposite  directions.  Generally,  smaller-scale farmers  created larger fields and the large-scale farmers created smaller fields. Statistically, smaller-scale farmers also  changed their  field  sizes  more often  a s they adjusted  their  new operations  to smaller parcels of land;  medium- and large-scale farmers were significantly less likely to change field sizes (Table 6).

These changes in field size varied  regionally along the lines of the farm divisions noted earlier.  Statistically  significant  changes  were  disproportionately  concentrated in the southern, mountainous regions of Sachsen Hills and Erzgebirge and in the northern glacial-lake district of Northeastern Mecklenburg  (Figure 2 and Table 7). Before World War  ll, these two regions were  characterized by small  farms  and  large estates,  respectively.

Field Change Direction. Farmers who changed their  fields  were  also  asked  if these increased or decreased in size. Of the 30 per-

Table 6. Field-Size Changes and Farm Cropland,  1990-1 994.

|               | Field-Size Changes. 1990-1 994 " I   | Field-Size Changes. 1990-1 994 " I   | Field-Size Changes. 1990-1 994 " I   | Field-Size Changes. 1990-1 994 " I   |
|---------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Farm CroDland | Yes                                  | Yes                                  | No                                   | No                                   |
| (hay          | Number                               | Percent                              | Number                               | Percent                              |
| <I01          | 76                                   | 43.2                                 | 232                                  | 56.0                                 |
| 101-500a      | 48                                   | 27.3                                 | 100                                  | 24.2                                 |
| >SO0          | 52                                   | 29.5                                 | 82                                   | 19.8                                 |
| Totalsb       | 176                                  | 100.0                                | 414                                  | 100.0                                |

Notes: aThe equivalents in acres are 247 and 1,235. bPearson Chi-square 9.5, DF 2; Cramer's  V  0.1 2 , significance .0001.

Sources: lsermeyer  (1994) and calculations based on survey data therein.

cent of farmers (188 respondents)  who changed field sizes,  175 also noted the direction  of  field  changes.  Forty-three  percent  of these respondents created larger fields, and 57 percent,  smaller fields.  Unfortunately,  the survey  did not ask  for  precise  figures  (in ha) on the changes in field sizes. Generally speaking, the more the number of new farms (over five) that were formed from an LPG, the more their farmers made larger fields;  note,  however, that a substantial number of  these farmers did make fields  smaller  (Figure 4).  Regionally,  the trend was  toward  smaller  fields in  Northeastern Mecklenburg and in the Sachsen Hills, and toward  larger fields  in the  Middle Brandenburg Lowlands and the Thuringer  Basin-the former having sandy  soils,  the  latter  loess  soils  (Figure  2  and  Table  8).  Moving  from  north  to south, the largest  farms accounted for relatively fewer  and  fewer  of  the  changes  to  smaller fields,  and conversely.  In Northeastern Mecklenburg,  for example,  the farms of 41  percent of  interviewees who  created smaller  fields ranked among the largest in size;  another  41 percent were of middle size.  In Sachsen Hills, by contrast,  60  percent  of  the  farmers  who made  smaller  fields had  the  smallest-sized farms.  The  creation  of  larger  fields  exhibited statistically  significant  differences in  regional pattern. Regardless  of  region, farmers  with smaller-sized  operations  increased  their  field sizes in greater  proportions than  did the largest-sized farms;  small-sized and medium-sized farms increased and decreased their field sizes in about the  same  number;  and almost  all of the large-sized farms decreased field sizes (Table 9).

Because farm  size  and  the  legal  status  of newly  formed  farms  in eastern  Germany  are

Table 7. Field-Size Changes and Physical Regions, 1990-1 994.

|                                                     | Field-Size Changes, 1990-1 994   | Field-Size Changes, 1990-1 994   | Field-Size Changes, 1990-1 994   | Field-Size Changes, 1990-1 994   |
|-----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|
|                                                     | Yes                              | Yes                              | No                               | No                               |
| Physical Regions                                    | Number                           | Percent                          | Number                           | Percent                          |
| 1 . Northeastern Mecklenburg Lakes and Lowlands     | 24                               | 13.0                             | 46                               | 10.4                             |
| 2. Mecklenburg Lakes and Northern Brandenburg Hills | 15                               | 8.1                              | 50                               | 11.3                             |
| lands 3. Middle Brandenburg Low-                    | 17                               | 9.2                              | 53                               | 12.0                             |
| 4. Altmark and Flaming                              | 19                               | 10.3                             | 47                               | 10.6                             |
| 5. Northwest Loess Area                             | 15                               | 8.1                              | 46                               | 10.4                             |
| 6. Eastern Brandenburg and Lausitzer Heatherlands   | 2                                | 1 .I                             | 23                               | 5.2                              |
| 7. Thuringer Basin                                  | 19                               | 10.3                             | 37                               | 8.4                              |
| 8. Thuringer Forest                                 | 19                               | 10.3                             | 58                               | 13.1                             |
| 9. Sachsen Hills                                    | 28                               | 15.1                             | 29                               | 6.5                              |
| 10. Erzgebirge                                      | 27                               | 14.6                             | 54                               | 12.2                             |
| Totalsa                                             | 185                              | 100.0                            | 443                              | 100.0                            |

apearson Chi-square 21.7, DF 9; Cramer's  V  0.18,  significance .0001.

Sources: lsermeyer (1  994) and calculations  based on survey  data therein.

statistically related, field  size increased  on individual and  incorporated farms  and  decreased on corporate farms. Individual farmers created more larger fields than  smaller ones;  incorporated  farmers  created  twice  as  many  smaller fields  as  larger  ones;  and  corporate  farmers essentially created only smaller fields (Table 10). Smaller  fields  often  resulted  when larger  landscape  fields  were  partitioned  into several  cultivated  fields  or  when  privatization restored formerly  cultivated fields to individuals. These newly created fields may have been small for eastern Germany, but they were large by western German standards.

Reasons  for  Changing  Field  Sizes. Farmers who  had  changed  their  field  sizes  provided different reasons for enlarging or reducing field sizes. Of the 43 farmers  who said they changed  fields  because  they  rotated  crops  in one  cultivated  field, 81 percent  made  their fields smaller. O f   the 42 farmers who cited  the loss o f cultivated  cropland  and  pastureland from the former LPGs, 88  percent  made

Table 8. Field-Size Changes (Smaller or Larger) and Physical Regions.

|                                                     | Field-Size Changes, 1990-1 994   | Field-Size Changes, 1990-1 994   | Field-Size Changes, 1990-1 994   | Field-Size Changes, 1990-1 994   |
|-----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|
|                                                     | Smaller Fields                   | Smaller Fields                   | Larger Fields                    | Larger Fields                    |
| Physical Regions                                    | Number                           | Percent                          | Number                           | Percent                          |
| 1 . Northeastern Mecklenburg Lakes and Lowlands     | 21                               | 20.2                             | 3                                | 4.0                              |
| Northern Brandenburg Hills 2. Mecklenburg Lakes and | 3                                | 2.9                              | 9                                | 12.0                             |
| lands 3. Middle Brandenburg Low-                    | 5                                | 4.8                              | 12                               | 16.0                             |
| 4. Altmark and Flaming                              | 15                               | 14.4                             | 6                                | 8.0                              |
| 5. Northwest Loess Area                             | 8                                | 7.7                              | 6                                | 8.0                              |
| 6. Eastern Brandenburg and Lausitzer Heathlands     | 0                                | 0.0                              | 2                                | 2.7                              |
| 7. Thuringer Basin                                  | 7                                | 6.7                              | 12                               | 16.0                             |
| 8. Thuringer Forest                                 | 14                               | 13.5                             | 5                                | 6.7                              |
| 9. Sachsen Hills                                    | 18                               | 17.3                             | 9                                | 12.0                             |
| 10. Erzgebirge                                      | 13                               | 12.5                             | 11                               | 14.7                             |
| Totalsa                                             | 104                              | 100.0                            | 75                               | 100.0                            |

Note: apearson Chi-square 30.3, DF  9; Cramer's  V 0.41, significance .0001. Sources: lserrneyer  (1 994) and calculations  based on survey  data therein.

Table 9. Field-Size Changes (Smaller or Larger) and Farm Cropland,  1990-1 994.

|              | Field-SizeChanges, 1990-1 994   | Field-SizeChanges, 1990-1 994   | Field-SizeChanges, 1990-1 994   | Field-SizeChanges, 1990-1 994   |
|--------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Farm         | Smaller Fields                  | Smaller Fields                  | Larger Fields                   | Larger Fields                   |
| Cropland(ha) | Number                          | Percent                         | Number                          | Percent                         |
| <I 01        | 35                              | 34.0                            | 41                              | 57.7                            |
| 101-500a     | 27                              | 26.2                            | 23                              | 32.4                            |
| >500         | 41                              | 39.8                            | 7                               | 9.9                             |
| Totalsb      | 103                             | 100.0                           | 71                              | 100.0                           |

Notes: aThe equivalents  in acres are 247 and 1,235. bPearson Chi-square 19.6,  DF 2,  Crarner's V  0.33,  sig- nificance  ,0001.

Sources: lsermeyer  (1994) and calculations based on survey data therein.

smaller  fields. Most of  these  farmers  rented their  lands  from  property  owners  who  received their land back after reunification. These  rental lands,  being substantially  smaller than the LPGs,  resulted  in smaller  field  sizes and 'gaps'  in the field  patterns. Of the 40 respondents  who cited  renting  more  land,  90 percent increased their field  sizes.  Of the 32 farmers who made larger fields,  65 percent did so  as  the  result of exchanging parcels of land with individuals who had acquired their  property thanks to the Soviet land reforms. And of the  20  respondents who  cited  adapting field sizes  to  their  field  equipment,  half  enlarged and half reduced their field sizes.

Farmers failed to cite several reasons for field changes that might have been expected.  They made  no  mention  of  changes  due  to  new hedges, ditches, and  roads, or  trails.  These once-common  features of  landscape fields were  largely  eliminated by field  consolidation during collectivization.  After  four years  of reunification,  few  efforts have been made to recreate them. This is consistent with the fact that only 30 percent of the surveyed farm operators changed field sizes,  and of these only 42 percent reduced their field sizes.  In this context, it  i s   unlikely that  many of the pre-1950  landscape features  will reappear.  Very  large fields, in other words,  seem to be a permanent feature of the eastern German countryside.

Farmers  were  also  asked  about  their  plans for  field  sizes over  the next ten years  (to the year  2004).  Farmers  who  had  increased their field  sizes  already  planned  to  increase  them more in the future, while farmers who reduced field  sizes  planned t o  continue  doing so  (Table l l ) .   The plans for future changes thus were

Table 10. Field-Size Changes (Smaller  or Larger) and Legal Forms of Farms, 1990-1 994.

|              | Field-SizeChanges, 1990-1 994   | Field-SizeChanges, 1990-1 994   | Field-SizeChanges, 1990-1 994   | Field-SizeChanges, 1990-1 994   |
|--------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
|              | Smaller Fields                  | Smaller Fields                  | Larger Fields                   | Larger Fields                   |
| Legal Forms  | Number                          | Percent                         | Number                          | Percent                         |
| Individual   | 29                              | 41.5                            | 40                              | 85.1                            |
| Incorporated | 8                               | 11.4                            | 4                               | 8.5                             |
| Corporate    | 33                              | 47.1                            | 3                               | 6.4                             |
| Totalsa      | 70                              | 100.0                           | 47                              | 100.0                           |

Note: apearson Chi-square 24.5, DF 2,  Cramer's  V  0.45, significance  .0001.

Sources: lserrneyer  (1994) and calculations  based on survey data therein.

similar  to their  reasons for past changes.  Farrners who had already increased their field sizes planned  disproportionally to increase  farm acreage,  construct new buildings for livestock, and start ecological farming,  while farmers who had already decreased field sizes planned disproportionally  to  decrease  farm  acreage,  decrease or  eliminate  livestock  production,  and develop cooperative relations with other farmers.

## Field Work Evidence of Field Pattern Changes

I also  examined field  changes  in  the three former LPGs  of  Rehmsdorf, Dedelow, and Hasenholz and the former VEG of Heinersdorf and compared them with rural areas in similar physical (glacial) settings  in northwestern Germany  (Niedersachsen)  and  in  the  northern Midwest of the United States (Wisconsin). The choice  of  cases  was  based  on  professional

Table 11. Field-Size Changes (Smaller  or Larger) as  of 1994 and in the Near  Future.

| Near Future Field   | Field-Size Changes as of 1994   | Field-Size Changes as of 1994   | Field-Size Changes as of 1994   | Field-Size Changes as of 1994   |
|---------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
|                     | Smaller Fields                  | Smaller Fields                  | Larger Fields                   | Larger Fields                   |
| Changes             | Number                          | Percent                         | Number                          | Percent                         |
| Smaller             | 8                               | 47.0                            | 0                               | 0                               |
| Larger              | 9                               | 52.9                            | 27                              | 100.0                           |
| Totalsa             | 17                              | 100.0                           | 27                              | 100.0                           |

Note: apearson Chi-square 15.5, DF 1, Cramer's  V  0.59, significance  ,0001.

Sources:  lsermeyer  (1994) and calculations based on survey data therein.

contacts, availability o f   cadastral  maps,  representativeness  o f   farm types and farming areas, and time  available for research.  The  changing pattern and sizes o f   fields are evident on maps and  field  work.  Topographic  and cadastral maps  at  scales  o f 1:25,000  and  1:10,000  are sufficiently  detailed  to  show  all  roads,  paths, trails, rows o f   trees or hedges, and ditches that defined the visual  borders  o f landscape  fields (what Stern [I  990:61] calls Gelandeschlage) as well as all farmsteads and major buildings. They do  not  show,  however,  the  cultivated  fields; these I  added based  on field work.

The  annual  (1990 through  1994) field  patterns and crop uses on the corporate farm  in Klein  Ziethen,  Brandenburg  serve to  illustrate the  pattern of permanent  (landscape fields) and annual (crop rotation) field divisions. The farm of  1,696 ha  (4,191 acres) consisted  o f   30 landscape  fields, apportioned into 41 cultivated fields  (Table  12). Twenty-two  o f these  cultivated fields were bounded by permanent landscape features, while 19 o f   the cultivated fields were subdivisions o f   the eight other landscape fields.  The  landscape  fields  averaged  57  ha (1  41  acres)  and the smaller cultivated fields averaged 30  ha  (74 acres). The more numerous annual  cultivated (rotated) fields  were  even smaller,  averaging  27  ha  (67 acres) in  19901991 and 23 ha (57 acres) in  1993-1994.  Over the four-year period, the number o f   cultivated fields varied  with  annual crop production  and rotation. A third  to a half  (49 to 35 percent) o f the 30 landscape fields were divided  into two or  more cultivated  areas in  each year save for 1991  - 1  992 when the proportion fell to 19  percent.  Note,  however,  that  individual farmers who  began  farming  in  1990  (either  because they had re-acquired pre-1949 land or because private  owners had  rented  the  land  to  them) did  not divide existing fields,  but  merely took them  over  as  a  whole.  Their  privatized  fields tended to be small, under 15 ha (37 acres).

Changes  in  field  sizes  were  modest  in  the case o f   large-scale farms and more frequent in the case o f   small-scale farms. Table 13 reports the  results  o f   this  comparative-historical  map and  field  analysis.  In  the  eastern  German  examples,  both  the  landscape  fields  and  cultivated fields were counted before and after major  transformational  events, that is,  Soviet land reforms and reunification. The lowest densities of fields-about two  fields  per  section  (640 acres or 259 ha)-and of   landscape fields were found in the former VEG  Heinersdorf and LPGs Rehmsdorf  and  Dedelow. As of   1991, privatization  had  not changed the number o f   Dedelow's landscape  fields, but had slightly increased  the  number  of  cultivated  fields  (Figure  5). I n   southwestern Dedelow,  where several individual farmers had established themselves, the number o f   cultivated fields increased as fields became smaller (Figure 6).

The  Soviet  land  reforms i n the  village  o f Hasenholz  established a large number o f   landscape fields-about as many as in western Germany  and  more  than  in  Emerald, Wisconsin. Collectivization  and  privatization  o f farmland had  little  effect  on  the  density  o f landscape fields because field sizes were sufficiently large for  economical  cultivation  and  because  the wide,  thick  field  hedges planted  by  individual farmers in  the late 1940s are cumbersome and expensive to remove. However,  once hedges had  been  planted  and  cultivated  fields  were consolidated,  their  density  decreased  by  almost a fifth. This pattern  has endured thereafter  during the  CDR  era  and  since  1990 (Table  13). Collectivization  in  Hasenholz  did  not obliterate the hedged  landscape as it  did  elsewhere  in eastern  Germany  where  fences, hedges, and even drainage ditches were mostly eliminated.

The  sample  areas  were  also  examined  for changes in  field  sizes  since  reunification  (Table  14). The  VEG Heinersdorf  and  the  LPGs Rehmsdorf and Dedelow contained the largest proportion o f   large cultivated fields (over 6.5 ha or  160  acres);  indeed,  64  percent  o f all o f Dedelow's  fields  were  in  this  category.  The continuity of  large fields in  this northern estate landscape is  remarkable. Fields that were large initially  were  made  even  larger by  the socialization  o f GDR  agriculture.  These  have  persisted  under  privatization  with  all  its  invisible (legal) small  ownership  parcels.  Similarly,  the small fields  in  Hasenholz  (unusual for  eastern Germany)  have  persisted after  1990.  When compared  to  fields  elsewhere,  eastern  Germany  today  has  a  larger  proportion o f large fields than Wisconsin  or Niedersachsen.

I n sum,  fields,  landscape  borders,  and  in most cases, the sizes and shapes o f   cultivated areas  from  the  GDR  era  have  persisted  after privatization. One  exception is on newly formed private farms (Figure 6). These farmers were especially more likely to cultivate smaller fields because of  the small parcels  returned to

Table 12. Annual Changes in Number and Size of Fields in Klein Ziethen,  1990-1994.

| Field No.   | Field No.   | Sizea   | Number and Size of Fields   | Number and Size of Fields   | Number and Size of Fields   | Number and Size of Fields   |
|-------------|-------------|---------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Landscape   | Cultivated  | (ha)    | 1990/91                     | 1991192                     | 1992/93                     | 1993/94                     |
| 823         |             | 84      |                             |                             | 87                          |                             |
|             | 823a        | 42      | 42                          | 42                          | 42                          | 42                          |
|             | 823b        | 12      | 12                          | 12                          | 12                          | 12                          |
|             | 823c        | 30      | 18, 7, 5                    | 30                          | 33                          | 33                          |
| 824         |             | 50      | 50                          | 50                          | 27, 23                      | 27, 23                      |
| 825         |             | 49      | 22, 27                      | 49                          | 23, 26                      | 49                          |
| 826         |             | 47      | 47                          | 47                          | 53                          | 53                          |
| 827         |             | 58      | 58                          | 58                          | 58                          | 58                          |
| 828         |             | 46      | 46                          | 46                          | 41                          | 26, 15                      |
| 829         |             | 52      | 30, 22                      | 30, 22                      | 13, 22, 8                   | 5, 30, 8                    |
| 830         |             | 35      | 10, 20, 5                   | 35                          | 40                          | 30, 10                      |
| 831         |             | 95      |                             |                             | 110                         |                             |
|             | 831a        | 57      | 37, 20                      | 57                          | 12, 43                      | 12, 30                      |
|             | 831b        | 38      | 38                          | 38                          | 55                          | 13, 25                      |
| 832         |             | 87      |                             |                             | 98                          |                             |
|             | 832a        | 31      | 31                          | 10, 21                      | 21,lO                       | 21,lO                       |
|             | 832b        | 30      | 30                          | 30                          | 40                          | 67                          |
|             | 832c        | 26      | 20, 6                       | 26                          | 9, 18                       | 21                          |
| 833         |             | 54      | 54                          | 54                          | 54                          | 10, 30, 9                   |
| 834         |             | 78      | 78                          | 78                          | 26, 39, 6                   | 26, 39, 6                   |
| 835         |             | 70      |                             |                             | 61                          | 62                          |
|             | 835a        | 14      | 14                          | 14                          | private                     | -                           |
|             | 835b        | 17      | 17                          | 17                          | 17                          | 17                          |
|             | 835c        | 39      | 39                          | 39                          | 44                          | 45                          |
| 836         |             | 75      |                             |                             | 62                          | 45                          |
|             | 836a        | 63      | 55, 8                       | 63                          | 42                          | 14                          |
|             | 836b        | 12      | 12                          | 12                          | 20                          | 23, 8                       |
| 837         |             | 73      | 28, 21, 14, 5, 5            | 49, 14, 10                  | 14, 14, 35, 8               | 5, 14, 40                   |
| 838         |             | 86      | 56, 30                      | 56, 8, 22                   | 58, 8, 12, 14               | 32, 30, 29                  |
| 839         |             | 69      | 25, 34, privateb            | 25, 14, 20                  | 44,12                       | 56                          |
| 840         |             | 56      |                             |                             | 52                          | 47                          |
|             | 840a        | 44      | 44                          | 44                          | 12, 35, 5                   | 13, 34                      |
| 841         | 840b        | 12 30   | privateb                    |                             | 2                           |                             |
|             |             | 65      | 30                          | 19, 11                      | 5, 27,                      | 32, 2                       |
| 842         |             |         |                             |                             | 70                          |                             |
|             | 842a        | 30      | 65                          | 30                          | 40                          | 40                          |
|             | 842b        | 35      | 35                          | 35                          | 30                          | 30                          |
| 843         |             | 36      | 10, 26                      | 26, privateb                | 26                          | 26                          |
| 844 844A    |             | 62 50   | 62                          | 25, 37                      | 4, 17, 50 50                | 7, 13, 29, 22 20, 30        |
| 845         |             | 19      | 19                          | 19                          | 19                          | 19                          |
| 846         |             | 47      |                             |                             | 43                          | 46                          |
|             | 846a        | 24      | 24                          | 24                          | 23                          | 25                          |
|             | 846b        | 23      | 23                          | 23                          | 20                          | 20, 1                       |
| 847         |             | 56      | 18, 19, 19                  | 18, 19, 19                  | 17, 21, 20                  | 17, 11, 6, 19               |
| 848         |             | 16      | 16                          | 16                          | traded land                 |                             |
| 848A        |             | 33      |                             |                             |                             | 31, 2                       |
| 849         |             | 60      | 10. 50                      | 60                          | 12, 44                      | 42, 14                      |
| 850         |             | 58      |                             |                             |                             | 58                          |

Note: 'The  original field sizes sometimes changed over the years.

b"Private"  means that all or a portion of a cultivated  field reverted to an individual farmer.

Source: Author's field work on the Klein Ziethen corporate farm,  September 1994.

them through privatization or  rented to them by  private  landowners. Also, these  farmers often divided large fields into smaller cultivated areas  when  variabilities  in  slope, soils, and drainage were  sufficiently  large  a s   to  impact yields-variations  that had been ignored when worked  by  the LPGs in favor of the  ease of cultivating large areas. After privatization, some farmers created fields in those ecologically homogeneous areas that were large enough to be

Table 13. Field Densities  in Six  Locations.

|                                        | Number of Sectionsa   | Number of Fields   | Number of Fields   | Fields/Sectiona   | Fields/Sectiona   |
|----------------------------------------|-----------------------|--------------------|--------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Year of Map or Field Work and Location | Sampled               | Landscape Fields   | Cultivated Fields  | Landscape Fields  | Cultivated Fields |
| Eastern Germany                        |                       |                    |                    |                   |                   |
| 1984 VEC Heinersdorf                   | 17.5                  | 26                 | 63                 | 1.5               | 3.6               |
| 1988 LPC Rehmsdorf                     | 30.0                  | NSb                | 60                 | NSb               | 2.0               |
| Privatization of Farmland              |                       |                    |                    |                   |                   |
| 1985 LPC Dedelow                       | 38.0                  | 67                 | 57                 | 1.8               | 1.5               |
| 1991 Dedelow                           | 38.0                  | 67                 | 84                 | 1.8               | 2.2               |
| 1994 SW corner o f the former          | 9.0                   | 15                 | 37                 | 1.7               | 4.1               |
| High-Density Hedges                    |                       |                    |                    |                   |                   |
| 1948 Hasenholz (Soviet Land Reforms)   | 2.24                  | 26                 | 106                | 11.6              | 47.3              |
| 1985 LPC Hasenholz                     | 2.0                   | 19                 | 20                 | 9.5               | 10.0              |
| 1994 Hasenholz                         | 2.0                   | 19                 | 20                 | 9.5               | 10.0              |
| Western Germany                        |                       |                    |                    |                   |                   |
| 1994 Uelzen Niedersachen               | 5.75                  | 62                 | 155                | 10.8              | 26.9              |
| Midwest United States                  |                       |                    |                    |                   |                   |
| 1994 Emerald. Wisconsin                | 12.0                  | 86                 | 156                | 7.2               | 13.0              |

Notes: aOne section equals 640 acres or 259 ha.

bNS = not shown on the map.

Source: Author's field work,  September 1994.

cultivated as  fields;  these were created  out of the former  LPG field,  that is,  reverting back to what might have been before collectivization. This  sort  of division  was  most likely  in cases where  several  owners  of  privatized  land decided to farm  the land separately. During collectivization, field paths  were straightened, survey  stone  markers  were  removed,  and  in many areas underground irrigation pipes were laid  out  irrespective  of  property  lines.  To  be sure,  some  post-reunification private  owners wanted  to  cultivate  exactly  the  same  land  as before 1950,  but for  the most part,  cultivated fields remained pretty much as they were during the GDR.

## Concluding Comments: Collective and Capitalist Agriculture

The  analysis  of  collectivized  agriculture  in eastern  Germany  and the subsequent  privatization to capitalist agriculture  raises a number of  perplexing issues with  regard to behaviors that  are  voluntary  or  coerced;  influences that are  direct  or  indirect;  consequences  that  are immediate or long term;  and changes that are fast or slow.

The  problem  with  the  centrally planned economies  had  less  to  do  with  the  public ownership  of  property  than  with  their  undemocratic institutions  for  decision  making. These  impeded  self-management,  decreased efficiency,  and  created  social  inequality.  Planners, state  bureaucrats,  local  managers,  and technocrats  in  the  GDR  monopolized  decisions  and  workers  carried  out  their  orders, often (not surprisingly) with little enthusiasm or effectiveness.

To  assure  compliance  with  state  policies, central planners granted LPG and VEG  managers  authority  over  workers.  Central  planners and  local managers then  used their  power to assure higher salaries, better housing  and health  care,  and  superior  schooling for  their own children. As did the political elites in the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and China,  they substituted their personal preferences for those of  the  larger  society (Konrad  and  Szelenyi 1980). Similarly,  when  capitalist  markets  allocate  resources  and  wealth  and  decisions  on the basis of technical calculations emphasizing

Figure 5. Field patterns in Dedelow,  1985 and 1991. The changing boundaries of landscape fields  (bounded by roads,  trails,  and waste  land) and  cultivated fields  (subdivision within  landscape fields)  between 1985 and 1991 (before and after German reunification) show  that  many of the  large collectivized  landscape fields  have been divided into smaller (yet still large) cultivated fields. The size of one field is indicated: 128 ha or 31  6 acres. Sources: Based on the map, 'LPC Planzenproduction' 1985, and updated through interviews in September 1994.

<!-- image -->

quantitative accounting and profit-making, the opinions  and  welfare  o f workers  are  usually regarded as irrelevant and are largely ignored. Thus whereas markets  have  pitted  individuals against  economic  elites  within  and  between firms,  state  socialist  economies have  subordinated  individuals to political  elites within  firms and the State. In  this  way,  coordinators in  the East  resemble  capitalists  and  managers  in  the

West. In  each case, managers ruled and workers obeyed. Both  systems were (and often still are) fundamentally  hierarchical and  undemocratic.

The emergence o f   capitalism  in  Europe was a  disruptive  process.  Starting  with  the  enclosure laws in sixteenth-century England, millions of peasants  were displaced  from  villages  that had  been  inhabited for  hundreds o f   years.  In

Figure 6. Field patterns in Southwest Dedelow,  1994. In the southwestern part of this former LPG in 1994, new private farmers cultivated smaller fields than did the newly formed corporate farm which essentially continued to cultivate  the  large LPG fields.  The  size  of one field  is  indicated:  89  ha or 220 acres.  Source: Author's  field work,  September  1994.

<!-- image -->

this  process o f   transformation, State  intervention  was  very  much  in  evidence (Goodman, Jorj, and  Wilkinson  1987:156-I  62).  Agrarian capitalism  has continued  the process by eliminating  family  farms  in  all  o f   the  industrialized countries  through  the  invisible hand  o f the market and the direct involvement o f   government  policies.  In the  United  States  since the 1920s,  for  example,  some  50  million  fewer people (about 80 percent) work in agriculture; likewise  in  the  FRG  between  1950 and  1980, 850,000 farms were dissolved  (Grigg 1992:102). Similar farm depopulations have occurred throughout  Western  Europe  (Goodman, Jorj, and Wilkinson 1987:167). But was their exodus voluntary,  or were they pushed or even forced out o f   agriculture (Vogeler 1981:5)? Is  this vast displacement  of family  farmers  in capitalist

Table 14. Field Sizes in Six  Locations.

|                                        |                             | Cultivated Field Sizes         | Cultivated Field Sizes   | Cultivated Field Sizes   | Cultivated Field Sizes   | Cultivated Field Sizes   | Cultivated Field Sizes   |
|----------------------------------------|-----------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
| Year of Map or Field Work and Location | Number of Sectionsa Sampled | Total Cultivated Fields # (YO) | 4 6 ha # (YO)            | 16-32 hab # (YO)         | 33-49 hac # (YO)         | 50-65 had # (YO)         | >65 ha # (Yo)            |
| Eastern Germany                        |                             |                                |                          |                          |                          |                          |                          |
| 1984 VEC Heinersdorf                   | 17.5                        | 63 (100)                       | 3 (5)                    | 9 (14)                   | 11 (17)                  | 12 (19)                  | 28 (45)                  |
| 1988 LPG Rehmsdorf                     | 30.0                        | 115 (100)                      | 33 (29)                  | 19 (16)                  | 7 (6)                    | 17 (15)                  | 39 (34)                  |
| 1948 Hasenholz                         | 2.24                        | 106 (100)                      | 103 (97)                 | 3 (3)                    | -                        | -                        | -                        |
| 1985 LPC Hasenholz                     | 2.0                         | 20 (100)                       | 6 (30)                   | 7 (35)                   | 4 (20)                   | 1 (5)                    | 2 (10)                   |
| 1994 Hasenholz                         | 2.0                         | 20 (100)                       | 6 (30)                   | 7 (35)                   | 4 (20)                   | 1 (5)                    | 2 (10)                   |
| 1991 Dedelow                           | 38.0                        | 84 (100)                       | 1 (1)                    | 8 (10)                   | 8 (10)                   | 13 (15)                  | 54 (64)                  |
| Western Germany                        |                             |                                |                          |                          |                          |                          |                          |
| 1994 Uelzen                            | 5.75                        | 155 (100)                      | 47 (95)                  | 8 (5)                    | -                        | -                        | -                        |
| Midwest United States 1994 Emerald     | 12.0                        | 156 (100)                      | 101 (64)                 | 45 (29)                  | 9 (6)                    | 1 (1)                    | -                        |

Notes: aOne section equals 640 acres, o r 259 ha.

bcdThe  equivalents in acres areb 41 - 8 0 ; ' 81 -1  20; andd 121  -1 60,  respectively.

Source: Author's field work, September 1994.

economies significantly different from the forced collectivization of agriculture in the centrally  planned  economies  of  Eastern  Europe? And  what  are  we  to  make  of  eastern  Germany's  forced rural depopulation through privatization since German unification-from 890,000  rural workers  in 1989 to just 160,000 in 1995 ('Privatbauern'  1995)?

Certainly the State collectivization of agriculture  in  centrally  planned  economies  was  direct, abrupt, and coerced, while the less-visible forces of the market,  government farm policies and programs, and tax codes in the West were indirect, gradual,  and  voluntary.  But  for  individuals and their families,  these distinctions  as to how they were forced out of agriculture are largely insignificant. Yet most farm families, policy makers,  and  scholars  perceive  these  two rural  transformations  as  fundamentally  different-the former  as  undesirable,  the  latter  as inevitable. In the end,  the words and concepts that we use to describe each of these agricultural  restructuring  processes  may  say  more about our  political ideologies than  about their realities. It might be wise to remember,  therefore, that  the  collectivization  of  agriculture, whatever  its deficiencies,  resulted in substantial economic and social gains for most of the farm  population and for the State. To be sure, we are in need of critical  analyses of socialist collective farming.  But analyses that condemn all  aspects  of the  socialist  past,  while  uncritically accepting the capitalist present,  preclude our taking the best of both models and abandoning the worst.

The fundamental transformation  of the eastern  German  rural  economy  and  landscape since German reunification  in 1990 is only the latest in a series of far-reaching changes brought on by the central authority of the State. In the  past fifty  years,  no  less  than  three  distinctive State regimes have imposed profound changes on these rural areas and their patterns of farmland ownership,  field size, and land use. Figure 7 summarizes the trend of field patterns in  eastern  Germany  created  by  the  various State  authorities  in  the  last  fifty  years.  Estate owners and large farmers cultivated large fields until the end of World War I I . The Soviet  occupation of eastern Germany after the war divided these farms and fields into many smaller units.  Under  the  GDR  collectivization  combined farms and fields and simplified  field patterns  again.  Finally,  privatization after  German reunification  re-entitled  the  many  owners  of the  land  during the  Soviet  era,  yet  farmland continued to be worked by large farms  using large fields.  In our hypothetical case (Figure 7), one Soviet-era  owner  worked  his  parcel and five other owners rented their parcels to a cor-

corporate farm new farmers

Figure 7. Changing field  patterns  in Eastern  Germany, 1930s-1990s. This  hypothetical diagram  depicts  the typical changes in the numbers and types of farm owners and the number of cultivated fields in eastern Germany in each of the transformational  eras from the 1930s to the 1990s.

<!-- image -->

porate farm which worked the five holdings in t wo  fields  because  the  private  farmer's  land divided the old collectivized field.

The farm economy of eastern Germany currently consists  of three complex  geographies: one of  land  ownership  parcels;  a  second  of farmland rental agreements; and a third of cultivated fields. Although the boundaries of these geographies occasionally coincide,  they usually do  not.  Corporate  farms  in  particular  have tended to preserve the field sizes and shapes established  during collectivization, albeit  with less land  under  cultivation  than  during  the GDR. Ironically,  the prevailing  pattern o f small farmland  ownership  represents  a  legacy  created  during  the  (communist)  Soviet  era  and subsequently  legalized  by the (capitalist) German  government.  But  the  resulting  cadastral map is largely invisible  on the landscape; correspondingly  small  field  sizes  simply  did not re-emerge in large  numbers.  Equally  ironic  is that  private ownership of land has  reinforced the  landscape  consequences  of  collectivization.  These  will  persist  for  the  simple  reason that  large-scale farm  operations  and large field sizes are well suited to industrial capitalist agriculture. Indeed,  the  extensive  but  profitable system of land use in eastern Germany increas- ingly  poses a threat  to the  economic  viability of the  intensive  small family  farms  in western Germany. In the end, the vanquished might yet triumph!

## Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the Office of University  Research,  University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire, while  I  was  on sabbatical. In Germany  I  worked  at three institutes. 1 ) lnstitut f u r Betriebswirtschaft, Bundesforschungsanstalt  fur  Landwirtschaft, Braunschweig-Voikenrode  (FAL).  Folkhard  Isermeyer,  director,  invited me to work with the institute;  Hilmar Frhr.  von  Munchhausen  explained  the  rationale  of and the  questions  on the  survey;  Bernard Forstner clarified German agricultural statistics and definitions. 2) Zentrum fur Agrarlandschafis-  und  Landnutzungsforschung,  Muncheberg (ZALF). Armin Werner,  director  of  the  lnstitut  fur  landnutzungssystem,  encouraged  my  research.  Helpful  individuals  at  this institute were Andreas Meyer-Aurich,  Holger Pfeffer, and Reinhold Roth. At the lnstitut f u r  Soziookonomie, also at ZALF,  Harald Kachele was particularly helpful. 3) ZALF research station in Dedelow, where G. Kuhn assisted my research. Of the many farmers and farm managers who  took  time  to  discuss  the  changing farm  structure  in eastern Germany,  I  want especially to thank  Rasmus Reinhardt  and  Rolf Schmidtke.  Finally,  I want  to  thank  my two German  colleagues who welcomed me into their homes and shared their

farm expertise with me: Theodor Bergmann  in Stuttgart and Walter  Roubitschek in Halle.

In preparing the final version of this paper, Walter Roubitschek  made  very  detailed  and  critical  comments;  and three anonymous referees  provided insightful suggestions. Thanks for their help.

## Notes

1. No data are  available on the  number  of owners by era;  hence, Table 1 shows only the number of farms.
2. These small farm  plots did not persist after 1945 because farmers died during the war,  migrated to the  growing industrial cities,  or  sold of f their  insufficient parcels. They therefore do not appear in Table 1.
3. Evidence is now emerging that some LPG managers actually pursued their own self interest by dramatically undervaluing farm assets,  falsifying information,  unnecessarily  liquidating farms,  and then creating new ones under their control. For specific examples,  see  Belogen und Betrogen (1  995:132143).
4. In December 1994 the German government dissolved  the  Jreuhandansalt;  the  BVVG continues the  unfinished  business  of  returning  and  selling the remaining GDR properties (both rural and urban).
5. Individual  farms and partnerships (especially those established with Western European, often Dutch, and German capital) primarily raise crops in order to maximize the usage of newly acquired capitalintensive machinery and to minimize labor inputs.

## References

- AID-lnformationen f u r die Agrarberatung. 1992. (AID). Volume 41,  No.  39. Bonn: Auswertungsund lnformationsdienst fur  Ernahrung, Landwirtschaft un Forsten.
- . 1993. Volume 42, No. 2. Bonn: Auswertungsund lnformationsdienst fur  Ernahrung, Landwirtschaft un Forsten.
- . 1994. Volume 2, No. 7. Bonn:  Auswertungsund lnformationsdienst fur  Ernahrung, Landwirtschaft un Forsten.
- Auerbach,  L. 1960. Sozialrevolution auf dem Lande: Politische  Hintergrunde  und  soziologische  Bedeutung  der  sowjetzonalen  Kollektiverierung. Politische Studen 11  :314-319.
- Barth,  L. , ed. 1966. Unsere Deutsche Demokratische Republik. Geographie ftir die 5. Klasse. Dresden: Grafischer GroBbetrieb Volkerfreundschaft.
- Bell,  W. 1992. Enteignungen in der  Landwirtschafi der DDR nach 1949 und deren politische Hintergrunde,  Heft 41  3. Munster-Hiltrup:  Landwirtsc haftsverlag.
- Belogen und Betrogen. 1995. Der Spiegel 24:132143.
- Benthien, B. 1963. Karten zur Entwicklungsgeschichte  des  Vollgenossenschaftlichen Dorfes Stresow (Kreis Greifswald). Geographische Berichte 26:l-9.

Bergmann, T. 1  992a. Zwangsprivatisierung. Sozialismus 5:16-20.

- . 1992b. The  Re-Privatization of  Farming  in Eastern Germany. Sociologia Ruralis 32:305-316. - . 1994. Personal interview. Professor Emeriti of Comparative Economics, Hohenheim University, Stuttgart. October 14, 1994.
- Bundesminister fur  Ernahrung, Landwirtschaft  und Forsten  (BML). 1992a. Agrarwirtschaft  in  den neuen Bundesl&amp;~dern. 1992. Bonn: Bundesminister fur Ernahrung,  Landwirtschaft und Forsten.

- .

199213. Situation  der  Agrarwirtschaft  in den neuen Bundeslandern. 1992. Bonn: Bundesminister fur  Ernahrung,  Landwirtschaft  und Forsten.
2. Bonn,  Moskau  und die Suche  nach  der  Wahrheit. 1994. Frankfurter  Allgemeine  Zeitung.  August 31:1, 5.
3. Cloke,  P . , and Goodwin, M. 1992. Conceptualizing Countryside Change: From Post-Fordism to Rural Structured Coherence.  Transactions of the fnstitute o f   British  Geographers, n.s.  17:321-336.
4. Corson,  M.,  and  Minghi, J. 1994. Reunification of Partitioned Nation-States: Theory  versus  Reality in Vietnam  and Germany. Journal of Geography 93:125-131.
5. Dabbert,  S. 1991. Die  Ostdeutsche  Landwirtschaft unter  EG-Bedingungen.  Band 4. Frankfurt  am Main: Landwirtschaftliche Rentenbank.
6. Diercke Weltatlas. 1991. Braunschweig: Westermann Schulverlag.
7. Feddersen, D. 1991. GDR  Emigres  and  Property Rights.  German Politics and Society 23:47-61.
8. Francisco, R. 1979. Agricultural  Collectivization in the German Democratic Republic. In The Political Economy of Collectivized  Agriculture, ed. Ronald A.  Francisco, Betty A.  Laird,  and Roy  D. Laird,  pp. 63-85. New York:  Pergamon Press.
9. Fuchs,  C. 1994. Personal interview.  Department of Agricultural  Economics,  Hohenheim  University, Stuttgart. October 15.
10. Gade, H. 1957. Die  landwirtschaftlichen  Produktionsgenossenschaften  in der  sowjetischen Besatzungszone. Vierteljahreshefte zur Wirtschaftsforschung 3:321-399.
11. Goodman, D.,  Jorj, B.,  and Wilkinson, J.  1987. From Farming  to Biotechnology.  New York: Basil Blackwell.
12. Grigg, D. 1992. The Transformation of Agriculture in the West. Oxford:  Basil Blackwell.
13. Harris, C. 1991. Unification  of  Germany  in 1990. Geographical Review 81:170-182.
14. Harvey, D. 1989. The Conditions of Postmodernity. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

- Henrichsmeyer,  W.,  and Schmidt, K.  1991.  Die Integration der Landwirtschaft  der neuen Bundeslander  in den europaischen Agrarmarkt.  Agrarwirtschaft,  Sonderheft 129.
- Heuer,  A.  1973.  Landwirtschaft und Wirtschaftsordnung, Heft 4. Braunschweig: Westermann Verlag.
- 'Im Zweifel.'  1995.  Im  Zweifel  Gibt's  Druck.  Der Spiegel 25:84-86.
- Isermeyer, F . 1994.  Questionnaire  called Agrarstruktureller  Wandel in den  neuen Bundeslandern. Braunschweig-Volkenrode: Bundesforschungsanstalt fur  Landwirtschaft (FAL).
- Kohl, H.,  Marcinek, J., and Nitz, B.  1986.  Geography of the German Democratic Republic. Gotha: VEB Herman Haack.
- Kohl,  H.,  Jacob, G.,  Kramm,  H. I., Roubitschek,  W., and Schmidt-Renner, G.  1970.  Okonomische Geographie der Deutschen Demokratischen Republik. Leipzig:  Herman Haack.
- Konig,  W.  1992.  Betriebswirtschaftliche und agrarstrukturelle Veranderungen der Landwirtschaft  in den funf neuen Bundeslandern.  BraunschweigVolkenrode:  Bundesforschungsanstalt  fur  Landwirtschaft (FAL).
- Konrad,  G.,  and Szelenyi, I. 1980.  The lntellectuals on the Road  to Class Power. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich.
- 'LPG  Planzenproduction.' 1985.  LPG Planzenproduction  'VlN.  Parteitag'  Dedelow. (map) Berlin: Akademie der Landwirtschaftswissenschaften der DDR.
- Muller,  K.  1975.  Die mitteldeutsche Landwirtschaft, 1945-1974. Berlin: Dietrich Muller Verlagsbuchhandlung.
- 'Privatbauern.'  1995.  Privatbauern wollen Bundestagsauschul3. Mittledeutsche Zeitung  July 22:5.
- Roubitschek, W.  1993.  Zum Strukturwandel der ostdeutschen Landwirtschaft. Osterreich in Geschichte und literatur 37:32-43.
- Rugg, D.  1971.  Aspects of Change in the Landscape of East-Central  and Southeastern Europe. In Eastern  Europe:  Essays  in  Geographical  Problems, ed. George W. Hoffman,  pp. 83-100.  New York: Praeger Publishers.
- . 1985.  Eastern Europe. New York: Longman.
- . 1986.  German Democratic Republic. In Inter-
- national Handbook on Land Use Planning,  ed. Nicholas  N.  Patricios,  pp.  351  -389. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press.
- Scholz, H.  1992.  Lage  der  Landwirtschaft  in  den neuen  Bundeslandern.  Berichte  uber  Landwirtschaft 70:161-173.
- Statistisches Jahrbuch der DDR.  1982.  Berlin: Staatsverlag der DDR.
- Stern,  K.  1990.  Wirkung der GroBbewirtschaftung in der  DDR  auf  Flora, Fauna  und Boden.  Berlin: Duncker &amp; Humblot.
- 'Studie zur Altschuldenproblematik.' 1992.  Studie zur Altschuldenproblematik in ausgewahlten Agrarunternehmen Sachsen-Anhalts. Groningen:  lnteressengemeinschaft  zur Entlastung von Altschulden  in  landwirtschaftlichen  Unternehmen.
- Szelenyi, I. 1982.  The Intelligentsia in  the Class Structure  of State-Socialist Societies. Marxist Inquiries 88:287-326.
- Tuathail, G., and Luke, T. 1994.  Present  at the (Dis)integration: Deterritorialization  and  Reterritorialization  in the  New Wor(l)d Order. Annals of the  Association of American  Geographers 84:381-398.
- Vogeler, I. 1981.  The Myth of the Family Farm:  Agribusiness Dominance of U.S. Agriculture.  Boulder,  Colorado: Westview  Press.
- Volgyes, I. 1980.  Economic Aspects  of Rural Transformation  in Eastern Europe. In  The  Process of Rural Transformation: Eastern Europe, Latin America, and  Australia,  ed. Ivan Volgyes,  Richard E. Lonsdale,  and  William  P . Avery,  pp. 89-127. New York: Pergamon Press.
- Wadekin,  K.-E.  1982.  Agrarian  Policies in Communist  Europe: A Critical Introduction. Totowa,  New Jersey: Allanheld,  Osrnun Publishers.
- Whittlesey,  D.  1935.  The Impress of Effective Central Authority upon the Landscape. Annals of the Association of  American Geographers 25:85-97.
- Zimpelmann,  U.  1991.  Probleme der Kreditvergabe an die Landwirtschaft. Politische Studien 42:284289.

Submitted 5/95; Revised l0/95, 11/95; Accepted 12/95.

Vogeler,  Ingolf. 1996. State Hegemony in Transforming the Rural Landscapes  of Eastern Germany: 1945-1 994. Annals of  the Association of American Geographers 86(3):432-458.  Abstract.

The West  German state  has transformed the  collectivized agriculture  of the  former  German Democratic  Republic  (GDR) since  reunification in 1990.  The  government's  reprivatization of land,  based on Soviet land reforms during their World-War-I1 occupation of eastern Germany, has  required  GDR  cooperative  farms  (LPGs)  to  reorganize themselves or  be dissolved  and encouraged  the  establishment  of  individual  private  farms.  These  hegernonic  changes  have

I

transformed the  rural landscapes in eastern Germany,  adding new farms,  re-establishing  previous  farms,  abandoning cooperative  farm  buildings,  and  resulting  in  smaller  fields.  Yet,  the landscape impress of earlier State hegemonies persists. The centrally planned economy  of the GDR gradually consolidated individual farms and fields (which had been largely established by the Soviets in the northern half of the GDR) and added barns,  apartments, and social services to the villages. Reprivatization  has produced profound changes in land use, farm management, and farmland ownership changes,  yet the large-scale corporate farms that now dominate agricultural production continue to work the large formerly collectivized fields.  Despite the privatization  of farmland  and farming,  the GDR's  imprint on the landscape in eastern Germany  is likely to continue. The efficiency of these new corporate farms threatens the small-scale farms in western Germany. Key Words: collective agriculture,  eastern Germany, farmland privatization, field patterns,  German Democratic Republic, landscape transformations, State hegemony.

Correspondence:  Department of Geography,  University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire,  Eau  Claire, Wisconsin.  54702-4004.