<!-- image -->

## Geographical Review

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/utgr20

## A LIFE-STAGE APPROACH FOR DECOMPOSING SPATIOTEMPORAL POPULATION CHANGES ALONG AN URBAN-RURAL GRADIENT: IMPLICATIONS FOR REGIONAL PLANNING

## Mikel Gurrutxaga

To cite this article: Mikel Gurrutxaga (2021): A LIFE-STAGE APPROACH FOR DECOMPOSING SPATIOTEMPORAL POPULATION CHANGES ALONG AN URBAN-RURAL GRADIENT: IMPLICATIONS FOR REGIONAL PLANNING, Geographical Review, DOI: 10.1080/00167428.2021.1906669

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00167428.2021.1906669

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 14 Apr 2021.

Submit your article to this journal C

Article views: 103

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## A LIFE-STAGE APPROACH FOR DECOMPOSING SPATIOTEMPORAL POPULATION CHANGES ALONG AN URBAN-RURAL GRADIENT: IMPLICATIONS FOR REGIONAL PLANNING

MIKEL GURRUTXAGA

ABSTRACT. The study of population changes across space and time of cohorts at different life  stages  is  relevant  for  regional  planning,  but  it  is  often  not  taken  into  account.  We focus  on  a  case  study  along  the  urban-rural  gradient  of  continental  Spain  from 2002 to 2017 at  a  municipal  scale.  Making  use of  longitudinal  data  from the  municipal registers, we  studied  changes  in  total  population  and  three  birth  cohorts:  the  cohort  joining  the workforce, the cohort at a mature working age and the cohort reaching retirement during the  study  period.  The  results  showed  key  spatiotemporal  population  variations.  The absolute population increased in 36 % of the municipalities, but at least one of the study cohorts showed an increase in 75 % of the municipalities. While the cohort joining workforce  tended  to  concentrate  in  urban  and  suburban  areas,  the  retiring  cohort  tended  to move to small suburban and rural municipalities. In the next decades the retirement of large  birth  cohorts  in  Spain  will  be  a  relevant  issue  for  planning.  This  methodological approach allows us to understand life cycle residential movements across urban, suburban and rural areas and better enables spatial planning decisions. The method can be applied to  other  study  areas  at  different  spatial  and  temporal  scales. Keywords: population, birth cohort,  life  course,  life  stage,  urban,  suburban,  rural,  regional  planning,  spatial  planning, Spain.

T he change in population volumes across space and time is a relevant variable in relation to spatial planning for housing, services, and transportation (Singleton  and  Spielman 2014 ;  Lee  et  al. 2016 ;  Barcus  and  Halfacree 2017 ).  In  the  last decades, numerous areas in Western countries have shown a population decrease caused  by  negative  natural  population  balance  (more  deaths  than  births)  and a  negative  total  net  migration  rate  (taking  into  account  both  internal  and international  migrations)  due  to  migrations  of  individuals  to  other  areas  in search  of  work  opportunities  after  a  decline  in  the  labor  market  (MartinezFernandez et al. 2016 ;  Salvati 2019 ;  Sobotka and Fürnkranz-Prskawetz 2020 ).  At the  same  time,  other  areas  have  seen  their  population  increase  significantly. Thus, demographic trends vary between different areas with opposite population trajectories  (Martinez-Fernandez  et  al. 2016 ;  Batunova  and  Gunko 2018 ;  GrosBalthazard and Talandier 2020 ).

The change in total population is the most common indicator used to assess population changes in a territory at different spatial scales (Martinez-Fernandez et  al. 2016 ;  United  Nations 2019 ).  The  change  in  total  population  in  an  area

MIKEL GURRUTXAGA,  Department  of  Geography,  University  of  the  Basque  Country  (UPV/EHU), Vitoria-Gasteiz,  Spain 01006 ;  [mikel.gurrutxaga@ehu.eus].

2

within a specific period depends on the sum between the natural balance (births minus deaths) and the net migration rate throughout the study period (Dax and Fischer 2018 ; Salvati 2019 ; Segers et al. 2020 ). In the current context of globalization  of  the  workforce,  in  aging  societies  with  low  fertility  rates  of  Western countries,  the  net  migration  rate  could  be  a  significant  factor  when  compared to the natural balance rate in total population dynamics (United Nations 2019 ). Total net migration rates across space and time will depend not only on internal migration flows, but also on international migration flows (Martinez-Fernandez et  al. 2016 ;  Salvati 2019 ;  Sobotka  and  Fürnkranz-Prskawetz 2020 )  and  on  those policies  regulating  them  (Ueffing  et  al. 2015 ).  Nevertheless,  the  study  of  total population  changes  in  different  locations  does  not  take  into  account  certain spatiotemporal demographic changes useful for regional planning, such as specific typologies for housing and priority services for different birth cohorts with distinct size (Andrews et al. 2009 ;  Gibler et al. 2009 ;  Lee et al. 2016 ;  Barcus and Halfacree 2017 ).

In order to more precisely understand population changes in the territory and  identify  how  these  changes  influence  spatial  planning,  it  is  useful  to decompose  the  changes  in  population  according  to  different  generations  or birth cohorts. Each generation reacts differently to economic, labor, and social changes  across  time,  as  well  as  to  different  life  events  throughout  life-course stages. This translates into different spatial distribution patterns of the cohorts across space and time (Plane et al. 2005 ; Howley 2009 ; Bernard et al. 2014 ; Tang and  Feng 2015 ;  McKee  et  al. 2017 ;  Sabater  et  al. 2017 ;  Damhuis  et  al. 2019 ; Coulter  et  al. 2020 ).  The  spatiotemporal  evolution  of  a  birth  cohort  within a given space and time depends on the sum between the number of deaths and the  net  migration  rate  specific  to  said  cohort  throughout  the  study  period. Official  data  sources,  such  as  the  annual  municipal  registers  and  local  area population  censuses,  provide  reliable  longitudinal  data  in  order  to  analyze  in detail spatiotemporal population changes by birth cohorts (Sabater et al. 2017 ; Kooiman et al. 2018 ).

Spain represents an interesting case study for the detailed analysis of recent changes in spatial distribution of different cohorts and the subsequent effect on spatial planning. In the whole of Spain, the net migration rate between 2002 and 2017 was of 4 . 5 million people, which includes labor migrations and retirement migrations,  while  the  natural  balance  reached  only 1 million  (INE 2018 ).  In Spain,  similar  to  other  Western  countries,  cohorts  who  have  recently  joined the labor force face, to a greater extent than the previous generation, economic uncertainty and diminished access to housing (McKee et al. 2017 ;  Coulter et al. 2020 ;  Cuervo  and  Cook 2020 ).  For  this  reason,  it  is  necessary  to  make  the distinction  between  the  cohort  who  has  only  recently  joined  the  labor  force and  the  cohort  of  a  more  mature  working  age  in  recent  years.  In  addition,  an analysis of the spatial  changes in the cohort who has reached retirement age is necessary, given that previous studies in other countries indicate that this cohort

tends to move to less populated areas during that phase of their life (Lee et al. 2016 ;  Sabater et al. 2017 ).

In  recent  decades,  countries  in  the  south  of  Europe  have  experienced a  transition  from  traditionally  compact  urban  areas  to  polycentric  and  less dense  suburban  and  urban  areas  (Salvati 2014 ;  Rubiera-Morollón  et  al. 2016 ). The Spanish urban-rural gradient has displayed very different demographic and socioeconomic characteristics with many rural areas experiencing an important loss in economic activity, population, and services. The population has concentrated  in  certain  urban,  suburban,  and  coastal  areas  with  a  more  dynamic economy,  while  many  inland  rural  areas  and  some  old  industrial  and  mining cities  have  suffered  a  demographic  decline  (Buciega  et  al. 2009 ;  Collantes  et  al. 2014 ;  Serra et al. 2014 ;  Molinero 2019 ).

The rural-urban gradient case study in continental Spain serves as the basis for this  research,  with  the  goal  to  identify  changes  in  the  population  at  a  municipal scale particularly in relation to the spatial behavior of different birth cohorts across time and to detect the implications these changes have for spatial  planning. The aim is to obtain an accurate view of the changes of the overall population and the population by birth cohorts at  different  life  stages  throughout  a  study  period,  in terms  of  number  of  inhabitants  and  number  of  municipalities  with  different typologies of change. The evolution of the following population groups is examined at  a  municipal  level:  absolute  population,  which  is  a  common  data  point  for  the analysis  of  population  evolution;  the  birth  cohort  of  individuals  who  have  only recently reached the age to join the work force during the study period (also called young, working-age cohort); the birth cohort of individuals who have remained at a  mature  working  age  during  the  study  period  (also  called  mature  working-age cohort); and the cohort of individuals who have reached retirement age during the study period (also called retirement cohort).

## METHODS

## DATA

Demographic data was obtained from the Spanish Continuous Municipal Register of the Spanish Statistical Office (INE), which indicates each municipality's official population by age on January 1 st  of  each year. The INE is an official and reliable source, however the data is not always precise because in some cases migrants take time  to  register  in  their  new  place  of  residence  and  inform  their  previous  local registry. The three birth cohorts for the study were obtained by combining the year of the registry and the age of the registered inhabitants.

## STUDY  AREA  AND  URBAN-RURAL  GRADIENT

The  area  of  this  case  study  comprises  continental  Spain  (Iberian  Peninsula, Southwest  Europe),  yielding 47 provinces  (Figure 1 ).  In  the  study  area,  we

4

FIG. 1 -Map of the study area.

<!-- image -->

worked  with  complete  longitudinal  population  data  for 7 , 914 of  the  municipalities,  with a total population of 43 . 12 million inhabitants in 2017 (INE 2018 ).

Municipalities were ranked by demographic size and distance to urban centers to classify them along an urban-rural gradient. The population-size-based classification of municipalities varies from one country to another and may even vary from one official body to another within the same country. In the case of this study, the criterion used was based on the same one established by Spanish law 45 / 2007 for the sustainable development of the rural environment, which categorizes municipalities with more than 30 , 000 inhabitants as urban and with less than 30 , 000 inhabitants as nonurban.  This  law  seeks  to  establish  measures  to  improve  the  socioeconomic situation of the nonurban population and improve access to quality services. Four types of municipalities were isolated as a function of their absolute population size in 2017 :  urban  (more  than 30 , 000 inhabitants),  large  ( 10 , 000 -30 , 000 inhabitants), medium-sized ( 2 , 000 -10 , 000 ), and small (less than 2 , 000 ) (Figure 1 ). Municipalities thus categorized according to population size were then further classified in terms of their distance from urban municipalities (Salvati 2014 ). Two categories of nonurban municipalities  were  used,  calculated  by  GIS  from  the  urban  municipalities:  suburban (less than 20 km) and rural (more than 20 km). By combining demographic size  with  distance  from  urban  municipalities  we  obtained  an  urban-rural  spatial gradient consisting of seven municipality classes.

## PERIOD  OF  STUDY

The  period  of  study  selected, 2002 -2017 ,  comprises 15 years  during  which important  demographic  changes  took  place  in  the  study  area.  Between 2002 and 2017 ,  the  absolute  population  registered  in  continental  Spain  increased  by 10 . 8 percent or the equivalent to 4 . 2 million inhabitants (INE 2018 ). The natural balance of the population (difference between the number of births and deaths) was positive between 2002 and 2014 and negative from 2015 (INE 2018 ).

## STUDY  BIRTH  COHORTS  AND  POPULATION  CHANGE  TYPOLOGIES

The  percentage  of  change  in  the  population  in  each  municipality  during  the study period was calculated based on the following population groups: absolute population;  the  birth  cohort  of  individuals  born  between 1973 and 1992 ,  who reached employment age during the study period and gained access to their first occupations  in  the  labor  market  (aged  between 25 and 44 in 2017 )-this  range was selected for this concrete case study of Spain (on average, young people take longer  to  enter  the  labor  market  and  do  so  with  less  stability  in  Spain  than  in other  developed  countries)  (Wölfl 2013 )- the  birth  cohort  of  individuals  born between 1953 and 1972 ,  comprising  individuals  that  have  remained  at  a  mature working age during the study period (aged between 45 and 64 in 2017 );  and the birth cohort of individuals born between 1943 and 1952 ,  who reached retirement age during the study period (aged between 65 and 74 in 2017 ).

The  number  of  inhabitants  and  their  percent  variation  during  the  study period  of  the  four  population  groups  were  calculated  in  each  of  the  seven municipality  classes  within  the  urban-rural  spatial  gradient.  Also,  the  number and  percentage  of  municipalities  which  experienced  an  increase  or  decrease  in their  absolute  population  was  analyzed,  resulting  in  two  population  change typologies.  In  addition,  the  analysis  included  the  number  and  percentage  of municipalities of each class of the urban-rural gradient in which the population of  the  study  birth  cohorts  increased  or  decreased  during  the  study  period, resulting in another eight population change typologies.

## RESULTS  AND  DISCUSSION

The young, working-age cohort born in 1973 -1992 and the mature working-age cohort born in 1953 -1972 are similar in overall size and contain the largest birth cohorts in the study area population pyramid (Table 1 and Figure 2 ). The cohort born  in 1973 -1992 grew  in  size  by 14 . 8 percent  in 2002 -2017 due  to  a  notably positive  migratory  balance.  The  variation  of  the  cohort  born  in 1953 -1972 was 2 . 1 percent  and  of  the  cohort  born  in 1943 -1952 was  5 . 3 percent  in  the  study period (Table 1 ). The cohort born in 1973 -1992 tended to move to suburban and urban areas. The cohort born in 1943 -1952 tended to move to medium-sized and small suburban and small rural municipalities (Table 1 and Figure 3 ).

6

TABLE 1 -NUMBER OF INHABITANTS OF THE TOTAL POPULATION AND THE STUDY BIRTH COHORTS IN EACH CLASS OF  MUNICIPALITIES  ALONG  THE  URBAN-RURAL  GRADIENT  IN 2017 ,  FURTHER  INDICATING  POPULATION  CHANGE (PERCENT) FROM 2002 TO 2017

|                   | POPULATION IN 2017 ( PERCENT POPULATION CHANGE IN 2002 - 2017 )   | POPULATION IN 2017 ( PERCENT POPULATION CHANGE IN 2002 - 2017 )   | POPULATION IN 2017 ( PERCENT POPULATION CHANGE IN 2002 - 2017 )   | POPULATION IN 2017 ( PERCENT POPULATION CHANGE IN 2002 - 2017 )   | POPULATION IN 2017 ( PERCENT POPULATION CHANGE IN 2002 - 2017 )   | POPULATION IN 2017 ( PERCENT POPULATION CHANGE IN 2002 - 2017 )   | POPULATION IN 2017 ( PERCENT POPULATION CHANGE IN 2002 - 2017 )   | POPULATION IN 2017 ( PERCENT POPULATION CHANGE IN 2002 - 2017 )   |
|-------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                   | CLASSES OF MUNICIPALITIES ALONG THE                               | CLASSES OF MUNICIPALITIES ALONG THE                               | CLASSES OF MUNICIPALITIES ALONG THE                               | CLASSES OF MUNICIPALITIES ALONG THE                               |                                                                   |                                                                   |                                                                   |                                                                   |
|                   |                                                                   | SUBURBAN                                                          | SUBURBAN                                                          | SUBURBAN                                                          | RURAL                                                             | RURAL                                                             | RURAL                                                             |                                                                   |
| POPULATION GROUP  | URBAN                                                             | LARGE                                                             | MEDIUM                                                            | SMALL                                                             | LARGE                                                             | MEDIUM                                                            | SMALL                                                             | TOTAL                                                             |
| Total             | 26 , 085 , 163                                                    | 7 , 521 , 258                                                     | 1 , 432 , 643                                                     | 806 , 196                                                         | 3 , 989 , 880                                                     | 1 , 535 , 576                                                     | 1 , 749 , 980                                                     | 43 , 120 , 696                                                    |
| population        | ( 10 . 0 )                                                        | ( 26 . 4 )                                                        | ( 24 . 4 )                                                        | ( 14 . 1 )                                                        | ( 5 . 7 )                                                         | (- 2 . 5 )                                                        | (- 13 . 8 )                                                       | ( 10 . 8 )                                                        |
| 1973 - 1992 birth | 7 , 525 , 110                                                     | 2 , 207 , 116                                                     | 407 , 056                                                         | 213 , 844                                                         | 1 , 095 , 808                                                     | 391 , 902                                                         | 392 , 108                                                         | 12 , 232 , 944                                                    |
| cohort            | ( 13 . 4 )                                                        | ( 29 . 8 )                                                        | ( 33 . 8 )                                                        | ( 30 . 2 )                                                        | ( 5 . 3 )                                                         | (- 0 . 3 )                                                        | (- 6 . 5 )                                                        | ( 14 . 8 )                                                        |
| 1953 - 1972 birth | 7 , 247 , 638                                                     | 2 , 081 , 229                                                     | 400 , 874                                                         | 236 , 429                                                         | 1 , 120 , 621                                                     | 437 , 168                                                         | 521 , 636                                                         | 12 , 045 , 595                                                    |
| cohort            | (- 0 . 8 )                                                        | ( 11 . 1 )                                                        | ( 16 . 2 )                                                        | ( 15 . 8 )                                                        | ( 0 . 9 )                                                         | ( 0 . 8 )                                                         | ( 0 . 2 )                                                         | ( 2 . 1 )                                                         |
| 1943 - 1952 birth | 1 , 343 , 415                                                     | 350 , 756                                                         | 69 , 289                                                          | 44 , 457                                                          | 198 , 883                                                         | 84 , 476                                                          | 110 , 816                                                         | 2 , 202 , 092                                                     |
| cohort            | (- 8 . 8 )                                                        | ( 1 . 4 )                                                         | ( 5 . 9 )                                                         | ( 8 . 7 )                                                         | (- 4 . 0 )                                                        | (- 0 . 7 )                                                        | ( 2 . 9 )                                                         | (- 5 . 3 )                                                        |

Data from Spanish Municipal Register.

Between 2002 and 2017 , 36 . 2 percent of the municipalities saw an increase in their  absolute  population.  The  percentage of municipalities in each class of the urban-rural  gradient  with  a  demographic  increase  was  higher  in  large  demographic  classes  with  a  shorter  distance  to  urban  centers.  In 75 percent  of  the municipalities the increase was noted in at least one of the study birth cohorts (Table 2 and Figure 4 ).

The  rural  small-sized  class  in  the  urban-rural  gradient  shows  the  lowest percentage of  municipalities  with  an  increase  in  absolute  population  of  a  mere 14 . 7 percent.  The  large  and  medium-sized  rural  classes  in  the  urban-rural gradient  revealed  the  lowest  percentage  of  municipalities  in  at  least  one  of  the study cohorts, at 63 . 2 percent and 64 . 3 percent, respectively. In the rural smallsized class, 71 . 2 percent of the municipalities displayed an increase in one of the study birth cohorts (Table 2 ,  Figure 4 ).

The variance in spatial distribution of the absolute population reveals a  demographic  increase  in  the  suburban  areas  of  the  main  cities  as  well  as  the Spanish metropolitan areas and the Mediterranean coastal area, while large inland areas in the Iberian Peninsula lost population (Figure 5 ). The municipalities where the study's three birth cohorts increased are also located in urban, suburban, and coastal  areas  (Table 2 and Figure 6 ),  however  they  are  less  numerous  than  those that had an increase in their absolute population (Table 2 and Figure 5 ).  Certain areas with higher volumes of work opportunities show an increase in working-age

FIG. 2 -Population pyramid of the study area in 2017 . The cohort born in 1973 -1992 was 25 -44 , the cohort born in 1953 -1972 was 45 -64 and the cohort born in 1943 -1952 was 65 -74 years old in 2017 .

<!-- image -->

cohorts  and  at  the  same  time  a  decrease  in  the  retirement  cohort,  for  example areas of Madrid and Gipuzkoa.

The  municipalities  where  the  study's  three  birth  cohorts  decreased  are located in areas where the working-age population decreased following a  decline  in  agriculture  (the  areas  of  Ourense,  Leon,  Badajoz,  Cordoba, Jaen,  Ciudad  Real,  Albacete,  Cuenca,  and  Toledo)  or  the  mining  sector (Asturias,  Leon)  and  where  inhabitants  of  the  retirement  cohort  did  not increase  (Figure 6 ).  The  areas  that  revealed  a  decrease  in  the  study's  three birth  cohorts  are  less  numerous  than  those  areas  with  a  decrease  in  their absolute  population  (Table 2 ).  Demographic  dynamics  in  the  latter  areas trend toward  an  aging  population,  resulting  in  a clear negative natural balance,  without  being  compensated  by  a  positive  net  migration  rate.

Among urban municipalities, 23 . 2 percent presented a decrease in the three study  cohorts  (Table 2 and  Figure 4 ).  In  many  cases  this  decrease  was  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  the  population  of  the  cohorts  in  nearby  suburban municipalities.  However,  in  some  old  industrial  cities  in  Alicante,  Jaen,  and A  Coruña  provinces,  and  old  mining  cities  in  Asturias,  the  cohorts  decreased both  in  the  urban  municipality  and  in  the  suburban  periphery  (Figure 6 ).  In these cities, the demographic and labor declines were remarkable and

Total population 1973-1992 birth cohort 1953-1972 birth cohort 1943-1952 birth cohort

<!-- image -->

FIG. 3 -Percent population change of the total population and the study birth cohorts in each class of municipalities along the urban-rural gradient from 2002 to 2017 .

suburbanization growth did not occur. The detection of the different dynamics between  core  urban  municipalities  and  suburban  municipalities  reveals  more detailed data than the one obtained in previous studies that were based on wider functional urban areas (Gurrutxaga 2020 ).

The 1973 -1992 birth  cohort  grew  in  urban  and  suburban  areas  as  well  as in  rural  municipalities  located  to  the  east  of  the  Iberian  Peninsula  and  was given a boost by the influx of foreign working immigrants during the study period  (Collantes  et  al. 2014 )  (Figure 7 ).  This  young,  working-age  cohort increases  particularly  in  municipalities  classified  as  urban  and  in  classes  of the urban-rural gradient characterized by having larger populations (Table 2 and  Figure 4 ).

The 1953 -1972 birth  cohort  exhibits  two  complementary  trends.  First,  this mature  working-age  cohort,  together  with  the  young,  working-age  cohort, increases its population in urban municipalities as well as in rural municipalities of the urban-rural gradient that are closest to urban centers and have the largest populations.  Second,  this  birth  cohort,  whether  examined  by  itself  or  together with the 1943 -1952 birth cohort, increases in higher percentages in municipalities

TABLE 2 -NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF  MUNICIPALITIES  OF  EACH  CLASS  OF  THE  URBAN-RURAL  GRADIENT  ACCORDING  TO  WHETHER  (I) THEIR  TOTAL  POPULATION  GREW  OR NOT, AND  (II)  THE  STUDIED  BIRTH-COHORTS  GREW  OR  NOT  ( 2002 -2017 )

| NUMBER OF MUNICIPALITIES ( PERCENT IN EACH CLASS ) CLASSES OF MUNICIPALITIES ALONG THE URBAN - RURAL GRADIENT   | URBAN LARGE MEDIUM SMALL LARGE MEDIUM SMALL TOTAL   | 534 ( 88 . 4 ) 333 ( 75 . 9 ) 688 ( 55 . 9 ) 240 ( 63 . 5 ) 211 ( 39 . 2 ) 663 ( 14 . 7 ) 2 , 864 ( 36 . 2 ) 70 ( 11 . 6 ) 106 ( 24 . 1 ) 542 ( 44 . 1 ) 138 ( 36 . 5 ) 327 ( 60 . 8 ) 3 , 838 ( 85 . 3 ) 5 , 050 ( 63 . 8 ) 604 439 1 , 230 378 538 4 , 501 7 , 914 ) 262 ( 43 . 4 ) 208 ( 47 . 4 ) 476 ( 38 . 7 ) 58 ( 15 . 3 ) 87 ( 16 . 2 ) 665 ( 14 . 8 ) 1 , 794 ( 22 . 7 ) ) 53 ( 8 . 8 ) 23 ( 5 . 2 ) 74 ( 6 . 0 ) 55 ( 14 . 6 ) 43 ( 8 . 0 ) 297 ( 6 . 6 ) 600 ( 7 . 6 ) 16 ( 2 . 6 ) 23 ( 5 . 2 ) 80 ( 6 . 5 ) 16 ( 4 . 2 ) 32 ( 5 . 9 ) 410 ( 9 . 1 ) 580 ( 7 . 3 ) ) 184 ( 30 . 5 ) 93 ( 21 . 2 ) 241 ( 19 . 6 ) 88 ( 23 . 3 ) 69 ( 12 . 8 ) 466 ( 10 . 4 ) 1 , 215 ( 15 . 4 ) 2 ( 0 . 3 ) 2 ( 0 . 5 ) 40 ( 3 . 3 ) 3 ( 0 . 8 ) 4 ( 0 . 7 ) 194 ( 4 . 3 ) 247 ( 3 . 1 ) 5 ( 0 . 8 ) 16 ( 3 . 6 ) 84 ( 6 . 8 ) 11 ( 2 . 9 ) 38 ( 7 . 1 ) 502 ( 11 . 1 ) 656 ( 8 . 3 ) 3 ( 0 . 5 ) 6 ( 1 . 4 ) 82 ( 6 . 7 ) 12 ( 3 . 2 ) 67 ( 12 . 5 ) 671 ( 14 . 9 ) 841 ( 10 . 6 ) ) 525 ( 86 . 9 ) 371 ( 84 . 5 ) 1 , 077 ( 87 . 6 ) 243 ( 64 . 2 ) 340 ( 63 . 2 ) 3 , 205 ( 71 . 2 ) 5 , 933 ( 75 . 0 ) ) 79 ( 13 . 1 ) 68 ( 15 . 5 ) 153 ( 12 . 4 ) 135 ( 35 . 7 ) 198 ( 36 . 8 ) 1 , 296 ( 28 . 8 ) 1 , 981 ( 25 . 0 ) 604 439 1 , 230 378 538 4 , 501 7 , 914   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Data from the Spanish Municipal Register.

10

FIG. 4 -Percentage (%) of municipalities of each class of the urban-rural gradient according to whether  i)  their  total  population  grew  or  not  and  ii)  the  studied  birth  cohorts  grew  or  not ( 2002 -2017 ).

<!-- image -->

of  smaller  classes  and  that  are  located  further  from  urban  centers  (Table 2 , Figures 4 and 8 ).

The 1943 -1952 birth  cohort  grew  in  the  Mediterranean  coastal  areas  and  in the  urban-rural  gradient  classes  with  lower  populations  located  further  away from  urban  centers  (Table 2 ,  Figures 4 and 9 ).  The  spatial  distribution  of  the cohort is influenced by the migration of foreigners at retirement age (Gibler et al.

FIG. 5 -Map of the total population change (%) in each municipality ( 2002 -2017 ).

<!-- image -->

2009 )  and by return migration to the place of origin (Rodríguez et al. 2002 ).  In addition  to  the  Mediterranean  coastal  area,  this  retirement-age  cohort  also settled  inland  in  shrinking  rural  areas  of  provinces  such  as  Lugo,  Ourense, Leon, Zamora, Salamanca, Caceres, Badajoz, Ciudad Real, and Granada.

The data obtained revealed varying residential mobility trends during different  life-cycle  stages  depending  on  the  birth  cohort.  The  young,  working-age cohort tends to live in urban and suburban municipalities and the tendency of the  mature-age-working  cohort,  and  in  particular  the  retirement  cohort,  is  to move  to  lesser  populated  areas.  These  trends  coincide  with  research  data  presented  by  authors  from  other  countries  (Nefs  et  al. 2013 ;  Lee  et  al. 2016 , 2019 ; Sabater et al. 2017 ; Moos et al. 2019 ; Bereitschaft 2020 ). Numerous areas showing a decline in absolute population, often located far from urban municipalities, are attractive  to  the  mature-age-working  cohort  and  especially  to  the  retirement cohort.

The general, population trends detected at the national level for the cohorts in  the  urban-rural  gradient  (Figure 3 )  differ  in  some  regions  and  must  be analyzed  at  regional  scale  to  be  taken  into  account  in  regional  and  urban planning.  For  instance,  in  the  provinces  of  Lleida  and  Huesca  there  are numerous rural municipalities where the young, working-age cohort increases (Figure 7 ),  due  to  the  economic  development of rural areas  and job creation

12

FIG. 6 -Map of  population  change  typology  of  each  municipality  according  to  whether  the studied birth-cohorts grew or not in 2002 -2017 .

<!-- image -->

in recent decades (Bayona-i-Carrasco and Gil-Alonso 2012 ). Along  the Mediterranean coast  there  are  a  number  of  urban  municipalities  in  the  provinces of Girona, Tarragona, Alicante, Murcia, Almería, and Malaga where the retirement cohort increases (Figure 9 ), due to lifestyle and retirement internal and  international  migrations  (Parreño-Castellano  and  Domínguez-Mujica 2017 ).  The  presence  of  rural  municipalities  where  the  retirement  cohort  and the mature working cohort increases and the young, working cohort decreases is  especially  notable  in  provinces  in  the  western  part  of  the  study  area,  such as León, Ourense, Zamora, Salamanca, Cáceres, and Badajoz, due to return migrations after working life together with the youth population moving  to  other  regions  with  better  job  opportunities  (Aldrey-Vázquez 2006 ; Maya-Frades et  al. 2011 ;  Pérez-Díaz  and  Leco-Berrocal 2013 ;  Aldrey-Vázquez and Del-Río-Franqueira 2014 ;  González-Leonardo  and  López-Gay 2019 ).  The presence  of  rural  municipalities  where  the  three  study  cohorts  decrease  is especially dominant in western and southern Asturias, eastern Lugo, and  districts  of  Córdoba  and  Jaén  (Figure 6 ),  given  that  there  are  few  local job  opportunities  and  the  provincial  population  is  concentrated  in  other areas (Ocaña-Ocaña and Larrubia-Vargas 2012 ; Aldrey-Vázquez and Del-Río-Franqueira 2014 ; López-Fernández 2016 ).

FIG. 7 -Map of the population change (%) of the 1973 -1992 birth cohort in each municipality ( 2002 -2017 ).

<!-- image -->

One  limitation  of  the  study  that  is  important  to  note  relates  to  the  spatial distribution  of  the  (small)  cohort  born  after 1992 ,  because  it  begins  to  join  the labor force during the study period. In relation to the cohort born before 1943 , comprised by older elderly persons, it would be relevant to understand whether their  residential  preferences  differ  from  those  noted  in  this  article  for  the retirement-age  cohort,  composed  by  younger  elderly  persons,  which  is  what other  studies  suggest  (Gibler  et  al. 2009 ;  Andersson  et  al. 2019 ).  Similarly,  it would  be  appropriate  to  increase  the  level  of  detail  studied  in  urban  municipalities  and  metropolitan areas by using an intramunicipal study scale (Sabater et al. 2017 ;  Moos  et  al. 2019 ).  In  addition,  the  method  can  be  applied  by delimiting  smaller  birth  cohorts  (Lee  et  al. 2019 ),  population  segments  with concrete  characteristics  (Kooiman  et  al. 2018 ;  Altaher  et  al. 2019 ;  Gil-Alonso and  Thiers-Quintana 2019 ),  and  shorter  periods  with  specific  socioeconomic dynamics (Bayona-i-Carrasco et al. 2018 ;  Gil-Alonso and Thiers-Quintana 2019 ; Salvati 2019 ;  Salvati  et  al. 2019 ;  Gurrutxaga 2020 ).

Further  research  is  needed  to  continue  analyzing  the  spatial  distribution dynamics  of  the  population  cohorts  across  time  within  the  framework  of Western  countries  that have rapidly  aging  populations.  The  demographic

14

FIG. 8 -Map of the population change (%) of the 1953 -1972 birth cohort in each municipality ( 2002 -2017 ).

<!-- image -->

forecast  of  the  United  Nations  ( 2019 )  predicts  a 6 . 6 percent  decrease  of  the absolute  population  in  Spain  between 2019 and 2050 .  Overall  in  Europe,  the population  could  decrease  by 5 . 2 percent  in  the  same  time  period  (United Nations 2019 ).  If  these  projections are met, many municipalities will lose population  overall.  The  future  dynamics  of  each  cohort  in  each  municipality  will depend to a large extent on the net migration rate of each cohort, which varies according to national and international migrant movements.

The residential mobility of each cohort in urban, suburban, and rural areas across countries and regions will depend not only on place attachment (Barcus and Brunn 2010 ; Husa and Morse 2020 ) and on the lifestyle preferences during their  life  cycle  (Lee  et  al. 2019 ;  Moos  et  al. 2019 ),  but  also  on  the  varying socioeconomic  constraints  at  different  levels,  such  as  employment  opportunities (Rodríguez-Pose and Ketterer 2012 ;  Kooiman et al. 2018 ;  Gil-Alonso and Thiers-Quintana 2019 ),  geography  of  housing  affordability,  and  cost  of  living and level of residential segregation between socioeconomic groups (Baker et al. 2016 ;  Moos  et  al. 2019 ;  Damhuis  et  al. 2019 ;  Tammaru  et  al. 2020 ),  local availability of specific housing characteristics for each life stage and household structure type (Rosenberg and Everitt 2001 ; Gibler et al. 2009 ; Bijker et al. 2012 ; Andersson  et  al. 2019 ;  Cividino  et  al. 2020 ;  Hartt  and  Hackworth 2020 ),

FIG. 9 -Map of the population change (%) of the 1943 -1952 birth cohort in each municipality ( 2002 -2017 ).

<!-- image -->

telecommunications coverage and the possibility to develop home-based businesses  (Salemink et al. 2017 ;  Kane  and  Clark 2019 ;  Philip  and  Williams 2019 ), local  and  service  amenities  (Gosnell  and  Abrams 2011 ;  Bijker  et  al. 2012 ;  Lee et al. 2016 ; Elshof et al. 2017 ), and rural accessibility to services (Camarero and Oliva 2019 ).

Knowing the recent residential choices of the different cohorts at diverse lifecourse  stages  provides  insights  into  potentially  emerging  spatial  trends  in  residence  that  could  aid  in  long-term  regional  planning.  Based  on  the  life-course approach, we would expect that different cohorts, made up of different generations,  might  behave  differently  in  each  life  stage  based  on  their  collective  life experiences.  Each  generation  could  respond  in  different  ways  to  structural (socioeconomic,  technological,  environmental)  changes  taking  place  in  society in  each  territory  (Findlay  et  al. 2015 ).  Variations  in  conditions  in  different locations, together with the preferences and real possibilities of residential choice at each moment, will influence spatial residential behavior of each cohort at each life  stage.  A  key  question  is  whether  the  recent  trends  observed  in  each  cohort and life stage is something that we might expect for the future behavior.

16

The increase in the number of single-person households, which increasingly affects individuals at different life stages (Ortiz-Ospina 2019 ), could increase the preference  for  urban  areas  with  high  accessibility  to  services  and  urban  amenities,  taking  into  account  the  preferences  shown  until  now  by  those  who  live alone  (Cividino  et  al. 2020 ).  However,  on  the  other  hand,  teleworking  and purchases  through  electronic  commerce  have  been  increasing  in  recent  years, and  have  accelerated  notably  since 2020 due  to  the  social-distancing  measures imposed by the COVID19 pandemic (Florida et al. 2020 ). Teleworking could make rural  areas  more  attractive  to  future  working-age  cohorts  than  in  previous generations.  In  Spain,  although  the  percentage  of  the  employed  who  telework amounted  to 8 . 3 percent  in 2019 ,  it  is  estimated  that  about 30 percent  of  the employed could telework (Anghel et al. 2020 ). Furthermore, proactive policies to attract  international  teleworkers  have  not  yet  been  developed  in  Spain.  If  these types of policies are activated, there is a great potential for attracting teleworkers along the Spanish urban-rural gradient, taking advantage of the climatic conditions and affordable costs of living.

## CONCLUSIONS

The  municipalities  analyzed  across  the  urban-rural  gradient  in  continental Spain during the study period 2002 -2017 follow patterns that are representative of  population  changes  in  cohorts  and  life  stages,  independently  of  the  evolution  of  the  absolute  population.  Thus,  the  population  changes  in  urban,  suburban,  and  rural  municipalities  are  related  to  the  residential  movements  of different  cohorts  of  distinct  size  and  at  various  life-cycle  stages.  While  the young,  working-age  cohort  tended  to  move  to  growing  urban  and  suburban areas  in  Spain,  the  retirement  cohort  tended  to  move  to  medium-sized/small suburban  and  small  rural  municipalities  during  the  study  period.  Numerous areas  with  absolute  population  decline,  often  located  far  from  urban  centers, are  attractive  to  the  retirement  cohort.  This  has  implications  for  adequate spatial  planning  in  housing,  transportation,  and  services  for  the  elderly  in rural  areas,  including  accessibility  to  health  facilities,  nursing  homes,  daycare  centers,  and  home  care  (Rosenberg  and  Everitt 2001 ;  Andrews  et  al. 2009 ;  Camarero and Oliva 2019 ).

The general trends detected on a national scale differ in some regions and it is  necessary  to  analyze  them  on  a  regional  scale  to  integrate  them  into  spatial planning. The spatiotemporal evolution of the birth cohorts is relevant both in terms of percent and absolute variation of inhabitants at the local and regional scale, given that the residential movements of the largest cohorts have a greater effect  on  the  spatial  changes  in  the  demand  for  housing,  transportation,  and services  (López-Gay  et  al. 2013 ;  Lee  et  al. 2016 ).  In  this  sense,  the  coming retirement  of  large  cohorts  in  Spain  must  be  considered  as  a  relevant  issue  in regional  planning.  Demographic  projections  of  the  United  Nations  indicate

a growth in the percentage of the population living in urban areas both in Spain and Europe between 2017 and 2050 (United Nations 2018 ).  However, the largest cohorts in Spain in 2017 are from 35 to 49 years old (Figure 2 ) and will therefore reach retirement age in the next decades, specifically  between 2033 -2047 . Moreover, Spain is one of the preferred residential destinations for retired people from  other  Western  countries  (Pickering  et  al. 2019 ).  Given  the  results  of  this study,  the  residential  decisions  of  the  retirement  cohorts  of  the  next  decades could  notably  increase  the  elderly  population  volume  of  certain  small  municipalities located in suburban and rural areas of Spain.

It  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  in  the  future  there  will  be  an  increase  of residential  movements  from  urban  municipalities  to  less  densely  populated places  by  working-age  cohorts  in  Spain.  In  previous  studies  in  other  countries, one  of  the  main  limitations  of  urban  living  as  perceived  by  the  inhabitants  of compact cities is lack of space and overcrowding (Howley 2009 ). Future research should take into consideration whether the COVID19 pandemic caused by SARSCoV2 coronavirus,  which  has  driven  social-distancing  measures,  will  have  an impact  on  the  percentage  of  the  population  at  different  life  stages  that  prefers less  populated  areas  with  better  access  to  unbuilt  open  spaces  for  outdoor activities. In the context of climate change, while the threat of future pandemics exists,  urban  policies  will  need  to  consider  creating  multifunctional  urban  and peri-urban  green  spaces  networks  to  improve  habitability,  enhance  urban  resilience, and reduce the urban heat-island effect (Samuelsson et al. 2020 ).

Establishing  a  residence  in  less  densely  built  areas  matches  the  housing trends  displayed  by  the  population  close  to  retirement  age,  but  not  with  the trend of the young, working-age cohort to concentrate around urban centers. In theory,  communication  media  and  technologies  will  facilitate  the  possibility  to live  in  areas  further  away  from  work  without  having  to  commute  frequently; however,  until  now  work  and  career  advancement  opportunities  have  been concentrated in concrete urban and suburban areas, and it is there where most of the young, working-age cohort establish their residence. Further research will be  necessary  to  establish  whether  future  generations  will  continue  the  trend  of living in these urban areas with a more dynamic labor market (Sabater et al. 2017 ; Kooiman et  al. 2018 ;  Kashnitsky  et  al. 2020 )  and  more  varied  urban  amenities (Lee et al. 2019 ) or whether this trend will lessen during the next decades thanks to  a  more  geographically  balanced  labor  market  (Iammarino  et  al. 2019 )  and a  more  balanced  economic  development  between  and  within  regions  (Rauhut and Humer 2020 ). Studies that integrate the multivariate analysis of those causal factors  of  demographic  variations  in  space  and  time  (Kabisch  and  Haase 2011 ; Salvati et al. 2019 )  will  be necessary to detect those concrete variables that most influence the specific spatial trends of each cohort at each life stage.

The results of the spatiotemporal evolution of the cohorts must be checked against the infrastructures available in the territory so that existing gaps may be

18

addressed. The spatial planning of housing, services, and transportation for the population should be integrated into comprehensive regional planning along the urban-rural  gradient  of  Spain  together  with  suitable  criteria  on  natural  risks, water  availability,  cultural  landscapes,  and  nature  conservation  (Barbero-Sierra et al. 2013 ;  Olcina et al. 2016 ;  Morote et al. 2017 ;  Valladares et al. 2017 ).

The methodological approach described in this article can be used by researchers,  planners,  and  policy  makers  for  the  anticipation  of  the  demand  for  specific typologies  of  housing,  services,  green  open  spaces,  and  infrastructure  (Andrews et  al. 2009 ;  Lee  et  al. 2016 ;  Andersson et al. 2019 ;  Damhuis et al. 2019 ;  Philip  and Williams 2019 ;  Segers  et  al. 2020 ).  This  approach is also helpful for the design of employment,  governance,  taxation,  welfare,  environmental,  and  heritage  policies both  in  urban  (Nefs  et  al. 2013 ;  Martinez-Fernandez  et  al. 2016 ;  Van  Hoof  and others 2018 ; Gros-Balthazard and Talandier 2020 ; Hartt and Hackworth 2020 ) and rural areas (Haartsen and Venhorst 2010 ; Dax and Fischer 2018 ).

It is therefore relevant to integrate the population dynamics of different birth cohorts  with  distinct  size  and  at  different  life  stages  within  the  framework  of comprehensive  regional  planning.  The  methodological  approach  used  in  this article  enriches  the  vision  of  spatiotemporal  population  changes  across  urban, suburban,  and  rural  areas.  This  method  can  be  applied  to  other  study  areas  at different spatial and temporal scales.

## FUNDING

This  work was supported by the University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) under Grant [MOV 15 / 12 ] and Grant [MOV 15 / 35 ]; Basque Government under Grant [IT 1163 -19 ].

## ORCID

Mikel Gurrutxaga http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5464-7318

## REFERENCES

- Aldrey-Vázquez, J. A. 2006 . As migracións de retorno actuais na Galiza. In As migracións en Galiza e  Portugal ,  edited  by  Lois-González  and  R.  M.  Verdugo-Matés. 119 -150 .  A  Coruña,  Spain: Candeia.
- Aldrey-Vázquez, J. A., and D. Del-Río-Franqueira. 2014 . Crónica de un envejecimiento anunciado: Galicia 2015 -2030 .  In Envejecimiento,  despoblación  y  territorio ,  edited  by  L.  López  Trigal, A. Abellán, and D. Goudenau. 69 -82 .  León, Spain: Universidad de León.
- Altaher,  A.  M.  A.,  J.  F.  Clapp,  and  S.  Sultana. 2019 .  Residential  Settlement  Patterns  among Immigrants  in  Atlanta  Metropolitan  Area,  Georgia. Geographical  Review 109 ( 3 ): 321 -355 . doi: 10 . 1111 /gere. 12319
- Andersson,  E.,  M.  Abramsson,  and  B.  Malmberg. 2019 . Patterns of Changing  Residential Preferences during Late Adulthood. Ageing and Society 39 ( 8 ): 1752 -1781 . doi: 10 . 1017 / S 0144686 X 18000259
- Andrews, G. J., C. Milligan, D. R. Phillips, and M. W. Skinner. 2009 .  Geographical Gerontology: Mapping  a  Disciplinary  Intersection. Geography  Compass 3 ( 5 ): 1641 -1659 .  doi: 10 . 1111 /j. 1749 -8198 . 2009 . 00270 .x
- Anghel, B., M. Cozzolino, and A. Lacuesta. 2020 . Teleworking in Spain. Banco de Espana Economic Bulletin 2 : 1 -17 .

- Baker, E., R. Bentley, L. Lester, and A. Beer. 2016 .  Housing Affordability and Residential Mobility as Drivers of Locational Inequality. Applied Geography 72 : 65 -75 . doi: 10 . 1016 /j. apgeog. 2016 . 05 . 007
- Barbero-Sierra, C., M. J. Marques, and M. Ruíz-Pérez. 2013 . The Case of Urban Sprawl in Spain as an Active and Irreversible Driving Force for Desertification. Journal of Arid Environments 90 : 95 -102 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.jaridenv. 2012 . 10 . 014
- Barcus,  H.  R.,  and  S.  D.  Brunn. 2010 .  Place  Elasticity:  Exploring  a  New  Conceptualization  of Mobility  and  Place  Attachment  in  Rural  America. Geografiska  Annaler.  Series  B,  Human Geography 92 ( 4 ): 281 -295 .  doi: 10 . 1111 /j. 1468 -0467 . 2010 . 00353 .x
- Barcus,  H.  R.,  and  K.  Halfacree. 2017 . An  Introduction  to  Population  Geographies.  Lives  across Space .  London: Routledge.
- Batunova, E., and M. Gunko. 2018 .  Urban Shrinkage: An Unspoken Challenge of Spatial Planning in  Russian  Small  and  Medium-sized  Cities. European  Planning  Studies 26 ( 8 ): 1580 -1597 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 09654313 . 2018 . 1484891
- Bayona-i-Carrasco,  J.,  and  F.  Gil-Alonso. 2012 .  Is  Foreign  Immigration  the  Solution  to  Rural Depopulation? The Case of Catalonia ( 1996 -2009 ). Sociologia Ruralis 53 ( 1 ): 26 -51 . doi: 10 . 1111 /j. 1467 -9523 . 2012 . 00577 .x
- Bayona-i-Carrasco, J., F. Gil-Alonso, M. Rubiales-Pérez, and I. Pujadas-Rúbies. 2018 .  New Spatial Mobility Patterns in Large Spanish Cities: From the Economic Boom to the Great Recession. Applied Spatial Analysis and Policy 11 ( 2 ): 287 -312 .  doi: 10 . 1007 /s 12061 -017 -9222 -x
- Bereitschaft,  B. 2020 .  Gentrification  Central:  A  Change-based  Typology  of  the  American  Urban Core, 2000 -2015 . Applied Geography 118 : 102206 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.apgeog. 2020 . 102206
- Bernard, A., M. Bell, and E. Charles-Edwards. 2014 . Life-course Transitions and the Age Profile of Internal  Migration. Population  and  Development  Review 40 ( 2 ): 213 -239 .  doi: 10 . 1111 /j. 1728 -4457 . 2014 . 00671 .x
- Bijker,  R.  A.,  T.  Haartsen,  and  D.  Strijker. 2012 .  Migration  to  Less-popular  Rural  Areas  in  the Netherlands: Exploring the Motivations. Journal of Rural Studies 28 ( 4 ): 490 -498 . doi: 10 . 1016 /j. jrurstud. 2012 . 07 . 003
- Buciega,  A.,  M.  D.  Pitarch,  and  J.  Esparcia. 2009 .  The  Context  of  Rural-urban  Relationships  in Finland,  France,  Hungary,  the  Netherlands  and  Spain. Journal  of  Environmental  Policy  and Planning 11 ( 1 ): 9 -27 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 15239080902774929
- Camarero, L., and J. Oliva. 2019 . Thinking in Rural Gap: Mobility and Social Inequalities. Palgrave Communications 5 ( 1 ): 95 .  doi: 10 . 1057 /s 41599 -019 -0306 -x
- Cividino,  S.,  G.  Egidi,  and  L.  Salvati. 2020 .  Unraveling  the  (Uneven)  Linkage?  A  Reflection  on Population Aging and Suburbanization in A Mediterranean Perspective. Sustainability 12 ( 11 ): 4546 .  doi: 10 . 3390 /su 12114546
- Collantes, F., V. Pinilla, L. A. Saez, and J. Silvestre. 2014 .  Reducing Depopulation in Rural Spain: The Impact of Immigration. Population, Space and Place 20 ( 7 ): 606 -621 .  doi: 10 . 1002 /psp. 1797
- Coulter,  R.,  S.  Bayrakdar,  and  A.  Berrington. 2020 .  Longitudinal  Life  Course  Perspectives  on Housing  Inequality  in  Young  Adulthood. Geography  Compass 14 ( 5 ):  e 12488 .  doi: 10 . 1111 / gec 3 . 12488
- Cuervo, H., and J. Cook. 2020 . Understanding Young Lives through Longitudinal Research Design. In Youth  and  the  New  Adulthood.  Perspectives  on  Children  and  Young  People ,  edited  by J.  Wyn,  H.  Cahill,  D.  Woodman,  H.  Cuervo,  C.  Leccardi,  and  J.  Chesters. 13 -30 .  Singapore: Springer.
- Damhuis,  R.,  W.  Van  Gent,  C.  Hochstenbach,  and  S.  Musterd. 2019 .  The  Regional  and  Local Dynamics of Life Course and Housing. In A Research Agenda for Housing , edited by M. Moos. 165 -181 .  Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar Publishing.
- Dax, T., and M. Fischer. 2018 .  An Alternative Policy Approach to Rural Development in Regions Facing Population Decline. European Planning Studies 26 ( 2 ): 297 -315 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 09654313 . 2017 . 1361596
- Elshof,  H.,  T.  Haartsen,  L.  Van  Wissen,  and  C.  H.  Mulder. 2017 .  The  Influence  of  Village Attractiveness on Flows of Movers in a Declining Rural Region. Journal of Rural Studies 56 : 39 -52 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.jrurstud. 2017 . 07 . 004

20

- Findlay, A., D. McCollum, R. Coulter, and V. Gayle. 2015 .  New Mobilities across the Life Course: A Framework for Analysing Demographically Linked Drivers of Migration. Population, Space and Place 21 ( 4 ): 390 -402 .  doi: 10 . 1002 /psp. 1956
- Florida,  R.,  A.  Rodríguez-Pose,  and  M.  Storper. 2020 . Cities  in  a  Post-Covid  World.  Papers  in Evolutionary Economic Geography 20 . 41 .  Utrecht, The Netherlands: Utrecht University.
- Gibler, K. M., M. Casado-Díaz, M. A. Casado-Díaz, V. Rodríguez, and P. Taltavull. 2009 . Late Life Second  Move  Housing  Choices  of  International  Retiree  Migrants. International  Journal  of Housing Markets and Analysis 2 ( 2 ): 190 -210 .  doi: 10 . 1108 / 17538270910963117
- Gil-Alonso, F., and J. Thiers-Quintana. 2019 . Population and Economic Cycles in the Main Spanish Urban Areas: The Migratory Component. Comparative Population Studies 44 : 317 -350 .
- González-Leonardo, M., and A. López-Gay. 2019 .  Out-migration  and  Brain  Drain  in  Castile  and León. Boletín de la Asociación de Geógrafos Españoles 80 : 1 -31 .
- Gosnell,  H.,  and  J.  Abrams. 2011 .  Amenity  Migration:  Diverse  Conceptualizations  of  Drivers, Socioeconomic Dimensions, and Emerging Challenges. GeoJournal 76 ( 4 ): 303 -322 . doi: 10 . 1007 /s 10708 -009 -9295 -4
- Gros-Balthazard,  M.,  and  M.  Talandier. 2020 .  Cooperation,  Proximity,  and  Social  Innovation: Three  Ingredients  for  Industrial  Medium-sized  Towns'  Renewal? Urban  Science 4 ( 2 ): 15 . doi: 10 . 3390 /urbansci 4020015
- Gurrutxaga,  M. 2020 .  Incorporating  the  Life-course  Approach  into  Shrinking  Cities  Assessment: The  Uneven  Geographies  of  Urban  Population  Decline. European  Planning  Studies 28 ( 4 ): 732 -748 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 09654313 . 2019 . 1634007
- Haartsen, T., and V. Venhorst. 2010 .  Planning for Decline: Anticipating on Population Decline in the Netherlands. Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 101 ( 2 ): 218 -227 .  doi: 10 . 1111 / j. 1467 -9663 . 2010 . 00597 .x
- Hartt, M., and J. Hackworth. 2020 . Shrinking Cities, Shrinking Households, or Both? International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 44 ( 6 ): 1083 -1095 .  doi: 10 . 1111 / 1468 -2427 . 12713
- Hochstenbach, C., and R. Arundel. 2019 . Spatial Housing Market Polarisation: National and Urban Dynamics of Diverging House Values. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 45 ( 2 ): 464 -482 .  doi: 10 . 1111 /tran. 12346
- Howley, P. 2009 .  Attitudes  Towards  Compact  City  Living:  Towards  a  Greater  Understanding  of Residential Behaviour. Land Use Policy 26 ( 3 ): 792 -798 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.landusepol. 2008 . 10 . 004
- Husa, A., and C. E. Morse. 2020 . Rurality as a Key Factor for Place Attachment in the Great Plains. Geographical Review 1 -19 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 00167428 . 2020 . 1786384
- Iammarino, S., A. Rodriguez-Pose, and A. Storper. 2019 .  Regional Inequality in Europe: Evidence, Theory and Policy Implications. Journal  of  Economic  Geography 19 ( 2 ): 273 -298 .  doi: 10 . 1093 / jeg/lby 021
- INE. 2018 . Demography and Population. Municipal Register. Continuous Register Statistics . Madrid: Instituto Nacional de Estadística.
- Kabisch,  N.,  and  D.  Haase. 2011 .  Diversifying  European  Agglomerations:  Evidence  of  Urban Population  Trends  for  the 21 st  Century. Population, Space and  Place 17 ( 3 ): 236 -253 . doi: 10 . 1002 /psp. 600
- Kane,  K.,  and  W.  A.  V.  Clark. 2019 .  Mapping  the  Landscape  of  Urban  Work:  Home-based Businesses and the Built Environment. Environment &amp; Planning A 51 ( 2 ): 323 -350 . doi: 10 . 1177 / 0308518 X 18762131
- Kashnitsky,  I.,  J.  De  Beer,  and  L.  Van  Wissen. 2020 .  Unequally  Ageing  Regions  of  Europe: Exploring the Role of Urbanization. Population Studies 1 -17 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 00324728 . 2020 . 1788130
- Kooiman,  N.,  J. Latten, and  M.  Bontje. 2018 .  Human  Capital  Migration:  A  Longitudinal Perspective. Tijdschrift  voor  Economische  en  Sociale  Geografie 109 ( 5 ): 644 -660 .  doi: 10 . 1111 / tesg. 12324
- Lee,  Y.,  G.  Circella,  P.  L.  Mokhtarian,  and  S.  Guhathakurta. 2019 .  Heterogeneous  Residential Preferences  among  Millennials  and  Members  of  Generation  X  in  California:  A  Latent-class Approach. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 76 : 289 -304 . doi: 10 . 1016 /j.trd. 2019 . 08 . 001
- Lee,  Y.,  C.  A.  Montgomery,  and  J.  D.  Kline. 2016 .  The  Influence  of  Age-specific  Migration  on Housing  Growth  in  the  Rural  Midwest  (USA). Landscape  and  Urban  Planning 148 : 68 -79 . doi: 10 . 1016 /j.landurbplan. 2015 . 12 . 005

- López-Fernández, B. 2016 . Poblamiento y declive demografico en Asturias, 2000 -2014 . Ería 99 -100 : 95 -108 .  doi: 10 . 17811 /er. 99 . 2016 . 95 -108
- López-Gay,  A.,  C.  H.  Mulder,  and  J.  A.  Módenes. 2013 .  Does  Cohort  Size  Matter  to  Residential Mobility? The Case of Barcelona's Central City. Busan, South Korea:  XXVII  IUSSP International Population Conference.
- Martinez-Fernandez,  C.,  T.  Weyman,  S.  Fol,  I.  Audirac,  E.  Cunningham-Sabot,  T.  Wiechmann, and H. Yahagi. 2016 . Shrinking Cities in Australia, Japan, Europe and the USA: From a Global Process to Local Policy Responses. Progress in Planning 105 : 1 -48 . doi: 10 . 1016 /j. progress. 2014 . 10 . 001
- Maya-Frades,  A.,  J.  Cortizo-Álvarez,  C.  Hidalgo-González,  M.  J.  Sánchez-Muñoz,  R.  BermejoGarcía, and L. López-Trigal. 2011 . La migración de retorno en Castilla y León . Valladolid, Spain: Junta de Castilla y León.
- McKee,  K.,  T.  Moore,  A.  Soaita,  and  J.  Crawford. 2017 .  'Generation  Rent'  and  the  Fallacy  of Choice. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 41 ( 2 ): 318 -333 . doi: 10 . 1111 / 1468 -2427 . 12445
- Molinero,  F. 2019 .  Rural  Space  in  Spain:  Evolution,  Delimitation  and  Classification. Cuadernos Geográficos 58 ( 3 ): 19 .
- Moos, M., P. Filion, M. Quick, and R. Walter-Joseph. 2019 . Youthification across the Metropolitan System: Intra-urban Residential Geographies of Young Adults in North American Metropolitan Areas. Cities 93 : 224 -237 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.cities. 2019 . 05 . 017
- Morote,  A.  F.,  D.  Saurí,  and  M.  Hernández. 2017 .  Residential  Tourism,  Swimming  Pools,  and Water  Demand  in  the  Western  Mediterranean. The  Professional  Geographer 69 ( 1 ): 1 -11 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 00330124 . 2015 . 1135403
- Nefs,  M.,  S.  Alves,  I.  Zasada,  and  D.  Haase. 2013 .  Shrinking  Cities  as  Retirement  Cities? Opportunities  for  Shrinking  Cities  as  Green  Living  Environments  for  Older  Individuals. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 45 ( 6 ): 1455 -1473 .  doi: 10 . 1068 /a 45302
- Ocaña-Ocaña, C., and R. Larrubia-Vargas. 2012 . Residentes extranjeros y crecimiento demográfico en el territorio andaluz. Boletín De La Asociación De Geógrafos Españoles 60 : 45 -76 .
- Olcina,  J.,  D.  Saurí,  M.  Hernández,  and  A.  Ribas. 2016 .  Flood  Policy  in  Spain:  A  Review  for  the Period 1983 -2013 . Disaster Prevention and Management 25 ( 1 ): 41 -58 . doi: 10 . 1108 /DPM05 -2015 -0108
- Ortiz-Ospina,  E. 2019 . The  Rise  of  Living  Alone:  How  One-person  Households  are  Becoming Increasingly  Common  around  the  World.  Our  World  in  Data.  Oxford .  U.K.:  University  of Oxford. https://ourworldindata.org/living-alone
- Parreño-Castellano,  J.,  and  J.  Domínguez-Mujica. 2017 .  Working  and  Retiring  in  Sunny  Spain: Lifestyle  Migration  Further  Explored. Hungarian  Geographical  Bulletin 65 ( 4 ): 407 -420 . doi: 10 . 15201 /hungeobull. 65 . 4 . 8
- Pérez-Díaz, A., and  F.  Leco-Berrocal. 2013 . 21 st  Century  Migrations  in  Extremadura:  The  Return Immigration. Boletín de la Asociación de Geógrafos Españoles 61 : 93 -115 .
- Philip,  L.,  and  F.  Williams. 2019 .  Remote  Rural  Home-based  Businesses  and  Digital  Inequalities: Understanding  Needs  and  Expectations  in  a  Digitally  Underserved  Community. Journal  of Rural Studies 68 : 306 -318 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.jrurstud. 2018 . 09 . 011
- Pickering,  J.,  V.  A.  Crooks,  J.  Snyder,  and  J.  Morgan. 2019 .  What  Is  Known  about  the  Factors Motivating  Short-term  International  Retirement  Migration?  A  Scoping  Review. Journal  of Population Ageing 12 ( 3 ): 379 -395 .  doi: 10 . 1007 /s 12062 -018 -9221 -y
- Plane, D., C. Henrie, and M. Perry. 2005 . Migration up and down the Urban Hierarchy and across the  Life  Course. Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences 102 ( 43 ): 15313 -15318 . doi: 10 . 1073 /pnas. 0507312102
- Rauhut, D.,  and  A.  Humer. 2020 . EU  Cohesion  Policy  and  Spatial  Economic  Growth: Trajectories in Economic Thought. European Planning Studies 28 ( 11 ): 2116 -2133 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 09654313 . 2019 . 1709416
- Rodríguez, V., C. Egea, and J. A. Nieto. 2002 . Return Migration in Andalusia, Spain. International Journal of Population Geography 8 ( 3 ): 233 -254 .  doi: 10 . 1002 /ijpg. 258
- Rodríguez-Pose,  A.,  and  T.  Ketterer. 2012 .  Do  Local  Amenities  Affect  the  Appeal  of  Regions  in Europe for Migrants? Journal of Regional Science 52 ( 4 ): 535 -561 . doi: 10 . 1111 /j. 1467 -9787 . 2012 . 00779 .x

22

- Rosenberg, M., and J. Everitt. 2001 .  Planning for Aging Populations: Inside or outside the Walls. Progress in Planning 56 ( 3 ): 119 -168 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /S 0305 -9006 ( 01 ) 00014 -9
- Rubiera-Morollón, F., V. M. González-Marroquin, and J. L. Pérez-Rivero. 2016 .  Urban Sprawl in Spain:  Differences  among  Cities  and  Causes. European  Planning  Studies 24 ( 1 ): 207 -226 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 09654313 . 2015 . 1080230
- Sabater,  A.,  E.  Graham,  and  N.  Finney. 2017 .  The  Spatialities  of  Ageing:  Evidencing  Increasing Spatial Polarisation between Older and Younger Adults in England and Wales. Demographic Research 36 : 731 -744 .  doi: 10 . 4054 /DemRes. 2017 . 36 . 25
- Salemink,  K.,  D.  Strijker,  and  G.  Bosworth. 2017 .  Rural  Development  in  the  Digital  Age: A  Systematic  Literature  Review  on  Unequal  ICT  Availability,  Adoption,  and  Use  in  Rural Areas. Journal of Rural Studies 54 : 360 -371 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.jrurstud. 2015 . 09 . 001
- Salvati, L. 2014 . The Spatial Pattern of Soil Sealing along the Urban-rural Gradient in a  Mediterranean  Region. Journal  of  Environmental  Planning  and  Management 57 ( 6 ): 848 -861 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 09640568 . 2013 . 770730
- - -. 2019 .  Bridging  the  Divide:  Demographic  Dynamics  and  Urban-rural  Polarities  during Economic  Expansion  and  Recession  in  Greece. Population,  Space  and  Place 25 ( 8 ):  e 2267 . doi: 10 . 1002 /psp. 2267
- Salvati,  L.,  P.  Serra,  M.  Bencardino,  and  M.  Carlucci. 2019 .  Re-urbanizing  the  European  City: A  Multivariate  Analysis  of  Population  Dynamics  during  Expansion  and  Recession  Times. European Journal of Population 35 ( 1 ): 1 -28 .  doi: 10 . 1007 /s 10680 -017 -9462 -0
- Samuelsson, K., S. Barthel, J. Colding, G. Macassa, and M. Giusti. 2020 . Urban Nature as a Source of  Resilience  during  Social  Distancing  Amidst  the  Coronavirus  Pandemic. OSF  Preprints doi: 10 . 31219 /osf.io/ 3 wx 5 a
- Segers, T., O. Devisch, J. Herssens, and J. Vanrie. 2020 .  Conceptualizing Demographic Shrinkage in  a  Growing  Region.  Creating  Opportunities  for  Spatial  Practice. Landscape  and  Urban Planning 195 : 103711 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.landurbplan. 2019 . 103711
- Serra, P., A. Vera, and A. F. Tulla. 2014 . Beyond Urban-rural Dichotomy: Exploring Socioeconomic and  Land-use  Processes  of  Change  in  Spain  ( 1991 -2011 ). Applied  Geography 55 : 71 -81 . doi: 10 . 1016 /j.apgeog. 2014 . 09 . 005
- Singleton,  A.  D.,  and  S.  E.  Spielman. 2014 .  The  Past,  Present  and  Future  of  Geodemographic Research  in  the  United  States  and  United  Kingdom. The  Professional  Geographer 66 ( 4 ): 558 -567 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 00330124 . 2013 . 848764
- Sobotka,  T.,  and  A.  Fürnkranz-Prskawetz. 2020 .  Demographic  Change  in  Central,  Eastern  and Southeastern  Europe:  Trends,  Determinants  and  Challenges.  In 30 Years  of  Transition  in Europe ,  edited  by  R.  Holzmann,  D.  Ritzberger-Grünwald,  and  H.  Schuberth. 196 -222 . Northampton, Mass: Edward Elgar Publishing.
- Tammaru, T., S. Marcinczak, R. Aunap, M. Van Ham, and H. Janssen. 2020 . Relationship between Income Inequality and Residential Segregation of Socioeconomic Groups. Regional Studies 54 ( 4 ): 450 -461 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 00343404 . 2018 . 1540035
- Tang,  S.,  and  J.  Feng. 2015 .  Cohort  Differences  in  the  Urban  Settlement  Intentions  of  Rural Migrants:  A  Case  Study  in  Jiangsu  Province,  China. Habitat  International 49 : 357 -365 . doi: 10 . 1016 /j.habitatint. 2015 . 06 . 009
- Ueffing,  P.,  F.  Rowe,  and  C.  H.  Mulder. 2015 .  Differences  in  Attitudes  Towards  Immigration between  Australia  and  Germany:  The  Role  of  Immigration  Policy. Comparative  Population Studies 40 ( 4 ): 437 -464 .  doi: 10 . 12765 /CPoS2015 -18
- United Nations. 2018 . World Urbanization Prospects 2018 .  New York: United Nations.
- - -. 2019 . World Population Prospects 2019 .  New York: United Nations.
- Valladares,  F.,  P.  Gil,  and  A.  Forner. 2017 . Bases  científico-técnicas  para  la  estrategia  estatal  de infraestructura  verde  y  de  la  conectividad  y  restauración  ecológicas .  Madrid:  Ministerio  de Agricultura y Pesca, Alimentación y Medio Ambiente.
- Wölfl,  A. 2013 . Improving  Employment  Prospects  for  Young  Workers  in  Spain .  Paris:  OECD Publishing.