This article was downloaded by: [University Of Pittsburgh]

On: 13 November 2014, At: 08:06

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954

Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH,

UK

<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## A LiDAR-Based Analysis of Stream Channel Cross Section Change Across an Urban-Rural Land-Use Boundary

Kirsten Hunt a &amp; Dan Royall b

a University of South Carolina

b University of North Carolina , Greensboro Published online: 29 May 2012.

To cite this article: Kirsten Hunt &amp; Dan Royall (2013) A LiDAR-Based Analysis of Stream Channel Cross Section Change Across an Urban-Rural Land-Use Boundary, The Professional Geographer, 65:2, 296-311, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2012.681517

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2012.681517

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## A LiDAR-Based Analysis of Stream Channel Cross Section Change Across an Urban-Rural Land-Use Boundary ∗

Kirsten Hunt

University of South Carolina

Dan Royall

University of North Carolina at Greensboro

Little is known about the downstream propagation of stream channel alterations initiated by urban flow regimes. In this study, freely available Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) data were combined with ground survey data to derive information on changes in stream cross sections in a North Carolina watershed, moving downstream across an urban-to-rural land-use boundary. Regression analyses relating LiDAR model and ground survey data exhibit poor relationships for all channel morphometric measurements except reachaverage channel capacity. Application of the channel capacity regression reveals a negative power function pattern of downstream decline in channel enlargement. The largest declines occur before streams enter the rural landscape, with more gradual declines afterward. The largest declines in channel size might be attributable to reservoir effects along reaches with wide floodplains. Model results indicate no discernible enlargement once rural land covers and percentage impervious areas of about 60 percent and 16 percent of watershed area, respectively, are reached. Key Words: channel capacity, channel enlargement, LiDAR, urban stream.

我们对由城市水流机制所造成的广泛的河道下游的改变知之甚少。在这项研究中，自由可用 的光探测和测距（LiDAR）数据，结合地面勘测数据，被用米推导北卡罗莱纳州流域，跨越 城市到农村的土地利用边界的向下游移动的河流截面变化的信息。回归分析表明，在LiDAR 模型和地面勘测数据，除了平均河道容量以外的其它所有河道地貌测量值之间，都存在差的 关系。河道容量的应用回归分析揭示了一个下游渠道的增大呈负幂函数下降的模式。最大的 下降幅度在河流进入农村景观前出现，随后更逐渐的下降。河道规模最大的下降可能是由于 水库对宽河漫滩的影响。模拟结果表明，一旦农村土地覆盖和百分比不透水地区分别达到约 60%和16%的流域面积时，河道就不再有明显的扩大。关键词：河道容量，河道扩大， LiDAR，城市流。

Poco se sabe de la propagaci´ on r´ ıo abajo de las alteraciones del cauce iniciadas por los reg´ ımenes de flujo urbano. En este estudio se combinaron datos de consulta abierta de la Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) con datos obtenidos mediante levantamiento de campo para derivar informaci´ on acerca de cambios en los perfiles de la corriente en una cuenca fluvial de Carolina del Norte, a medida que la corriente se desplaza r´ ıo abajo a trav´ es del l´ ımite urbano-rural de uso del suelo. Los an´ alisis de regresi ´ on que relacionan el modelo LiDAR y los datos del levantamiento de campo exhiben relaciones muy pobres para todas las mediciones morfom´ etricas del cauce, con excepci´ on de la capacidad del cauce por tramo promedio. La aplicaci´ on de la regresi´ on de la capacidad del cauce revela un patr´ on de funci´ on negativa de la fuerza de declinaci´ on en la ampliaci´ on del cauce aguas abajo. Las declinaciones m´ as grandes ocurren antes de que las corrientes entren en el paisaje rural, mostrando despu´ es declinaciones m´ as graduales. Las reducciones m´ as grandes en tama ˜ no del cauce podr´ ıan atribuirse a efectos de los embalses, junto con la presencia de tramos con amplias planicies

∗ We thank Dr. Zhi-Jun Liu for discussions of quantitative interpretations. Anita Henderson, Elizabeth Binkley Colyer, and Robert Sorrells provided valuable field assistance. We are also grateful for the many helpful comments made by the reviewers.

de inundaci´ on. Los resultados del modelo no indican ampliaci´ on discernible alguna tan pronto como se llega a las coberturas de la tierra rural y se alcanzan los porcentajes de ´ areas impermeables de alrededor del 60 y del 16 por ciento, respectivamente, del ´ area de la cuenca. Palabras clave: capacidad del cauce, ampliaci´ on del cauce, LiDAR, r´ ıos urbanos.

T he morphological characteristics of stream channels coevolve in the short term (10 1 -10 2 years) in accordance with hydrologic regimes and sediment loads (Schumm 1977; Knighton 1998; Brierley and Fryirs 2005; Schumm 2005). These fundamental controls reflect the combined effects of an array of watershed variables including drainage area, relief, bedrock geology, climate, vegetation characteristics, and system history. Land use represents a further major influence that is capable of heavily impacting discharges of water and sediment (Poff, Bledsoe, and Cuhaciyan 2006; Walling 2006). Alteration of land cover changes the rainfall-runoff response of watersheds by changing the capacity of the land surface to absorb rainfall, often leading to greater runoff and increased erosion and sedimentloads (Dunne and Leopold 1978; Gregory 2006). This change is particularly intense in urban environments in which the high impervious surface area greatly magnifies runoff and stream discharge peaks, commonly resulting in channel cross section enlargement and other morphological changes (Booth 1991; Chin 2006).

The mechanisms and results of urban channel enlargement have been well documented in a number of areas within urban environments (Wolman 1967; Hammer 1972; Booth 1991; Chin 2006; Gregory 2006). Most studies have been based on observations of channel morphology as rural streams enter urban environments or of separate rural and urban watersheds (Ebisemiju 1989; Roberts 1989; Gregory, Davis, and Downs 1992). Few studies have evaluated the nature of channel change as streams arising in fully urbanized watersheds flow into rural landscapes. The rate and trajectory of this shift have important implications for rural landowners as well as downstream municipalities whose legal borders might be approaching contact with those of upstream urban areas. In addition, the details of downstream morphological change have implications for understanding the range of natural variability in hydraulic geometry, which is crucial to successful stream rehabilitation (Downs and Gregory 2004).

In this study, Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR)-derived digital topographic models and field survey data are utilized to examine the urban-to-rural transition in channel cross-sectional change for two headwater streams in the North Carolina Piedmont: North and South Buffalo Creeks, in Guilford County (Figure 1). Topographic models constructed from freely available LiDAR data are calibrated using field-surveyed channel cross section measurements, allowing high-density model sampling and tracking of downstream trends. The results are combined with data from independent hydraulic geometry curves and land use mapping to describe and explain the nature of adjustments in channel cross section dimensions for North and South Buffalo creeks as they flow from urban into rural landscapes.

## Background

Urban Stream Syndrome and Downstream Hydraulic Geometry

Urban stream syndrome refers to a set of hydrological, geomorphological, and biological symptoms commonly associated with streams where a significant portion of the contributing upland catchment has been affected by urbanization (Paul and Meyer 2001; Walsh et al. 2005). As urbanization takes place in a watershed, increases in the areal extent and connectedness of impervious surfaces and the concentration of storm flow by physical conduits like sewer systems increase the volume and velocity of flow in channels (Dunne and Leopold 1978; Booth 1991; Schueler 1995). The hydrogeomorphic consequences of this include 'flashier' hydrographs with higher discharge peaks and altered channel morphology (Booth 1991; Paul and Meyer 2001; Walsh et al. 2005). Channel cross section enlargement is the most frequently cited response, with urban channels commonly becoming two to three times and as much as fifteen times larger than nonurban channels of comparable watershed area (Dunne and Leopold 1978;

Figure 1 Buffalo Creek watershed and the city of Greensboro in Guilford County, North Carolina. The ten open circles along North Buffalo Creek indicate stream reaches for which both ground-survey and modelextracted cross-section data were obtained. Filled circles along both North and South Buffalo creeks indicate stream reaches with model-extracted cross sections only. The numbers of ground-surveyed cross sections for each of the ten survey reaches on North Buffalo Creek are Wesley Long (1), Westover (5), Lower Latham (2), Elm St. (3), Church St. (4), Summit (2), White St. (3), Landfill (1), NBCnG (2), and Creekview (2).

<!-- image -->

Booth 1991; Walsh et al. 2005; Chin 2006). Much less enlargement, reductions in size, no clear pattern, and complex patterns of change have also been observed (Gregory, Davis, and Downs 1992; Odemerho 1992; Chin and Gregory 2001; Grable and Harden 2006; Kang, Storm, and Marston 2010).

Although much has been written about urban channel enlargement, little literature exists documenting precise trends in channel cross section adjustment as urban streams flow into rural areas downstream. Knighton (1998) noted that 'the extent to which enlargement is propagated downstream remains unknown' (322). McBride and Booth (2005) found that the general symptoms of urban stream syndrome 'improve' downstream if the riparian zone is substantially forested and devoid of road crossings. Odemerho (1992) found that channel constriction (rather than enlargement) occurred in the urban zone due to large sediment inputs from new construction and that this was rapidly reversed downstream of the urbanized area. Kang and Marston (2006) presented regression results for channel capacity of the predominantly rural Skeleton Creek, flowing out of Enid, Oklahoma. Residuals from their regression line drop sharply to lower capacity following the creek's exit from the municipal boundary, although there are few data points situated across that boundary, and their regression line trends positively overall. In the nearby watershed of Stillwater Creek, urbanization (3.9 percent impervious surface area) was found to have little impact on channel capacities (Kang, Storm, and Marston 2010). The authors cited the importance of geological setting as well as local variations in bank cohesiveness and riparian vegetation characteristics as effective influences resisting erosive urban runoff regimes.

## Topographic Measurements from LiDAR

LiDAR technology allows the rapid remote acquisition of highly accurate elevation points at high spatial resolution. Expected horizontal and vertical root mean square errors are frequently less than 1 m and point spacing of refined data sets is commonly less than 4 m (Kraus and Pfeifer 1998; Baltsavias 1999; Hodgson et al. 2003). Several important limitations of LiDAR exist, though. For example, even at 4-m resolution, LiDAR returns might be ill-suited to defining features with precise boundaries such as the tops and bottoms of stream banks, necessitating manual input of breakline data derived from other sources (Maune 2001). Automated methods for filtering buildings from bare-earth surfaces tend to also filter or smooth natural features with similarly sharp topographic breaks (Kraus and Pfeifer 1998; Maune 2001; Bowen and Waltermire 2002; James, Watson, and Hansen 2007). LiDAR returns from water features are generally unreliable, due to the absorption and scattering of pulses (Maune 2001; H¨ ofle et al. 2009). In densely vegetated areas, a nearvertical pulse is needed to effectively penetrate canopy and generate a true bare-earth return (Kraus and Pfeifer 1998; Hodgson et al. 2003). The mean distance to the nearest LiDAR point might be closely tied to land cover class, with the greatest point spacing in deciduous, mixed, and scrub or shrub environments (Hodgson et al. 2003).

## Morphometric Analyses with LiDAR

Despite the limitations, useful geomorphological analyses have been conducted using LiDAR data. An early application of LiDAR technology involved the measurement of channel and gully morphology. Ritchie et al. (1994) made rough estimates of river channel widths and depths by connecting minimum elevation measurements with straight and curvilinear lines using 'best judgment' practices. Bowen and Waltermire (2002) sought to identify the types of river corridor terrain most commonly associated with the largest measurement errors in the Western United States. Large LiDAR elevation overestimations were found to be common in areas with both dense vegetation and steep banks. Charlton, Large, and Fuller (2003) evaluated the abilities of LiDAR to map a gravel-bed wandering stream in the United Kingdom and found that error was introduced by both the presence of vegetation and by deep water, which tended to produce gaps in the point spacing. James, Watson, and Hansen (2007) used LiDAR to map gully networks and headwater streams under forest canopy in South Carolina. Their model captured the location of gully networks accurately but not gully channel dimensions. Overestimation of channel width and underestimation of channel depth were tied to point spacing. The authors recommended the incorporation of ancillary data such as breaklines to explicitly delineate the rims and bottoms of channels.

These studies illustrate that accurate measurements of channel width and depth are difficult to extract from LiDAR data sets. If the limitations of the methods with respect to topography and land cover are consistent or constant, however, then scaled relationships between model and nature might be obtainable. In this study we create and field-calibrate a LiDAR-based model of downstream change in channel dimensions and particularly channel capacities at higher resolution than could be obtained by field studies alone in a similar time frame. We use this model to test the hypothesis that decline in channel enlargement ratio downstream of urban headwaters is directly proportional to the proportion of watershed area that is urbanized, a value that declines exponentially with downstream distance from the municipal boundary.

## Field Area

North and South Buffalo creeks head in Greensboro, North Carolina (population 250,000; Figures 1 and 2), a medium-sized city in the Piedmont physiographic province. The area falls within the humid subtropical climate zone, with an average annual temperature of 14.5 ◦ C and an average annual rainfall of 1,074 mm. Vegetation consists predominantly of mixed deciduous and coniferous trees. Upland soils are formed in residuum from metamorphosed felsic rocks and contain a clay-rich Bt (argillic) horizon. North and South Buffalo creeks (henceforth, NBC and SBC) exit the urban boundary at drainage areas of approximately 65 and 75 km 2 , respectively, and join in

Figure 2 Selected images of North and South Buffalo creeks. Names refer to stream reaches displayed in Figure 1. NBC = North Buffalo Creek; SBC = South Buffalo Creek. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

rural eastern Guilford County to form Buffalo Creek (total drainage area of 230 km 2 ). Total relief in the watershed is 76 m. The majority of the municipal area within the NBC and SBC

catchments has been fully urbanized since the 1960s and 1970s, respectively; thus, there has been some time for a new quasi-equilibrium state under urban conditions to be achieved.

Data on stream bankfull cross-sectional area (capacity), width, and depth for large numbers of both rural and urban streams in the North Carolina Piedmont demonstrate that urban streams typically exhibit an increase in channel dimensions relative to rural streams of equivalent drainage areas (Doll et al. 2002). Regional hydraulic geometry curves derived from these data display an average channel capacity enlargement ratio (the urban capacity divided by the corresponding rural capacity at the same drainage area) of 2.6. The channels surveyed in this study are partially confined to unconfined and increase in sinuosity downstream, reaching values of 1.4 to 1.8 near the NBC-SBC confluence. Some upper urban reaches have been dredged for flood control as recently as 1986. Elsewhere, deliberate direct modification of channels is uncommon, particularly in areas downstream of the urban boundary. Based on maps of historical land uses in 1895 and 1908, and subsequent 1951 and 1994 U.S. Geological Survey topographic maps, four mill ponds existed on the main stem of NBC and one on SBC at different times prior to 1951. No impoundments on the main stems of either stream were documented for subsequent decades.

## Methods

Field Surveys

Ground surveys using meter tape and leveling (Abney or theodolite) were conducted to acquire data on the dimensions of twenty-six channel cross sections from ten different stream reaches (one to five cross sections per reach, spaced 20-30 m apart) along NBC and one cross section at one reach downstream of the NBC-SBC junction (Figure 1). Surveys were conducted over a period of three years from 2005 to 2008. Sites were chosen to avoid the spatially immediate effects of tributary junctions, bridges, and culverts. Bankfull elevation heights were estimated at each site using morphological criteria, including the top of well-developed point bars and prominent benches (when present) and, more commonly in the absence of such indicators, the elevation of the apparent floodplain (top of lowest bank; Harrelson, Rawlins, and Potyondy 1994). Morphological evidence of bankfull stage was emphasized due to the unreliability of features like temporary scour lines and vegetation zones along eastern streams (Harman 2000; Doll et al. 2002; U.S. Department of Agriculture 2003). Bankfull stages thus identified were judged on the basis of gauging data and postflood field evidence to be reached by flows typically occurring every one to two years, the most common frequency cited for bankfull flows in eastern U.S. streams. Bankfull channel capacity, width, and depth were calculated from the field data for each section.

## Channel Model Data Preparation

LiDAR data acquired in 2000 and 2001, the only years for which these data are available in the study area, were obtained for the Buffalo Creek watershed from the North Carolina Floodplain Mapping Project Web site (http://www.ncfloodmaps.com/ [last accessed 14 November 2011]). Although LiDAR data acquisition predates the field surveys by several years, field observations suggest that rates of channel change along the mainstem drainages of NBC and SBC are sufficiently low to permit useful comparisons. Two data sets, one 'bare-earth' point set with a spatial resolution of roughly 3 m and its associated breaklines and a 6.1-m (20-ft) hydrologically correct raster set, were obtained. Specifics regarding the return information used by the private vendor to create the bare-earth data set for the State of North Carolina are unavailable, although it is likely that the data were processed using a local elevation variance filter applied to all returns. The 3-m data set was cropped to an area within 152.4 m (500 ft) adjacent to stream channels and was used for creating the channel model. The 6.1-m resolution set was collected for a larger area and was used to calculate upstream drainage areas for channel cross sections.

Using ArcGIS (version 9.3; ESRI 2009), the bare-earth 3-m tiles were converted to point shapefiles, projected into NAD83 State Plane Zone 17N (feet) coordinates, the native projection, then converted to SI units. The vector point files were then merged and converted to a triangulated irregular network (TIN) file to create a digital model of the land surface. Breaklines provided with the 3-m data set were insufficiently accurate for determining channel top-of-bank features and thus the top-of-bank breaklines were manually digitized using 2002

orthophotography and verified using contours generated from the 3-m TIN and ground survey data. These breaklines were converted to 3D lines, and a new TIN was generated.

In the 3-m bare-earth data set, automated filtering techniques have resulted in a significant reduction of point density in many areas along the stream channels. To consider these potential omissions, 'raw' unclassified LiDAR point cloud data were obtained from the U.S. Geological Survey Center for LiDAR Information Coordination and Knowledge Web site (http://lidar.cr.usgs.gov/ [last accessed 14 November 2011]). Raw points were selected from in between the top-of-bank breaklines, omitting points redundant within the 3-m set, and then manually filtered to only include points below the breakline elevations. The remaining raw points were then merged with the 3-m data set to create a density-enhanced 'mixed model' point data set. A new TIN surface was derived from this merged set and the breaklines, and manual editing was performed to eliminate obvious non-earth returns (i.e., lone returns more than 1 m higher than surrounding returns) within the channel area.

## Model Evaluation, Calibration, and Extension

Channel cross sections were extracted from the LiDAR-derived TIN for the reaches containing ground-surveyed sites. Selection of locations for LiDAR model data extractions were constrained by random variations in LiDAR point densities that produce optimal extraction locations only where points fall near channel margins. As a result, precise correspondence between ground survey and model sample point locations was rarely achievable. Instead, the dimensions from three model cross sections at each field sample location were averaged for comparison with averaged dimensions for field-based cross sections from the same locations. Modeled and field-based average dimensions were regressed to evaluate model accuracy (by coefficients of determination) and determine best practice techniques for subsequent selection of model cross section extraction locations between the ground survey sites. This approach assumes that even in cases where field determinations of bankfull stage place it below the top-of-bank elevation best suited to LiDAR measurement, a substantial degree of proportionality between the two measurements with respect to drainage area will remain. A successful regression model was then used to correct LiDAR-derived cross section measurements from locations in both NBC and SBC without ground surveys to permit higher density sampling of downstream trends in channel size (Figure 1).

## Results

Channel widths were generally overestimated by the LiDAR model and channel depths and capacities were underestimated by it (Figure 3). The fact that LiDAR returns from the bank top rarely occur right at the edges of opposing banks and thus are always set back from the bank edge some distance (less than the LiDAR point-spacing resolution) accounts for width overestimation ( James, Watson, and Hansen 2007). The underestimation of depth might largely be due to returns from the water surface or above-water in-channel features as opposed to the submerged channel bed. Width measurements also appear to be more accurate under lessvegetated conditions, as indicated by the higher regression residuals for Mixed 2 and Forested conditions (Table 1).

Regression lines for modeled and surveyed channel widths and depths have very low ( &lt; 0.1) coefficients of determination ( R 2 ; Figure 3), especially when evaluated on the basis of the individual sample points making up the raw data. R 2 for channel capacity is higher but still low at 0.36. Coefficients of determination for sample reach average values remain poor for

Table 1 Regression residuals for three cross section measurements by vegetation category

|                 | Vegetation category   | Vegetation category   | Vegetation category   | Vegetation category   |         |
|-----------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|---------|
| Measure         | Open                  | Mixed 1               | Mixed 2               | Forest                | Average |
| Width (m)       | 2 . 83                | 1 . 79                | 4 . 41                | 4 . 24                | 3 . 32  |
| Depth (m)       | 0 . 34                | 0 . 30                | 0 . 12                | 0 . 30                | 0 . 27  |
| Capacity (m 2 ) | 4 . 56                | 5 . 32                | 4 . 70                | 5 . 65                | 5 . 06  |

Note: Vegetation category descriptions: open = few trees/shrubs, banks clearly visible in orthophotography; Mixed 1 = shrub or scrub or small trees along one bank, not extending beyond riparian zone; Mixed 2 = shrub or scrub or small trees along both banks, not extending beyond riparian zone; Forest = mixed evergreen and deciduous trees extending beyond riparian zone.

Figure 3 Scatterplots of ground surveyed versus LiDAR-modeled channel dimensions for North Buffalo Creek with linear regression lines and 1:1 reference lines. LiDAR = Light Detection and Ranging. Note: Plots in the right-hand column are for reach-average values of width, depth, and channel capacity.

<!-- image -->

width and depth but are substantially higher ( R 2 = 0.73) for channel capacity (Figure 3). This result is perhaps unexpected, given that poor correlations for width and depth might also be expected to produce poor correlations for channel capacity. The differences between modeled and actual widths (which are overesti- mated by the LiDAR model) and depths (which are underestimated), however, act to offset one another when combined to determine capacity. This effect is proportional; when width is highly overestimated by the LiDAR model, depth is more strongly underestimated (Figure 4). Width is more greatly overestimated for

Figure 4 Scatterplot of variations in model error for width (W) and depth (D) measurements. Model error in depth is inversely proportional to model error in width.

<!-- image -->

narrower channels, possibly because LiDAR point setback from the banks is a greater proportion of total width. That depth is more strongly underestimated in narrower channels might be because there is a smaller area from which to produce accurate LiDAR returns and more of the width is taken up by the exposed bases of banks. Together these decrease the chances for accurate representation of the lowest portions of the channel bed. The resulting systematic offset in model error for width and depth acts to stabilize difference values for channel capacity, resulting in better correlation.

Correcting model-derived channel capacity values using the reach-average regression equation (Figure 3) produces values that largely plot between the Doll et al. (2002) hydraulic geometry curves for urban and rural Piedmont streams (Figure 5). Moving downstream, both ground survey values and model values shift toward the rural curve, with enlargement ratios (ERs) beginning to decline well before the streams exit the urban (municipal) boundary at 65 and 75 km 2 for NBC and SBC, respectively (Figures 5, 6, and 7). The largest declines in enlargement occur at low drainage areas below 35 km 2 , approximately coincident with the first major increase in floodplain widths (Figure 8) and associated gradient reductions.

At SBC, channel capacities attain and even decline below rural dimensions (ER ≤ 1) for several reaches beginning at 90 km 2 (Figure 6), corresponding to 17 percent rural land use and 34 percent impervious area in the watershed (Figure 9A) before enlarging again around 125 km 2 . Although channel capacities at NBC never quite attain ER = 1 (Figure 6), they do occur within the scatter envelope for the rural regression (Figure 5), allowing for the possibility that rural dimensions might still have been achieved above the confluence with SBC. Values within the rural point scatter limits first occur at 88 km 2 drainage area at NBC, corresponding to a 26 percent proportion of rural land use cover in the watershed and 30 percent total impervious area (Figure 9A), and remain within it further downstream (Figure 5). Power functions give better fits than exponentials for downstream changes in enlargement ratios (Figure 6). The power function regressions for NBC and SBC place zero enlargement (ER = 1) at 240 and 143 km 2 , respectively, areas not achieved before the confluence of the two streams. Extrapolated rural area percentages for these drainage areas are 72 percent and 48 percent, respectively; impervious area percentages are 11 percent and 22 percent, respectively.

Although the general downstream trend is toward reduced channel enlargement, there is higher frequency variability displayed in the data plots (Figure 6), some of which is coherent (i.e., apparently nonrandom), particularly at drainage areas greater than 50 km 2 . At NBC, an increase in channel enlargement occurring after the junction with Muddy Creek is followed by a decline to near rural values ( &lt; 1.5) after the junction with Jorden Branch (Figure 6). A similar pattern is also exhibited by SBC beginning around 80 km 2 , with increases in enlargement ratios ranging from 1.5 to 2.3 succeeded downstream by values below 1 before returning to ∼ 1.5 near the NBC junction. Muddy Creek at NBC drains the highly impervious central business district (CBD) of Greensboro and passes through zones of heavy and light industrial development with high impervious cover (Figure 7B).

Enlargement increases at SBC similarly occur downstream of the entrance of drainage from the densely urbanized CBD fringe (Figure 6), which also passes through a long industrial

Figure 5 Channel capacities of North and South Buffalo creeks relative to hydraulic geometry curves for urban and rural watersheds in the North Carolina Piedmont (hydraulic geometry curves based on data from Doll et al. 2002).

<!-- image -->

corridor just upstream of its SBC confluence (Figure 7B). Similar to the NBC case, a rapid decline in enlargement at SBC around 95 km 2 coincides with both reduction in urban area stormwater inputs and the first consistently large expansion of floodplain area (Figures 6, 7, and 8). In the SBC case, the large and sustained reduction in channel capacity does not begin until approximately 4 km downstream of the municipal boundary. An increase in enlargement of SBC near the confluence with NBC (112 km 2 ; Figure 7) coincides in space with a return to greater valley confinement and narrow floodplain conditions (Figure 8).

## Discussion

The free and publicly available LiDAR data we use to construct the channel model are useful but limited by their resolution for purposes of deriving morphometric measurements from headwater channels, as evidenced by the poor correlations between modeled and groundsurveyed channel widths and depths. Even the best regression for channel capacity accounted for only 73 percent of variability in surveyed capacity, and there are several possible factors contributing to this weak result. The resolution issue produced the need to seek cross section locations having optimal LiDAR point

Figure 6 Downstream trends in channel enlargement ratio for North and South Buffalo creeks. Unfilled triangles show the former locations of old mill dams.

<!-- image -->

spacing with returns near the channel edge, and such optimal locations rarely coincide exactly with survey locations. Thus, any random natural variation in channel dimensions over short distances would decrease the strength of individual point correlations. In some locations, error due to local changes in channel morphology taking place between the time of the LiDARflight(2000-2001) and when surveys were conducted (2005-2008) might also weaken the correlation. Judging from observations since 2003, however, change has been localized and minor and in our judgment is of lesser importance than LiDAR model error with respect to accurately defining general downstream trends in channel capacity.

Difficulties in the field identification of bankfull stage, a particularly severe problem in many urban environments (U.S. Department of Agriculture 2003), might contribute error reflected in the point scatter. In our application, LiDAR obtained the best information for top-of-bank locations, which might or might not coincide with bankfull stage as determined from field evidence. Overestimations of bankfull channel capacity in the field at some locations would erroneously increase the Y -intercept of the LiDAR model regression for channel capacity (Figure 3), resulting in exaggeration of both enlargement ratios and projected downstream distances for zero enlargement.

Only through the regression of reachaverage measurements could error be sufficiently equilibrated to produce a useful model of changing channel capacity. The application of this regression model to tracking downstream changes in channel capacity across the urban-rural land use boundary reveals variations in channel enlargement ratio at three scales: (1) the broad negative power function trend in downstream channel enlargement, (2) moderate frequency (e.g., 25 km 2 ) coherent changes embedded in the broader trend, and (3) high-frequency variation between consecutive sites.

Thenegative power function trends that best fit the downstream sequences of enlargement ratios do not parallel the exponential decline of the proportion of watershed area classified as urban as hypothesized. The largest reductions in enlargement occur close to or upstream of the urban-rural landscape boundary (Figure 6). At NBC, the correspondence between this decline, the first major expansion of floodplain width and area, and marked decrease in channel gradient from as high as 0.0023 to 0.0011 suggests that flood-peak attenuation via reservoir effects could be an important constraint on downstream propagation of urban impacts. A similar early enlargement decline and expansion of floodplain width is also evident at SBC (Figures 6, 7, and 8). TurnerGillespie, Smith, and Bates (2003) observed strong flood-peak attenuation in association with wide valley bottoms and low stream gradients in an environmentally similar urbanizing basin near Charlotte, North Carolina. Analyses of hydrographs above and below Latham Park at NBC reveal flood-peak attenuation in eight of the last twelve flow events. Most of these events were below bankfull stage, indicating the importance of both channel and overbank storage at this site.

(A)

Figure 7 Spatial distribution of channel enlargement ratios for North and South Buffalo creeks: (A) relative to municipal boundary and (B) relative to impervious area concentration and tributary inputs.

<!-- image -->

Figure 8 Cumulative floodplain area and floodplain width as functions of drainage area for North and South Buffalo creeks.

<!-- image -->

Turner-Gillespie, Smith, and Bates (2003) noted that flood-wave attenuation was a function of the interplay of both geologically controlled valley geometry and hydrologic response in headwater reaches at their sites. Thus, the rapid decline of enlargement in the uppermost reaches of the Buffalo Creek watershed is not likely to represent a trend intrinsically associated with conditions of urban land use. Downstream increases in sinuosity might also contribute to parallel reductions in peak discharge and channel enlargement, but substantial increases in sinuosity do not occur in the upstream zone of greatest channel capacity decline. Based on average values derived from the power function curve fits, some degree of urban channel enlargement persists downstream many kilometers until the proportion of drainage area categorized as rural increases to

Figure 9 (A) Percentage of watershed covered by impervious surface and percentage in rural land use (i.e., outside the municipal boundary) as a function of drainage area in the North and South Buffalo creek watersheds. (B) Scatterplot of percentage impervious land cover versus channel enlargement ratio for North and South Buffalo creeks.

<!-- image -->

around 60 percent (i.e., 40 percent urban) and impervious area percentage declines to about 16 percent. The latter value is similar to the effective impervious cover value of 10 percent that has been suggested by Booth and Jackson (1997) as a threshold value for major channel instability and permanent stream habitat degradation.

Moderate frequency variations in enlargement are sometimes spatially coincident with such changes as major tributary confluences, large zones of particularly high impervious area, and floodplain size variations. Storm water inputs from subwatersheds of the CBD and highly impervious industrial zones could enlarge the trunk stream until countered by greater low-density residential or rural landscape drainage. This might explain the coherent enlargement increase and subsequent decline between Muddy Creek and Jorden Branch tributary inputs along NBC (Figures 6 and 7). Floodplain widths and presumably

related flood-peak attenuation effects, however, also increase between Muddy Creek and Jorden Branch (Figure 8), potentially curtailing any local enlargement effects produced from the highly impervious Muddy Creek watershed. Floodplain and valley width controls might also be evident along SBC around the 90-km 2 drainage area. The lowest values of enlargement observed at SBC begin at this point just downstream of the municipal boundary and correspond with even larger floodplain expansion than at NBC (Figure 8).

High frequency variation could represent real variation in channel capacities, random error in LiDAR-modeled cross section dimensions, or, perhaps most likely, both combined. In addition to the sorts of extrinsic hydrogeomorphological controls on channel dimensions discussed so far, as well as intrinsic variability always present in fluvial systems, there are many possible sources of local variability, particularly in urban environments, that could increase high frequency variability in channel dimensions. Urban environments feature complex palimpsest land uses, stemming from sometimes long, complex histories, not all of which can be accounted for. The most local of these, such as old infrastructure crossings, variations in bank vegetation and stability, and local storm water outfalls might account for much apparently random variability in channel dimensions (Hammer1972; Ebisemiju 1989; Roberts 1989; Gregory, Davis, and Downs 1992; Chin 2006; Grable and Harden 2006).

Also of importance are more areally extensive channel modifying influences, including historical channelization impacts and old stream impoundments such as mill dams. Although muchreadjustment has occurred in those upper urban reaches known to have been channelized, it is probable that LiDAR-model channel capacities in at least some of these remain larger than average, and this would serve to exaggerate the rapid decline in enlargement observed at low drainage areas. The powerfunction regression equations for our watersheds, however, are insensitive to removal of local high values, preserving the trend of rapid decline in enlargement. With regard to impoundments, Walter and Merritts (2008) and Merritts (2011) have remarked on the influence of often-unrecognized mill dam sediment accumulations on channel morphology in the eastern United States. Deep incision into pond sediments following dam removal could manifest as local increases in enlargement ratios. Of the sample points nearest five former mill dam locations along NBC and SBC (triangles in Figure 6), none exhibit high enlargement ratios. Walter and Merritts (2008) estimated an average frequency of between five and ten mill dams per 100 km 2 for this area, and such a frequency would make dam sediments important in only a small number of reaches. Further detailed studies of the stratigraphy of bank sediments in the Buffalo Creek drainage, however, would allow a better assessment of the full impacts of such historical features on channel morphology.

## Conclusion

This study demonstrates that channel terrain models derived from 3-m point-spacing resolution LiDAR data do not accurately represent specific cross-sectional shapes in detail at most points but can be used, at least at our sites, to estimate reach-averaged channel capacities. Based on these modeled capacities, enlargement ratios decrease downstream of urban areas with a trend best fit by a negative power function. A large proportion of the total decrease occurs within or relatively close to the urban boundary as a result of the interplay between diminishing runoff augmentation by reduced impervious cover and the occurrence of geologically controlled wide floodplain reaches and commensurately strong reservoir effect. The power function relationships describing declines in enlargement ratio indicate that full return of channel capacity to rural dimensions does not occur until over half of the watershed area is rural or about 16 percent of the watershed is impervious.

Although generally decreasing, enlargement ratios appear to fluctuate in response to significant increases in contributing drainage area at major tributary junctions, with the directions of the fluctuations influenced by the nature of land use in the tributary's watershed. These relationships are not always clear, though, and the high complexity of the urban environment and its history of human modifications and of fluvial processes in general continue to present

many challenges to understanding the impacts of urbanization on channel morphology.

Limitations of both the data set and technique reduce the general utility of our outcomes, and it would be inadvisable to apply our model uncritically to any other geological or hydrogeomorphological environment. Similar studies of different streams in the Piedmont and elsewhere are advocated for determining whether averaging model-derived dimensions is a robust approach, although more current LiDAR data would be needed for this. Future exploration is also recommended with regard to the use of raw LiDAR data. The development of algorithms to specifically target bare-earth points in riparian settings, as well as the exploration of other interpolation options (kriging, etc.), could be invaluable in the development of models that more accurately capture channel dimensions at a local scale. Such models would be of great benefit in studying all kinds of landuse impacts on stream channel change. /squaresolid

## Literature Cited

- Baltsavias, E. P. 1999. A comparison between photogrammetry and laser scanning. Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 5:83-94.
- Booth, D. B. 1991. Urbanization and the natural drainage system-Impacts, solutions, and prognoses. The Northwest Environmental Journal 7:93-118.
- Booth, D. B., and C. R. Jackson. 1997. Urbanization of aquatic systems-Degradation thresholds, stormwater detention, and the limits of mitigation. Journal of the American Water Resources Association 22 (5): 1077-90.
- Bowen, Z. H., and R. G. Waltermire. 2002. Evaluation of Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) for measuring river corridor topography. Journal of the American Water Resources Association 38 (1): 3341.
- Brierley, G. J., and K. A. Fryirs. 2005. Geomorphology and river management: Applications of the River Styles framework. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
- Charlton, M. E., A. R. G. Large, and I. C. Fuller. 2003. Application of airborne LiDAR in river environments: The River Coquet, Northumberland, UK. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 28:299-306.
- Chin, A. 2006. Urban transformation of river landscapes in a global context. Geomorphology 79:460-87.
- Chin, A., and K. J. Gregory. 2001. Urbanization and adjustment of ephemeral streamchannels. Annals
- of the Association of American Geographers 91 (4): 595-608.
- Doll, B. A., D. E. Wise-Frederick, C. M. Buckner, S. D. Wilkerson, W. A. Harman, R. E. Smith, and J. Spooner. 2002. Hydraulic geometry relationships for urban streams throughout the Piedmont of North Carolina. Journal of the American Water Resources Association 38 (3): 641-51.
- Downs, P. W., and K. J. Gregory. 2004. River channel management: Towards sustainable catchment hydrosystems. New York: Arnold/ Oxford University Press.
- Dunne, T. R., and L. Leopold. 1978. Water in environmental planning. New York: Freeman.
- Ebisemiju, S. F. 1989. Patterns of stream channel response to urbanization in the humid tropics and their implications for urban land use planning: A case study from southwestern Nigeria. Applied Geography 9:273-86.
- ESRI. 2009. ArcGIS, Version 9.3. Redlands, CA: Environmental Systems Research Institute.
- Grable, J. L., and C. P. Harden. 2006. Geomorphic response of an Appalachian valley and ridge stream to urbanization. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 31:1707-20.
- Gregory, K. J. 2006. The human role in changing river channels. Geomorphology 79:172-91.
- Gregory, K. J., R. J. Davis, and P. W. Downs. 1992. Identification of river channel change due to urbanization. Applied Geography 12:299-318.
- Hammer, T. R. 1972. Stream channel enlargement due to urbanization. Water Resources Research 8:6.
- Harman,W.A.2000.FindingbankfullstageinNorth Carolina streams. River Course Fact Sheet No. 3. North Carolina Stream Restoration Institute, Raleigh, NC.
- Harrelson, C. C., C. L. Rawlins, and J. P. Potyondy. 1994. Stream channel reference sites: An illustrated guide to field technique. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-245, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO.
- Hodgson, M. E., J. R. Jensen, L. Schmidt, S. Schill, and B. Davis. 2003. An evaluation of LiDAR and IFSAR derived digital elevation models in leaf-on conditions with USGS Level 1 and Level 2 DEMs. Remote Sensing of Environment 84:295-308.
- H¨ ofle, B., M. Vetter, N. Pfeifer, G. Mandlburger, and J. St¨ otter. 2009. Water surface mapping from airborne laser scanning using signal intensity and elevation data. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 34:1635-49.
- James, L. A., D. G. Watson, and W. F. Hansen. 2007. Using LiDAR data to map gullies and headwater streams under forest canopy. Catena 71:132-44.
- Kang, R. S., and R. A. Marston. 2006. Geomorphic effects of rural-to-urban land use conversion on three streams in the Central Redbed Plains of Oklahoma. Geomorphology 79:488-506.

- Kang, R. S., D. E. Storm, and R. A. Marston. 2010. Downstream effects of urbanization on Stillwater Creek, Oklahoma. Physical Geography 31 (2): 186-201.
- Knighton, D. 1998. Fluvial forms and processes. London: Arnold.
- Kraus, K., and N. Pfeifer. 1998. Determination of terrain models in wooded areas with airborne laser scanner data. Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 53:195-203.
- Maune, D. F. 2001. Digital elevation model technologies and applications: The DEM user's manual. Bethesda, MD: American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing.
- McBride, M., and D. B. Booth. 2005. Urban impacts on physical stream conditions: Effects of spatial scale, connectivity, and longitudinal trends. Journal of the American Water Resources Association 6:565-80.
- Merritts, D. 2011. Anthropocene streams and base-level controls from historic dams in the unglaciated mid-Atlantic region, USA. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical &amp; Engineering Sciences 369 (1938): 976-1009.
- Odemerho, F. O. 1992. Limited downstream response of stream channel size to urbanization in a humid tropical basin. Professional Geographer 44 (3): 332-39.
- Paul, M. J., and J. L Meyer. 2001. Streams in the urban landscape. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 32 (1): 333-65.
- Poff, N. L., B. P. Bledsoe, and C. O. Cuhaciyan. 2006. Hydrologic variation with land use across the contiguous United States: Geomorphic and ecological consequences for stream ecosystems. Geomorphology 79:264-85.
- Ritchie, J. C., E. H. Grissinger, J. B. Murphey, and J. D. Garbrecht. 1994. Measuring channel and gully cross sections with an airborne laser altimeter. Hydrological Processes 8:237-43.
- Roberts, C. R. 1989. Flood frequency and urbaninduced channel change: Some British examples. In Floods: Hydrological, sedimentological and geomorphological implications , ed. K. Beven and P. Carling, 57-82. New York: Wiley.
- Schueler, T. 1995. The importance of imperviousness. Watershed Protection Techniques 1 (3): 100-11. Schumm, S. A. 1977. The fluvial system. New York: Wiley.
- ---. 2005. River variability and complexity. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Turner-Gillespie, D. F., J. A. Smith, and P. D. Bates. 2003. Attenuating reaches and the regional flood response of an urbanizing drainage basin. Advances in Water Resources 26: 673-84.
- U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2003. Identifying bankfull stage in forested streams in the eastern United States (video). Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Stream Systems Technology Center.
- Walling, D. E. 2006. Human impact on land-ocean sediment transfer by the world's rivers. Geomorphology 79:192-216.
- Walsh, C. J., A. J. Roy, J. W. Feminella, P. D. Cottingham, P. M. Groffman, and R. P. Morgan II. 2005. The urban stream syndrome: Current knowledge and the search for a cure. Journal of the North American Benthological Society 24 (3): 706-23.
- Walter, R. C., and D. J. Merritts. 2008. Natural streams and the legacy of water-powered mills. Science 319:299-302.
- Wolman, M. G. 1967. A cycle of sedimentation and erosion in urban river channels. Geografiska Annaler 49A:385-95.

KIRSTEN HUNT is a scientist with Atkins North America, and a graduate student in the Department of Geography at the University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208. E-mail: kirsten.hunt@atkinsglobal.com. Her interests concern the application of geotechnologies in geomorphological and environmental research and assessment.

DANROYALL is an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC 27403. E-mail: pdroyall@uncg.edu. His interests focus on human impacts on fluvial systems at multiple scales.