## The Greening of the Squares of London: Transformation of Urban landscapes and Ideals

Henry W.  Lawrence

Department of Ceosciences, Edinboro University of Pennsylvania,  Edinboro, P A   16444

Abstract. The residential squares of London developed in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries into a unique urban landscape  form that  introduced  rural  landscape values  into the  urban  fabric i n  ways  that  continue  to shape  urban  landscape  ideals  today. This study takes the viewpoint of cultural geography to look at the gardens in the squares a s symbolic statements expressing social values in a critical period in the history of European cities,  a s   property and social relations were in transition  from  late feudal  to early  capitalist modes. The open spaces of the squares were changed from open plazas in the seventeenth century to enclosed private parks at the end of the eighteenth century,  based on the social values of the aristocracy,  later adopted by the middle classes.  Public  rights of access  were extinguished  and  the  gardens were  planted with  trees  and  shrubs  reminiscent  of  rural landscape parks.  The  squares  and their  surrounding residential districts represented some of the first expressions of the desire for class segregation,  domestic isolation, and privatized open space that later were to  form the basis  of  suburban  living.  They  also  were  a major  arena for  playing out the tension  between classes over access to open space and they  influenced  the  development  of  early public parks. The residential  squares and their gardens  inspired  imitation  beyond  London, including in the U.S. during the first third of the nineteenth century.

Key Words: landscape ideals, urban morphology, cultural and  historical geography,  eighteenth  century, Britain.

N  February  1991  the  residents  around Cramercy  Park  in  New  York  City  were embroiled in a struggle over assessments for the repair of the sidewalk around the park. As  reported in the New  York Times, 'charges of election fraud, slander, threats and-worst of all-a breach of  good  manners and  fair  play, have  caused  a group  of  residents to rise  up against the  Cramercy Park trustees-a self-seIecting group that clings jealously to its sovereignty over keys to the park and the planting of  flowers  and  shrubs'  (Stanley  1991).  The tempest in this quaint teapot revolved around the fact that  Cramercy Park  is,  and has  been since  1831,  a  private park,  jointly  owned and maintained by its surrounding residents. While other New Yorkers may walk by and enjoy the sight of the park, only the residents have keys to the gates  in the fence that surrounds it. The private control of this  oasis of greenery in the hard  urban  landscape  of  Manhattan  is  an anachronism today,  and its legal arrangements are  little  more than  a  curious footnote  in the history of the  city.  But  it  represents an  urban landscape form  that was  important for  almost two hundred years,  one that developed first in the  British Isles  but has  since  played a  major role  in  the  development  of  modern  urban landscapes both in Britain and elsewhere.

The residential  square and its garden formed the  central  elements  in  the  residential landscape of elite districts of London from the late seventeenth to the mid-nineteenth century. In the  eighteenth century,  they  played a pivotal role in introducing trees and gardens into the urban  landscape  and  in  shaping subsequent environmental ideals of urban life. In the transformations of the  residential squares  of  London,  the nearly two centuries can be seen as an  important  chapter  in the  development  of urban form and of urban landscapes as expressions  of  social  values.  The  squares  reflected and responded to changes in ideas about the use and control of land, about nature and  its

I

role  in  urban  life,  and  about  the  shape  and form of the city.

To  understand  the  residential  squares,  it is necessary to consider  aesthetics,  both architectural  and  landscape,  and  the  continuing struggle  between  private  and  public  control over the access to and use of landscapes. The ways the gardens in the squares were created and  used  reveal  these  changes  most  clearly. Both as  amenities  and a s   expressions  of taste, they reflect  the social situation from which they arose.  From  paved plazas in the 1630s based on European models,  the  squares developed into  shady  green  parks  in  the  1 7 8 0 ~ ~ transformed  not  only  in  appearance  but  also  in function,  from public plazas to private parks. It i s   the role of the lawns and gardens themselves that  provides  the  key  to  understanding this landscape  form. As F.M.L. Thbmpson  said about the rise of suburbia (1 982,  15), 'it would be sensible to look to the suburban garden for the roots of the demand for suburban  living,' so  it is  sensible  to  look  to  the  garden  in the Georgian  squares  of  London for  the  roots  of another way of urban living that preceded suburbia and  continues to  influence urban  landscapes throughout the world.

## Nature in the City:  Four

## Traditions

A city,  a s   a built place,  is often  seen as  the antithesis of nature,  since buildings  and pavements displace  forests  and fields.  Yet  in most cities,  the  artificial  human  landscape  includes elements  of  living  nature  selectively  woven into its hard fabric.  In Europe since the time of the  Renaissance,  these  elements  have  usually been derived from  the  forms  used  in  aristocratic  parks and gardens, incorporated as echoes of an amenity landscape preferred to that of the city  itself.  In most  of western  Europe, these have derived from the garden allee,  used as  lines  of trees  within  the  city  in  malls,  avenues,  and  boulevards  (Lawrence  1988). Their use developed first in French cities in the seventeenth and eighteenth  centuries and gained widespread  popularity and  imitation with the renovations  of Paris under Napoleon Ill in the mid-nineteenth century.

In the  British  Isles,  however,  different traditions developed for  incorporating natural ele- ments into the urban landscape, based on English landscape tastes and social structures (Lowenthal and  Prince 1965). The three  most representative  were  the  large  city  park,  the residential square,  and  the  house-and-garden of  suburbia.  The  first  derived  from  the  royal parks  near  London that  were  surrounded  by the growth of the city. These later inspired the creation  of wholly  new parks, thus  beginning an  urban tradition that  is perhaps  best  represented in this country by the work of Frederick Law Olmsted (Chadwick 1966; Schuyler 1986). The third  has gone  on to  become the dominant urban form of the twentieth century,  not just  in Britain but in most of the industrialized world, shaping  the  growth  of  urban  areas, drawing  infrastructure  and  resources  to i t s needs, and providing the most common places for  the incorporation of natural elements  into the  urban  landscape  (Thompson  1982;  Fishman 1987).

The second of the three British forms  is the subject  of this  paper.  The  contribution of the residential square to modern urban landscapes was more complex than either  the large park or the  suburban  house,  and  its  legacy  is  less distinct today.  Yet  for  two  centuries,  roughly from  1650-1 850,  the  residential  square  was the  most  important way that  the  urban landscapes of  England  incorporated  natural  influence.  It had a strong influence on the form of urban  squares in cities  outside England: Edinburgh,  Dublin,  Munich,  Paris,  New York,  and Boston,  to name a few.  It also  influenced the design  of  nonresidential  public  plazas  in  the nineteenth century.  It influenced the development of the  large city  park  as  an  urban landscape  form  in  the  early  nineteenth  century, both in its aesthetics and in its social functions. And it had a major influence on the early development of both the value system underlying the suburban way of life and the physical form of suburbia.

## Symbolic Landscapes and Social

## Values

Scholars have studied  the  British  residential squares from  a variety  of points of view,  particularly  in  London:  as  part of the general  history  of  the  development  of  the  city  (Rude 1971), i t s   social  history (Chancellor 1907), its

I

architectural history (Summerson 1978), and, more recently, as the history of the building urban landscape. The mature expression of the square gardens has been described by archi-

This study approaches the subject from the perspective of cultural geography by looking at physical and social landscapes as expressions ofculturalprocesses.Itispartlyastudyintransformations of urban morphology, seeking to explain the relationship between social processes and landscape patterns at a critical period in the history of the Western city. The particular object of study is the use of ornamental vegetationintheresidentialsquaresof London and how they contributed to changes in the patternsofurbanform.Ialsoconsidertherelationship between city and country and the role of nature in the human environment. The gardens when planted represented a concept of landscape that has become anachronistic but whichhadapowerfulinfluenceinitstimeand which has left us a legacy in the ways we view urban landscapes today. Central to an understanding of the gardens in the squares are the roles of aesthetics in urban design and of social values placed on amenities in the urban landscape.

process (Olsen 1982; Chalklin and Havinder 1974; Cruickshank and Burton 1990). Yet they have paid little attention to the open spaces of the squares, to the forms of their gardens, or to the role they played in creating a distinctive tectural and urbanhistorians(Rasmussen1982; Giedion1967,716-39),and theirmodernremnants are well known. Yet the squares laid out in the early eighteenth century were distinctly differentfromthoseofthelateeighteenthand earlynineteenthcenturiesintheircomposition, use, and function in the overall landscape of the city. These changes have been the subject ofonlyfragmentary accounts with little discussion of the role they played in expressing social values as theyformed urban landscapes.

expression of social relationships. The transformation  of economic  relations  from  feudal  to capitalist had a major impact on the landscape, which is apparent in the transformations of the Since theresidential squares of Londonwere hometotheeliteclassesofthenation,therole of theeliteisalsocentral.Atonelevel,the squares can be seen as urban amenity landscapes reflecting changes in elite tastes in garden design, but more fundamentally they reflected changing concepts of landscape as an squares. These squares were not isolated ele- ments  in  London's  fabric;  they  were  centerpieces of larger  developments on aristocratic urban-fringe estates meant initially to house rural aristocrats when in residence in the capital. The gardens in the squares must be seen in the context  of  the  estate  development  process, both urban and rural,  which was  itself  undergoing a transition from feudal to capitalist values for the land. As  Cosgrove  points out,

the period of capitalist transition in Europe is  precisely one  in which the status  of land was  uncertain.  .  .  .  For a  long period land was  the arena for social struggle: it was  both status and property. To the  extent  that  wealthy  bourgeois aimed  in  the sixteenth  to  nineteenth  centuries  to  gain  social prestige in social formations still powerfully influenced  by  feudal  relations  and  values,  they aped the manners and tastes of the still significant landed  nobility.  . . . Increasingly land  was  seen through new eyes: a s   a  form of capital, a s   property, and  both  classes  bent  themselves to  extinguish remaining feudal and collective rights on the part of the peasantry (1984, 63).

## Continental Influences and

## B  r  it  is  h Traditions

The form of the urban squares in Britain derived  initially  from  continental  models,  especially the piazzi of Italy and the places of France in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries (Lavedan  1941; Zucker  1959).  There were distinct regional cultural differences in the role of squares in the form  and  public  life  of towns  in  Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages  (Claval 1984).  In England squares were  relatively  unimportant except as  marketplaces until Renaissance influences were felt in the late sixteenth century.  The  first  London  residential  square was Covent Garden,  begun in 1630 with designs by lnigo Jones on land owned by the Earl of Bedford (Summerson 1978, 29-32).  On the south side was the back wall of the garden of Bedford  House,  the  home of the estate landlord,  and  on the  west  was  the  new  parish church of St.  Paul. Leasehold houses were built on the north and east sides in Italian architectural  style,  but the  whole  composition o f the arcaded  buildings  around  the  square  imitated the form used in the Place Royale (now Place des Vosges) built in Paris twenty-five years earlier.  The  space at  the  center  was  paved with stone  and  completely  open,  which  allowed public use that was to grow in importance over the years (Fig. 1 ).

rupuonjo wnasnw au jo Asano aenbs au jo aeds uado au padinsn Aenpa iaua aun ne layeu aui sued auos pue ezzed papee Figure 1.

<!-- image -->

I

The  Italian  models  for  the  architecture  of lnigo Jones should  not obscure the  fact  that Covent Garden was  originally intended to be fundamentally different from any  Italian precedent. It was,  like the Place Royale, meant to be a  residential  square  first  and  a  public  open space second. From the beginning we can see the tension between private and public use of squares that was to be a central concern later. The Duke of Bedford had not anticipated that the square would  become a favorite place for market vendors, cab men,  pickpockets, prostitutes, and others who sought to make money off the presence of the wealth residing around the square. By failing to provide a  separate market square,  he had condemned the residential square  itself to  a public  commercial role that would ultimately be its undoing as an elite resi- dential quarter.

Another square emerged at the same period in an  irregular fashion around  the  fields adjacent to Lincoln's  Inn, one of the City's Inns of Court. Lincoln's  Inn Fields lay just  west of the City and had been open to common use for many years (Survey of London 191  2,3-I  2). By the 1630s, a group of investors had bought up property  surrounding  the  three  sides  of  the fields away  from  Lincoln's  Inn  and  begun to build  houses.  The  residents  of  the  Inn  defended their access to the fields,  and the developers agreed that buildings would only surround it and that residents would continue to have access to it. When completed by 1659, it was  in effect a sort  of residential square,  but the field was  left in an  unimproved condition and retained its former rural character  for many years.

Three other squares were established in the five years just before the Great Fire of 1666 that destroyed most of central London. The first to bear the name 'square' was Bloomsbury  (originally Southampton)  Square, created in 1661 on land owned by the Earl of Southampton at the northwestern edge of the built-up area of London  (Summerson 1978,  39-41). It  had  at  its center  an open  area  paved  with  gravel,  surrounded on three  sides  by  the  houses  built for the wealthy leasehold  tenants of the Southampton Estate and on the fourth  by the home of the Earl of Southampton. Construction o n St.   James's Square began a few  years  later in the royal precinct of Westminster, just north of Pall Mall  and St. James's Palace. Intended to house the highest nobility in the land, its urban mansions surrounded an  open area,  surfaced with  gravel  but  not  otherwise  improved  for human use  (Dasent 1895, 49). Each  of  these developments included a  separate market square  located on the  side  streets away  from the  main  residential square.  A  similar  project was  begun in the 1660s surrounding the field in front of Leicester House,  home of the Earl of Leicester,  between  London and  Westminster. It had been part of a larger field used a s   common  land  by  surrounding  residents, but  by planting  'walks'  of  elm  trees  in  the  fields, Leicester effectively made the place into a garden;  the  ensuing Leicester  Fields,  later  called Leicester  Square, became  the  first  London square  to  have trees  at  its  center  (Survey of London 1966, 424-33).

That the rural Lincoln's Inn Fields, the  parklike Leicester Square, the graveled Bloomsbury and St. James's Squares, and the paved Covent Garden  could  all  exist  simultaneously within one mile of each other to the west of London in the years just  before the  Fire points up the wide  range of taste  and architectural style inspiring them.  Despite increased uniformity after  the  middle of the  seventeenth century  in urban architectural  designs based on Italian and Dutch models, there was very little consensus on the most appropriate way to use or adorn the open spaces at the center of the squares.

Although most  of  the earliest residential squares  followed  the  continental  models  in keeping  the  space  at  the  center  completely open,  later squares were usually laid out with gardens.  Before  the  end  of  the  seventeenth century  came  Soho  (originally King's) Square, Golden  Square, Red  Lion  Square, Charterhouse Square, and the New Square at Lincoln's Inn (Report of the Royal Commission on London Squares 1928,  11). These  all  had  some form of garden in the open space, from simple turf  to tree-lined walks.  They were  unprecedented in Europe, and their antecedents were not to be found in the design traditions of the continent  but in two other  British landscape forms. The more important was the traditional right of  commons, which allowed some nonlandowners to use certain private lands.  Near London the most important were the Moorfields, just  north of the city walls,  where generations of Londoners had access to land for  recreation,  drying and bleaching of cloth, and the  practice of  archery (and later  of firearms). The common right gradually became a public right (Levy 1990), and in 1606, the City undertook  to  plant  tree-lined  walks  in  the

~

Moorfields at the same time that suburban expansion had begun to encroach on surrounding lands (Brett-James  1935,  452-60).  The result was in effect a city park, a genuinely public ornamental  open  space.  Other  open  spaces near town that were used in common, though still privately owned,  and later turned into residential  squares  included Leicester Fields,  Red

Lion Fields,  and Lincoln's  Inn Fields.

The  other antecedent  to the residential green  square  was  the  form  of  the  medieval garden,  enclosed in a cloister or college quadrangle  (Stott  1990).  The  seizure  of  Church lands by Henry Vlll and the transfer of them to his  favorites converted many religious houses on the urban fringe into private estates or into leasable  residential property a s   urban growth came to them. In fact,  Covent Garden derived from  a former  convent  garden on the  same site. The college quadrangle tradition gave rise to  residential squares within  the  city's  inns of court, its law schools. Gray's Inn, Lincoln's  Inn, and the  Temple all  had  large  garden squares within them  that  were  open to the  public  in varying degrees and were surrounded by residential  quarters  of  the  members  of the  inns (Fig. 2).

The use of common lands and quadrangles as  places for promenades developed in Britain in the  late  seventeenth century apparently in response to  fashionable trends  coming from Italy and France. They were even built in many provincial  towns and in almost all resort  towns, where  they  played  important  social roles  as gathering  spots  for  the  local  gentry  (Borsay 1989,  162-72).  The design  or  redesign of the parks  and  gardens  generally followed  continental baroque forms,  the most important element being a tree-lined walk.  But the surface of the ground was almost always some form of grass  or  turf,  sometimes even maintained by small  flocks  of  sheep.  The  use  of turf  a s   an ornamental garden  surface was  not strictly a British form,  since it was also to be found elsewhere in  northern Europe.  It  was recommended as  early  as  1260 by Albertus Magnus (Thacker 1979, 84), but its use in carefully kept urban open spaces was almost unique to Britain.

## Prestige

## Value

The  conjunction  of  these  British  medieval garden traditions with the imported continental forms of the  public  plaza lay  behind the  particular  form  of the  London  residential square. But the form also owed much to the peculiarly British systems  of property  ownership and  of social prestige. After the Fire, in the latter decades of the seventeenth century, as the urban area spread slowly to the east and more rapidly to the  west and north of the City of London, the residential  square became one of the major forms  used  to  establish  new  districts for  the wealthier  classes. From  the  beginning,  the squares  were  intended  to  be  amenities  that increased the value  of the property  surrounding them,  in speculative construction  projects aimed  at  providing  housing for  the  growing upper-class population of London.

A residential square was  the  centerpiece of a larger development that sometimes included a separate market  square, shops, a  parish church, and housing for servants, artisans, and other lesser folk  in addition to housing for the major tenants on the square. The land in most cases  belonged  to  a  large  landowner  who leased it to speculators or directly  to the tenants, usually  on  very  long  leases, up  to  99 years, rather  than  selling it  to  them  outright (Cruickshank and Burton 1990, 99-1 33). Often the  landowners (or more rarely, the developers) had control over the design of the buildings  surrounding the  square  and  most strove for some sort of unified facades,  though many fell  short  of  their  goal due  to  vagaries  in the pace of construction and the will of contractors and  tenants.  Most  had  restrictive  covenants that limited the tenants in their modification of the premises and were usually applied to their use of the open space as well, prohibiting such activities  a s dumping  of  refuse, building  of sheds,  or  planting private gardens.

That a square was an amenity that increased the  value  of  surrounding  real estate  presupposed that the housing on a square was more attractive to wealthy tenants than similar housing on streets without squares. While this may seem a truism today,  in the seventeenth century,  such  was  not always  the  case.  Covent Garden failed to develop into the stylish quarter envisioned by its landlord mostly due to the filling  of the square with market stalls and the presence of prostitutes and pickpockets in the arcades surrounding it. Even St. James's Square, planned from the outset to house the highest nobility, suffered  for many  years  from  the dumping of refuse,  periodic crowding by cabs and coaches (and the resulting horse manure),

<!-- image -->

and  the  presence of  unsavory  characters at night. When the residents  of the square sought relief by an Act of Parliament in 1725, enabling them to close the square and improve its condition,  they  complained that the square  "doth now lie  and  hath from  some  years  past  lain rude,  waste,  uncleanly,  and in great disorder" (Report of the Royal Commission on London Squares 1928,  12). Such  was  also  the  fate  of other squares with unimproved surfaces. Poet John Gay  in  1716 described  the  dangers  of crossing one at  night (lines 133-138):

Where Lincoln's-Inn, wide space, is  rail'd  around, Cross not with  vent'rous  step; there oft' i s   found The lurking thief, who while the day-light  shone, Made the wall echo with  his begging  tone:

That crutch which  late compassion  mov'd,  shall wound

Thy bleeding head, and fell thee to the ground.

Those  with  well-kept  lawns  and  especially those  with  trees  and  shrubs, like  Leicester Square  and  Soh0 Square,  seem  to  have suffered much less from such abuse,  though they still could be subject to the presence of undesirable people at all hours of the day and night. A maintained garden, then, became an asset in efforts to control the public use of these open spaces. In this we can see one of the seeds for the  later  use  of gardens,  viz., as   ways  of expressing  control over socially contested space. The  amenity  value of  the gardens  in  the squares derives as  much from the exercise of social  control  of space a s   it does from the visual beauty of plantings in the urban landscape.

The  seventeenth-century squares were  socially  ambiguous  landscapes.  The land  on which  they  lay was,  in most cases,  the  property  of  aristocratic  landowners,  a s   were  the surrounding houses  that  were  leased to tenants.  The  whole  arrangement  derived  from feudal relations of property: neither the land of the  square, that  under  the  houses,  nor  the houses themselves could be bought and sold except by the landlord. Residents leased a right to  use the  land and the  houses. Some of the squares  were  in  effect  commons  to  which prior residents had old rights of access for productive  activities like drying and bleaching of cloth and for nonproductive activities, such as military training and recreation. They were not entirely private places under the control of the landlord or  of the estate tenants who resided around  them.  Exclusion  of  the public  was difficult  and,  until the  1720s,  not clearly legal.

Their  visual  aesthetic  value  came  more  from the  architecture surrounding them  than from the  design of the  open  area  itself,  and  their social  value  did  not  derive  directly  from  an exchange value a s   real  estate  since the  open space was not available for development. Value depended a s   much on the prestige associated with the particular square,  often expressed directly by the residence of the  estate landlord on one side of the square or,  in the case of St. James's Square,  by proximity to the King's  palace  and  his  personal park.  In  all  of this,  the squares reflected feudal notions of land value that capitalist values would contest in the eight- eenth century.

## Standardization of Form,

## Control of Space

It was  in the  Georgian period that the  residential square reached its formal standardization. Beginning with  Hanover Square in 171  3,  all  subsequent squares  had gardens  of turf, with  or  without  trees, and  they  were fenced (but initially not locked) in attempts to limit public access. In  addition the design of the buildings surrounding the square was intended to  have  some  sort  of  architectural  similarity. Cavendish  Square  followed  shortly  after, in 1717, with  a  garden  designed  by  Charles Bridgeman, and Berkeley Square gradually  took shape from an  irregular open area adjacent to new houses in the 1720s-30s.  The garden in Grosvenor Square (Fig. 3) was  planted in 1725 with beds of evergreen and deciduous shrubs, and hedges of tightly pruned elms rather than turf,  the  only  exception  in  the  increasingly standardized form of succeeding squares (Survey of London 1980,  1 1   3).

Many older squares were "improved" at this time, especially  those whose public access and ill-defined  open  space  had  invited  unwanted guests. Square residents developed a new legal arrangement to accomplish their ends of controlling the  use  of the  squares:  Parliamentary enclosure acts similar to those used at the same time on rural estates.  The first  was  passed in 1726  to  enable  the  residents  of  St.  James's Square to restrict access to the square and to levy a rate on themselves for  its improvement and  maintenance (Report of the  Royal Commission on London Squares  1928,  12). They

<!-- image -->

Grosvenor Square in a view to the north by Sutton Nichols in 1754.Laid out in 1725, the oval shape and massed shrub beds of the garden were Courtesyof theMuseumof London. Figure 3.

kept its  rather  severe  formalism  by not using plantings,  choosing  instead to  replace gravel with stone pavement and to install a statue and a basin of water  in the  center  of the  square. But the  legal  precedent they  set  became the preferred instrument of improvement of older squares and for  building new ones.

Lincoln's  Inn Fields were  enclosed and privatized  in 1735. The  residents of  the  square complained in their  petition to Parliament that year  that:

by reason of the said Fields being kept open many wicked  and  disorderly  persons  had  frequented and  met  together  therein,  using unlawful sports and  games,  and  drawing  in and  enticing  young persons  into gaming,  idleness,  and  other  vicious courses,  and  vagabonds,  common  beggars,  and other  disorderly  persons resorted therein where many robberies, assaults, outrages, and enormities had  been  and  continually  were  committed  (in

Sexby 1898,  500).

Parliament apparently agreed and allowed the square  to  be enclosed with an  iron fence to which only  the surrounding  residents  had keys.  And  with  that  action,  the  urban  common-field tradition  quietly  died.  Other  Parliamentary  enclosures  followed, among  them Red  Lion  Square  in  1736,  Golden  Square  in 1750, Berkeley Square in 1766, and Grosvenor Square in 1774 (Report of the Royal Comrnission  on  London Squares 1928,  162). The  results  were summed up succinctly by designer and critic James Ralph's description: 'LeicesterSquare  has  nothing remarkable in it,  but the inclosure in  the  middle,  which  alone  affords the  inhabitants round about it,  something like the prospect of a garden, and preserves it  from the rudeness of the populace too' (1736, 22).

The triumph of the  Georgian square  model is  nowhere  better  illustrated than  in the  later transformations of the  Moorfields  by the City of  London. This  city  park,  planted with treelined walks in 1606, was itself turned into residential squares in the 1790s. In the second half of the eighteenth century, Moorfields became the gathering  place for large crowds of people, from  the  Methodist  revival  meetings  of John Wesley to the mobs that touched off the Gordon Riots of 1780. As  its social role changed, the city fathers felt it had outlived its usefulness as  a  public open space for  recreation. Reserving  one part for artillery practice (today Finsbury Barracks), they  used the  rest of  the Moorfields to build the residential  Finsbury  Cir- cus and Finsbury Square,  under the designs of George  Dance the  younger,  inspired  by the success  of  the  Woods  at  Bath  (Hugo-Brunt 1955). The  gardens  were  enclosed  and  the City  reaped the  revenue from  the  expensive lease rents of surrounding houses. The green square had come full circle, transforming even

its own progenitor.

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  enclosures were often  initiated by the  residents of the  square, not the ground landlords. The petitions to Parliament were put forward by groups of tenants to protect the  space  in front  of their  houses, their personal amenity,  a s   well a s   by landlords attempting to maintain the value of real estate. The landlords of the  houses surrounding Lincoln's  Inn Fields even tried to intervene to prevent the tenants from taking control of the garden but were rebuffed by Parliament (Records of  the  Honourable  Society  of  Lincoln's  Inn 1899, 470).

The enclosures were a major step away from the feudal forms of property  relations and toward  capitalist  forms. The  extinguishing  of common rights of access to them was a direct parallel to  the  enclosures taking  place  in the countryside as  estate owners evicted peasants to create scenic landscape parks. That the gardens in the squares were maintained  and used communally  by  the  estate  residents  still  retained some of the older forms of use. But their value  changed  significantly  a s   they  became amenities with a definable monetary value  in the  real estate  market  of building leases  and property  development.  They  were  seen  increasingly a s   economic  assets  to the  ground landlords  who  owned  them, by  raising the value  of  surrounding  property,  and  a s social assets  by the  leasehold tenants  who had sole access to them once the public was excluded.

## Rural Aesthetics in the Urban landscape

The aesthetic  goals  of  the  enclosures were only  vaguely  defined.  The  Parliamentary  Act for Golden Square authorized its inhabitants to 'inclose,  pave,  repair,  enlighten,  adorn,  and beautify' it. The Act for  Grosvenor Square enabled the residents to 'inclose the said garden in a more substantial manner, and to alter and embellish the same.' Much more attention was

paid in the Acts  to the  legal arrangements for assessing fees and extinguishing rights of commons and of public access. The main purpose of the  Acts  of  enclosure was  to  legally  empower the  inhabitants of the squares to form associations for their joint responsibility and to extinguish old common rights.

Taste  cannot be discounted, however, for it was  a  reflection  of  the  social  control  of  the urban landscape and the basis of the continuing appeal of the squares  in later years.  In the late seventeenth and  early  eighteenth centuries, there was  considerable turmoil in the development  of  aesthetics in  both  architecture and  gardening in  England.  Continental  influences  were  dominant, Italian, French, and Dutch. But by the  early decades  of the eighteenth  century,  there  began to  appear  a  distinctly  English aesthetic in architecture,  based on late Renaissance Italian models. The canonization of architectural  design in the early eighteenth  century  resulted in the  'Rule  of Taste' based on British interpretations of the rules of the  Venetian  architect  Palladio  (1  965; Burke 1976,  3-37). There developed  more slowly a garden  aesthetic  based  on  continental  landscape painting  (Dutch, French, and  Italian influences were  pronounced)  rather than  on continental garden design. By the 1 7 2 0 ~ ~ a distinctly English  way  of  designing  rural  landscapes emerged (Watkin 1982; Jacques 1983). Developed and perfected on rural estates and reflecting an  antiurban sentiment,  its  pastoral aesthetic  became the main inspiration for  garden  design  in  Britain  by  the  mid-eighteenth century.

Both  architecture and  landscape aesthetics shared a rural basis. Palladio developed his architecture most extensively in rural villas owned by town-dwelling  Venetians (Cosgrove 1984,  135-41), and  the  landscape  paintings that influenced English landscape design were scenes of idyllic,  even mythic,  nature. In England of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, both  social  status  and  wealth  derived largely from possession  of rural estates and the farm  rents they  prgduced.  The  wealthy  residents of the first  squares  of  London were  almost all  owners  of  rural estates,  which  were their  primary  residences.  They  came  to  the capital  mostly  for  the  social  'season'  in the winter  months when estate  life became both boring  and  cold.  Spring  and  fall  were  often spent at  resorts such as Bath, Tunbridge Wells, or Cheltenham; summers were spent on their

estates.

Rural living carried  with  it also  a  moral dimension.  It  was  felt  to  be  superior  to  town living, just as  agriculture was felt to be morally superior to commerce and manufacturing a s   a source  of  income  for  the  wealthy  (Williams 1973,  35-59).  The use of rural aesthetics in the design  of  urban residential squares conveyed this  moral sense  a s   well.  The  gardens  in the squares  were  statements  that  the  residents were really rural at heart and resided in the city by necessity a s   much a s   by choice. This same standard led  many of the  rising  bourgeois to soon  as  they to  legitimate  their  arrival purchase  country  estates, as could  afford  them, into the class  of the wealthy.

## Open and Closed Gardens: The

## Increasing Importance of Trees

The aesthetics of the square gardens were in flux  through  most of the  eighteenth  century. Contemporary  views  show  a  wide  range  of conditions, from open pavement to grass plots to tree-lined walks. But there was a noticeable trend  over  the  course  of  the  century  from open to closed, from grass and gravel to trees and  shrubs.  The  details  of  the  layout  of the gardens  in  the  squares  are  difficult  to  document  a s   there  are  few  remaining  records  of original design  plans or  gardeners' work.  The best  extant  evidence  lies in  views of  the squares made by contemporary draftsmen and topographers,  though the  record  is  fragmentary before the 1720s. Chief among these were Sutton  Nicholls  (whose  views  of  London's squares  from  the  1720s-50s show them  at  a pivotal point in the development of the form), Thomas Bowles (1  750s), Edward Dayes (1  780s), Thomas Malton (1 790s),  and Rudolph Ackermann (1  81 0s). In the middle of the eighteenth  century,  most  views  show  plain  turf plats, though a few, such a s   Red Lion, Leicester, and Charterhouse, had neat rows of trees, and Grosvenor Square was unique with its beds of shrubbery.  From  these  and  later  views, it  i s clear that through much of the eighteenth century,  trees  and shrubs  in all the squares  were kept far  enough apart or low enough to allow views  across  and  through  the  open  space. Small trees  such a s   laburnum were used most

often  and  when  larger  ones  such  a s   lindens and hornbeams were used they were  usually tightly  pruned and pleached (branches plaited or  interlaced).  Nowhere  were  the  plantings dense enough to obstruct the visual openness of the squares.

The visual openness of the early squares was an  integral element  in their  form.  They  were intended  to  be  open  space  surrounded  by buildings, ideally of uniform design and creating a unified spatial composition. The  houses facing each other across a square were a social setting as  much a s   an  aesthetic achievement. Each  square  was  thought  of  a s being like  a village,  an  intimate neighborhood grouping, in the  larger  context  of the  city.  The  class  and character  of each square's residents  were widely  known,  and though  the  relatively  unadorned facades presented an impassive mask to the public, the comings and goings of each resident were easily  visible to all  others. The actual form of the square was its openness, not the plants in its garden. Several of the London squares,  Leicester and Bloomsbury in particul a r , had  along  one  side  the  mansion  of  the estate landlord, a view of which was important to the social standing of the other residents.

No square depended more on its open sight lines  than  Hanover  Square  (Fig.  4), on  the northwest  fringe  of  London's built-up  area when it was laid out in 1713. The open space was  carefully constructed to contribute to the design of the city that would  later surround it. Rather  than  a simple open  block,  the  square was  made by setting each  of  its four  corners back  from  the  adjacent intersections. George Street leaving  the square on the south side was wider at the end near the square and narrower farther  down,  creating  an  exaggerated  perspective. And most dramatically,  the new parish  church,  St.  George's, was  set  forward  of adjacent buildings encroaching on the  line of the sidewalk. As critic James  Ralph stated,  'the view down George-Street, from the upper side of the square .  .  . is  one of the most entertaining in the whole  city'  (1736,  73). The  whole effect  of  Hanover  Square  depended  on  the square being visually open,  and it was  laid out with turf only rather than shrubs or trees.

There were some who considered any vegetation  to  be  an  affront  to  pure  neoclassical ideals. One was the anonymous author of the Critical Observations on the Buildings and Improvements of London (1  771,  7-1 4): 'The no- tion I form  to  myself of a perfect  square,  or public place in a city,  is a large  opening,  free and  unencumbered.  . . . To  illustrate  this  in some degree, I refer to St. James's Square. . .  . You are not confined in your space;  your eye takes in the whole compass at one glance.'  As for the others,  however, he (or she) had nothing but scorn:

Almost  every  other  square  in  London  seems formed on a quite different plan; they are gardens, they are parks, they are sheep-walks, in short they are every thing but what they should be. The rus in urbe is a preposterous idea at best; a garden in a street is not less absurd than a street in a garden; and he that wishes to have a row of trees before his door  in town,  betrays almost a s   false a taste a s he that would build a row of houses for an avenue to his seat in the country.

This represents the pure architectural  aesthetic that  saw  the  squares  as  spatial elements  in  a composition of stone and brick. It was at odds with  the  tradition  of  the  cloister  garden,  the courtyard  walk,  and the  village common that had influenced some of the seventeenth-century  squares.  Both  of  these  were  being  replaced by another aesthetic in the second half of  the  eighteenth  century,  one  that  saw  the open spaces of the squares as  aristocratic gardens in  the city. It was this aesthetic that gained most  prominence  with  the  enclosure  of the squares.

By the third quarter of the century, there was a noticeable trend toward increasing density of vegetation. Larger tree species such as London planes  and  sycamore-maples  were  planted, and older plantings of lindens and hornbeams, formerly tightly pruned, were allowed to grow more freely.  Even St. James's Square finally acquired a lawn to replace most of its stone pavement  in  1759  (Survey of London 7960, 69). Berkeley Square was  enclosed and improved in 1766 with tree-lined walks.  It was  replanted in  1777  with  London  plane  trees  that  were allowed  to  grow  to  their  full  height  and  are reputed to be the oldest surviving plane trees in  London (Fricker 1974, 84). Grosvenor Square was  enclosed in 1774,  its  shrub  beds were  rearranged,  and  trees  previously  kept small were allowed to grow up. A view in 1789 shows  tall,  untrained shrubs  and  some  small trees perhaps 10-15  feet tall beginning to obscure the view across the square,  and another in 1816 shows trees at  least twice that height with  buildings  barely  visible  beyond  (Fig.  5).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

1816. The large trees of the naturalistic garden ofMichigan. Figure 5.h

The larger  squares in particular began to look like little parks whose spaces were increasingly rather than external within the open space framed by internal  within  a  screen  of  plantings, buildings.

How are we to account for this transformation of the squares from open lawns to shady parks? Most  of  the  changes  involved  major renovations of the  gardens,  not just  a  lack  of pruning. One strong influence came from the changing styles of landscape gardening in the eighteenth century. While early Georgian gardens were based on the composition of a series of framed views,  often with artificial architectural elements inserted to recall scenes from Classical literature, by the end of the century, the goal was to evoke an image of nature itself, using  broader  views  over  the  countryside, framed by trees and woodland. Of course, the countryside in view  was  cleared of fields and farmers and turned  into an arcadian  prospect this  the role of trees changed significantly,  from background in a pictorial composition to an essen- of pastures,  woodland  and  water. I n tial element in the view  itself.

The naturalistic English school of gardening drew  inspiration  from  the  nascent  romantic spirit of the times,  one element of which was what Thomas has called the 'worship of trees' (1 982, 21  2-23). In the  eighteenth  century, trees were invested with anthropomorphic  attributes;  they  were  planted to  commemorate the births and deaths of loved ones,  and their cutting was protested vigorously by those who valued  them  a s much as  their  favorite  pets. Many aristocratic families took  venerable  old trees a s   tokens  of  their  lineage and  had their portraits painted. The composition and character of woodland in estate planning became important  enough  to  take on social overtones. Trees  became symbols  of  the  possession  of landed  property; their  management  was  a statement of its economic  improvement.  Different species even acquired partisan political symbolism (Daniels 1988). In short,  trees  became the focus of concern in the aesthetics of the later landscape estates.

The  gardens  in  the  squares  responded  to these  changes  in rural landscape aesthetics  in large  part because they were also  undergoing a change in use at the same time. The residents were  spending  more  time  in  the  city  as  the century  progressed.  While  the  first  squares were  inhabited by rural aristocrats  using their town houses for  the winter  social season,  by the second half of the century,  many more of the residents were town-dwellers, both aristocrats  and  wealthy  commoners.  The  squares were their major residence and the gardens in the  squares  became more important to them than they had been to the temporary rural aristocrats. The square gardens became  their landscape prospect and borrowed the same aristocratic  aesthetic  to  create an  'imitation  of the country,'  with  its  symbolism of possession of

the land through the control of nature.

The small spaces of the squares posed a severe challenge to the skill of garden designers working in the  rural idiom.  Indeed,  Humphry Repton, who laid out the gardens in Bloomsbury Square and Russell Square on the Bedford Estate  around 1805,  insisted on 'the difference  between  a  garden  and  a  park  or forest. . .  .  No one will,  I  trust,  contend that a public square should affect to imitate the latter' (Fricker  1974,  82).  Generally  the  new  style showed itself in the squares by a loosening of the lines of the plantings, the cessation of pruning of shrubs and smaller trees,  and the planting of  larger  species  of trees.  But  the  switch from  rectangular to circular geometry  still  remained rather stiffly formal,  and  in  1803,  the plantings  in  the  squares  were  criticized  for their  overuse of  dingy  evergreen shrubs and for  their  lack  of 'picturesque beauty' by J. C. Loudon, who recommended instead the adoption of  'the  principles of natural scenery' and the  use  of a wider  selection of species (1803, 87).

By  the first decades  of the nineteenth  century,  squares with turf alone or very few trees and shrubs were considered 'naked.'  George Papworth, in his Select Views of London, felt it necessary to offer an apology for the openness of Portman Square:

If this square is  inferior, a s   a promenade, to some others which are  more enlivened and diversified by trees  and  shrubs,  its  nakedness,  however, affords this advantage, that the eye o f the passenger is  enabled  to  take  in  the  whole  at  one  view; whereas  in  Crosvenor-square, for  example,  the prospect o f the houses on every side, except that where  the  spectator  may  happen to  be,  is  in  a great measure obstructed (1 81  6, 43).

This  statement reveals a change in the aesthetics of urban landscape design that reflects changes in society at the time. While the early squares were open spaces for display of archi-

tecture and for the aesthetic of the literary and pictorial prospect, which were the major status emblems  of  early  Georgian  rural  aristocracy, the later squares turned to the aesthetic of the landscape  park  with  its  trees  and  woodland, symbolic of the property rights of estate owners. The gardens in the squares thus began to convey meanings more in line with  property values  in an  economic  sense than in a  social sense, just as the enclosures  were changing  the value of the squares a s   amenities in the urban landscape from feudal social values to capitalist property values.

## Spatial Transformations: The

## Creation of Townscape

The  standardization of the form  of the  residential  square  that  was  achieved  during  the early eighteenth  century  also included  the achievement of an  architectural uniformity  in the design of the surrounding buildings based on  a  strict  interpretation of  Palladian  rules (Summerson 1977, 381  -86).  The greatest examples in architectural uniformity surrounding residential  squares,  however, were to be found outside London, in Bath and Edinburgh, where the squares were used not just to create neighborhoods but to reshape entire towns.

In  Bath, where  Londoners  and  provincial gentry  mingled  at  the  spa,  the  work  of John Wood, Sr. and his son John Wood, jr. built the Queen  Square  in 1732,  the  King's  Circus  in 1754,  and the  Royal Crescent in 1767,  to be followed  by squares  and  crescents  by  other designers (Neale 1981).  The Woods turned the terrace  and  square  into  a  plastic  urban form that created and connected a series of spaces that in  effect became the landscape of the residential section o f the  resort town. What  the West End of London had become by accretion and  accident  between  1660-1 730, Bath  became by design during the next 35 years. The year  after  the  Royal  Crescent  was  begun  in Bath,  construction started on the New Town at Edinburgh based on  James  Craig's design, using a  series  of  linked  squares  to  create  another urban fabric (Youngson 1966).

At the same time,  London remained an  unconnected series  of  individual developments; its  streets  and  squares  could  not be  said  to form a composite urban landscape as much as a pastiche of separate landscapes. The lack of unity  did  not go  unnoticed.  In  1766 the  designer  and  critic  john  Gwynn  published  his London and Westminster Improved,  in which he laid out  a  plan for  reorganizing the  street network of the western side of the metropolis. Without commenting on the design of gardens in the  squares,  Gwynn called for  "a  range of squares, each of the same size with Crosvenor Square"  a s   the  centerpieces of a  regularized grid  of  streets.  Little  came  of  it  at  the  time, though  his  recommendations  were  debated widely and provided an image for many years. By accepting the contemporary squares as the basis for his proposed system o f open spaces, Gwynn confirmed them  a s   the  unquestioned norm of his own day and showed  how they could  be  the  basis  for  comprehensive  town planning.  His  proposed  master  plan  of  improvements covered only the western  half of town,  however. It did not extend east  of  Lincoln's  Inn and left out the parts of the metropolis where the people were mainly of the middle and lower classes. In Gwynn's view,  the urban landscape was a concept reserved for the upper classes, just as the residential  squares were.

By the 1780s a major change was evident in the  squares  in London. There was  greater  diversity in the shapes of their spaces,  a s   London began  to  imitate  Bath's circus  and  crescent forms (Hugo-Brunt 1955). The transformations also reflected an increasingly sophisticated aesthetic  sensibility that  began to  appreciate the urban  scene  for  its  own  landscape  qualities. Steeped in the pictorial rural landscape  aesthetics of the time,  educated observers by the end of the  century were able to see the  city  itself as  a  picturesque composition  of sorts.  In this they  were  aided  by  the  uses  of  ornamental open spaces and their greenery within the urban fabric.

The  sense  of  townscape  was  not  only  an aesthetic sensibility.  It was also an  engineering one,  'expressed  in  a  series  of  laws  aimed  at improving the  quality of the  urban infrastructure. Beginning with the City of London Lighting Act of 1736 and more comprehensively in the Westminster Paving Act of 1762,  the metropolis (and later the provincial towns) began to systematically pave, drain, and  light its streets,  and to provide sidewalks for  pedestrians (Cruickshank and Burton 1990, 3-22). The London  Building Act  of  1774  extended  this spirit  of standardization to  land development

and  construction  practices.  In all  of this,  the planning and design of the residential squares provided  a  model that  was  influential in the development of larger applications of planning and design controls in London.

The economic opportunities in estate development  were  enormous  and  the  sense  of townscape was felt keenly by the commercial sensibilities  of the great estate landlords a s  they enlarged the  scale of their development  projects at the end of the century. The fifth  Duke of  Bedford tore  down  his  ancestral mansion and ripped out its gardens in 1800  to begin the laying  out  of  seven  squares  and  connecting streets  of  his  Bloomsbury development,  not completed  until some fifty  years  later  (Olsen 1982,  49-73).  And  the  development  of  Belgravia on the lands of Lord Grosvenor beyond Buckingham Palace,  beginning in 1821,  went beyond the lessons of Bath and Edinburgh, creating the most complete urban composition in Britain up to that time,  viz., a series  of interconnecting streets and squares that finally realized  much of John Gwynn's  visions of fifty years  earlier  (Summerson 1978,  193-95).  To this  day, Belgravia  remains one  of  the  most fashionable  neighborhoods  of  London  and contains some of the most expensive real estate  in  the  world.  Integral to  these  and  later developments, such a s   Tyburnia in Bayswater (Fig.  6),  were  linked  series  of  spaces,  some square,  some oval,  some long and linear,  approaching  the  dimensions  of later  parkways, creating unified urban compositions.

## The Domestication of Open Space: From Public Piazza to Private Park

The changes in the gardens also responded to changes in the use of outdoor  space in the city. The earlier squares depended on their visual  openness  for  their  social  role:  they  provided sight of all the houses of the square and a full view of all who walked in the square itself. To walk  in an open square was to promenade publicly  and  the  purpose  of  the  promenade was to meet and to be seen  by others doing the  same;  it was  a social act,  and the  square was  a  special  place for  meetings and conversations. John  Wood,  Sr.  had described his pur- pose  in laying out  Queen  Square  and  King's Circus in Bath: "The intention of a square in a city is for people to assemble together,  and the spot whereon they meet ought to be separated from the ground common to men and beasts, and  even  to  mankind  in general,  if  decency and good order are necessary to be observed in such  places  of Assembly"  (in Neale 1974,

273).

The  separation from  "mankind  in general" was  the  goal of the  iron  railings and  locked gates enclosing squares since the middle of the eighteenth  century. The  visual  openness  imposed a kind of social control by allowing for observation of the movements of everyone in the  square.  But  the  visual  openness  of  the grassy squares did not prevent passers-by from looking  into the  square  and  did  not provide much seclusion to those  privileged to  be inside. And by  the end of the eighteenth century, some kind of seclusion became necessary for people to observe "decency and good order" in their assembly. The street life of London had changed markedly from  that of a half-century earlier  (Corfield  1990). A  rapid growth  of the city's  population, fed  largely  by rural migrants of the lower classes,  had increased the density of street traffic, and  their poverty had increased the incidence  of  street  crime.  The  streets teemed  with  strangers, and  even  a  welldressed person could no longer safely be assumed to be a gentleman. Private pleasure gardens like Vauxhall and Ranelagh were popular at this time (Wroth 1896), and the promenade in public  parks died out as  a  social activity of the upper classes by the end of the eighteenth century. This was  most notable at  the  Mall in St. James's Park,  whose invasion by the middle classes was bemoaned by  John  Gwynn as early as  1766 (p. 88).

The increasing density of vegetation in some of  the  squares  provided  for  another  use  of open space: they became small private parks, frequented in daytime by nannies tending children and footmen walking pet dogs, and in the summer evenings,  by key-holding families out for  a  breath of fresh air.  The trees  and shrubs provided a modicum of visual privacy,  but the biggest change was in the minds of those using the squares. Rather than resorting to them for social  encounters and public display, they went for private  relaxation,  as individuals  and  a s families,  privileged to have a park of their own

x aJ 3 v , L ln I C aJ x E u 1867-68).Courtesy of theBritish Library.

<!-- image -->

out their  front door,  safe  behind iron railings, locked gates,  and a  screen of vegetation from the eyes and voices of those on the street.

By the nineteenth century, the process was widespread. St. James's Square,  once the paragon  of  the  open  square,  was  planted  with shrubs  including  'a  screen  of  plantation extending  round  the  interior  of  the  railing  of about ten feet  in width'  in 181  7 ,   according to plans by John Nash,  the  designer of  Regent's Park,  and  in 1825 linden and laburnum trees were added to the garden (Survey of London 1960,  69).  The  changes  in  the  use  of  the squares are seen in drawings and prints at the end of the  century. Children are  shown with their  parents,  nursemaids are  shown  pushing carriages.  The  squares  became extensions of the  private  lives  of  their  occupants. In short, they  had  become  domesticated,  transformed from  public  piazzas into private parks.

## The Roots of

## Suburbia

The appeal of living in the residential  squares lay  not  just  in  the  prestige  of  the  particular estate  or  in the  amenity of the  garden in the square. It also  lay  in the location of the neighborhood at the edge of town. Almost all of the squares were built on previously open ground at  the  fringe  of  the  built-up area  at  the  time, and beyond them lay open countryside (Fig. 3). Development of the Grosvenor estate began around 1725,  and much of the  neighborhood  was  still  not finished  twenty  years later.  Despite contemporary accounts, most of the rapid growth of the population of'london in  the  eighteenth  century  took place  after 1750.  Between 1700-50  the  population  was virtually unchanged, from  674,350  to 676,250 (George 1925,  31  9).  Fashionable Westminster and  the  western  parishes  did  increase  from 139,000 to 174,000 in the first half of the century,  but even this was  a gain of only 25  percent over fifty  years.

This  slow  growth  meant  the  squares  and their  neighborhoods were,  for  many years,  in suburban locations relative to the heart of the city. Some remained at the very edge of development for several decades. Queen Square in Bloomsbury was  built up on only three  sides for  its  first  sixty  years  and  had a view  of the countryside to the north including the  hills of Hampstead and Highgate (Fig. 2). Not only was the  view  better at  the  edge  of town,  but the air  was cleaner  away from the stench of open sewers  in  town.  While  new  squares  were praised for their  salubrious  air,  free of the  noisome taint of older neighborhoods, later develwith buildings and streets,  and they  lost their  subthis  happened,

opment eventually surrounded them urban location  by default. As they often lost their  prestige a s   well.

The  houses around Grosvenor  Square also included another landscape amenity missing in the older squares: private rear gardens (Fig. 3). Since  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century, much of the new housing for the middle and upper  classes  in  London  had  included  small backyards that were often turned into gardens (Longstaffe-Gowan 1990).  Private  gardening became somewhat of a fad and there arose a lively  commercial  nursery  and  job-gardener trade. The new value given to truly private outdoor space was in large part a response to the increased emphasis on family life and the segregation of  residential space  from  the  other activities of daily life that were then beginning to transform British society (Stone 1977).

The domestication of the squares is reflected also  in  the  change  in  character  of  their  surrounding neighborhoods. Their location off the major streets with limited access to them, away from the noise of traffic and street commerce, added to their  appeal.  Most of the  later  projects such a s   Bloomsbury were purely residential,  without  the  shops  and markets that characterized  the  side  streets of  earlier  square development projects. Like Bloomsbury,  many had  barriers  at  the  street  entrances  to  the neighborhood  that  denied  entry  to  through traffic,  peddlers, and any  pedestrians without business on the estate (Olsen 1982, 145-50).

By the early nineteenth century, the squares and their  residential neighborhoods  began to express a new set of landscape values,  reflecting a  bourgeois sensibility centered on family and on the home as possession rather than as social venue. The attempts at isolation from the busy life of the city and its diverse social  classes were difficult to achieve  on the squares despite the street gates and the  garden gates. A small garden behind the house allowed only a token private  landscape  space; the  garden  in  the square  in front  provided  a pleasant  little park and carried suitable rural aristocratic overtones, but it lacked privacy. In the end,  the desire for a larger private landscape space that had been

nurtured  by the  Georgian residential squares finally outgrew their confines. This new sensibility  expressed  the values of the middle classes as they rose to positions of wealth and influence after the turn of the nineteenth century.  While  some  of  them had  purchased houses  in  villages  outside  London  since the middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  (Fishman 1987, 39-72), the  limitations  of  travel  prevented the growth of any extensive suburban settlement  until  the  mid-nineteenth  century. But the first manifestation of the physical form of  the  suburban  house  in  the  city  arrived sooner,  in the  182Os,  with the  completion  of Regent's  Park  at  the  northwest  edge  of London.

Regent's  Park was a royal domain built from open  countryside  a s   an  exclusive  residential area.  It  brought  about  simultaneously several innovations  in  landscape forms  that  have  an influence to this  day.  It took  the  form  of the royal  park  in  a  suitably  pastoral design,  surrounded it  with large blocks of terrace housing, and sprinkled  it  with  detached houses  called 'villas' (Fig. 7). Regent's  Park  was initially a private park with gates at the entrances, but suitably dressed visitors were allowed on the main roads through it. In the 1830s, yielding to public pressure, the Crown opened the park in the center to the public by stages.  It represents in physical form  a metaphor for  the transition in landscape symbolism that was to turn the residential  square  into  suburbia. At  its  southern end, closest to town,  it began with a crescent, linked to a square,  and this opened up to the park,  which  was  flanked  on  both  sides  by blocks  of  terraces,  in effect  opening  up and expanding the form of an enclosed square and grafting it  onto  the form of the large landscaped park.  Several  villas  were  placed  in  the  park, almost a s   miniature country houses;  others appeared in two picturesque groupings,  Park Village East and Park Village West,  adjacent to the park. The whole ensemble was without prece- dent.

This  effort  was  also  a successful  real estate venture.  The  value  of the  housing derived  in large  part from  the  amenity  value  of the  park at the center,  and that derived largely from its privacy and greenery, just as in older residential squares. But by placing a large park at the tenter  instead of a small square  garden,  the  designer created a new kind of private residential space, a large domestic park where individuals and families could enjoy the romantic beauties of nature and where children could safely play. That  Regent's  Park  was  later  opened  to  the public  does  not obviate  its  private  origins  or the strength of the movement toward privatization and domestication of open space that it represented. It merely showed the inappropriateness of a city location for such housing and confirmed the exurban rationale of residential development  in  later  years.  It also  marked  a major  development  and turning  point  in the trend  toward  residential segregation and  domestication of  open  space  that  began  in the late eighteenth century in  the green squares of

London.

## From Private Squares to Public

## Parks

In  the  early  nineteenth  century,  the  green square and its permutations in circus and crescent were still the most common elements in the  shaping  of  new  elite  sections  of  British towns.  Late Georgian and Regency towns depended on the square a s  the organizing device for almost all new urban residential  expansions in upper and upper-middle class areas. In London from 1800 to the third quarter of the century,  the Bloomsbury,  Belgravia, Bayswater, and Pimlico  areas, among others, were built around a  series  of  small  green  open  spaces,  some square,  some oval,  some long and linear. Almost all were planted heavily with shrubs and trees,  and  almost  all  the  green  spaces  were fenced in,  reserved for the private use of surrounding tenants  (Olsen 1976,  162-69).

By the 1830s the need for public open space was becoming acute in some of the older parts of London, and the private green squares were eyed longingly by nearby residents denied access  to  them.  The  cholera epidemic  of  1832 struck particularly  harshly  in  the  crowded slums areas  of  London, especially  in the eastern part of town. Tens  of thousands died. The prevailing  medical  knowledge  of  the  time blamed  the  disease  on  'miasmas' fed by dampness, darkness, and still air (Pelling  1978). One of the cures recommended, in addition to the  provision  of sewers and clean water,  was to open up the urban fabric  to let in light and air. Yet there were very few public open spaces anywhere in London.

<!-- image -->

The Parliamentary Select Committee on Public  Walks,  convened  to  look  into  the  matter, reported in 1833 that in the entire metropolis, the only open spaces available to 'all  classes' of society were Hyde Park and the Green Park, both at the far  western  edge of town. Three other royal parks,  also on the western side of town,  St.  James's  Park,  Kensington  Gardens, and Regent's Park, were open only to 'persons well-behaved and properly dressed' (Report of the  Select  Committee on Public Walks  1833, 5).  The  Committee  suggested  several  places where  public  walks  could  be  created  and called  for  admission of the  general public  to Regent's  Park.

The motive for  opening the  parks was  not pure  altruism,  however.  The  Committee  felt that one of the principal benefits would be an improvement  in  the  character  of  the  poor. 'Open places reserved  for the amusement (under  due  regulations to preserve order) of the humbler  classes,  would  assist  to  wean  them from  low and debasing pleasures.'  The Committee  also  cited  the  'advantages  which  the Public Walks  (properly regulated and open to the  middle  and  humbler  classes) give to the improvement in the cleanliness,  neatness and personal appearance of those  who  frequent them.'  This  would  exert  'the  most  powerful effect  in  promoting Civilization,  and  exciting Industry' (Report of the Select Committee on Public Waks, 1833, 8-9). The residential squares were  not felt to be the  proper  venue for this socializing mission, and they remained locked  and  private,  but the  social landscape values they expressed, of genteel people living amid greenery in the city,  were those that lay behind the  motivation  to  use  public  parks to improve the health, manners, and political tractability of the working class.

Thus,  by the 1830s, the urban amenity landscape  had  become  the  concern  not just  of developers and aestheticians, but also of social reformers,  epidemiologists,  and the  police  as well. The residential  squares that stood for high status  and the  values  of property  provided  a model for the use of public parks imbued with another,  more vital value,  as protectors of the public health and keepers of the public order. Access to open space was increasingly  thought to  be a  right  of  all town dwellers,  not just  of the privileged few,  and to be a benefit to social and political stability by helping to defuse social tensions  that  were  building  to  the  breaking point.

By  1840 Regent's  Park  was  fully  opened  to the public, and in the 1840s, Victoria Park was created at the east end of London to  provide open space for  that part o f the  metropolis. It was planned a s   a real estate venture as well, to be ringed with expensive villas,  but due to the unfashionability  of  the  area, these  drew  no buyers  and  were  dropped  from the plan (Chadwick 1966, 112-25).

Elsewhere in England the residential  squares were imitated in the laying out of elite residential quarters from  the  end of the  seventeenth century,  but only two towns,  Bath and Bristol, were  large  enough  to  have  more  than  two squares by 1770 (Borsay 1989, 323-24).  In the next fifty  years,  many more were laid out,  especially at  resort towns like Brighton and Bath. Beyond England the squares  were  imitated in Edinburgh, with its New Town of  the 1760s and later  squares  and  crescents  as  it  expanded. Dublin gained several by the end of the eighteenth century, including St.  Stephen's  Green, Merrion, Fitzwilliam, and Mountjoy Squares, all very  much  along  the lines  of  the  London squares.  And  beginning  in  the  183Os,  many cities and towns were laying out public parks, most often with  surrounding terraces  or villas on  the  model of  Regent's  Park,  to  generate revenue (Chadwick 1966,  65-11 0).

## The British Square i n America

In British colonies overseas, residential squares  were  used  only  sparingly,  a  few  in each of the major Australian cities and a handful in Canada,  most surprisingly in Montreal a s English-speakers  moved  into  the  city  in  the early  nineteenth century  (Marsan 1981,  13943).  They  were  built  more extensively in the U.S.  after independence from  Britain. In colonial America,  public squares were important in the  laying out  of many new towns,  but most often  they  were  centrally  located  and  functioned as  civic  plazas,  town commons,  or village  greens  rather than  as  residential squares on the  London  model.  They  were  generally treated as  parks,  however,  and have become an  indigenous  landscape form  that  incorporates rural  amenity aesthetics into a public civic context. The courthouse square developed as an  especially important variant (Price 1968).

The first  American residential squares were those in Philadelphia, planned by William Penn in 1682,  when the  London  square  was  still a

new and changing landscape form;  Penn modeled his squares on the Moorfields rather than Covent Garden or Lincoln's  Inn Fields. A plan and  description  of  Philadelphia  of  1683  describes  the  intention  to  lay  out  a  ten-acre square  at  the  center o f the  city  to  be  surrounded  by public  buildings  and  four  public squares of eight acres in each of the four quarters  of the  city  'to  be for the  like uses of the Moore-fields in London' (Reps 1965,161 ). The Philadelphia  squares  were, in  the spirit of Brotherly  Love,  intended from the first  to  be public open spaces in the residential quarters of the  city,  a  significant  variation  of the  form developing in London at the same time. Of  the four, Rittenhouse  Square  became  the  most fashionable,  reachings  its  peak  of  prestige  in the second half of the nineteenth century.

A  more direct copy of London's  residential squares  was  planned  but  never  built  in Annapolis, Maryland. The plan of 1695 called for a Bloomsbury Square,  but it was never laid out

(Reps 1972, 123). More successful was the remarkable series of  squares  that formed the basic structure  for  the  town of  Savannah,  Georgia. James Oglethorpe's  plan  of 1733  divided  the town into wards  of forty houses,  each with a central square,  in effect providing a neighborhood grouping much like those of the squares of  London  (Reps  1965,  195-202). The  basic module was  replicated  as  Savannah grew,  so that by  the time of the Civil War,  it had twentythree  such  neighborhood  squares.  They  remain to this day,  making Savannah one of the truly remarkable urban landscapes in America. Several other  towns were  planned during the colonial period on the models  of Philadelphia and Savannah,  but few  grew  to any  size and what squares they had have become more like civic plazas than residential squares.

Ironically,  it was  in the fifty years after  independence  that  the  British  residential  square was  most widely  imitated  in the  U.S.  Boston received the first of the new generation of resi-

Figure 8. Louisburg Square in Boston about 1895. The square was developed in the 1830s as   a private residential square along English lines, though the American elms are a native touch. Courtesy o f the Bostonian Society, Old State House.

<!-- image -->

dential squares in Charles Bulfinch's project for the  Tontine  Crescent  and  its little  elliptical Franklin Place in 1793. It was  clearly modeled on  the  latest  crescents  of  Bath  and  London, which he had seen when he studied architecture in England (Kirker and Kirker 1964). Later residential squares in Boston included Columbia  Square  in  1801,  Washington  Place,  now Fort Hill Park,  in 1808, and Pemberton Square and Louisburg Square  in the  1830s,  the  latter still privately enclosed (Whitehill 1968) (Fig. 8).

Lafayette  Square  in  Washington,  DC  was planned by L'Enfant  a s   a public  plaza in front of the  White House,  but for  most of the first half of the last century,  it functioned  as a residential square,  home to  such illustrious lights as   Stephen Decatur,  Andrew  Jackson, Daniel 33).  It  has  since  become  Lafayette  Park  and attained the  function  originally envisioned for

Webster,  and Henry Clay (Froncek 1985,124it.

In  New  York City, a  'great  square'  was planned in  1760 but never  built  (Reps 1965, 154).  Later  came  St.  John's  Square  in  1803 (since  destroyed),  Union  Place  (now  Union Square) in 1811,  Washington Square in 1827, and Gramercy Park in 1831 (Spann 1981). The latter retains a locked communal garden (Klein 1987). Baltimore's  Mt. Vernon  Place  of  1815 and New Haven's Wooster Square of the 1820s are also in the tradition of the British residential square and have kept their residential  character though now open to the public.

As  the  nineteenth  century  progressed, the residential square  faded  from  fashion  in the US. Almost  all  have been turned  into  public parks. Since the middle of the last century,  the public neighborhood park has been an important  element  in town  planning a s   the  democratic  nation finally adapted the British form to the American context.  At the  same  time,  the two other  English forms of green urban landscape became very important in America, the detached housing of  suburbia  (Archer  1983; Fishman 1987)  and the large city park (Schuyler 1986).  Both of these borrowed from the English originals,  though,  and seem to have been little influenced  by  American  residential  squares. Frederick Law  Olmsted,  the designer of New York's  Central Park,  for  example, had traveled in England and openly admired the new parks built in the 1840s, particularly  Birkenhead Park, near  Liverpool  (Chadwick  1966,  70-72).  But there  is  an  echo  of  Regent's  Park's  transition from  square  to  park  in  the  form  of  modern private  golf-course  developments  ringed  by

blocks of condominiums and ranch houses.

## From  English Square to  French Square

The English style of landscape  gardening was widely  imitated on the continent after the  last quarter of the eighteenth century, and after the Napoleonic wars,  English taste in general occupied a place  of preeminence in most of Europe. The large city parks and the villa suburbs began to inspire imitation especially in northern Europe  and Germany. But the residential square failed to catch on in most places,  one of the few exceptions being Munich at the turn of the century, but even there it was in a context  of villa suburbia (Nerdinger  1983). It was in France that  the  British green squares were adapted and transformed and were eventually to make their  most lasting direct contribution to the form of cities around the world. As early as 1827,  the  Board  of  Health  in  Paris  'expressed the wish to see in the centre of every quarter  of the town a spacious square,  railed in,  and  planted with  trees,  in which the  children of all classes  might  .  .  .  give themselves up to the exercise suitable to their  years,  and in which the inhabitants of all ages might enjoy the solar influence, and breathe a purer air than in their  dwellings.' They also  asked for  a  national law regulating town planning that would ensure such public open spaces. 'All the citizens will enjoy its benefits  with a perfect equality;  and  the  poor  man,  even  more than  the rich,  will  find  himself  protected  by  it  in  his health,  in his life,  in his happiness' (Trebuchet 1842, 41  4-1 5).

In the 1840s, when the young Louis Napoleon  was  living  in  exile  in  London,  its squares were at the height of their importance as  green spaces within the city. The older ones had become genteel little parks, and the newer ones  were  being  built  in  the  smartest  new neighborhoods. But they  were  locked to the general public at a  time when epidemic disease in London was thought to be due in part to the lack  of  open  spaces  available  for  the  lower classes. When, a s   Napoleon I l l , he ordered the remodeling of Paris in the 1850s, he carried the image  of the  British squares  with  him  but  in-

I

sisted that Parisian squares be open to the public  from  the  outset and  be truly  urban  parks rather than private gardens (Pinkney 1958, 9394). French squares were not laid out only  in residential neighborhoods,  nor  were  they  always in regular geometric shapes. They were inserted into a variety of openings in the urban fabric in commercial as well as residential  areas, and in a much wider social cross-section  of the city  than  was  common  in  Britain  (Alphand 1868-73).

Along with the tree-lined boulevards  and the larger public parks such a s   the redesigned Bois de Boulogne and the Parc Monceau (also patterned after British models), the smaller squares gave  Paris  a modern  system  of  public  green open  spaces  and  corridors  that  made  it  the envy of other European cities. The renovations of Paris under Napoleon I l l and his aide Baron Haussmann set a standard for other city planners for  years  to come,  however, and in the international  acclaim that  accompanied them made  these  hybrid  Anglo-French  squares  a model  for  small  urban  parks  in  other  cities throughout the areas of European influence in the world of the late nineteenth century.

## E  p  i

## l o p e

It  is  ironic  that  at  just  the  same  time,  the mid-nineteenth century,  the residential square was  beginning to fall  out  of fashion in Britain for the building of new residential areas. Most new housing for the upper and middle classes after 1850  was suburban villas or semidetached houses,  each  with its  own  private gardens in front  and  behind.  Terraces  and town  houses around a square were important in the development  of  many  inner  suburbs  of  London through  the  1870s,  but  they  were  outnumbered  by  the  villa  suburbs  springing  up  all around the metropolis (Prince 1964).

By the 1830s most of the squares had trees planted  in  them, even  the  formerly open Hanover and Cavendish Squares,  and had become small parks rather than open spaces. By the  1850s  London  began  to  imitate  Paris  by planting trees along its major new streets,  first in new developments at  the edge of the metropolis  (Edwards 1981,  36),  and  later  along new streets cut through older sections of town (Edwards 1898, 58). The  special role that the introducing greenery into the urban fabric was superseded by a more general use of trees in many parts

residential squares played in of the urban landscape.

As the nineteenth century wore on,  many of the squares lost their residential tenants,  to be replaced by shops and offices. But as the gardens in most of the squares  remained locked to the public, they became a curious blend of public  visual amenity  and  private recreational amenity  for a  diminishing  clientele.  By  the 1880s, serious efforts were under way to open many of the  residential squares  to  public  use (Report of the Royal Commission on London Squares 1928). At  the  end  of the  nineteenth century,  the  private  street  barriers  were  removed,  those of Bloomsbury in 1890 and all others  by  act  of  Parliament  in  1893  (Olsen 1982,  149).  Among  the  major  squares,  Lincoln's  Inn Fields were opened to the public in 1894,' but  others  held  out  longer.  Leicester Square was opened to the public only in 1933; that same year St. James's Square was opened to the public at  lunch hours,  though gradually the hours have been extended. To this day the gardens of many of the squares in the  busiest parts of the  city  remain locked to the  public: Bedford,  Manchester,  and  Belgrave  Squares among them.

## Conclusion

The residential squares of London were the centerpieces of a  unique form  of urban landscape  that  was  important  for  more than  two hundred  years  in the  morphology  of  British towns  and  had  strong  influence  elsewhere. They were the  home of the  elite classes and reflected their  tastes and social consciousness in a concrete and living form. The transformations of the squares responded to changes in the aesthetics of the elite, derived from a rural base of wealth and status,  and to changes  in the role of property as   British society made the transition  from late  feudal  to  fully capitalist modes  of  production.  The  squares  were  the arena for  the working out  of major class tensions  in  the  struggle  over  public  and  private rights in the  urban  landscape,  a struggle that continues. They developed one of the first effective  ways  of  integrating  elements  of  the natural landscape into the  urban fabric. They

provided  a  social  model for  the  first  modern public  parks.  They  represented some  of  the first expressions of the desires for social segregation and privatized domesticated open space that were to form the basis for the landscape  of suburbia. And they  became models of  urban  planning  that  were  adopted  and adapted in other cultures to create much of the urban landscape in most areas of European culture in the world today.

To  understand their  role  in the  creation of urban  landscapes,  it  has  been  necessary  to consider them from a variety of perspectives. The  perspective  of  aesthetics  in  urban  morphology has been studied in twentieth-century U.S. residential  and  commercial  landscapes (Duncan 1973; Rubin 1979) in ways that show its role in expressing elite control of the landscape. In  the British context, Summerson (1  963,  1978) and Olsen (1  976,  1986) point up the advantages of an art-historical  approach to the role of aesthetics in understanding the  intentions of builders of urban environments and the social use of spaces created by them. But they  do not fully  consider the  garden a s   an integral element  in the  urban  landscape aesthetic,  nor its role in the  symbolism  of social and economic values about the landscape.

The role of nature in the structural relations between  economic  classes  is  explained  by Harvey (1985, 48-56)  in ways  that can illuminate the  role of the  garden in the  squares  of London. He sees the divorce from  nature inherent  in  the capitalist  organization  of  the means of production calling forth a spontaneous response from both bourgeoisie and proletariat alike for a new relationship  with nature. But  the  new  relationship  is  also  based  on  a fundamental separation from  nature,  a  "mystification"  of  nature  (Williams 1973,  125) that ends up treating it a s   an amenity and as a commodity that ultimately is subsumed by capitalistic economic  processes. This  is seen also  in the changes of the squares of London, from a functional  to  an  aesthetic  role  in  the  urban landscape and ultimately to a commercial one. But  it fails  to  explain  fully  the  interaction  between  social  and  landscape processes or  to shed  much light  on the  interaction  between aesthetics  and  social tensions in the  transformations  of  the  squares.  It  is  the  concept  of landscapes as symbolic statements,  open to a reading  of  the  social  relations  behind  them (Cosgrove 1984), that offers the most valuable avenue  of  approach  to  understanding  these transformations and especially for appreciating their  influence  on  later  landscape  developments. The use of ornamental vegetation in  the urban landscape  is  of  necessity a cultural act that carries with it some expression, implicit or explicit,  of social values.  From the sixteenth to the nineteenth century, most European uses of urban ornamental vegetation were  shaped  by the prevailing  tastes of elite social groups,  most important the rural aristocracy.  While the forms developed  on  the  continent  were derived mostly from the garden allee, transformed into malls,  cours,  avenues,  and  boulevards in the city,  in England the  dominant aristocratic garden  form  adopted  in the  city  was  the  landscape park. It eventually took three forms,  the residential square,  the large city park,  and the house-and-garden of suburbia.  For  two  hundred years,  the  most important of these  was the residential square,  and its legacy is felt today in the other two which have outlived it. All three landscapes are strong statements of social values,  but the  gardens  in the  residential squares provide the key to understanding the evolution  of  all  three.  The  green  squares  of London show us the importance of seeing the cultural  basis  of  landscape  ideals  in  understanding urban morphology a s   social process.

The squares of London developed in a particular  cultural  situation,  but  they  are  by  no means unique a s   symbolic statements of social process in the  urban  landscape.  It would  be useful to  compare the  residential squares  of North America and  Australia with  the  British squares to see the ways in which societies with less  stratification and  different  environmental aesthetics arrived at a different working out of social processes in the landscape. Ornamental vegetation can serve as a key to understanding urban landscapes in other contexts. This study has  shown the role of elite landscape taste  a s an expression of social use of space. Investigation  of the  symbolic  meanings expressed by the  many  forms  of  the  American  domestic landscape  assemblage  of  house  and  garden, from  colonial times to the  present day,  could shed new light on the political and social processes  involved in the evolution  of the American urban landscape. And the planting of street trees  in  the  public  landscape of  many  large cities today expresses  a  range of social issues in  symbolic  form,  from  the  community-empowerment of inner city neighborhoods to the

I

I

I

protection  of  exclusive  privilege  in  incorporated bedroom suburbs.

## Note

1. In an ironic twist,  Lincoln's Inn Fields is again home to the  homeless  in London much as   it was  three hundred  years  ago.  An  article  in the  New  York Times  (Schmidt 1992) on homelessness in European  cities  reports  that  'as  many  as  200  people live at  any time  in makeshift  shelters and tents in Lincoln's Inn Fields, a square that is surrounded by the  offices  of  some  of London's  most prominent barristers.'

## Acknowledgments

I  thank the Lucia Harrison Endowment Fund of the Department of Geography at Western Michigan University for research  support  and  the  editor  and anonymous reviewers for their criticism and suggestions.

## References

- Alphand, Adolphe. 1868-73. Les  promenades  de Paris.  2 vol.  Paris: J.  Rothschild.
- Archer, John. 1983. Country and city in the American romantic suburb. Journal of the Society of  Architectural Historians 42: 139-56.
- Borsay,  Peter. 1989.  The  English  urban  renaissance: Culture and society in the provincial  town 16601770. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
- Brett-James, Norman G. 1935.  The  growth of Stuart London. London: George Allen &amp; Unwin.
- Burke, Joseph. 1976.  English art 1714-1800. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
- Chadwick,  George. 1966.  The  park  and  the  town: Public landscapes in the  nineteenth and twentieth centuries. New York: Praeger.
- Chalklin,  C. W.,  and  Havinder, M. A., eds. 1974. Rural change and urban growth 1500-1800: Essays in English  regional  history  in  honour  of  W. G. Hoskins. London: Longman.
- Chancellor,  E. Beresford. 1907.  The  history  of  the squares of London,  topographical and historical. London: Kegan Paul,  Trench, Trubner &amp; Co.
- Claval, Paul. 1984. Reflections on the cultural geography of the  European city. In  The  city in cultural David Sopher,  pp. 31-49. Boston: Allen  &amp;  Unwin. context, ed.  John  Agnew,  John  Mercer, and
- Corfield,  Penelope J. 1990. Walking the  city  streets: The  urban  odyssey  in eighteenth-century  England. Journal  of Urban History 16: 132-74.
- Cosgrove, Denis E. 1984.  Social formation  and symbolic landscape. Totowa,  NJ: Barnes &amp; Noble.
- Critical  observations on the  buildings  and  improvements of London. 1771. London: J. Dodsley.
- Cruickshank,  Dan,  and Burton, Neil. 1990. Life in the Georgian city. London: Viking.
- Daniels,  Stephen. 1988. The political iconography of woodland in later Georgian England. In The iconography of landscape: Essays on the symbolic representation,  design and use o f   past environments, ed. Stephen Daniels and Denis Cosgrove, pp.  43-82. Cambridge:  Cambridge  University Press.
- Dasent,  Arthur  1. 1895.  The  history  of St.  James's Square and the  foundation of the  West  End of London. London: Macmillan.
- Duncan,  James  S. 1973. Landscape taste as  a symbol of group identity. Geographical  Review 63: 33455.
- Edwards,  Arthur  M. 1981.  The  design  of suburbia. London: Pembridge Press.
- Edwards,  Percy J. 1898. History of London street improvements, 1855-1897. London: London County Council.
- Elmes,  James. 1827.  Metropolitan  Improvements,  or London in the nineteenth century. London: Jones &amp; Co. Reprint ed. 1978. New York:  Arno Press.
- Fishman,  Robert. 1987.  Bourgeois  utopias:  The  rise and fall of  suburbia.  New York: Basic Books.
- Fricker, Laurie. 1974.  John  Claudius  Loudon:  The plane truth? In Furor hortensis: Essays on  the history of the English landscape garden in memory of H. F. Clark,  ed.  Peter Willis,  pp. 76-88.  Edinburgh: Elysium Press.
- Froncek,  Thomas,  ed. 1985. An illustrated history  of the  city  of  Washington.  New  York:  Alfred  A. Knopf.
- Gay,  John. 1716.  Trivia; or, The  art  of walking  the streets of London. London.
- George,  M. Dorothy. 1925. London life in the  eighteenth  century. London: Kegan  Paul, Trench, Trubner &amp; Co.
- Giedion, Sigfried. 1967. Space,  time and architecture: The  growth  of a  new  tradition.  5th  ed.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Gwynn,  John. 1766.  London  and  Westminster  improved. London.
- Harvey,  David. 1985.  Consciousness and the  urban experience:  Studies in the history and theory of capitalist urbanization.  Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Hugo-Brunt, Michael. 1955.  George Dance, the younger,  a s   town  planner  (1768-1814).  Journal of the Society of  Architectural Historians 14:1322.
- Jacques,  David. 1983. Georgian gardens:  The reign of nature. London: Batsford.
- Kirker, Harold, and Kirker, James. 1964. BuHinch's Boston, 1787-1877. New York:  Oxford  University Press.
- Klein,  Carole. 1987.  Gramercy  Park:  An American Bloomsbury. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

- Lavedan,  Pierre. 1941. Histoire de I'urbanisme,  vol. 2, Renaissance  et  temps  modernes.  Paris:  Henri Laurens.
- Lawrence,  Henry W. 1988. Origins  of the  tree-lined boulevard.  Geographical Review 78:355-74.
- Levy, Eleanor. 1990. Moorfields,  Finsbury and the City of  London  in  the sixteenth  century.  London Topographical Record 26:78-96.
- Longstaffe-Gowan,  Todd. 1990. Gardening  and  the middle  classes 1700-1830. In  London's  pride: The glorious history o f   the capital's gardens,  ed. Mireille  Calinou, pp. 122-33. London:  Anaya Publishers.
- Loudon, J.  C. 1803. Letter to the editor.  Literary lournal,  Dec. 31,  1803. Reprinted in John Claudius Loudon:  The  plane  truth?,  L. Fricker.  In  furor hortensis:  Essays  on  the  history  o f  the  English landscape garden in memory of H. E Clark,  ed. P. Willis,  pp. 76-88. Edinburgh:  Elysium  Press, 1974.
- Lowenthal,  David,  and Prince,  Hugh C. 1965. English landscape tastes.  Geographical Review 55:186222.
- Marsan,  Jean-Claude. 1981. Montreal in  evolution: Historical analysis of the development of Montreal's architecture and urban environment. Montreal: McCill-Queen's  University Press.
- Neale, Ron S. 1974. Society,  belief,  and the  building of Bath, 1700-1 793. In Rural change and urban growth 1500-1800: Essays  in  English  regional history in honour of W. G.  Hoskins,  ed.  C.  W. Chalklin  and M. A.  Havinder,  pp. 253-80. London:  Longman.
- . 1981. Bath 1680-1850: A  social history;  or A valley o f   pleasure,  yet a sink o f iniquity. London: Routledge &amp;  Kegan Paul.
- Nerdinger, Winfried. 1983. Town planning in Munich around 1800. Daidolus 7:  75-82.
- Olsen,  Donald J. 1976. The growth of Victorian London.  New York:  Holmes &amp; Meier.
- . 1982. Town  planning in London:  The  eighteenth  and nineteenth  centuries.  2nd  ed.  New Haven, CT: Yale  University Press.
- . 1986. The city as  a work of  art:  London,  Paris, Vienna. lvew Haven, CT: Yale  University Press.
- Palladio, Andrea. 1965 [I  5701. The four books of architecture.  Trans.  Isaac Ware, 1738. Reprint ed. New York: Dover.
- Papworth, John B. 1816. Select views of  London. London:  R.  Ackermann.
- Pelling,  Margaret. 1978. Cholera, fever  and English medicine 1825-1865. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Pinkney, David H. 1958. Napoleon 1 1 1  and the rebuildi n g  o f  Paris. Princeton,  NJ: Princeton  University Press.
- Price, Edward T. 1968. The central courthouse square in the  American  county  seat.  Geographical Review 58: 29-60.
- Prince,  Hugh  C. 1964. North-West London 1814-
1863. In Greater London,  ed. J.  T.   Coppock and Hugh C.  Prince,  pp. 80-119. London:  Faber  &amp; Faber.
- Ralph, James. 1736. A new critical review of the publick  buildings, statues  and  ornaments  in  and around London and Westminster. 2nd ed.  London.
- Rasmussen, Steen Eiler. 1982. London,  the unique city. Rev. ed. Cambridge,  MA: MIT Press.
- The Records of  the Honourable Society of Lincoln's I n n : The Slack Books,  vol. 3, AD. 1660-1775. 1899. London: Lincoln's  Inn.
- Report of the Royal Commission on London Squares. 1928. London: HMSO.
- Report of  the Select Committee on Public Walks, 1833. London: House of Commons.
- Reps,  John  W. 1965. The making of urban America: A history  o f  city  planning  in  the  United States. Princeton,  NJ: Princeton University Press.
- -. 1972. Tidewater towns:  City planning in colonial  Virginia  and  Maryland.  Williamsburg, VA: Colonial Williamsburg Foundation.
- Rocque, John. 1982 [I  7461. Plan of the Cities of London and Westminster and the Borough of Southwark.  Reprinted in The A to Z of  Georgian London.  London: London Topographical  Society.
- Rubin,  Barbara. 1979. Aesthetic  ideology  and  urban design.  Annals o f the  Association of American Geographers 69: 339-61.
- Rude, George. 1971. Hanoverian London, 1714-1808. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Schmidt,  William  E. 1992. Across  Europe,  faces  of homelessness become more visible and vexing. New York  Times,  January 5, 1992, p. 1.
- Schuyler, David. 1986. The new urban landscape: The redefinition o f   urban form in nineteenth-century America. Baltimore:  Johns  Hopkins  University Press.
- Sexby, J.  J. 1898. The  municipal parks,  gardens,  and open spaces of  London:  Their history and associations. London: Elliott Stock.
- Spann,  Edward  K. 1981. The  new metropolis:  New York City, 1840-1857. New York: Columbia University  Press.
- Stanley,  Alessandra. 1991. Angry  invective  blots  out the sun over  genteel Cramercy Park. New York Times,  February 2,  1991, p. 25.
- Stone, Lawrence J. 1977. The family, sex and marriage in  England, 1500-7800. New  York:  Harper  &amp; Row.
- Stott,  Peter. 1990. The medieval garden. In London's pride:  The  glorious  history of the  capital's gardens, ed.  Mireille Galinou,  pp. 30-41. London: Anaya Publishers.
- Summerson, John. 1963. Urban forms. In The historian and the  city,  ed.  Oscar  Handlin and John Burchard,  pp. 165-76. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press and Harvard University Press.
- . 1977. Architecture  in Britain 1530-1830. 6th ed. Harmondsworth,  U.K.:  Penguin Books.

- . 1978. Georgian  London.  3rd  ed. London: M.I.T. Press.
- Survey of London, vol.  3, The Parish of St.  Giles-inthe-Fields.  191  2.  London: Joint Publishing Committee Representing the London County Council and the  London Survey Committee.
- . vol.  29, The  Parish of  St.  James  Westminster: South of  Piccadilly. 1960. London: London County Council.
- . vol.  34, The  Parish of St.  Anne,  Soho.  1966. London: London County Council.
- . vol. 40,  The Grosvenor Estate in Mayfair. 1980. London: Greater London Council.
- Thacker,  Christopher. 1979.  The  history  o f  gardens. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Thomas,  Keith. 1982.  Man and  the  natural world: Changing attitudes in England 7500-7800. London:  Penguin.
- Thompson,  F.  M.  L., ed. 1982.  The  rise of suburbia. Leicester: Leicester University Press.
- Trebuchet, M. 1842. Boards of Health:  Report on the Labours of the "Conseil de Salubrite of Paris. In
- Report on the sanitary condition of  the labouring population o f   Great Britain,  ed. Edwin Chadwick, Appendix  14,  pp. 409-16.  London: H.M.S.O.
- Watkin,  David. 1982.  The  English vision:  The picturesque in architecture,  landscape and  garden design.  New York: Harper &amp; Row.
- Whitehill, Walter Muir. 1968. Boston: A topographical history. Cambridge,  MA: Belknap  Press of Harvard  University Press.
- Williams,  Raymond. 1973.  The country  and the  city. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Wroth, Warwick. 1896. The London pleasure gardens of  the  eighteenth century.  London: Macmillan.
- Youngson, Arthur I. 1966. The making of classical Edi n b u r g h , 7750-7840. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University  Press.
- Zucker, Paul. 1959. Town and square: From the agora to  the  village green.  New York:  Columbia University  Press.

Submitted 5/97, revised 4/92, accepted 5/92.