## Regional Inequality in China: A Case Study of Jiangsu Province*

## Yehua Dennis Wei

University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee

## C. Cindy Fan

University of California, Los Angeles

The tremendous changes in China's development philosophy and regional economies during the last two decades have carved out selectively new locations of development across the nation. While politicians heatedly debate the acceptable levels of regional inequality, most scholarly studies focus on broad aggregate trends of inequality among provinces and groups of provinces, and pay little attention to identifying and conceptualizing sources and major agents of spatial change. This paper aims at revealing detailed spatial ramifications of the reforms, and at understanding the impacts of the state, local agents, and foreign investors on regional development. T o this effect, we conduct a disaggregated and empirical study of Jiangsu, a coastal province experiencing dramatic economic and spatial restructuring. We show that local agents which favor rural industrial enterprises accelerated new growth in selected rural areas, in contrast to slower growth of older cities and state-owned enterprises, resulting in a net decline of intercounty inequality. But the coalescence of state policy, local agents, and foreign investment has widened the historical gap between northern and southern Jiangsu, and is likely to accelerate intercounty inequality in the future. Our study demonstrates the utility of the 'developments from above, below and outside' framework for analyzing key forces of regional  growth  in  socialist  transitional  economies. Key  Words:  regional  development,  regional  inequality, China, Jiangsu.

## Introduction

he  trends  and  underlying  factors  of  regional  inequality  are  hotly  debated  in scholarly  work  (e.g.,  Williamson  1965;  Soja 1980;  Smith  1984;  Barro  and  Sala-I-Martin 1995). In socialist economies, regional inequality is a particularly burning issue as it is a point of disagreement between reformers and hardliners  who  are  frequently  involved  in  power struggles,  and  it  is  central  to  the  discourse among scholars and policymakers who seek to balance equity and efficiency objectives so as to optimize development path and resource allocation (Schiffer 1989). While a number of governments  embarked  on  plans  to  reduce  regional  inequality  (Fuchs  and  Demko  1979), recent transformations of these nations introduced a host of new agents, in addition to the state, which play important roles in shaping the landscape of regional development (Fan 1995a; Smith  1996;  Wei  and  Ma  1996;  Bradshaw 1997; Lin 1997; Wei 1999). T

For the first 30 years of the People's Repub- lic of China (PRC), the state set out to reduce regional inequality. The Chinese economy is a highly complex one, and its transition to a 'socialist  market  economy'  since  the  late  1970s introduced  even  more  complexities  as  both plan  and  market  mechanisms  coexist  in  not necessarily  coordinated  fashions.  Reports  of widening spatial disparities, fears of social unrest,  and outcries from poorer regions forced policymakers to give regional policy a high priority,  and  stimulated  studies  of  regional  inequality.  However,  most  existing  studies  focus on inequalities among large spatial aggregates such as provinces or groups of provinces. Partly due to data limitations, little attention is paid to inequalities that exist within provinces, such as those among cities and counties. On the other hand, many new agents of spatial change operate at levels below the provinces. Their roles are inevitably concealed in studies that employ only large spatial aggregates.

Existing  research  on  China's  regional  inequality largely focuses on the trends of regional inequality, but does not provide detailed analy-

* An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association of American Geographers, Fort Worth, TX, April 2-6, 1997. This research was partially supported by a Graduate School Research Committee award, University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee. We would like to thank Chiu-Ming Luk, three anonymous referees, and the editor for comments and suggestions which helped improve the paper.

ses  of  agents  or  factors  of  regional  growth. Nevertheless, differential regional growth is a fundamental  explanation  for  changes  of  regional inequality-faster growth of already developed regions will bring about increase in regional inequality, and their slower growth will result in a decline in regional inequality. This paper argues that factors and agents of regional growth must be analyzed in light of the complexities of the Chinese economy, and respective historical, geographical, and politicaleconomic  contexts.  In  post-Mao  China,  we identified three particularly powerful agents of regional  growth,  namely  the  state,  the  local agent, and the foreign investor. We attempt to conceptualize the effects of these agents in relation  to  the  notion  of  'developments  from above, below  and  outside,'  following  Fan (1995b). Through a case study of Jiangsu, we wish to show that these agents, each having differing objectives and hence varied impacts on regional  development,  jointly  produced  an economic landscape that is marked by two apparently contradictory trends: rapid growth in the core of the province and slower growth of cities.

In the next section, we give a brief review of existing knowledge about regional inequality in China. Then, we elaborate upon our research and conceptual framework, in relation to theories of regional inequality and the complexities of  the  Chinese  transitional  economy.  After  a short introduction to the Jiangsu province, we examine the roles of state policy, local agents, and  foreign  investment  in  regional  development. This is followed by an empirical analysis of the inequality among county level units, and among  groups  of  county  level  units  within Jiangsu. The discussion and conclusion section summarizes our findings.

## Regional Inequality in China

Regional inequality has been at the center of scholarly and policy debates since the establishment of the PRC in 1949, due largely to the diverse views on the nature and practice of socialism,  the  balance  between  central  control  and local autonomy, and the role of market mechanisms. The PRC inherited a spatially uneven economy  with  a  large  coastal-interior  imbalance, which was the basis of one of the 'T en Great Relationships' analyzed by Mao (1977)

in  1956.  Partly  because  of  socialist  ideology and egalitarian ideas, and partly because of defense concerns, Mao argued for development of the interior, especially during the First Five Year  Plan  (1953-57)  (Ma  and  Wei  1997). While studies of the Maoist period produced varied  empirical  evidence  (partly  because  of variations in methodologies and study periods) (e.g., Pannell 1988; Cannon 1990; Lyons 1991; Fan 1995a; Wei and Ma 1996; Wei 1998), most suggested that Mao's policy halted escalation of regional inequality, if not reduced it.

Since  the  beginning  of  reforms  in  1978, China's dominant development philosophy has shifted from self-reliance to efficiency, comparative  advantage,  and  foreign  investment  and trade.  The  state  encourages  some  regions  to get  rich  first  and  emphasizes  development  of the coastal region, arguing that concentration of  resources  and  specialization  are  necessary for speedy economic growth. Under the open door  policy,  coastal  zones  are  designated  for foreign  trade  and  are  encouraged  to  actively seek foreign investment. The early 1990s witnessed a temporary setback of these efforts because of the Tiananmen incident in 1989. But during Deng's famous southern tour in January 1992,  he  called  for  deeper  reforms  toward  a socialist  market  economy,  which  once  again boosted  the  reform  movement  and  coastal development.

Yet the reforms also rekindled the concern over regional inequality. Research documents a widening  gap  especially  between  coastal  and inland China, accompanied by severe criticisms of  the  post-Mao  regional  policy  (Fan  1997). Scholars and particularly authorities from inland and poorer regions argue that the reform policy has been unfair toward them, and blame it for the outflows of resources from inland to coastal  regions,  regional  protectionism,  and ethnic conflicts. Increasingly, regional inequality  is  identified  as  a  root  of  China's  regional problems.  Partly  due  to  these  criticisms,  the Ninth Five Year Plan (1996-2000) shies away from the coastal development blueprint and instead advocates policies for narrowing regional inequality.

Despite a fairly large number of studies on regional inequality in post-Mao China (e.g., Lo 1990;  Yang  1990;  Lyons  1991;  Fan  1995a, 1995b; Wei and Ma 1996; Wei 1998), there are obvious  gaps  in  this  literature.  First,  studies

based on aggregate data (e.g., interprovincial) are less capable of revealing detailed processes that  shape  regional  development.  Substantial spatial  disparities  exist  within  provinces.  For example, Fan (1995a) shows that the observed decline  in  interprovincial  inequality,  widely noted in the literature, masked the rapid growth of  selected  regions  in  southern  and  eastern China, and the polarization and spatial restructuring  within  provinces  (between  urban  and rural areas and between open zones and their hinterland).

Second,  empirical  studies  have  not  yielded conclusive findings about the trends of regional inequality,  partly  because  of  data  constraints and  different  research  methods  (Wei  1999). For  example,  both  Rozelle  (1994)  and  Fan (1995b) examined variations in gross value of industrial and agricultural output (GVIAO) per capita across Jiangsu's counties. But by studying only rural counties Rozelle notes increases in intercounty inequality in Jiangsu, while Fan's analysis of all counties reveals a decline of inequality during the 1980s. Clearly more empirical information about intraprovincial inequalities is needed.

Another  gap  involves  the  factors  and  processes of regional inequality. Although the reform policies have been identified as a prominent factor, how they engendered increases or decreases  in  regional  inequality  is  not  clear. Fan (1995a, 1995b) argues that both state policy  and  foreign  investment  reinforced  spatial polarization in Guangdong, as the special economic  zones  and  the  Pearl  River  Delta  diverged from the rest of the province, and that rural industrial enterprises (especially townshipvillage enterprises or TVEs) were an important agent of regional development in Jiangsu. But there  are  few  other  studies  of  the  processes of regional  development,  or  attempts  to  systematically  conceptualize  these  processes.  In the following, we outline a conceptual and research framework that attempts to address specifically  the  factors  underlying changes in regional inequality.

## Conceptual and Research Framework

Existing  studies  of  regional  inequality  frequently employ approaches based on assumptions of free market economies and experiences of developed countries. Studies adopting neo- classical  theories  maintain  that  efficient  markets and factor mobility will equalize regional differentials (e.g., Borts and Stein 1964). Those drawing on the inverted-U model describe the rise in regional inequality during early stages of development  and  its  decline  as  the  economy matures  (e.g.,  Williamson  1965;  Friedmann 1966).  Scholars  favoring  divergence  theories, including those influenced by Marxist perspectives, hold that regional inequality and its increase  are  inevitable  consequences  of  capitalism (e.g., Myrdal 1957; Soja 1980). Still others examine the product cycle theory and the roles of  innovation  and  standardization  in  regional development, but do not give concrete explanations for regional inequality (e.g., Amos 1990).

These  approaches  are often competitive rather than complementary, and each captures at best only part of the picture of regional inequality. They are less relevant for explaining regional  inequality  in  socialist  or  transitional economies, where agents of development and factor  mobility  differ  from  those  in  capitalist economies. In China, the transition to a socialist  market  economy,  and  the  coexistence  of plan  and  market  mechanisms,  created  very complex situations that demand analytical approaches  that  are  contextually  sensitive  and that identify, specifically, key agents of regional development. Recent research has pointed out that  state  policy  and  foreign  investment  play critical roles in shaping China's regional development. We argue that the local agent, especially  in  light  of  rural  industrialization,  is  an emerging yet crucial agent of spatial change in China. While other factors may also exert some influence,  we  argue  that  the  Chinese  transitional economy offers unique opportunities for the  concurrent  operations  of  the  state,  local agents, and foreign investors, and that a synthesis of their roles is a powerful explanation of recent changes in regional inequality.

The state, the local agent, and the foreign investor each have different objectives, are accompanied by different types of resources, and offer differing but probably mutually reinforcing opportunities  for  economic  development.  Each has to be understood in the context of the transitional nature of the Chinese economy. In this paper  we  use  the  'development  from  above, below  and  outside'  framework  developed  by Fan (1995b) to conceptualize these agents' differing roles in and implications for regional de-

velopment,  and  provide  new  empirical  information  with  regard  to  the  validity  of  this conceptual  framework.  'Development  from above' (DFA) refers to processes of development attributable to government and/or external institutions (Stohr and T aylor 1981). These institutions tend to favor economic growth that begins in geographic clusters or cores, and are less  eager  to  pursue  strategies  to  reduce  regional disparity. In China, both the state (during the post-Mao period) and foreign investors tend  to  behave  like  these  institutions. 1   The state has designated certain regions and zones, mostly along the coast, and provided them with investment and preferential policies for rapid economic  growth.  Although  the  state  anticipates diffusion of growth in the future, it has so far  not  provided  strong  incentives  or  instruments  (commensurate  with  those  for  coastal development) for inducing regional diffusion. Foreign  investors  desire  well-developed  regions  with  skilled  labor,  good  infrastructures and accessibility, and capacities for agglomeration economies, and are attracted to state-designated open zones where cost of production is low (Leung 1990). There is little incentive for them to pursue diffusion. T o differentiate the roles of state policy and foreign investors, Fan (1995b) referred to the latter as 'development from outside' (DFO).

On the contrary, the notion of 'development from below' (DFB), conceptually analogous to 'urbanization from below' (Ma and Fan 1994) but  emphasizing  regional  economic  growth, describes  small-scale,  rural-centered  development mostly based on local resources and local community organizations (Grant 1973; Stohr 1981).  Local  agents  are  geographically  more widespread and are more concerned with engendering  rural  economic  growth  that  will likely  narrow  rural-urban  gaps.  Since  the  reforms, many cadres and enterprises in China's rural areas have been given unprecedented opportunities to promote rural industrialization. As will be shown later in the paper, rural industrial enterprises are a locomotive of economic growth in the countryside. Their impacts are aptly described as DFB.

DFA, DFB, and DFO are convenient concepts for analyzing the state, local agents, and foreign investors as agents of regional development in China. Yet a cautionary note is in order. In the classical versions of DFA and DFB, they are designed as competing paradigms, emphasizing  contrasting  paths  of  development that  involve  deliberate  planning,  and  representing dichotomous  conceptual constructs that are mutually exclusive. In practice, however, these models of development often coexist  and  coalesce  without  necessary  coordination. The transitional economy, in particular, is one  which  is  most  susceptible  to  the  coexistence and interaction of multiple agents of development.  In  China,  the  state,  local  agents, and foreign investors are often mutually reinforcing in their impacts on regional development. T easing out the independent contributions  of  each  agent  is  a  complicated  exercise, and must involve detailed analysis of their roles in light of historical and geographic contexts. Previous  research  on  regional  inequality  in China tends to focus on one or two of these agents, but seldom brings them together for a thorough analysis. Given the centrally planned economy which continues to accord considerable power to the state, the economic reforms which have managed to free up local resources and  promote  local  entrepreneurship,  and  the almost  full-throttle  participation  of  China  in the world market, we argue that analyses of the state,  local  agents,  and  foreign  investors  are necessary  for  a  better  understanding  of  the processes of regional development. In our case study of Jiangsu, we address the effects of the state, local agents, and foreign investors separately, as well as their combined effects.

## Jiangsu

Jiangsu is probably the most suitable candidate for  implementing  the  research  approach  described  above.  First,  it  has  directly  benefited from the reform policies, and its growth trajectory reflects that of many other coastal provinces,  such  as  Zhejiang  and  Shandong.  The province has always been sensitive to state policy  changes,  partly  because  it  is  one  of  the more developed provinces and partly because of  its  close  ties  to  Shanghai,  which  has  long been  an  epicenter  of  political  and  economic change. Second, large regional disparities, especially  between  a  poorer  northern  Jiangsu (Subei) and a richer southern Jiangsu (Sunan), have  existed  historically  and  concerned  local governments. In fact, Jiangsu is often viewed as  'two provinces in one' (Veeck 1995). An-

Figure 1: Regions in Jiangsu.

<!-- image -->

other notion that has gained favor is a threefold  division  of  the  province  into  the  south (Sunan), the central (Suzhong) and the north (Subei) (Fig. 1). Suzhong is considered a transition zone between Sunan and Subei. Regardless  of  which  divisional  scheme  one  prefers, spatial disparities within the province remain substantial.

Availability  of  subprovincial  data  provides another incentive for studying Jiangsu. Jiangsu Statistics  Bureau  recently  published  detailed county  level  statistics  whose  comprehensiveness is not matched by any other province (JSB 1990-1996; 1994b). In addition to analyses of these  data,  we  will  synthesize  information gathered  from  our  interviews  with  local  officials and researchers in China to illustrate the roles  of  different  agents  in  Jiangsu's  development and to help us interpret the findings. Finally, in Jiangsu the interplay and interaction of a  multitude  of  agents  of  development  can  be observed, as illustrated in the next section.

## Underlying Factors and Agents of Regional Development

State Policy and Regional Development

The  state  has  played  an  important  role  in China's regional development, by implementing 'from above' macropolicies that focus development in  selected  regions.  Maoist  industrial policy mostly favored large-scale industrial development, and diverted resources to stateowned  enterprises  (SOEs)  that  were  highly represented in cities. Therefore, cities generally enjoyed faster economic growth than rural areas (often represented  by  counties).  But Jiangsu  has  traditionally  been  less  dependent on SOEs. By contrast, township and village enterprises (TVEs) in Jiangsu were able to grow and expand during periods of decentralization and  rural  industrialization  (Ho  1994).  When Mao called for rapid industrialization in 1958, for  example,  the  leaders  of  Jiangsu  required that every commune start 15 to 25 small enter-

prises  within  three  to  five  years  and,  consequently, 39,000 commune enterprises were established  (Editorial  Committee  1989).  Then, in  1970,  Premier  Zhou  Enlai  called  for  development  of  rural  industries  for  supporting agricultural mechanization and for processing agricultural  products.  These  macrodirectives promoted development of collective enterprises in Jiangsu and cultivated a firm base for rural industrialization  within  the  commune  system that paved the way for the phenomenal growth of  TVEs after  the  commune system was dismantled in the 1980s (Christiansen 1992).

Post-Mao  reforms  further  stimulated  economic growth in Jiangsu and benefited Sunan disproportionately.  First,  new  fiscal  contract systems  implemented  in  the  late  1970s  and 1980s gave coastal provinces, including Jiangsu,  more  fiscal  autonomy  and  incentives (Wei  1996).  Accordingly,  local  governments and enterprises have been given greater autonomy in investment decision making and greater access to different sources of investments, such as  bank  credits,  enterprise  funds,  and  foreign capital, and are motivated to allocate their investments in order to maximize returns. More developed regions like Sunan enjoy early implementation  of  reform  policies  and  are  allowed to retain larger shares of their revenues for reinvestment.

province's rapid industrial growth (Veeck and Pannell 1989; Prime 1992). Since Sunan has a larger nonstate sector (79.2% compared with 58.1% in Suzhong and 59.7% in Subei in 1995 [ JSB 1994]), it is able to quickly capitalize on the reform policies. For example, in 1995, fixed asset  investment per capita in rural collective enterprises was 1,770 yuan in Sunan, and only 315 yuan in Subei (T able 1). On the other hand, the SOEs that continue to operate under the pre-reform socialist mold lag in efficiency and growth. For example, in 1995 the ratio of profits and taxes to fixed assets was the lowest for SOEs.  Subei,  which  is  more  dependent  on SOEs, has not shared Sunan's growth. By the same token, the concentration of SOEs in urban areas is expected to correlate with slower growth of cities, while TVEs, mostly in rural areas, are expected to stimulate the growth of counties.

Second, the reforms defined a climate that promotes development of nonstate enterprises, especially  TVEs,  through  policies  of  low  tax rates, budget bonus, and new labor policies. In Jiangsu, TVEs are an important reason for the

Third, the state has designated open zones for  attracting  foreign  investment  to  Jiangsu, one of the first provinces 'opened up' as a result of the open door policy. Like in most other provinces, open zones selected by the state are in or near more developed regions, which enjoy  preferential  policies  such  as  tax  relief  for using  foreign  capital,  tariff  reduction  on  imports, and greater retention of exchange earnings. In Jiangsu, these preferential policies concentrate in Sunan.

The  above  shows  that  state  policy  in  the post-Mao period permits locally-based agents, particularly  local  governments  and  TVEs,  to exert  greater  influence  on  regional  develop-

i Table 1 Major Indicators in Sunan, Suzhong, and Subei

|                                                       |   Average |   Sunan |   Suzhong |   Subei |
|-------------------------------------------------------|-----------|---------|-----------|---------|
| GVIAOP (1990 constant prices)                         |           |         |           |         |
| 1950 (Yuan)                                           |     334   |   454   |     338   |   260   |
| 1978 (Yuan)                                           |    1291   |  2000   |    1404   |   852   |
| 1995 (Yuan)                                           |   11129   | 25983   |   10995   |  4667   |
| 1950-78 Average Annual Growth (%)                     |       4.9 |     5.4 |       5.2 |     4.3 |
| 1978-95 Average Annual Growth (%)                     |      13.5 |    16.3 |      12.9 |    10.5 |
| 1995 Output of Township Enterprises Per Capita (Yuan) |    5921   | 13364   |    3414   |  1248   |
| 1995 Foreign Direct Investment                        |           |         |           |         |
| Total (US$ Millions)                                  |    4781   |  3447   |    1034   |   273   |
| Per Capita (US$)                                      |      67.9 |   258.5 |      41.3 |     9.1 |
| 1995 Fixed Asset Investment Per Capita                |           |         |           |         |
| State-Owned Enterprises (Yuan)                        |     853   |   990   |     958   |   349   |
| Rural Collective Enterprises (Yuan)                   |     460   |  1770   |     499   |   315   |

GVIAOP: gross value of industrial and agricultural output per capita.

Source: JSB 1994b, 1996.

ment,  and  directs  foreign  investors  to  designated open zones. Rather than acting independently, forces 'from above' reinforce local and external agents of development, which collectively engender changes in regional inequality.

## Local Agents and Regional Development

Much  research  on  China's  regional  development emphasizes the role of the state. Other relevant  agents  and  forces  that  operate  more locally  are  rarely  addressed  in  the  literature. Since the evaluation of local governments is a direct function of local economic development, and decollectivization has rendered local cadres  more  dependent  on  incomes  generated locally, they have strong vested interests in the local economy. Accordingly, many local cadres have  become  bureaucrat-entrepreneurs  who actively seek the capital needed for economic growth, and lobby the central government for preferential  policy  (Oi  1992).  Unlike  SOEs, TVEs are less controlled by state plans, and a large proportion of their profits can be retained in local coffers. Therefore, local cadres are especially keen on mobilizing communal capital and transforming it into the basis for successful TVEs, and turning TVEs into more efficient and market-oriented enterprises.

Yet the work of local governments and entrepreneurs is not unconstrained but must be interpreted in the context of the locality's historical  and  geographical  conditions.  Since  the 1950s, Subei has been designated for the development of heavy industry and agriculture, with very  little  investment  given  to  light  industry. This inertia  has  impeded  development  of TVEs in the reform period. In 1994, the share of  the  primary  sector  in  output  was  32.5%, 13.7%, and 7.2% for Subei, Suzhong, and Sunan respectively. In 1995, per capita output of township enterprises was much higher in Sunan (T able 1).

Although  TVEs  are  primarily  rural  enterprises,  those  near  large  cities  are  locationally more advantaged. TVEs in Sunan's rural areas are close to a multiplicity of cities, e.g., Shanghai,  Suzhou,  and  Wuxi,  and  have  established cooperation with enterprises and research institutes in the cities (Veeck and Pannell 1989), benefiting from the resultant economic, technical,  and  market  linkages.  Sunan's  proximity to  Shanghai  in  particular  has  aided  its  TVE growth. Shanghai was seceded from Jiangsu to become a provincial level administrative unit in 1929, and in 1958 Shanghai annexed ten more counties from Jiangsu. During Mao's regime, numerous youths and intellectuals in Shanghai were 'rusticated' to Jiangsu, particularly to Sunan (Du and Gu 1987), to 'learn from the peasants.'  They  have  indeed  become  a  primary source  of  technical  and  management  knowhow for rural industrialization in Jiangsu, and forged production and marketing ties between Jiangsu and Shanghai.

TVEs lack direct backing of the central government,  but  must  derive  their  production inputs  primarily  from  local  sources.  Sunan's relatively  stronger  agricultural  bases,  which provided raw materials for industrial production and  enabled  capital  accumulation  for investment,  and  its  more  abundant  human resources, as reflected by higher levels of education, skills, and managerial know-how, provide favorable conditions for  TVEs.  The growth of TVEs in Sunan, supported by favorable local endowments and active roles of local  governments  and  entrepreneurs  working 'from  below,'  has  further  polarized  Sunan and Subei since the mid-1980s (see empirical analysis).

## Foreign Investment and Regional Inequality

An  important  outcome  of  China's  reforms  is the  increasing  role  of  agents  'from  outside,' especially  foreign  investment,  in  shaping  regional development (Leung 1990; Fan 1995a). The  open  door  policy  sets  aside  open  zones that  enjoy  preferential  policies  and  decision making power in terms of foreign investment and trade. In these zones, concessions such as low land cost and tax breaks are offered to attract  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI).  Those regions  in  China  first  allowed  or  selected  to 'open' for foreign investment have benefited disproportionately  because  they  are  able  to translate FDI quickly into income and employment, which in turn stimulate local economic growth and attract resources such as domestic investment and migrant labor. Jiangsu is among several coastal provinces that have benefited considerably from the preferential open door policy. Foreign investment has been conducive to promoting rural industries in Jiangsu, especially in Sunan (Su and Veeck 1995).

The distribution of FDI is spatially uneven, partly due to the regional bias of the open door

policy.  Jiangsu's  largest  and  most  successful open  cities  and  zones  are  in  or  near  Sunan. While  Nantong  (in  Suzhong)  and  Lianyungang (in Subei) were among China's 14 'open coastal  cities'  designated  in  1984,  Suzhou, Wuxi, Changzhou, and 12 counties in Sunan became open zones in 1985 (Fig. 1). Economic growth in Sunan further motivated the central and local governments to designate more open zones there. In 1988, the first wholly foreignowned enterprise in Jiangsu was established in Changzhou,  also  in  Sunan.  While  Kunshan and Zhangjiagang in Sunan are two of the largest county level open zones in China, cities in Subei such as Xuzhou and Huaiyin remain not 'opened.'

Foreign investors who come to China are interested in locations where they can enjoy preferential treatments, and where infrastructure is well developed and cheap labor is available for minimizing  the  cost  of  production.  The  cost minimization  objective,  combined  with  the state's spatially biased open door policy and local factor endowments, resulted in the concentration  of  FDI  in  Sunan  (Fig.  2).  In  1995, 72.1% of FDI in Jiangsu concentrated in Sunan; Suzhou  alone  attracted  48.7%  of  total  FDI ( JSB 1996). T otal amount of and per capita FDI in  Subei  were  considerably  less  (T able  1).  In 1995, the leading cities/counties of FDI were all in Sunan-Zhangjiagang (US$600 million), Kunshan (US$505 million), Jiangyin (US$252 million), and Wuxian (US$251 million).

Figure 2: Regional distribution of foreign direct investment in Jiangsu, 1995.

<!-- image -->

The concentration of FDI in Sunan, in conjunction  with  favorable  state  policy  and  local factors there, has engendered a coalescence of ingredients of economic growth which are expected to further widen the gap between Sunan and  the  rest  of  the  province.  Moreover,  the concentration  of  SOEs  in  urban  areas  is  expected to decelerate the growth of cities, while the TVEs, mostly in rural areas, are expected to stimulate the growth of counties.

## Empirical Analysis: Regional Inequality in Jiangsu

The main objective of our empirical analysis is to  document  changes  in  regional  inequality within  Jiangsu. 2 A  high  level  of  regional  inequality depicts large spatial disparity in development, and changes in regional inequality signal  and  are  a  function  of  changing  trends  of regional  growth.  Using  county  level  units (counties and cities), which are the basic building blocks of China's administrative divisions, we evaluate the inequality among all the counties and cities in Jiangsu. 3  Since our focus is on spatial disparity among county level units, spatial  or  social  inequalities  within  them  are  beyond the scope of this paper. However, to the extent that a city or county's level of development correlates with the average wellbeing of its  residents,  our  analysis  highlights  the  discrepancy in average wellbeing among cities and counties.  We  also  aggregate  prefecture  level data for studying the disparity among Sunan, Suzhong, and Subei. T o differentiate the two scales  of  analysis,  inequality  among  Sunan, Suzhong, and Subei is referred to as interregional inequality, and that among counties and cities  intercounty  inequality.  A  set  of  timeseries  data  (1950  to  1995)  is  used  for  documenting temporal changes of inequality. 4

The empirical analysis employs GVIAO per capita  (GVIAOP),  a  popular  indicator  of  regional  economic development in China (e.g., Rozelle  1994),  as  a  summary  measure  of  the level  of  development  in  Jiangsu's  cities  and counties.  We  use  GVIAO  and  GVIAOP  for three reasons. First, GVIAO  is  the only county/city level economic indicator with a full array of time-series data for Jiangsu from the 1950s to the 1990s. While national income and gross  national  product  include  all  economic sectors, the limited time span of such data se-

verely  constrains  their  utility  for  temporal analysis. Second, GVIAO indeed accounts for the bulk of economic output in Jiangsu, and as such is expected to correlate strongly with income and average wellbeing of the residents of cities/counties.  Third,  GVIAO  is  by  far  the most reliable indicator of city and county economies,  since  the  Chinese  socialist  accounting system  is  complex  (Lyons  1991),  and  since heavy and miscellaneous subsidies render wages  not  an  accurate  measure  of  economic well being. For temporal changes, we use data in comparable prices (real GVIAO), calculated from  growth  indices  (see  Chen  and  Fleisher (1996)  for  the  transformation).  Among  commonly used indices of inequality,  we  selected the coefficient of variation (CV) and the location quotient (LQ) for their simplicity in calculation and interpretation.

## Interregional Inequality

Figure  3  shows  that  interregional  inequality registered  a  small  increase  during  Mao's  era (1950-1978),  contrary  to  the  conventional view  that  Maoist  policy  counteracted  an  increase in regional inequality. The CV increased from 0.23 in 1950 to 0.33 in 1978. From 1950 to 1978, the gap between Sunan and Subei increased from 194 yuan to 1,148 yuan, and that between  Sunan  and  Suzhong  rose  from  116 yuan to 596 yuan (T able 1). Although agricultural productivity in Subei witnessed some improvement, Sunan grew even faster due to its firm base in industrial growth.

During the post-Mao period, interregional inequality experienced an even bigger increase

Figure 3: Trends of regional inequality in Jiangsu, 1950-1995.

<!-- image -->

(Fig.  3).  This  was  particularly  the  case  since 1985,  when  China's  urban  industrial  sectors, following the success of agriculture, began to undergo  substantial  reforms.  Sunan,  with  its relative advantages in industrial development, benefited  disproportionately  from  urban  industrial reforms and the open door policy, and as  a  result  outgrew  Subei  and  Suzhong.  The CV reached 0.64 in 1995, doubling its level in 1978. The gap between Sunan and Subei rose to  21,316  yuan,  and  that  between  Sunan  and Suzhong to 14,988 yuan, in 1995 (T able 1). In the 1990s, the north-south divide, or more precisely the gap between Sunan on one hand and Subei and Suzhong on the other, is larger than ever in PRC history.

Table 1 shows that during Mao's era, the average annual growth rate of GVIAOP in Sunan (5.4%) was only slightly higher than in Suzhong and Subei (5.2% and 4.3%). Between 1978  and  1995,  however,  the  average  annual growth rate of GVIAOP in Sunan was 16.3%, much higher than that of Subei (10.5%) and Suzhong (12.9%). In 1995, Sunan's GVIAOP reached 25,983 yuan, compared to 4,667 yuan in Subei, which accounted for 42.8%  of Jiangsu's  population  but  only  22.6%  of  its GDP.

## Intercounty Inequality

The inequality among counties and cities has always  been  higher  than  that  among  Sunan, Suzhong, and Subei, as shown in Figure 3, due primarily to greater inequality between urban (cities) and rural (counties) areas. The trend of intercounty inequality also differed from that of interregional inequality. The former registered big increases during the late 1950s and the 1970s, corresponding to two periods of decentralization in China, when the central government gave provinces  greater  autonomy  in economic development. Cities and more developed counties in Jiangsu, which had richer resource bases to start with, benefited considerably  from  decentralization.  As  a  result,  the intercounty  CV  reached  its  highest  level  in 1977, just before the reform in 1978.

In  contrast  to  the  increase  of  interregional inequality  since  the  reforms,  intercounty  inequality  declined  during  the  1980s.  A  closer look at the data shows that the declining trend was due to the relatively slower growth of cities and  faster  growth  of  some  counties.  We  se-

Figure 4: Change of location quotients in selected cities and counties, 1950-1995.

<!-- image -->

lected one city in Sunan (Wuxi), one county in Sunan (Kunshan), one county in Subei (Shuyang), and one county in Suzhong (Gaoyou), to illustrate these dynamics (Fig. 1). Wuxi is selected  to  represent  older  cities  with  high  per capita incomes. Kunshan is selected to represent counties that started out poorer but experienced rapid growth since the reforms. Shuyang and Gaoyou are poorer counties in Subei and Suzhong respectively.

As shown in Figure 4, the relative economic position (reflected by LQ) of Wuxi declined, in contrast  to  the  increasing  trend  of  Kunshan, during  the  reform  period.  Many  other  cities shared Wuxi's experience, and counties in Sunan  shared  the  experience  of  Kunshan.  The slow  growth  of  cities  was  largely  due  to  the dominance of SOEs, which were less efficient especially when compared with nonstate enterprises.  Other  factors  that  hampered  the  economic growth of many cities included stronger government  control,  more  rigid  bureaucracy, overburdened  urban  infrastructure,  and  limited land for development. Many counties, on the other hand, were able to profit from more flexible TVEs. In the mid-1990s, several counties  (e.g.,  Wujiang and Kunshan) have grown so  rapidly  that  their  per  capita  incomes  were higher than many cities, accounting for a small renewed  increase  in intercounty inequality (Fig. 3).

Maps of GVIAOP growth rates can further illustrate the trends of interregional and intercounty inequalities reviewed above. Figure 5, for the period 1950-1978, shows that cities as a whole grew faster than counties. Apart from a

Figure 5: Average annual growth rates of gross value of industrial and agricultural output per capita (GVIAOP), 1950-1978.

<!-- image -->

small number of counties adjacent to large cities (e.g., Suzhou, Wuxi, and Changzhou), most counties lagged significantly in economic growth. The widening gap between cities and most counties resulted in a surge of intercounty inequality during this period.

By  contrast,  cities  in  general  grew  slower than  counties  during  the  reform  period  (Fig. 6). Since the slower growth of cities offsets the faster growth of counties, the net effect is a decline in intercounty inequality. But this by no

Figure 6: Average annual growth rates of gross value of industrial and agricultural output per capita (GVIAOP), 1978-1995.

<!-- image -->

means  signals  more  even  regional  development, since Sunan as a whole grew faster than Suzhong  and  much  faster  than  Subei,  which also  led  to  the  observed  increase  in  interregional  inequality.  None  of  the  high  growth counties was found in Subei. Most counties in Subei  were  already  very  poor  to  begin  with; their  lagging  growth  further  depressed  their relative  economic  positions  in  the  province. The widening gap between Sunan and the rest of  Jiangsu  is  even  more  alarming  when some counties in Sunan, such as Wujin and Wuxian, have by the mid-1990s achieved higher levels of GVIAOP than cities in Subei. In short, the age-old  regional  delineation  within  Jiangsu continues to define uneven regional development within the province.

In  order  to  evaluate  the  relative  contributions of state policy, local factors, and foreign investment  to  regional  differentials  in  economic growth, we conduct a regression analysis with growth rate of GVIAOP (GROWTH) as the dependent variable. 5  The units of analysis are counties and cities in Jiangsu. The period of analysis is from 1985, the beginning of urban industrial reforms in China, surge of interregional  inequality,  and  decline  of  intercounty inequality in Jiangsu (Fig. 3), to 1995. We selected several independent variables that emphasize  the  roles  of  various  agents  and mechanisms of regional growth (T able 2). 6  INVESTMENT is growth rate of fixed asset investment per capita. It is selected to represent the effect of the state, through its investment policy, and is expected to positively relate to re-

Table 2 Results of Regression Analysis

| IndependentVariable       | IndependentVariable           | Coefficient                   | Standardized Regression Coefficient   | T-Value                   | Significance Level (P)    |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
| INVESTMENT                | INVESTMENT                    | 0.235                         | 0.402                                 | 4.390                     | 0.001                     |
| STATE-ENTERPRISES         | STATE-ENTERPRISES             | 2 0.083                       | 2 0.194                               | 2 2.248                   | 0.028                     |
| FOREIGN                   | FOREIGN                       | 0.578                         | 0.379                                 | 4.131                     | 0.001                     |
| CITY                      | CITY                          | 2 3.135                       | 2 0.185                               | 2 1.615                   | 0.111                     |
| GROWTH7885                | GROWTH7885                    | 0.461                         | 0.242                                 | 2.685                     | 0.009                     |
| Constant                  | Constant                      | 6.409                         | 0.000                                 | 1.647                     | 0.104                     |
| Dependent Variable GROWTH | Dependent Variable GROWTH     | Dependent Variable GROWTH     | Dependent Variable GROWTH             | Dependent Variable GROWTH | Dependent Variable GROWTH |
| R 5 0.767                 | R Square 5 0.589              | Adjusted R Square 5 0.559     | Adjusted R Square 5 0.559             |                           |                           |
| F 5 19.767                | Significant level (P) 5 0.001 | Significant level (P) 5 0.001 | Significant level (P) 5 0.001         |                           |                           |

Notes: GROWTH is average annual growth rate of gross value of industrial and agricultural output per capita (%), 1985-95; INVESTMENT is average annual growth rate of fixed asset investment per capita (%), 1985-95; STATE-ENTERPRISES is share of state-owned enterprises in the region's fixed asset investment (%), 1990; FOREIGN is per capita foreign direct investment, 1990 (US$); CITY is a dummy variable with values 5 1 for cities and 0 for counties; and GROWTH7885 is average annual growth rates of gross value of agricultural and industrial output per capita (%), 1978-85

gional  growth.  STATE-ENTERPRISES  is share of state-owned enterprises in a region's fixed  asset  investment,  and  is  a  proxy  for  the importance of the state sector in the regional economy. Given the increasing role of nonstate sectors,  especially  sectors  based  on  local  resources and agents such as TVEs, and the declining role of state-owned enterprises, we expect  STATE-ENTERPRISES  to  negatively relate to GROWTH. Thirdly, to estimate the effect  of  foreign  investment,  we  selected  foreign direct investment per capita (FOREIGN) as another independent variable. It is expected to positively contribute to GROWTH. Fourthly, a dummy variable (CITY), with values equaling one for cities and zero for counties, is selected to represent variations in growth between cities and counties. Lastly, we include average annual growth  rate  of  GVIAOP  in  the  1978-1985 period  (GROWTH7885)  to  reveal  whether those  growing  faster  during  the  1978-1985 period  continued  to  grow  faster  after  the mid-1980s.

Table 2 summarizes the results of regression analysis.  The  regression  model  as  a  whole  is highly significant. Most of the regression coefficients are significant at the 5% level. We conducted  tests  for  multicollinearity  and  spatial autocorrelation of the residuals, and the results suggest that the regression coefficients are reliable and that the regression model is not misspecified. 7   The five independent variables together explain 58.9% (R square) of the variation of GROWTH. GROWTH is positively related to INVESTMENT, FOREIGN,

and GROWTH7885, whose standardized regression coefficients suggest that they are the most important determinants. In other words, regions  that  benefited  from  state  policy,  received  more  foreign  investment,  and  grew faster  in  the  early  reform  period  tended  to grow  faster  in  1985-1995.  The  finding  for GROWTH7885  has  important  implications for  regional  inequality,  namely,  if  the  growth trajectories  of  cities  and  counties  in  Jiangsu continue, then intercounty inequality will increase in the future, which is already signaled by a slight increase in intercounty CV in the mid-1990s  (Fig.  3).  GROWTH  is  negatively related  to  STATE-ENTERPRISES, suggesting that regions that depended heavily on the state  sector  grew  slower.  Finally,  though  the coefficient of CITY is only barely significant at the  10%  level,  its  negative  sign  is  consistent with  our  earlier  observation  that  cities  grew slower than counties in the reform period. The coefficients  of  STATE-ENTERPRISES  and CITY together confirm that nonstate sectors, which were more highly represented in counties,  were  more  conducive  to  regional  economic growth. A comparison of standardized regression coefficients suggests that state policy (INVESTMENT) remains a leading factor of regional growth in Jiangsu, and that at the same time local agents (nonstate sectors) and foreign investment (FOREIGN) also emerged as important factors.

## Discussion and Conclusion

Our analysis shows that during Mao's era, interregional inequality in Jiangsu increased, primarily due to the growth of Sunan, while faster growth of cities contributed to an increase in intercounty inequality. Since the reforms, Sunan's growth was even faster, further widening its  gap  with  Suzhong  and  Subei.  Meanwhile, cities in Jiangsu grew slower than counties, resulting in a decline in intercounty inequality.

We argue that regional inequality in Jiangsu must  be  understood  through  a  scrutiny  and synthesis  of  the  effects  of  the  state,  the  local agent,  and  foreign  investors.  The  growth  of Sunan during both Mao's era and the reform period reflects the work of these three agents of development. While Maoist policy focused primarily  on  urban  industries,  which  stimulated the growth of cities, it also laid the foundation for TVEs (especially in Sunan) through decentralization and rural industrialization programs. Post-Mao policies are even more favorable toward Sunan, which has benefited from preferential financial, industrial, and open door policies. State policy has provided macrolevel 'development  from  above'  mechanisms  that targeted selected locations for rapid economic growth, and escalated interregional inequality in Jiangsu.

Agents  'from  below'  and  local  politicaleconomic and historical-geographic factors further  reinforced  Sunan's  continued  growth. Historically,  Sunan  has  had  relatively  more abundant endowments, especially agricultural resources and human capital. Moreover, local governments  in  Sunan  acted  as  development and entrepreneurial agents who actively lobby the central government, cultivate ties with foreign investors, and seek resources for local economic development. Sunan's close ties to Shanghai  are  another  favorable  factor.  Subei and Suzhong, on the other hand, are in relatively  disadvantaged positions in terms of resource endowments, the role of local governments, and proximity to Shanghai.

Foreign investment has emerged as an important  factor  of  regional  development  since the open door policy. Much of the FDI concentrates in Sunan, because of the designated open zones there and because of foreign investors' locational  considerations.  Foreign  investors, representing  a  'development  from  outside' agent, favor areas with conciliatory policy environments  (e.g.,  open  zones)  and  good  infrastructures, and accordingly have focused their investment  in  Sunan  rather  than  the  poorer and less 'open' Suzhong and Subei.

Similarly, changes in intercounty inequality also reflect the role of the above agents of development.  Not  only  did  Mao's  policy  favor Sunan, it also accelerated the growth of cities and brought about an increase in intercounty inequality. On the other hand, post-Mao economic reforms, which favor nonstate sectors, stimulated many rural counties, especially those  in  Sunan,  to  grow  more  rapidly.  Local governments and local entrepreneurs, constituting a development force 'from below,' combined with foreign investors 'from outside' to fuel the growth of TVEs in counties. By contrast, cities, whose economies are more likely dominated by SOEs and perhaps obsolete pro-

duction structures, experienced slower growth. This  has  offset  the  rapid  growth  of  counties and  resulted  in  a  decline  of  intercounty  inequality during the reform period. But during the  early  1990s,  a  renewed  increase  of  intercounty inequality signals that regional inequality in Jiangsu is more directly a function of the widening gap between Sunan and other parts of the province.

We have shown that a synthesis of three major agents of spatial change-the state, the local agent,  and  the  foreign  investor-is  necessary for understanding the dynamics of regional development and changes in regional inequality in Jiangsu. They represent forces of development 'from above,' 'from below' and 'from outside.' Rather than competing and acting in mutually exclusive fashions, their impacts coalesce and are mutually reinforcing in Sunan in general  and  in  Sunan's  counties  in  particular. Our empirical analysis of Jiangsu demonstrates that Fan's (1995b) 'developments from above, below and outside' framework is an appropriate conceptual tool for analyzing the process of transition in socialist states, during which decentralization,  marketization,  and  globalization increase the influence of local agents and foreign investors, while the state continues to exert control through its policies. We believe this framework is also relevant to other provinces in China, to other transitional economies as they promote decentralization and marketization, and to developing countries that are increasingly affected by globalization. j

## Notes

- 1 The Chinese state prior to the reforms, and to a certain extent since the mid-1990s, has indeed attempted to emphasize the need to reduce regional inequality.  The  DFA  framework  is  perhaps  most relevant for describing the early post-Mao period (late 1970s to early 1990s) when the state was especially keen on concentrated and uneven regional development.
- 2 While  most  studies  of  China's  regional  development focus on regional inequalities of income and output, Wei and Dutt (1992), for example, analyzed the regional inequality of health care in China.
- 3 In China, county level units include cities ( shiqu or city  districts)  and  counties.  These  spatial  units  of analysis  may  constrain  the  investigation  of  spread effects at the edge of cities, but with the aid of maps we are able to show possible diffusion from Shanghai to Sunan (Fig. 6). Data at finer scales, such as those for a city's built-up area and its suburbs, would

be  required  to  fully  examine  spatial  diffusion  of development.

- 4 Since  Jiangsu  Statistical  Bureau  (JSB)  has  not  released the growth index for 1993, we averaged the inequality  indices  for  1992  and  1994  to  estimate their respective levels for 1993.

5 Growth rate of level  of  development  is  especially useful in this paper, which aims at deciphering the mechanisms behind changes in regional inequality. For  example,  when  county  level  units  with  high GVIAOP experience low growth, one would expect a decline in regional inequality; when they continue to grow faster than others, an increase in regional inequality  is  likely.  See  also  Jian  et  al.  (1996)  and Chen and Fleisher (1996).

- 6 FOREIGN and STATE-ENTERPRISES are evaluated  for  1990,  the  mid  point  of  the  1985-1995 study period.

7 The largest variance inflation factor (VIF) for independent variables is 2.2, indicating that severe multicollinearity  (depicted by VIFs over 10) does not exist  and  that  regression  coefficients  are  reliable. We used joint account statistics, a simple but effective  test  for  spatial  autocorrelation  of  residuals (Clark and Hosking 1986). The results show that the absolute values of Z scores are all smaller than 1.96  (Z(NN) 5 0.97,  Z(PP) 5 0.34,  Z(PN) 5 2 1.95), indicating that spatial autocorrelation of regression residuals is not statistically significant and that our model is not misspecified.

## Literature Cited

Amos, Orley M., Jr. 1990. Growth pole cycles. Review of Regional Studies 20(1):37-48.

- Barro, Robert, and Xavier Sala-I-Martin. 1995. Economic Growth. New York: McGraw-Hill.
- Borts, George H., and Jerome L. Stein. 1964. Economic Growth in a Free Market. New York: Columbia University Press.
- Bradshaw, Michael J. 1997. Geography and Transition in the Post-Soviet Republics. New York: Wiley.
- Cannon, T erry. 1990. Regions: Spatial inequality and regional policy. In The Geography of Contemporary China , ed. T erry Cannon and Alan Jenkins, 28-60. New York: Routledge.
- Chen, Jian, and Belton M. Fleisher. 1996. Regional income inequality and economic growth in China. Journal of Comparative Economics 22:141-64.
- Christiansen, Flemming. 1992. 'Market transition' in  China: The case of the Jiangsu labor market, 1978-1990. Modern China 18(1):72-93.
- Clark,  W.A.V.,  and  P .L.  Hosking.  1986. Statistical Methods  for  Geographers. New  York:  John  Wiley and Sons.
- Du, Wenzhen, and Jirui Gu, eds. 1987. Population in China: Jiangsu (Zhongguo renkou: Jiangsu fengche). Beijing: China Financial Economy Press.
- Editorial  Committee.  1989. Dangdai  zhongguo  de Jiangsu  (Contemporary  China:  Jiangsu). Beijing: The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences Press.

- Fan, C. Cindy. 1995a. Of belts and ladders: State policy and uneven regional development in post-Mao China. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 85(3):421-49.
- ---.  1995b.  Developments  from  above,  below and outside: Spatial impacts of China's economic reforms  in  Jiangsu  and  Guangdong  Provinces. Chinese Environment and Development 6(1&amp;2):85116.
- ---. 1997. Uneven development and beyond: Regional  development  theory  in  post-Mao  China. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 21(4):620-39.
- Friedmann, John. 1966. Regional Development Policy. Cambridge: MIT Press.
- Fuchs, Roland J., and George J. Demko. 1979. Geographic  inequality  under  socialism. Annals  of  the Association of American Geographers 69(2):304-18.
- Grant, James P. 1973. Growth From Below. Washington DC: Overseas Development Council.
- Ho, Samuel P.S. 1994. Rural China in Transition. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
- Jian,  Tianlun,  Jeffrey  D.  Sachs,  and  Andrew  M. Warner.  1996.  Trends  in  regional  inequality  in China. China Economic Review 7(1):1-21.
- Jiangsu Statistical Bureau ( JSB). 1990-1996. Jiangsu tongji nianjian ( Jiangsu Statistics Y earbook). Beijing: Chinese Statistics Press.
- ---. 1994b. Benxiang xiandaihua licheng (Pathways to Modernization). Nanjing: Jiangsu Statistical Bureau.
- Leung, Chi Kin. 1990. Locational characteristics of foreign equity joint venture investment in China, 1979-1985. Professional Geographer 42(4):403-20.
- Lin,  George  C.S.  1997. Red  Capitalism  in  South China. Vancouver: UBS Press.
- Lo, C.P. 1990. The geography of rural regional inequality in Mainland China. Transactions, Institute of British Geographers, N.S 15:466-86.
- Lyons, Thomas P. 1991. Interprovincial disparities in China:  Output  and  consumption,  1952-1987. Economic Development and Cultural Change 39:471506.
- Ma, Laurence J.C., and Ming Fan. 1994. Urbanisation from below: The growth of towns in Jiangsu, China. Urban Studies 31(10):1625-45.
- Ma, Laurence J.C., and Yehua Wei. 1997. Determinants  of  state  investment  in  China,  1953-1990. Tijdschrift Voor Economische  En  Sociale  Geogrfie 88(3):211-25.
- Mao, Zedong. 1977. On the ten major relationships. In Selected  Works  of  Mao  Tsetung .  Vol.  5,  61-83. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press.
- Myrdal,  Gunnar.  1957. Rich  Land  and  Poor. New York: Harper and Brothers.
- Oi,  Jean  C.  1992.  Fiscal  reform  and  the  economic foundations  of  local  state  corporatism  in  China. World Politics 45(1):99-126.
- Pannell, Clifton W. 1988. Regional shifts in China's industrial  output. Professional  Geographer 40(1): 19-31.
- Prime, Penelope B. 1992. Industry's response to market liberalization in China: Evidence from Jiangsu province. Economic Development and Cultural Change 41(1):27-50.
- Rozelle, Scott. 1994. Rural industrialization and increasing inequality: Emerging patterns in China's reforming  economy. Journal  of  Comparative  Economics 19:362-91.
- Schiffer, Jonathan R. 1989. Soviet Regional Economic Policy. London: Macmillan.
- Smith, Adrian. 1996. From convergence to fragmentation. Environment and Planning A 28:136-56.
- Smith, Neil. 1984. Uneven Development. London: Basil Blackwell.
- Soja, Edward. 1980. The socio-spatial dialectic. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 70(2): 207-25.
- Stohr, Walter B. 1981. Development from below. In Development From Above or Below? ,  ed.  Walter B. Stohr and D.R. Fraser T aylor, 39-72. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons.
- Stohr, Walter B., and D.R. Fraser T aylor, eds. 1981. Development  From  Above  or  Below? Chichester: John Wiley and Sons.
- Su, Shew-Jiuan, and Gregory Veeck. 1995. Foreign capital  acquisition by rural industries in Jiangsu. Chinese Environment and Development 6(1&amp;2):16992.
- Veeck,  Gregory.  1995.  Introduction. Chinese  Environment and Development 6(1&amp;2):5-8.
- Veeck, Gregory, and Clifton W. Pannell. 1989. Rural economic  restructuring  and  farm  household  income in Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. Annals of the  Association  of  American  Geographers 79:275-92.
- Wei,  Yehua.  1996.  Fiscal  systems  and  uneven  regional development in China, 1978-1991. Geoforum 27(3):329-44.
- ---. 1998. Regional inequality of industrial output in China, 1952 to 1990. Geografiska  Annaler 80B(1):1-15.
- ---. 1999. Regional inequality in China. Progress in Human Geography 23(1):48-58.
- Wei, Yehua, and Ashok Dutt. 1992. Distribution of medical facilities in the People's Republic of China with  particular  reference  to  rural  areas. Indian Geographical Journal 67(1):9-19.
- Wei, Yehua, and Laurence J.C. Ma. 1996. Changing patterns  of  spatial  inequality  in  China,  19521990. Third World Planning Review 18(2):177-91.
- Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1965. Regional inequality and the process of national development. Economic Development and Cultural Change 13(4):3-45.
- Yang, Dali. 1990. Patterns of Chinese regional development strategy. China Quarterly 122:230-57.

YEHUA DENNIS WEI is  Assistant  Professor  of Geography at University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI 53201. His research interests include regional development and planning, urban development and policy, globalization and international development, and China/Pacific Rim.

C. CINDY FAN is Associate Professor of Geography at University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1524. Her research interests center on regional development and population, with emphases on uneven regional development and migration in post-Mao China.