## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## The Making of White Water Citizens in Australia and the Western United States: Racialization as a Transnational Project of Irrigation Governance

Kate A. Berry &amp; Sue Jackson

To cite this article: Kate A. Berry &amp; Sue Jackson (2018): The Making of White Water Citizens in Australia and the Western United States: Racialization as a Transnational Project of Irrigation Governance, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2017.1420463

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2017.1420463

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 01 Mar 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 23

View related articles

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## The Making of White Water Citizens in Australia and the Western United States: Racialization as a Transnational Project of Irrigation Governance

Kate A. Berry* and Sue Jackson y

* Department of Geography, University of Nevada, Reno y Australian Rivers Institute, Griffith University

This article examines the role of settler irrigation systems and water governance in establishing and reinforcing tenacious imperial geographies of whiteness. Through an analysis of the lives and work of two powerful men who made foundational contributions to establishing irrigation economies and water governance systems in Australia and the Western United States, we investigate the racialized sociospatial processes that bound whiteness to water. Alfred Deakin (1856-1919) and Elwood Mead (1858-1936) were men of science, technology, and politics who actively circulated in and shaped transnational flows of knowledge about whiteness and racial hierarchies. As Deakin and Mead vigorously promoted particular social and political systems associated with irrigation, steering water flows toward uses regarded as modern and productive according to taken-for-granted norms, they imagined, naturalized, and privileged a white water citizenry. In the process, they contributed to the dispossession and displacement of Indigenous peoples as well as marginalizing Other water users, most notably Asian migrants. These men's hydro-imaginaries, which were endorsed and enacted by their respective governments, served to motivate a form of state protection of family farms, inculcate civic self-reliance and local organization, and establish the white water citizen, a baseline against which others were expected to conform. By examining the making of white water citizens, we hope to contribute to Indigenous geographies and studies of racialization in rural places, as well as the effects of irrigation in settler nations. Key Words: Alfred Deakin, Elwood Mead, Indigenous water rights, water governance, whiteness.

本 文 检 视 迁 佔 灌 溉 系 统 与 水治 理 在 建 立 并 深 化 白 人 性 的 顽 固 殖 民 地 理 中 扮 演 的 角 色 。 我 们 透 过 分 析 澳 大 利 亚与 美 国 西 部 两 位 握 有权 势 并 对 建 立 灌 溉 经 济 与 水治 理 系 统 作 出 重 大 贡 献 的 男 性 的 生 活 与 工 作 , 探 讨 将 白 人 性 与 水 结 合 的 种 族 化 社 会 空 间 过 程 。 艾 尔 弗 雷 德 ． 迪 金 (1856-1919) 和 埃 尔 伍 德 ． 迈 德 (1858-1963) 是 科 学家 、 技 师 与 政 治 家 , 并 积 极 地 流 通 和 形 塑 有 关 白 人 性 与 种 族 阶 层 的 跨 国 知 识 流 。 当 迪 金 与 迈 德强 力 提 倡 与 灌 溉 有 关 的 特 定 社 会 及 政 治 系 统 , 将 水 导 向 被 视 为 理 所 当 然 的 常 规 中 认 为 现 代且 具 生 产 性 的 使 用 者 时 , 他们 想 像 、 自 然 化 、 并 偏 好 白 人 的 水 资 源 公 民 权 。 他们 在 此 般 过 程 中 , 导 致 对 原 住 民 的 侵 占 与 迫迁 , 以 及 边 缘 化 主 要 是 亚 洲 移 民 的 其 他 水 资 源 使 用 者 。 这 两 位 男 性 的 水 想 像 , 由 他们 各 自 的 政 府 所 支 持 并 推 进 , 作 为 促 动 国 家 保 护 家 庭 农 场 的 形式 , 灌 输 了 公 民 自 给 自 足 和 地 方 组织 , 并建 立 了 白 人 性 的 水 资 源 公 民 --个他人 被 期 待 遵 守 的 基 线 。 藉 由 检 视 白 人 水 资 源 公 民 的 打 造 , 我 们 希 望 对 原 住 民 地 理 和 乡 村 地 区 的 种 族 化 研 究 , 以 及 灌 溉 在 迁 佔 国 家 中 的 影 响 作 出 贡 献 。 关 键 词 ： 艾 尔 弗 雷 德 ． 迪 金 , 埃 尔 伍 德 ． 迈 德 , 原 住 民水 权 , 水治 理 , 白 人 性 。

Este art  ıculo examina el papel de los sistemas de irrigaci  on de colonos y la gobernanza del agua en el proceso de establecer y reforzar las tenaces geograf  ıas imperiales de lo blanco. Mediante un an  alisis de las vidas y trabajo de dos hombres poderosos que hicieron contribuciones fundacionales para establecer econom  ıas de irrigaci  on y sistemas de gobernanza del agua en Australia y los Estados Unidos occidentales, investigamos los procesos socioespaciales racializados que conectan a lo blanco con el agua. Alfred Deakin (1856-1919) y Elwood Mead (1858-1936) fueron hombres de ciencia, tecnolog  ıa y pol  ıtica que activamente configuraron los flujos transnacionales de conocimiento acerca de lo blanco y las jerarqu  ıas raciales, y los promovieron. A medida que Deakin y Mead impulsaban vigorosamente sistemas pol  ıticos y sociales particulares asociados con la irrigaci  on, direccionando los flujos del agua hacia usos considerados como modernos y productivos, de acuerdo con normas sobreentendidas, ellos imaginaron, naturalizaron y privilegiaron una ciudadan  ıa blanca del agua. En ese proceso, ellos contribuyeron a la desposesi  on y al desplazamiento de pueblos ind  ıgenas y de otros usuarios de agua marginados, m  as notablemente migrantes asi  aticos. Estos hidro-imaginarios, que fueron respaldados y aprobados por sus respectivos gobiernos, sirvieron para motivar cierta forma de protecci  on estatal de granjas familiares, inculcar independencia c  ıvica y organizaci  on local, y establecer un ciudadano del agua blanco, como punto de referencia frente al cual se esperaba la

conformidad de los dem  as. Al examinar la formalizaci  on de los ciudadanos del agua blancos, esperamos contribuir a las geograf  ıas ind  ıgenas y a los estudios de racializaci  on en las localidades rurales, lo mismo que los efectos de la irrigaci  on en las naciones de pobladores. Palabras clave: Alfred Deakin y Elwood Mead, derechos ind  ıgenas al agua, gobernanza del agua, blancura.

I n the past half-century, numerous publications have focused on comparisons and connections between Australia and the Western United States, several of which have drawn similarities in the historic constructions of society, agriculture, and water. Among these are Rutherford's (1964) article in the Annals of the Association of American Geographers about large-scale irrigation systems and water resource project development, Powell's (1982) article concerning historic agricultural settlement, McQuilton's (1993) article on comparative agrarian frontier environments and ideologies, Tyrrell's (1999) book about mutual influences in agricultural and environmental reform, and Teisch's (2011) book on interchanges in agricultural and water expertise and technologies. What these and other sources ignore, or only mention in passing, is that late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century irrigation interchanges within and between Australia and the Western United States were marked by transnational racialization processes that constituted whiteness.

This article has been motivated by our long-standing interest in the consequences for Indigenous peoples of processes and practices of racialization that connect society, agriculture, and water. Dispossession and displacement of Indigenous peoples are often understood as processes that result from expropriation of rights to land. Our analysis, however, points to the ways in which racialized processes associated with colonization dispossessed and displaced Indigenous people from another set of nature-society relations by limiting their access to water (Berry 1998; Turner and Neale 2015), at the same time as they excluded Others from the privileges of whiteness. Although many studies have contributed to culturally and historically specific studies of irrigation practices and technologies (e.g., Boelens, Chiba, and Nakashima 2006; Palmer 2015), little attention has been paid to the role of irrigation and water governance 1 in establishing and reinforcing the geographies of whiteness, as we do in this study. Our analysis points to the racialized sociospatial processes and practices that bind whiteness to water, an agent with distinct qualities that geographers interested in the hydrosocial cycle understand to include the capacity to embody flows of power and reproduce inequalities (Swyngedouw 1999; Linton 2010; Gandy 2014).

Here we understand whiteness to be a social construction that functions as a set of related and tenacious processes and practices that marks some bodies as white, whereas others are not. As Nayak (2006) pointed out, whiteness is malleable: changing, stretching, and reconstituting along ethnic as well as other social cleavages. This is to say that whiteness is a viscous configuration, neither fully fluid nor fully fixed in space or time (Saldanha 2006). Whiteness can be thought of as sticky in the sense that its constitutive processes and practices sort and cluster bodies because property, privilege, and pale skin tend to adhere to one another (Saldanha 2006).

Yet, whiteness operates not only at the level of the body. The processes and practices central to racialization have long influenced social organization in settler societies through materialities and discourse shaped by, attached to, and ultimately grounded within space and time (Wolfe 2006; Andrucki 2010). Here we are especially concerned with how whiteness is transnational in reach, even when articulated nationally or locally (Anderson 2000; McKittrick 2013). As Lake (2004, 2007) pointed out for Australia, race was part of the foundation of nation-building, and to understand this entails examining transnational circulation of knowledge during the nineteenth century when a dominant brand of race thinking was called AngloSaxonism, a formulation of whiteness as it is referred to today. Australia inaugurated its nation-state through the White Australia Policy of 1901, a 'radical act of racial expulsion' that Lake (2003, 354) linked to Australian interpretations of the U.S. experiment in racial democracy embarked on in the 1860s. Bound within these historical geographies, such racialization was simultaneously configured by 'global geographies of colonization, modernity, and migration; national policy contexts that mediate other scales of negotiation; and local geographies of everyday life' (Anderson 2000, 386).

Welook for the cultivation of whiteness in the rural spaces of settler societies at the time it was being embedded in the systems of irrigation and water governance. Our thinking has been informed by Hughes's (2010) study of the ways in which a white imaginary in Zimbabwe was shaped through the remaking of

waterways and landscapes. More particularly, our analysis draws on ideas advanced by Frankenberg (1993) and Kobayashi and Peake (2000) to characterize the processes and practices associated with whiteness. The processes and practices associated with whiteness include (1) those that mark white as a location of social privilege and generate structural advantages and entitlements associated with being white; (2) those that cultivate a white imaginary , which encompasses the view(s) of the world of and for people who identify as white or that evoke a sense of belonging to that world; and (3) those that naturalize whiteness by generating expectations and obligations that conform with dominant values and institutions. We use these attributes to analyze the production of the white water citizenry.

The sociohistorical processes and practices of the period from 1880 to 1920 are of interest because this was a foundational moment in which modernist water governance systems were established in the settler societies of both Australia and the Western United States (Molle, Mollinga, and Wester 2009). It was also the time in which transnational exchanges related to irrigation, exchanges of ideas, knowledge, technologies, institutional designs, and bodies were escalating and extending as the forces of globalization intensified during the late nineteenth century (Akhter and Ormerod 2015). Thus, we enhance understanding of both the national as well as transnational sociospatial processes associated with whiteness that reinforced settler colonialism, 2 as called for by Smith (2012) and Bonds and Inwood (2015).

In this project, we examine the geography of whiteness through an analysis of the lives and work of two powerful men involved in irrigation and water governance, Australian Alfred Deakin (1856-1919) and American Elwood Mead (1858-1936). We have chosen to examine these internationally renowned men to render visible how whiteness was codified through the making of water citizens. These men of science, technology, and politics prescribed a set of technical requirements and institutional preconditions for irrigation that were intended to restructure frontier agrarian societies by breaking the dominance of large land holdings and expanding settler territories deemed underutilized. At the same time, they actively circulated in and shaped transnational flows of knowledge about whiteness and racial hierarchies as they worked on irrigation and water governance around the globe.

Envisioning themselves as agents of social reform in their own countries, Deakin and Mead not only worked to improve farmers' skills; they also vigorously promoted particular social and political systems associated with irrigation, enfranchised a white water citizenry, and, in the process, contributed to the dispossession and displacement of Indigenous peoples, as well as the marginalization of Other water users, most notably Asian migrants. Their hydro-imaginaries, which were endorsed and enacted by their governments, served to motivate a form of state protection of family farms, inculcate civic self-reliance and local organization, and establish the white water citizen as the norm, a baseline against which others were judged and expected to conform. Although these were not the only men of their era 3 to establish expectations about whiteness and irrigation, nor were they the only ones involved in the transnational circulation of ideas about irrigation and society, both men made significant and foundational contributions that enabled both whiteness and irrigation to firmly take hold in the Western United States and Australia.

This study relies on evidence found in Deakin's and in Mead's own writings and research along with biographies and secondary sources. As with all historical geographic research that relies on documentary sources, what remains is necessarily a partial record. Yet because of their prominence, many primary sources are still available for these men, who have also been the subject of numerous studies as well. The evidence we have chosen to highlight reveals our interpretations of their experiences, actions, and visions, and these cannot help but anticipate several significant tendencies and logics, as well as historically constituted injustices in water governance that evolved over the course of the past century, although we have tried to place these men within the context of their times.

The remainder of the article is organized into four parts and a conclusion. The first introduces the concept of water citizenship and explicates the connection between it and whiteness. The second part establishes the reliance of modernist irrigation and water governance on colonial systems of appropriation and control of water. In the third part, we discuss the lives and legacies of Deakin and Mead, especially transnational mobility and promotion of social and political systems associated with irrigation. In the fourth part, we show how Deakin and Mead enfranchised white water citizens in Australia and the United States by marking white as a location of privilege, cultivating a white imaginary, and naturalizing whiteness. Finally, we consider the ramifications of these men's actions in light of the dispossession and displacement of Indigenous

peoples, as well as the marginalization of anyone not identified as a white water citizen.

## Whiteness and Water Citizenship

Recent scholarship has put the spotlight on the formerly taken-for-granted category of white to such an extent that whiteness has now generated its own knowledge domain (Steyn and Conway 2010; Baldwin 2012). Whereas some scholars emphasize white privilege, others address white supremacy (Smith 2012; Bonds and Inwood 2015) or debate whiteness with respect to a postrace world (Nayak 2006; Saldanha 2006), and still others focus on the ways in which whiteness makes visible the complex intersections between multicultural, black-white, and Indigenoussettler relations (Anderson 2000; Shaw 2006). We appreciate the need to respond a call from Steyn and Conway (2010) to deepen and expand the repertoire of whiteness studies, and to Shaw's (2006) appeal for more geographical analyses of whiteness in relation to the experiences of Indigenous peoples. In Australia and the Western United States, Indigenous water cultures, rights, and uses were effaced or elided as modernist water governance took hold and as rural places, agricultural spaces, irrigation practices, and institutions became understood as white realms.

The processes and practices that establish whiteness are bound to their geographies and histories, spatialized in ways that often allow whiteness to pass without question (Shaw 2006; Baldwin 2012; Bonds and Inwood 2015). Although marked by the space-times that produce it, whiteness also has the capacity to extend far beyond its original site or moment of generation. Here we concern ourselves with transnational circuits associated with irrigation that contributed to the tenacity and expansiveness of whiteness, particularly circulation that changed water governance or reinforced the defining characteristics of an irrigator. We argue that the materialities, governance, and ideologies associated with irrigation simultaneously marked white as privileged, cultivated white imaginaries, and naturalized whiteness so as to produce the white water citizenry.

Being a citizen has been variously used to mean different things, pointing to the complex and multifaceted character of citizenship. Nonetheless, citizenship necessarily involves individualization and raises issues about governance and ideologies (Staeheli, Marshall, and Maynard 2016). Rather than defining citizenship as exclusive national obligations to the state, we are interested in the rights and expectations associated with citizenship that operate within the context of daily life and are conditioned by local, everyday practices, while simultaneously relating to global ideals (Anderson 2000; Staeheli, Marshall, and Maynard 2016).

Paerregaard, Stensrud, and Andersen (2016) used the term water citizenship to refer to the institutional and discursive practices and processes through which membership, belonging, and loyalty are associated with water management and governance. Beyond these aspects, our specific interest lies in the entitlements, such as guarantees of access that come with water citizenship, and how citizenship conveys expectations and obligations (Staeheli, Marshall, and Maynard 2016). We suggest that connecting these facets of citizenship to the three characteristics of whiteness outlined earlier exposes the wide range of social actions that created a racialized environment in which white water uses and users were afforded privilege and power to the exclusion of others. First, white water citizens were privileged in obtaining structural advantages and entitlements associated with irrigation and water governance. Second, white water citizens shared white imaginary(ies) based on collective worldviews and a sense of belonging among fellow citizens. Third, whiteness was naturalized when white water citizens recognized, responded to, and simultaneously conveyed expectations and obligations associated with irrigation and water governance. We posit that these three attributes formed the core of the white water citizenry and in combination contributed to the legitimacy and persistence, or stickiness, of whiteness (Saldanha 2006).

Established as virtuous, indeed superior, users of water and members of the polity in this formative period of irrigation governance, white water users throughout many settler societies were 'awarded the premium of modernity and water citizenship' (Zwarteveen and Boelens 2014, 145). Although the term water citizen was not to our knowledge applied at the time, in our analysis we have looked for evidence of the characteristics of citizenship noted earlier. It is our contention that whiteness was embedded in this early period of settler history, as white water citizens' claims were privileged without question over the claims and needs of people from other water cultures and as water flows were steered in the direction of uses regarded as modern and most productive according to dominant, taken-for-granted norms. The processes, practices, and systems that facilitated certain individuals becoming water citizens simultaneously excluded others from these entitlements. We

now turn to the connections between irrigation and water governance and the establishment and empowerment of the white water citizenry.

## Irrigation and Water Governance and Whiteness

Water is not simply a transparent chemical substance, nor is it just an objectified resource governed by the state. Recent scholarship asserts that water constitutes and conveys cultural precepts and sociopolitical relations. Conceived of as a coproduced entity, water is mediated by and circulates within natural processes and social relations imbued with power; shaped by hydro-technologies, human labor, and symbolic meanings and regulated by institutions that are often capitalist in form (Swyngedouw 1999; Linton 2010; Zwarteveen and Boelens 2014). Large, bureaucratic, modernist water systems controlled under centralized as well as hierarchical decision making are assumed to be the international norm, but equally in small-scale, customary, and communal irrigation societies, such as traditional Balinese rice producers (Geertz 1972), water is always flowing through the realms of governance and ideologies (Palmer 2015). Water shapes and is shaped by rights and patterns of access, norms, modes, and mechanisms of dispute resolution and quixotic as well as ritualized practices essential to the maintenance of social coherence.

Embedded in many different water cultures and systems of political control, irrigation has long been responsible for using the world's largest share of fresh water. Although irrigation systems vary in scale, technology, and use patterns between multitudes of societies, in all cases irrigation involves moving water across land through technological conveyance and application systems. Part natural and part social, irrigation is not an abstraction: it encompasses material assemblages of water, soil, and cement and technologies used to support the growth of plants (Berry 2014; Akhter and Ormerod 2015). At its essence, irrigation brings complex materialities in contact with governance and ideologies. From a hydrosocial perspective, controlling water through irrigation leads 'to communal reorganization, to new patterns of human interaction, to new forms of discipline and authority' (Worster 1985, 20). In the Western United States during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, for example, irrigation generated hydrosocial configurations designed to reclaim lands from waste, make the deserts bloom, and realize imperial destinies (Worster 1985; Molle, Mollinga, and Wester 2009).

Aligned with imperial ideologies, irrigation supported quests for expansion in Australia and the Western United States. Irrigation in the service of colonization drove the production of racially advantageous and exclusive property rights regimes, including water allocation mechanisms and state-sponsored water infrastructure, which were to entrench and reproduce gross inequities in access to water for Indigenous peoples for decades to come (Berry 1998; McCool 2002; Boelens, Chiba, and Nakashima 2006; Jackson 2011). Settler colonialism functioned by eliminating Indigenous societies and replacing them through continuing immigration and expansive agriculture that consumed their waters and lands, as well as undermined their modes of production (Wolfe 2006). Agriculture served as a form of occupation, according to McKittrick (2013), and was a means of transforming socioeconomic systems for the expropriated spaces that had been occupied by Indigenous peoples. Such occupations resulted in racialized geographies that not only reconstructed 'the native' but, as this article shows, simultaneously rooted whiteness in modernist agricultural spaces and bound it to water.

Adding water through irrigation made it possible for colonial state and private actors to push around rivers (Schmidt and Peppard 2014) and, in doing so, use modernist agriculture and attendant technologies to further extend the frontier to secure and maintain permanent possession. This involved ideological subjugation with cycles of expansion necessitating secure and socially ordered conditions for settlement and environmental improvement (Molle, Mollinga, and Wester 2009). Irrigation was promoted for its capacity to provide such conditions, as Pisani (2000) pointed out for the United States: 'Irrigation promoters in the West turned their quest . . . [to] building a civilization in which cooperation, interdependence, and planning replaced individualism, extremes of wealth and poverty, and random economic development' (470-71).

In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, irrigation and water governance made whiteness stickier as it shaped racialized processes, legitimized on-the-ground practices, and formed a white water citizenry to support democratic nation building in these settler states. Government legislation and administrative institutions promoted extensive land and water reforms that stimulated crop-based agriculture to increase and disperse the number of white settlers and stimulate economic growth in agricultural production.

In the arid and semiarid regions of both countries, however, growing crops was not possible without regular, reliable water supplies, as well as compatible institutions to govern water and support small-scale yeoman farming. The attendant hydrosocial changes required more regular water supplies to guarantee crop survival and income stability at the same time as they increased the political power of the rural settler population (Harris 2007).

Such hydrosocial changes supported the yeoman agrarian ideal, in which independently minded, selfsufficient farmers would engage in small-scale irrigated agriculture and foster democratic values under conditions of mutual support and cooperative decision making. Yeoman farmers were expected to create and sustain permanent settlements built on what was considered the true foundation of wealth: water and land (McQuilton 1993; Powell 2002). Yet, the yeoman agrarian ideal was freighted with racialized assumptions that construed the idealized farmer as white. As the following sections show, water use and control were designed to bring yeoman farmers into the networks of water supply and systems of irrigation governance, transforming nature for the benefit of these idealized settlers. These networks and systems, when materialized as irrigation schemes, enabled yeoman farmers to extend their occupation of space and transformed them into white realms by establishing the privileges, imaginaries, and naturalizations that underlie the white water citizenry. In the following part, we introduce the life histories, irrigation agendas, and governance programs of Alfred Deakin and Elwood Mead.

## Alfred Deakin and Elwood Mead: Transnational Irrigation Advocates

The man who is acknowledged as the father of Australian irrigation and water law is Alfred Deakin (Gabay 1987). Deakin grew up in an inner Melbourne suburb in a family of modest means. Although he studied law, he spent more of his working life in politics than serving at the bar, entering the Parliament of the state of Victoria when he was twenty-two. For a short time before that, he was a journalist. His principal interests were literature and spiritualism (Gabay 1987).

Deakin is a well-known figure in Australian political history for the many contributions he made, not only to irrigation but to Australian federation and the creation of several national institutions. He played a crucial part in bringing the British colonies into a federation in 1901 under an elected prime minister. Deakin served in that role on three occasions when the bulk of the Commonwealth's foundation legislation was initiated (Gabay 1987). One biographer described him as a 'commanding orator, an energetic administrator, and an innovator in public policy' (Macintyre 2004, 4).

As a colonial nationalist, he pursued an ideal of duty to his nation and an abiding belief in the destiny of the 'Anglo-Saxon race' (Gabay 1987). Believing that Australia was 'reserved for Anglo-Saxons only' (Murdoch [1923] 1999, 94), he actively pursued one of Australia's founding acts of racial exclusion, in the radical form of the White Australia Policy, which prevented immigration of non-whites, especially targeting Asians. It also expelled Pacific Islanders who had been brought to Australia as laborers for tropical sugar plantations (Lake 2003). For Deakin, this doctrine was 'a reasoned policy which goes to the roots of national life, by which the whole of our social, industrial and political organisation is governed' (cited in Macintyre 2004, 7).

Deakin is also well known to scholars of Australian water governance, primarily recognized for having rejected British common law water doctrine and setting Australia on its path of state-administered water management. In his time, he was the 'foremost authority' on Australian water management (Rankin 2013, 128), doing more than any other statesman and lawmaker to shape a set of distinctly Australian governance arrangements through the development of state water institutions. Deakin was a leader in forging water ideologies adapted to a modern nation moving toward independence from Britain and one that needed to develop agricultural production to absorb the population boom following the Victorian gold rushes.

Deakin introduced the colony's first irrigation law in 1883 and built on that contribution throughout the next decade. While attorney general in the Victorian government, he served as the chair of the internationally celebrated Royal Commission on Water Supply (1884-1887). That inquiry recommended legislation to nationalize water by transferring rights to all water of the colony to the Crown and establishing a state system to license private diversions (Harris 2007). Deakin brought to that commission a comparative approach to the global study of irrigation, examining the water cultures and institutional frameworks of southern Europe, Egypt, Italy, India, and the United

States. During the 1880s he wrote two books: Irrigation in Western America , which was for many years a standard textbook in the United States, and Irrigated India: An Australian View of India and Ceylon . His extensive tours and correspondence significantly influenced Australian water policy (Rankin 2013).

Deakin was particularly interested in the merits of 'new world' experiences in irrigation: the circumstances of 'every country in which the practice of irrigation is grafted upon agriculture for the first time' (Deakin 1885b, 10). Strongly affected by his tour of the U.S. West in 1885 (Deakin 1885a), Deakin saw similarities that were significant to his water policy reform agenda (Harris 2007) and, ultimately, Australia's (Rankin 2013). Deakin identified with U.S. manhood, which he equated with the republic, at a time when 'manhood was enshrined in the Anglo-Saxon world as a key political value' (Lake 2007, 36). He deemed the U.S. irrigation experience a suitable model for the state of Victoria because of its comparable place in the white man's world, a world that was taking shape during the nineteenth century as globalizing theories of race, gender, and nationhood were being refined in transnational exchanges (Lake 2003).

His tour of California, Colorado, New Mexico, and Mexico altered his perception of the inherent value of irrigation such that he became an 'enthusiastic believer' and 'at once embarked on an irrigation crusade in his own country' (Murdoch [1923] 1999, 93; see also Rankin 2013). Irrigation would secure continuous agricultural development: 'We have evidence to show us,' said Deakin, 'that irrigation . . . is at least calculated to make agriculture a sure and certain calling, with profits that could be relied on whatever the seasons might be' (cited in Rankin 2013, 122). Irrigation would also serve to fulfill the Jeffersonian ideal of a virtuous rural society, as the following speech by Deakin (1912) shows:

No pursuits are more attractive than horticulture, agriculture, grazing, fruit-growing, and beef farming. Nothing is more beautiful than the healthy and natural labour by which upright and honest people obtain a sufficient living. . . . [They] are in touch with nature . . . their homes are healthy and restful, their freedom and independence making their citizenship a far greater prize than it is in city communities as we know them. (2940)

When in California, Deakin witnessed the irrigation enterprises established by the Canadian Chaffey brothers and he later negotiated an agreement that would enable them to establish Australia's first large-scale irrigation colony at Mildura on the Murray River. The Chaffey brothers adapted plans and systems from their U.S. enterprises to the Australian site, which was to become a model for others around the country.

Examination of his U.S. diary gives reason to suggest that Alfred Deakin most likely met Elwood Mead in Colorado, but long before this Mead identified with agriculture. He was the first of seven children born and raised on his parents' prosperous farm in Switzerland County, Indiana, on which the Mead family grew tobacco and corn and raised sheep and a few cattle. As a youth, he was disturbed as many nearby farms were sold by their owners to speculators and then rented to tenants, tenants who Mead thought did not tend the soil properly and cared little about local affairs, religion, or their children's education (Kluger 1992). His distrust for systems of farm tenancy and his motivation to promote small farm ownership were constants throughout his life. He dedicated himself to agricultural reform and 'helping men own farms,' which became the title of one of his many publications. As a reformer of men, farms, and society, Mead was passionate about the yeoman agrarian ideal (Teisch 2011). By the end of his career, Mead's zeal led him to serve in one of the most significant water leadership positions in the world, the U.S. Commissioner of Reclamation.

Mead started his career after college with a brief stint at the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers, followed by a professorial appointment at Colorado State University (Kluger 1992). He spent his thirties in Wyoming as its First Territorial Engineer, during which time Mead tried to organize and bring order to irrigated agriculture throughout the state. To that end, he drafted Wyoming's constitutional provisions relating to water rights (Teisch 2011), which later became a model for other Western U.S. states. In 1899, he took a position as the lead irrigation investigator for the U.S. Department of Agriculture, a role in which he reviewed irrigation projects across the country. Mead's contention that states should take the lead in irrigation and water initiatives rather than the federal government was not favorably received in Washington, however, so he left to teach at the University of California at Berkeley (UC Berkeley), where he became Professor of Rural Institutions and the Practice of Irrigation (Powell 1982).

Although Mead started off focused on the material and technical issues that enabled and constrained irrigation, throughout his life he became increasingly involved in irrigation governance, particularly its social and financial dimensions. He also pursued

opportunities to promote irrigated agriculture as a means of social engineering; for example, immigration policy favorable to farmers. His was an ideology of a nation made strong through rural communities of small white farmers who sustained themselves by means of irrigated agriculture (Tyrell 1999). While irrigation was a key to democracy in Mead's view, he was not alone in his thinking or actions. Progressivism, fueled by the growth of cities and paranoia associated with increasing southern European immigration (considered non-white at the time), along with reported declines in white birth rates, sought to make rural conditions more attractive and efficient. Within Progressivism, the Country Life Movement reinforced rural nostalgia, humanitarianism, and scientific and technological efficiency (Powell 1982). As a middle-class, well-educated, white man with a Protestant belief system, MidWestern roots, and a strong belief in the yeoman agrarian ideal, Mead fit the profile as a crusader in this movement (Powell 1982).

Mead's work was known to Australian water administrators (Powell 2002), who considered him perfectly placed to invigorate and restructure their water sector following the reforms undertaken by Deakin. In 1907, he and his family moved to Australia, where he became the first chair of the State of Victoria's Rivers and Water Supply Commission (SRWSC) and assumed several related professional responsibilities. He was to play a central role in establishing irrigation settlements in Australia and the content of their water rules. Mead's large-scale program of closer settlement based on irrigation was pursued for decades in Australia (Davis 1968). Completing the circle of transnational transfers that started with Deakin's tour of the United States, Mead 'brought the Victorian formula back to the United States where he was influential in securing land use legislation' (Davis 1968, 658). While in Australia, Mead explained U.S. irrigation practices and water governance and, in turn, when he returned to the United States he promoted the closer settlement policies and irrigation practices that he had worked on in Australia (Mead 1920; Powell 1982). Returning to UC Berkeley, Mead continued to advocate for governance arrangements and ideologies associated with irrigated agriculture as a means of bettering society, not only through his teaching, professional lectures, and writings but also through his work as an irrigation consultant in Mexico, Hawaii, Australia, and Palestine, along with two Californian irrigation demonstration projects he initiated (Kluger 1992).

## Alfred Deakin and Elwood Mead: The Making of a White Water Citizenry

Deakin and Mead both envisioned irrigation as more than an economic activity. For these men, it was also a sociocultural practice freighted with white privilege, embedded in white imaginary, and it served to naturalize whiteness through actions that transformed landscapes. Deakin and Mead intended that irrigation would foster the white water citizenry such that the normal irrigation farmer (perceived to be a male) accepted, and indeed expected, the structural advantages and rights associated with whiteness and could be counted on to share their worldview and sense of belonging. As Figure 1 from the Mildura irrigation colony illustrates, irrigators would work on their own small farms, employing cultural practices, meeting expectations, and handling responsibilities that were understood to be derived from white civilization. All of this facilitated citizens organizing around jointly held social, economic, and political interests. In this part, we examine what Deakin and Mead did to establish processes, practices, and systems that facilitated certain individuals becoming white water citizens, while excluding others.

## White Privilege

Deakin's public statements indicate a tenacious commitment to whiteness and the 'imperative of race homogeneity to nation building' (Lake 2007, 41). He believed that sovereignty carried with it the rightindeed obligation-to protect the racial character of the white nation, and this explains why he pursued so vigorously the Immigration Restriction Act (1901) that barred non-whites through a dictation test (following precedents in Mississippi in 1890 and Natal in 1897) and the Pacific Islands Labourers Act (1901), which provided for the deportation of Pacific Islanders (Lake 2004). The 'unity of Australia,' Deakin insisted, 'means not only that its members can intermix, intermarry and associate without degradation on either side, but implies one inspired by ideas, and an aspiration towards the same ideals' (cited in Macintyre 2004, 7).

Deakin was preoccupied with maintaining the structural advantage of whiteness. His perspectives on race, nation, and irrigation were strongly influenced by the effects of immigration and international competition on the agricultural economies of those countries

Figure 1. Mildura Orchards, 1890, by J. W. Lindt. Source : State Library of Victoria, Image H96.160/1915.

<!-- image -->

he visited. This concern was to underpin his motivations in the White Australia policy and other legislative actions. During debates on the 1901 Immigration Restriction Act, for example, Deakin argued that the Japanese had to be excluded from settlement in Australia because they would be an internal threat to white farmers. The Japanese, who 'most nearly approach us, and would therefore be our most formidable competitors' (cited in Macintyre 2004, 7), were a threat precisely because of their high abilities.

For his part, Mead was also unapologetically prowhite and anti-Asian, especially while at Berkeley and as a consultant, integrating his racial notions into his work on irrigation and water governance (Mead 1921). He recognized that whiteness was associated with social and economic benefits, as he noted during an irrigation consulting trip to Hawaii: 'No race that does not intermarry and mingle freely with the whites, is or can be a good American. It is not a question of political but of social and economic domination' (Mead correspondence 1922).

Both Deakin and Mead played significant roles in establishing modernist resource management institutions that were protected by statute and backed by government funds and engineering ingenuity to provide irrigators with security, legal certainty, and strong prospects for economic gain from rural development. On his return from the United States in 1885, Deakin recommended that Victoria adopt the approach taken to water law in Colorado (Harris 2007). Deakin feared the monopolistic consequences of the Californian practice of separating land and water titles, believing that this would trigger costly speculation and inefficient water use and thereby stifle development. In pursuit of a specific form of social liberalism, the Irrigation Act of 1886 was passed to nationalize water by transferring rights in water to the Crown and introducing a state system of licensed private diversions (Rankin 2013). In the same year, the Waterworks Encouragement Act was passed, empowering the Governor in Council to grant tracts of land to private developers together with water rights. These laws had the colonial government playing an active role in the construction of dams and distribution networks.

Deakin and Mead both worked on securing structural advantages in rural regions by establishing rights and benefits that reinforced white privilege. They not only facilitated white water citizens' access to water for irrigation, but because these entitlements were underpinned by state-funded infrastructure and supplemented by expertise, crop agriculture was made possible where it otherwise could not be developed. This resulted in increased

social and financial security for individuals and groups, such as local water organizations in irrigation districts, endowing them with wide jurisdiction and extensive powers to stimulate irrigation activity. For example, largely independent Irrigation Trusts, composed of white land owners, struggled to finance irrigation infrastructure and under Deakin's recommendations were supported through government loans.

## White Imaginary

Both men promoted their imaginaries as they communicated their worldviews based on whiteness and developed initiatives to create the sense of belonging needed for white water citizens. Deakin's imaginary embraced Europeans because of a sense of belonging based on their shared whiteness:

As Europeans by descent, as competitors in the world's markets under European conditions, united to European peoples by all the ties of social, political, and commercial relationship, we cannot disguise the fact that in a large measure their crisis is our crisis, and their future our future. (Deakin 1887, 6)

Yet, Deakin saw whiteness rooted in settler irrigation societies and believed Australia shared a set of imperial characteristics with those of the United States, its recent colonial history, its purity of racial character, as well as the more prosaic environmental parallels:

It is like Victoria-a new country, settled by the pick of the Anglo Saxon race, attracted in the first instance by gold discoveries, and remaining after that excitement passed away to build up a new nation under the freest institutions and most favourable conditions of life. California is almost exactly the same age as our colony, and in soil also the two countries are not unlike. (Deakin 1885b, 4)

Although Australian Indigenous peoples' need for land to sustain livelihoods, including irrigated farming, was being articulated at the time Deakin was vigorously promoting irrigation, 4 his water citizenry was composed of Anglo Saxon men who were 'among the best class of our population' (Deakin 1886, 427). At the height of Deakin's political influence, Aboriginal people were assumed to pose no problem for a white Australia; hence, there was no need to consider altering their citizenship status. Cast as a dying race by Deakin and most others who adhered to the transnational theories of social Darwinism, they were 'excluded from the national census and thus from the imagined community of the new Australian nation' (Lake 2004, 57). The rights, interests, and cultural practices of Aboriginal people (in either land or water) were not reflected anywhere in the Victorian Royal Commission into Water Supply, in Deakin's water and irrigation laws, or in attendant administrative structures that transformed Australian water governance in the late 1800s.

Deakin believed that Indigenous peoples of the United States would also die out. While on his study tour, he said that 'the reign of the Indian is over and has left no trace, but it was a reign of only yesterday' (Deakin 1885a). Deakin's diary account of Mexican society indicates that he thought white dominance was an inevitable (and desirable) outcome of the mixing of races:

It is doubtful if the people [Indigenous communities] will be able to do much for themselves until the AngloSaxon invasion comes. This may not be for a century but come it must (and) then the problem how to deal with the Mexican will be something like the problem what to do with the negro was after the war. (Deakin 1885a)

In describing the places visited in the United States and Mexico, Deakin revealed little personal animosity toward the non-white races he encountered. In fact, he took note of long-standing Indigenous irrigation traditions practiced in New Mexico and Arizona and was keenly attuned to the role of custom in the water use practices and laws of the states he saw as models for Australia, especially Spanish law applied to the Western United States and Mexico following Spanish colonization.

Although Deakin witnessed and described customary water institutions and practices in his travels, he did not describe an easy coexistence with state or introduced colonial systems. In the United States, for example, he saw legal complexity in the articulation between various customary and civic laws. In addition, the challenges of racial assimilation after the Civil War preoccupied many Australian statesmen, including Deakin (Lake 2004). In Australia's newly written Constitution, to which he contributed, he saw a 'distinct advance upon and difference from that of the United States,' for it provided the 'amplest powers to deal' with the disruption and 'possible contamination' that come with 'the admixture of other races' (cited in Lake 2004, 56). Deakin's imaginary of

whiteness thus rested on a belief in racial purity. It was predicated on the fear that heterogeneity would result in conflict and miscegenation, undermining the order required for effective governance of land and water in the service of the new settler nation.

Mead shared Deakin's perspective on progress made in irrigation reflecting the forward march of civilization. A passage in his manuscript, The Water Resources of Mexico, indicates that Mead minimized the significance of Indigenous irrigation systems, while praising modernist water development:

There are in various parts of Mexico the remains of irrigation works which have outlived the [Indigenous] civilization in which they were born. Measured by their cost and the skill required to construct them, or even by the area of land irrigated, these early works have small importance compared with the monumental ones recently built or being built, in the valleys of the Yaqui, the Nazas, the Lemke, the Rio Grande, and the Colorado. (Mead n.d., 1-2)

Although Mead did not express hostility toward contemporary Indigenous people, the absence of any discussion suggests that he regarded their water cultures as obsolete and inconsequential. To the best of our knowledge, Mead did not work on any water initiatives specifically for (or against) the Indigenous peoples and tribes of the Western United States that were his contemporaries. 5

Whiteness was part of Mead's imaginary, reflecting the values of white civilization he held in high esteem, and he often articulated whiteness when brokering material solutions with irrigation systems and structuring water governance. As Mead saw it, irrigated agriculture done the proper way was a means to make society better, superior to societies dependent on grazing and pastoralism and better than those societies rooted in an urban existence. As part of the 1899 U.S. Department of Agriculture's Yearbook , Mead wrote a section on the 'Rise and Future of Irrigation in the United States' in which he extolled the virtues of irrigation, providing a sense of belonging and hope:

The future is luminous with new hopes for humanity. . . . Irrigation is much more than an affair of ditches and acres. It not only makes civilization possible where men could not live without it, but it shapes that civilization after its own peculiar design. Its underlying influence is that which makes for democracy and individual independence. (Mead 1899, 609)

As a spokesman for the superiority of Western European civilization, Mead made frequent reference to the sense of belonging he associated with white water citizenry. Mead extolled what he described as the 'Anglo Saxon thirst for land' and advocated a reorientation in Western U.S. communities along Western European lines:

The European custom of making homes in village centers has been adopted in parts of Utah, Wyoming, Idaho, and California, and steadily gains in public favor. . . . The agricultural society of the future in the Western valleys will realize a happy combination of town and country life. . . . Such conditions are favorable to the growth of the best forms of civilization and the noblest institutions. This is the hope which lies fallow in the arid valleys of the West. (Mead 1899, 611-12)

Mead applied and advocated for irrigation practices and systems he associated with Australia, along with those from Western European countries, while being greatly troubled by Asian people and their irrigation and agricultural practices. His statements not only underscore the anti-Asian racism Mead shared with many of his contemporaries, including Deakin, but in his hands these sentiments became arguments against monopolies and in support of state settlement policies that would preserve and perpetuate white civilization in the Western United States and in Australia (Teisch 2011). Mead published an article in 1921 in a leading academic journal that advocated legislation to prohibit selling or leasing agricultural lands to Japanese Californians, who he portrayed as separatist, evasive, misleading, and culpable for ignoring laws and public opinion and who refused to assimilate into white civilization and accept white norms:

Japanese farmers have come to California knowing they were not wanted. They have bought land knowing it was contrary to the spirit of the law and the wishes of the people of California. . . . If during the last ten years the Japanese had gone into farming districts as individuals and mingled with white farmers as individuals, there would today be no more prejudice against them as a race than there is against Swedes or Italians, which is none at all. . . . The objection to the Japanese is that with their coming Anglo-Saxon culture came in direct conflict with a Mongolian one. They cannot live side by side and neither will give way to the other without a conflict. (Mead 1921, 55)

Mead seemed to be at his most racist and pro-white when speaking about Japanese Californian farmers. By preventing Asian Americans from holding a place in his white imaginary, Mead denied them the opportunity to be white water citizens.

## Naturalizing Whiteness

On his arrival in Victoria, Mead became the chair of the SRWSC and, in this role, he contributed to naturalizing the white water citizenry in Australia by mandating standards to determine the consumption of water and by designing irrigated land use plans. As a stimulus to closer settlement, in 1908 he required water users to pay a compulsory water charge because it would compel land owners to make intensive use of their water right and, at the same time, defray the operating costs of state irrigation system (Davis 1968). Mead ensured that each farm was assigned a standardized volume of water per acre for which a charge was levied whether the water was used or not. Mead assumed overriding control in the planning of settlements in Victoria's irrigation districts, claiming much of the credit for the hierarchical arrangement of allotment sizes and for the provision of state assistance to irrigators (Powell 1986; Teisch 2011).

Mead shared with Deakin the notion that the normal irrigation farmer was a white man who worked for his living on his own small farm, but for Mead white water citizenship was not limited only to those who were phenotypically white. A white water citizen was someone who assumed specific characteristics that Mead associated with white civilization and was able and willing to conform to an expected set of behaviors and shoulder the responsibilities. This served to naturalize whiteness. Whether in Australia, the Western United States, or elsewhere, behaviors and responsibilities that Mead associated with white water citizens were being industrious, being efficient, being frugal, adopting peaceful and orderly ways, and adapting to scientific and technological advances in irrigated agriculture (Mead 1920). Late in his career, for example, while serving as Commissioner of Reclamation, Mead went to Haiti after it had been invaded by the United States. While there, he wrote an article for the New Republic to shape public opinion, saying that Haitians needed what the United States had to offer: freedom, justice, and democracy. He was particularly enthusiastic about how irrigated farming introduced by Americans elicited civility in Haitians:

How farmers . . . could now sleep at noon under their own mango tree, I began to realize that something wonderful and not understood here was going on and that Haiti had enlisted the altruism, efficiency and zeal of a remarkably able body of [American] men, who are not only making government peaceful, solvent and efficient, but showing the humblest of these people what the complex thing we call civilization really means. (Mead 1926, 378-79)

Thus, Mead turned his passion for white civilization toward perpetuating white cultural practices, specific sets of obligations and expectations that served to naturalize whiteness. By naturalizing whiteness through extending benefits of white civilization to certain Others, he simultaneously perpetuated his white imaginary and legitimized the structural advantages and rights associated with white privilege. This, however, was not done even-handedly or without contradictions. From the previous examples, it is clear that Mead excluded certain groups of people, including Japanese Californians, from being white water citizens.

For his part, a distinct racial imperialism lay at the heart of Deakin's vision for a white Australia, and this is especially evident in an election speech pitched to a crowd in rural Victoria: 'Where is Australia to obtain white men and women if we neither produce them ourselves nor attract them from abroad?' (Deakin 1903). For Deakin, irrigated agriculture would enable white water citizens to create and occupy rural spaces, thereby fulfilling their obligations to secure and unify the newly formed nation:

A white Australia does not by any means mean only the preservation of the complexion of the people of this country. It means the multiplying of their homes, so that we may be able to occupy, use and defend every part of our continent; it means the maintenance of conditions of life fit for white men and white women. (Deakin 1903)

Such actions naturalized whiteness through adherence to certain culturally accepted practices, meeting expectations, and handling responsibilities; for example, repaying government loans for infrastructure.

Deakin's awareness of the global economic shifts that were threatening the supremacy of whites as the world moved toward a postcolonial era manifest as concrete concerns about Australia's white farmers:

It is Indian wheat and Chinese rice reared by irrigation which are underselling the wheat and rice of the European irrigator, who, while recognising that irrigation is indispensable perceives that some new factor must be introduced to enable him to regain his lost ground. It is becoming very evident that, to succeed in his struggle for existence with coloured labour and its low price the white farmer of the future must bring his superior qualities into full play. (Deakin 1887, 6, italics added)

Deakin recognized that the white irrigation farmer, with all his superior qualities and, despite the

multitudes of challenges he faced, was (and would continue to be) a standard that united Australians and that all should adhere to; in other words, a white water citizen. Deakin knew that new crops from Asia created pressure on agricultural practices in Europe and the United States. To be able to compete with Asian producers, farmers in Australia would have to fulfill their responsibilities as good irrigators and cultivators of high-value products.

Deakin paid close attention to a shared sense of race during his observations of irrigation systems abroad as well. It was, for example, a central factor in comparisons made between the United States and India, with the former's whiteness lending comparative power over the latter as a model for Australia:

Indian irrigation is known to be carried on upon the greatest scale, and many of its works are acknowledged to be marvels of engineering skill. But they are designed to meet the needs of a dense imperfectly civilized population, whose habits and wants differ from those of our race, and whose climate, country, and water supply lead them to grow a class of products chiefly foreign to our farmers. (Deakin 1885b, 4)

Because Deakin saw whiteness differentiating Australia from India, the work of India's irrigators was rendered less relevant and valuable than that of U.S. irrigators. He was nonetheless impressed by the degree of state control of Indian water resources (Rankin 2013), being particularly enamored of the technical knowledge of the English- and Scottish-trained engineers who staffed the Indian Public Works Service from the 1860s (Goodall 2008). Yet, the achievements and responsibilities of Indian farmers and irrigators, which he described as 'but one remove from savagery,' had little to offer Australia (Goodall 2008, 139).

During his eight years in Australia consolidating state control of water management, Mead was also called on to assist Australian state governments in stimulating the immigration of new Australians. In this capacity, Mead traveled to promote irrigation ideologies and governance structures, encouraging emigration for those he felt would conform to the obligations of a white water citizen. In 1910 Mead was sent to Europe, Canada, and the United States to look for settlers as part of an official Land Settlement Delegation on behalf of Victoria (Mead correspondence 1910). In a U.S. advertising campaign, Australia was promoted as 'the land of promise: the white man's hope' ('Australia' 1911). The choice of words intentionally stoked the white imaginary by promising emigrants a sense of belonging based explicitly on whiteness. Mead reported that he had been successful in attracting a 'constant stream of settlers chiefly from England but a number from Canada' (Mead correspondence 1910), but his hope to secure a considerable number of U.S. irrigators was never realized. Under Mead's initiative, the government paid 80 percent of their passage and paved the way so that Australia's newest-and white-residents could settle into farming with ready-made homes, secure irrigation systems defined by land and water use norms, and other forms of community support (Mead 1920; Teisch 2011). Thus, Mead's promotion of white privilege, his white imaginary, and his efforts to naturalize whiteness were intertwined as he worked to form the white water citizenry.

Although undoubtedly many of their contemporaries shared beliefs about the structural advantages of being a white male and the attendant racial and gender privileges, what distinguished Mead and Deakin from others was the efficacy of strategies that they pursued to perpetuate white privilege, develop a white imaginary, and naturalize whiteness through irrigation practices. Both Deakin and Mead actively sought to reshape irrigation governance and ideologies in a number of ways that not only indicated an awareness of whiteness and racial privilege but consciously extended white power through establishing and reinforcing a white water citizenry.

## Conclusions: Dispossessing and Displacing Indigenous Peoples and Marginalizing Others

Despite originating on different continents, Deakin and Mead shared several characteristics, experiences, and objectives. Having experienced arid environments, both men believed in the transformative potential of water when used for irrigated agriculture. They supported a liberal maxim of public welfare that dictated that water should be controlled to generate the greatest good for the greatest number and shared similar aspirations for civilizing settler society and democratizing small-scale agriculture, while recognizing the value of applied science and technologies. Both were actively involved in the transnational circulation of ideologies, materialities, and governance arrangements associated with modernist irrigation, as they extended whiteness within and beyond the boundaries of the state. Although both men were well traveled, exposed

to diverse cultures, and actively involved in expanding irrigation networks by promoting supportive ideologies and reconfiguring hydrosocial relations within their own countries as well as abroad, Deakin and Mead had an abiding sense that white irrigation practices and skills were superior to those of all others. They aspired to direct water to its 'best use' and for them such use was a white one, applied in the service of imperial objectives.

Although they did not use the term white water citizen , Deakin's and Mead's notions about democracy and citizenship, along with their justifications based on European practices, principles, and civilization, served to constitute the white water citizen. The result of their initiatives to privilege whiteness, promote their white imaginaries, and naturalize whiteness in conjunction with irrigation systems, practices, and policies, we believe, has extended the persistence and stickiness of whiteness in Australia and the United States over many generations. Moreover, in constituting and empowering white water citizens, Deakin and Mead also rendered whiteness as less visible. Still many decades later, few can see how whiteness influences land and water use debates or the imprint on the manifestly skewed patterns of water rights distribution (Bark et al. 2012). For instance, Deakin's water work influenced other Australian states to resolutely maintain control of their water resources beyond the era of federation through governance systems that licensed private diversions. Licensees came to regard these entitlements 'almost as rights in perpetuity' (Tan 2002, 14).

Probing the configurations of power relations enabled by irrigation helps expose the 'historical production of whiteness as a form or economic value' in settler societies (Baldwin 2012, 177). Because of water's significance in frontier development and in more widely consolidating imperial and state power (Schmidt and Peppard 2014), looking at materiality, governance, and ideology in irrigation provides a means to unpack racialized sociospatial processes associated with whiteness and better understand the stickiness of whiteness. Conversely, looking at whiteness reveals how irrigated agriculture came to be such a 'potent symbol of settler-colonial identity' (Wolfe 2006, 395), one that was made more so as it circulated throughout the world. Thus, analyses conducted at a transnational scale also help our study of the colonial practices of water governance, for as Anderson (2000) contended, 'Theorizing indigenous dispossession within power relations that exceed the boundaries of the nation-state, far from weakening the logic for claims to special status, potentially strengthens them' (386).

Both Deakin and Mead ignored Indigenous water rights and interests within their own countries and beyond. Preexisting customary systems were displaced, some alternatives were superseded (e.g., reconfiguring the pastoral estates and grazing lands or affirming Indigenous rights and interests in public lands), and other alternatives that could have been pursued were foreclosed (e.g., clearly articulated Indigenous sovereignty over water and formal recognition of Indigenous water governance systems; Jackson 2017). Our article reveals the emergence of the white water citizen, and we see the need for additional work on the development of the white water citizen over the course of the twentieth century and on its specific effects on Indigenous relations with and access to water.

## Acknowledgments

We appreciate our institutions for their support of this project (the University of Nevada, Reno and Griffith University), as well as that provided to Sue Jackson from the Australian Research Council (Project FT130101145). We are grateful for the assistance of librarians and use of archival materials at the American Heritage Center at University of Wyoming, Water Resource Archives at the University of California, Riverside, and the Bancroft Library at the University of California, Berkeley. The constructive comments of the anonymous reviewers helped us to refine our argument and we also acknowledge the contributions of Tony McLeod, Teresa Cavazos Cohn, and Leslie Head.

## Funding

Sue Jackson was supported by the Australian Research Council's Future Fellowships Program funding scheme (project number FT130101145).

## Notes

1. Water governance is defined as the processes, institutions, and practices involved in harnessing, measuring, controlling, regulating, transporting, and utilizing water for irrigation.
2. Settler colonialism involves 'the permanent occupation of a territory and removal of indigenous peoples with the express purpose of building an ethnically distinct national community' (Bonds and Inwood 2015, 2).
3. Men dominated the fields of irrigation, water management, and agriculture.

4. Deakin was appointed to the Aboriginal Protection Board the year before he became Victorian Commissioner for Public Works and Water Supply.
5. For example, we have found no record of Mead's opinion or any actions in response to the foundational 1908 Winters case that established the parameters for reserved water rights for tribes.

## References

- Akhter, M., and K. J. Ormerod. 2015. The irrigation technozone: State power, expertise, and agrarian development in the U.S. West and British Punjab, 1880-1920. Geoforum 60:123-32.
- Anderson, K. 2000. Thinking 'postnationally': Dialogue across multicultural, Indigenous, and settler spaces. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 90:381-91.
- Andrucki, M. J. 2010. The visa whiteness machine: Transnational motility in post-apartheid South Africa. Ethnicities 10 (3):358-70.
- Australia. 1911. Chicago Sunday Examiner . November 19.
- Baldwin, A. 2012. Whiteness and futurity: Towards a research agenda. Progress in Human Geography 36 (2):172-87.
- Bark, R., D. Garrick, C. Robinson, and S. Jackson. 2012. Adaptive basin governance and the prospects for meeting Indigenous water claims. Environmental Science &amp; Policy 19-20:169-77.
- Berry, K. A. 1998. Race for water? Native Americans, Eurocentrism, and Western water policy. In Environmental injustices, political struggles: Race, class, and the environment , ed. D. E. Camacho, 101-24. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- ---. 2014. Actor-network theory and traditional cultural properties: Exploring irrigation as a hybrid network in 19th century Hawai'i. Human Geography 7 (2):73-87.
- Boelens, R., M. Chiba, and D. Nakashima, eds. 2006. Water and Indigenous peoples . Paris: UNESCO Press.
- Bonds, A., and J. Inwood. 2015. Beyond white privilege: Geographies of white supremacy and settler colonialism. Progress in Human Geography 40 (6):1-19.
- Davis, P. 1968. Australian and American water allocation systems compared. Boston College Law Review 9:647-711.
- Deakin, A. 1885a. Papers of Alfred Deakin, 1804-1973, Manuscript Series 2: Diaries, 1884-1916, Item 2/38: 'Travel diary' from America, 1885, MS 1540. Accessed January 20, 2018. https://volunteer.ala.org.au/project/ index/7565486.
- ---. 1885b. Royal Commission on Water Supply, First progress report: Irrigation in Western America, so far as it has relation to the circumstances of Victoria . Melbourne, Australia: Parliament of Victoria.
- ---. 1886. Speech made to introduce the Water Supply and Irrigation Bill. June 24 1886: 415-47. Victorian Parliament Hansard. Accessed January 25, 2017. http:// www.parliament.vic.gov.au/hansard2/6-hansard/articles/ 2872-hansard-1886-8.
- ---. 1887. Royal Commission on Water Supply, 4th progress report: Irrigation in Egypt and Italy . Melbourne, Australia: Parliament of Victoria.
- ---. 1903. Speech delivered at Ballarat, Victoria, October 29, 1903. Accessed December 12, 2017. http://elections peeches.moadoph.gov.au/speeches/1903-alfred-deakin.
- ---. 1912. Speech made to the House of Representatives. September 5, 1912, Commonwealth Parliamentary Debate, Australian Parliament Hansard.
- Frankenberg, R. 1993. White women, race matters: The social construction of whiteness . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Gabay, A. 1987. The private writings of Alfred Deakin. Historical Studies 22:525-46.
- Gandy, M. 2014. The fabric of space: Water, modernity, and the urban imagination . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Geertz, C. 1972. The wet and the dry: Traditional irrigation in Bali and Morocco. Human Ecology 1 (1):23-39.
- Goodall, H. 2008. Digging deeper: Ground tanks and the elusive Indian archipelago. In Beyond the black stump: Histories of outback Australia , ed. A. Mayne, 129-60. Adelaide, South Australia: Wakefield Press.
- Harris, E. 2007. Lobbying for legislation: An examination of water rights transition in colonial Victoria, Australia 1840-1886. Discussion Paper 1206, Monash University Department of Economics, Melbourne, Australia.
- Hughes, D. M. 2010. Whiteness in Zimbabwe: Race, landscape, and the problem of belonging . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Jackson, S. 2011. Aboriginal access to water in Australia: Opportunities and constraints. In Water resources, planning and management , ed. Q. Grafton and K. Hussey, 601-28. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- ---. 2017. Enduring injustices in Australian water governance. In Natural resources and environmental justice: The Australian experience , ed. A. Lukasiewicz, S. Dovers, L. Robin, J. McKay, S. Schilizzi, and S. Graham, 12132. Melbourne, Australia: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation.
- Kluger, J. R. 1992. Turning on water with a shovel: The career of Elwood Mead . Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Kobayashi, A., and L. Peake. 2000. Racism out of place: Thoughts on whiteness and an antiracist geography in the new millennium. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 90 (2):392-403.
- Lake, M. 2003. White man's country: The transnational history of a national project. Australian Historical Studies 34 (122):346-63.
- ---. 2004. The white man under siege: New histories of race in the nineteenth century and the advent of white Australia. History Workshop Journal 58:41-62.
- ---. 2007. The brightness of eyes and quiet assurance which seem to say American: Alfred Deakin's identification with republican manhood. Australian Historical Studies 38:32-51.
- Linton, J. 2010. What is water? The history of a modern abstraction . Vancouver, Canada: University of British Columbia Press.
- Macintyre, S. 2004. Alfred Deakin: A centenary tribute. Paper presented as a lecture in the Department of the Senate Occasional Lecture Series at Parliament House, August 22, 2003.

- McCool, D. 2002. Native waters : Contemporary Indian water settlements and the second treaty era . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- McKittrick, K. 2013. Plantation futures. Small Axe 42:1-15.
- McQuilton, J. 1993. Comparative frontiers: Australia and the United States. Australasian Journal of American Studies 12 (1):26-46.
- Mead, E. n.d. The water resources of Mexico . Water Resources Archives, Elwood Mead Papers, Folder 8, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA.
- ---. 1899. Rise and future of irrigation in the United States. In The yearbook of the United States Department of Agriculture , ed. G. W. Hill, 591-612. Laramie, WY: American Heritage Center.
- ---. 1910. Letter of January 15, E. Mead to son, and T. Mead. Mead Collection, Box, Folder 2, American Heritage Center, Laramie, WY.
- ---. 1920. Helping men own farms . New York: Macmillan.
- ---. 1921. The Japanese land problem of California. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 93:51-55.
- ---. 1922. Letter of June 1, E. Mead to C. Colonel Cole (Punjab, India). Elwood Mead Papers C-B 1041 Carton 1, Bancroft Library , University of California, Berkeley.
- ---. 1926. What we have done in Haiti. The New Republic , November 17:378-79.
- Molle, F., P. P. Mollinga, and P. Wester. 2009. Hydraulic bureaucracies and the hydraulic mission: Flows of water, flows of power. Water Alternatives 293:328-49.
- Murdoch, W. [1923] 1999. Alfred Deakin: A sketch . Melbourne, Australia: Bookman Press.
- Nayak, A. 2006. After race: Ethnography, race, and postrace theory. Ethnic &amp; Racial Studies 29 (3):411-30.
- Paerregaard, K., A. B. Stensrud, and A. O. Andersen. 2016. Water citizenship: Negotiating water rights and contesting water culture in the Peruvian Andes. Latin American Research Review 51 (1):198-217.
- Palmer, L. 2015. Water politics and spiritual ecology: Custom, governance and development . London and New York: Routledge.
- Pisani, D. J. 2000. Beyond the hundredth meridian: Nationalizing the history of water in the United States. Environmental History 5 (4):466-82.
- Powell, J. M. 1982. Elwood Mead and the California state colonies: An episode in Australasian-American contact. Journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society 67 (4):328-53.
- ---. 1986. Mead, Elwood (1858-1936). Australian Dictionary of Biography, National Centre of Biography. Accessed April 3, 2017. http://adb.anu.edu.au/biogra phy/mead-elwood-7543/text13159.
- ---. 2002. Environment and institutions: Three episodes in Australian water management, 1880-2000. Journal of Historical Geography 28:100-14.
- Rankin, B. 2013. Alfred Deakin and water resources politics in Australia. History Australia 10:114-35.
- Rutherford, J. 1964. Interplay of American and Australian ideas for development of water projects in Northern Victoria. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 54 (1):88-106.
- Saldanha, A. 2006. Reontologising race: The machinic geography of phenotype. Environment &amp; Planning D 24:9-24.
- Schmidt, J. J., and C. Z. Peppard. 2014. Water ethics on a human-dominated planet: Rationality, context and values in global governance. WIREs Water 1:533-47.
- Shaw, W. S. 2006. Decolonizing geographies of whiteness. Antipode 38 (4):851-69.
- Smith, A. 2012. Indigeneity, settler colonialism, white supremacy. In Racial formation in the 21st century , ed. D. HoSang, O. LaBennett, and L. Pulido, 66-90. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Staeheli, L. A., D. J. Marshall, and N. Maynard. 2016. Circulations and entanglements of citizenship formation. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 106 (2):377-84.
- Steyn, M., and D. Conway. 2010. Introduction: Intersecting whiteness, interdisciplinary debates. Ethnicities 10 (3):283-91.
- Swyngedouw, E. 1999. Modernity and hybridity: Nature, regeneracionismo , and the production of the Spanish waterscape, 1890-1930. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 89:443-65.
- Tan, P. 2002. Legal issues relating to water use. In Property: Rights and responsibilities, current Australian thinking , ed. C. Mobbs and K. Moore, 13-42. Canberra, Australia: Land and Water Australia.
- Teisch, J. 2011. Engineering nature: Water, development, and the global spread of American environmental expertise . Durham: University of North Carolina Press.
- Turner, S., and T. Neale. 2015. First law and the force of water: Law, water, entitlement. Settler Colonial Studies 5 (4):1-11.
- Tyrell, I. 1999. True garden of the gods: Californian-Australian environmental reform, 1860-1930 . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Wolfe, P. 2006. Settler colonialism and the elimination of the Native. Journal of Genocide Research 8: 387-409.
- Worster, D. 1985. Rivers of empire: Water, aridity, and the growth of the American West . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Zwarteveen, M., and R. Boelens. 2014. Defining, researching and struggling for water justice: Some conceptual building blocks for research and action. Water International 39:143-58.

KATE A. BERRY is a Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557. E-mail: kberry@unr.edu. Her research interests include the analysis of water law and intergovernmental relations in water conflicts, cultural politics of water, Indigenous geographies, and identity studies.

SUE JACKSON is a Professor at the Australian Rivers Institute at Griffith University, Brisbane, Queensland 0411, Australia. E-mail: sue.jackson@griffith.edu.au. She is also an Honorary Fellow in the School of Geography at the University of Melbourne. Her research interests include environmental governance, particularly systems of water governance, customary Indigenous resource rights, and nature-society relations.