## SOCIAL CAPITAL, DEVELOPMENT, AND INDIGENOUS POLITICS IN ECUADORIAN AMAZONIA*

## THOMAS PERREAULT

ABSTRACT. This article examines  the formation  of social capital4efined  as the norms of trust  and reciprocity  integral  to social  relations-and the ways  in  which  it  may  help  rural people's organizations gain  access to rights  and resources.  The formation  of  social  capital must be viewed within the context of the symbolic systems, or cultural capital, that  imbues social relations  with  meaning.  The concept  of social capital provides  a valuable conceptual framework for analyzing the multiscale processes of environmental management, rural development, and resource  conflicts  with  which  many rural social movements are involved. The role played by social capital is illustrated  through a detailed case study of an indigenous political  and cultural organization in the Ecuadorian  Amazon. The organizational  history of a lowland Quichua federation and the successes and problems it has had in managing development projects  and achieving  political  objectives  provide  insight  into the  importance of social capital in the development  of the region. Keywords: cultural capital, development, Ecuador, indigenous  organizations, social capital.

7 n August 1998 the recently elected leaders of the Federation of Indigenous Organizations of Nap0 ( FOIN) gathered  in the center of the Amazonian  town of Tena, Ecuador  to take their oaths of  office. They sat on a stage overlooking the town's central  square, joined by representatives of the provincial and municipal governments, political  parties, other indigenous federations, the Josephine mission, and the mayor of  the nearby town of Archidona, himself  a former FOIN president. As they  do for every inauguration,  federation  leaders shared their stage with  representatives of the institutions of local and regional power-those institutions  most directly  responsible  for the historical  marginalization  of  Ecuador's  indigenous peoples. The square they shared is commonly used for parades, concerts, and political  speeches  and as a public  gathering place by the town's populace.  That the federation  inaugurated  its new leaders  in this very public  space, with  the visible support of state authorities, illustrates the web of relations that FOIN has fostered and the degree to which, by virtue of these relations, it has become a  significant actor in regional  politics.

This article examines the ability of indigenous federations such as FOIN to foster interorganizational  relationships and to mobilize the social capital-that is, the relations of trust and reciprocity-that inheres in them. I argue that this social capital is embedded within and given meaning through the constellation of shared understandings, or cultural capital, of which it is a part. If we are to understand how social capital is formed, we must examine the symbolic context and systems of meaning

' This research was supported by a Fulbright-IIE  grant and an Inter-American  Foundation Doctoral Fellowship. Many thanks are owed to the personnel of  the Federation of Indigenous Organizations of Napo for their patient assistance and to the anonymous reviewers, whose comments substantially improved  the article.

%CJ DR. PERREAULT is an assistant professor of geography at Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York 13244-1020.

within which it functions. I therefore consider the formation  of social capital through FOIN'S organizing activities and explore the ways in which social capital has facilitated  the federation's ability to access resources and make political claims against the state. The concept of social capital, viewed within a context of symbolic meanings, provides  a valuable conceptual  framework for analyzing the multiscale  processes of environmental management, rural development,  and resource conflicts with which many rural social movements are engaged.

After an initial discussion of social and cultural capital, I  maintain that the ability of social movement organizations to access and manage natural resources is to a large extent  a  function of  the movement's  social relationships.  Analysis of those relationships, and the multiscalar (frequently transnational) networks of which they are a part, can help geographers understand the capabilities and limitations of rural peoples' organizations. This article probes the organizational history of FOIN, emphasizing the institutional  relationships it has forged over time, shows how these connections have enabled  the federation  to gain  access to resources  and political rights,  and outlines the federation's role  in  constructing the symbolic  meanings within which its social relations and material practices must be understood.'

## SOCIAL CAPITAL AND SYMBOLIC MEANING

In  the decade since the publication  of  Robert  Putnam's Making Deniocrucy Work (1993), adoption of the concept of social capital has outpaced agreement regarding its definition  (Bebbington and Perreault 1999). Indeed, John Harriss and Paolo De Renzio (1997) identify six distinct  uses of the term, highlighting the confusion  in the idea and its application. Within  sociology, where the term was developed  by Pierre Bourdieu (1977,  1984) and James  Coleman (1990)~ social capital has retained a focus on individual benefits and microscale social relations.  In this sense, social capital may best  be defined  as 'the ability  [of individuals] to secure resources by virtue  of  membership in social  networks  or larger social  structures' (Portes and Landolt 2000,532). As the concept diffused beyond sociology-most notably through the work of Putnam-its focus shifted away from individual actions and benefits to the collective spread of effects through society (DeFilippis 2002). Defined by Putnam (1993,167) as the 'norms of reciprocity  and networks of civic engagement' inherent in social organization, social capital has been widely adopted by development theorists as a framework for analyzing the functional value of social relations and organizational networks, as well as their influence on economic outcomes and state accountability.  In  particular, social capital  is used  to examine  interactions  among civil society actors, the state, and the market and to explain how civic engagement may lead to better-functioning markets and improved governance.

Contributing  both to the  widespread acceptance of social capital by some  scholars and to its outright rejection by others was the rapidity with which the notion was adopted by the World Bank, which has described the concept as possibly the 'missing link' of development  (Seregeldin and Steer 1994; Fox 1997; World  Bank 2001). Together with the functionalist aspects of the  notion common in the  work of Putnam,

this fact has put off many scholars who are otherwise concerned with social movements, local empowerment, democratization, and governance (for example, Fine 1999). Thorough critiques of  social capital and the work of Putnam are presented elsewhere (Harriss and De Renzio 1997; Foley and Edwards 1999; Portes and Landolt 2000; Fine 2001). Here I highlight some of the limitations and strengths of the social capital concept as an analytical framework for examining environmental struggles and indigenous politics. Social capital is a useful tool in analyzing the specific ways in which rural peoples'  organizations engage in diverse,  overlapping, and multiscaled sets of  relationships  with  the state, nongovernmental  organizations ( NGOS), and other actors engaged in regional development. It thus provides a conceptual framework  for scholars who are concerned with  the ability of  marginalized  groups  to manage resources and access markets, activities that inevitably require engagement with a variety of social networks operating at multiple scales.

Such a view must account for the power relations within which social networks are embedded, a perspective generally absent from much of the social capital literature (Mohan and Mohan 2002). Neither Putnam nor most of those who followed him successfully link the idea of social capital to political economy, class structures, or ideologies of gender  or ethnicity. As a  result,  discussions of  development  that incorporate social capital are frequently  devoid  of  political  content or consideration of inequitable power relations (Fine 1999). A notable exception is the work of Jonathan  Fox (1996), who analyzes differential power relations and the distinct roles of repressive state regimes and progressive state reformers in influencing the political  construction of  social capital.  Fox's  analysis  illuminates  historical  processes whereby collective actions are constituted and transformed, reveals the social context  within  which  these  activities take  shape, and elucidates  the  power  relations through which they are constrained. This view points to the need to look closely at particular  histories of organizational  formation  in order to examine how specific networks have been constructed over time and the role that external actors play in this process.

## CULTURAL CAPITAL AND THE PRODUCTION OF MEANING

What is required is a more historically and politically complex view of social capital and of the actors and organizations that strive to possess it. Attention must be paid not  only to forms of social mobilization  but also to the cultural contexts within which such mobilization takes place. Social capital, as the bonds of trust and mutual obligation fostered within social networks, is not distributed equally in society, or even among particular social groups. The ability of an individual to acquire and draw on social capital is contingent upon the quantity and quality of social relations  slhe has. This capability also depends  on the  individual's command of  the shared symbolic repertory used to gain what Bourdieu (1977,1984) identifies as cultural capital: shared understandings of the symbolism in discourse, images, goods, or actions that can be transformed  into other forms of capital, symbolic or otherwise. For Bourdieu, cultural capital resides in particular, hierarchical forms of knowl-

edge and symbolic  meanings. The mastery of this knowledge  (re)produces  social distinction  and class status. Social capital has value only within  a given sociocultural milieu, beyond which its worth diminishes or is lost altogether. The ability to accumulate or draw on social capital implies an overlapping (though not necessarily identical) understanding of  cultural meanings and values that provides  a context for social relations.

Drawing on Bourdieu's discussions of symbolic or cultural capital, Patricia Fernindez Kelly (1994) argues that  the  repertory of symbolic  meanings  and cultural understandings shared by members of any group are contingent outcomes of the group's social capital. This interaction  is  made more explicit through a consideration of the role that identity plays in forming and reinforcing social capital. As she states: 'Social capital depends on processes of identity formation through norms of exclusion and inclusion. More often than not, membership in a social network occurs on the basis of  ascriptive criteria  related  to ethnicity, race, gender,  national background  and  social class' (p. 97). In this way the historical  nature  of  identity formation  contributes  not only to the heterogeneity  with  which  social capital is distributed  through  society but  also to the fact that  the  formation  and utility of social capital depends on the cultural meanings attributed to social relations by a group's members. If  cultural capital is derived from the functioning of social capital, then  social capital is given meaning through the workings of cultural capital.

Moreover, the concept  of social capital should be attentive to  the spatial and scalar aspects of social relationships, which inform cultural understanding and symbolic systems (Bebbington 2000). Social capital, as a function of social relations, is necessarily embedded within space and place. Consequently, not only is it important to seek generalizations about the formation of social capital, but the specificity of place must be recognized. For example, spatial variation in natural-resource endowments, coupled with  social variation  in resource  access, inevitably  affects the formation of social capital among rural peoples' organizations (Perreault, Bebbington, and Carroll 1998). Thus the contingent nature of space and place shape and are in turn (re)produced  by social practice, including the relations in which social capital resides.

These questions are central to the concerns of political ecology. A growing number of political  ecologists are focusing their  attention on the organizational  practices  and  political  struggles  of  environmental social  movements  (Rangan 1996; Escobar 1998; Sundberg 1998; McCarthy 2001). This focus is central in the development literature as well, for both neoliberal discourse and radical critiques 'look to civil society, participation, and ordinary people for their development vision for the next millennium,' though for widely divergent ends (Peet and Watts 1996, 26; emphasis  in  the original). As Anthony Bebbington (2002) notes, social relations  are resources that  can facilitate access to other resources, but these relationships map neither  easily nor automatically  onto an actor's ethnicity, class, gender, or other social identity. A social capital framework that  is attentive to the cultural embeddedness of social relations may therefore be useful in analyzing the ways in which

FIG.  +The three regions of Ecuador, with the Amazonian provinces  named. Until  recently, Nap0 Province included the territory that is now the provinces  of Sucumbios and Orellana. (Cartography by Joseph Stoll, Department of Geography, Syracuse University)

<!-- image -->

social-movement organizations  mediate  resource access and environmental management, as well as the very real limitations that such organizations confront.

## REG  I ONAL TRANSFORM AT ION AND I N DIG  ENO u s M  o B I LIZAT  I o N

Ecuadorian Amazonia, also known as the Oriente, has undergone significant social and environmental transformations in recent decades. Situated at the eastern base of the Andes Mountains, where the foothills flatten  into the green expanse of  the Amazon Basin (Figure I), the Oriente has long been  considered a frontier  region where state-sponsored colonization, oil extraction, and commercial agriculture have

clashed  with  the resource  uses  and territorial claims  of the region's  indigenous peoples. The upper Nap0 River basin-the region of concern for this articleis  dominated by rolling hills covered with humid premontane forest and, farther east, lowland tropical rain forests. The landscape descends steeply from the Andean chain at more than 4,000 meters above sea level to the Nap0 River, which is at just under 500 meters  near the town of Tena  (Figures 2 and 3). Average temperatures vary with altitude, ranging from 16 O C to 25°C; rainfall  varies between 3,500 and 6,000 millimeters annually  (Unupi and others 1993). The region  is drained by the northern tributaries  of  the Amazon  River, the most important of which  is the Nap0 River, which  provides  both sustenance  and transportation  for the indigenous  Quichua and mestizo' colonist communities that line its banks.

Families in those communities make their living by fishing and ferrying goods and people along the river. Quichua families maintain household gardens in which they cultivate  the staples manioc (Manihot esculenta) and plantain (Musa spp.), together with  a large variety of other crops (Whitten 1976; Perreault 2000). Away from the rivers, among the forested hills, Quichua and mestizo families engage in a variety of market-oriented  activities, including cattle raising, wage labor, and cultivation of coffee, cacao, and naranjilla (Solanurn quitoense), a fruit popularly  used for juices in Ecuador and Colombia. Subsistence hunting and fishing have diminished in importance over the past thirty years as a result of both declining stocks of fish and game and increasing reliance on the cash economy (Macdonald 1992).

Quichua communities  in Nap0 Province were among  the first indigenous peoples of the Oriente to feel the impact of widespread colonization and oil exploration in the 1960s and 1970s. Ecuador's agrarian reform laws of 1964 and 1973 promoted colonization of  the sparsely populated  Amazonian  lowlands as a solution  to land conflicts in the highlands. Similarly, the 1967 discovery of oil in the country's northeast, and the ensuing road  construction, opened the region  to colonization  and resource  exploitation  (Muratorio 1991; Brown  and others 1992). These processes put intense pressure on the lands and resources of Amazonian indigenous communities.  Pressure was exacerbated by the military government's agrarian reform legislation,  which  declared  noncultivated areas  (including forested  lands used  for hunting and gathering) to be 'fallow lands.' As a consequence, among FOIN'S earliest and longest-lasting projects were helping indigenous communities obtain clear title to  their  land  claims and protecting  them  from settlement by colonists, commercial interests, or the military (Perreault 2001). In the late 1960s and early i97os, in response to incursions by colonists and oil companies, indigenous peoples in the Oriente began  to mobilize in defense of their territorial  claims, natural resources, and basic civil and human rights.

Indigenous organizations operating at various spatial scales from community, provincial, and regional to national have worked to gain legal recognition  for communal land claims and ethnic territories (Whitten 1981; CONAIE 1989). The first indigenous organization to form in  the Oriente was the Shuar Federation,  which, with the support of Salesian missionaries, organized  in 1964 to defend Shuar land

FIG.  2-Tena, the capital and commercial center of Ecuador's Nap0 Province, is home to the offices of the Federation of Indigenous Organizations of Napo. (Photograph by the author, January 2001)

<!-- image -->

claims and promote rural development (Salazar 1981; Rubenstein 20 0 1 ) . The ensuing decades saw the formation of  numerous other community- and provinciallevel organizations,  along with the emergence in 1980 of a regional  confederation linking all organizations in the Oriente (CONAIE 1989). FOIN, based in the town of Tena, has a membership of nearly 170 community-level organizations. Since its inception in 1969,  the federation has worked to secure community lands and improve agricultural  production,  infrastructure, health care, and education for its member communities. Although FOIN has been  concerned with  the  material  welfare and livelihoods  of  its  members, these cannot be separated  from contested  notions  of indigenous identity and its connection to territory. The social capital that inheres in FOIN'S network, formed through more than thirty years of social organizing, must be understood  within  the context  of  cultural  politics;  that  is, contestations  over material  practices and their associated  symbolic  meanings  (Escobar 1998; Moore 1999)-

Although FOIN has succeeded in building and strengthening a large network of organizational  relations  that connects Quichua  communities, state agencies, and international NGOS, the social capital formed through these networks is distributed unevenly through society and across space. Traditionally, FoiN has been dominated by a relatively small group of urban and semiurban men. Social access to these men, and therefore to the federation, varies with  gender, linguistic ability, and place of residence. For instance, women-particularly rural women who are less accustomed to town life-are less likely than are men to seek assistance from FOIN representa-

FIG.  3-Indigenous community lands near Tena, Ecuador. Note the forested hills and cleared cattle pastures. (Photograph by the author, January 2001)

<!-- image -->

tives in the federation's Tena offices.  In a survey I conducted of seventy-four Quichua visitors to FOIN'S Tena offices, only sixteen (21 percent) were women. This gendered difference is compounded by limited linguistic ability,  because monolingual Quichua speakers, more common among rural residents, older generations, and women, have less access to FOIN than do Spanish speakers. FOIN's lingua franca is Spanish, despite the fact that virtually all of the FOIN leaders speak Quichua, often as their first language. FOIN records are kept in Spanish, and most meetings are conducted in Spanish (often with Quichua as a secondary language). In the federation's offices, I once witnessed FOIN leaders mocking a pair of monolingual Quichua speakers, referring to them in Spanish as ignorant country  bumpkins, even as they sat a few feet away.

Access to the federation is also spatially uneven. In my survey, 68.2 percent of all respondents, and 83 . 3 percent of women, traveled less than 20 kilometers to FOIN'S offices.' Proximity to the offices improves access to the federation, but so do social relations  and organizational capacity. For instance, communities belonging to the Rucullacta  agricultural cooperative, 12 kilometers north of Tena, have historically enjoyed disproportionate influence over the federation. This is partly a function of the cooperative's proximity to the federation's headquarters, but it is also a product of its size and organizational capacity, as well as its ability to attract its own NGO funding. Indeed,  at various  times  the cooperative's leadership  has threatened to split  with FOIN and form its own federation in order to promote its agenda. By comparison, residents of more distant and isolated rural communities-those most

in need  of FOIN'S support-find it  more difficult to influence the federation, both logistically and socially. Ironically, then, those who possess the most 'indigenous' characteristics-poor, rural, monolingual Quichua speakers-have the least  access to FOIN and the benefits from the social capital fostered through its relational  networks.

## FOIN  IN  THE 1970s: ORIGINS AND CONSOLIDATION

FOIN's origins date to early 1969, just  two years after the discovery of oil in the eastern  Oriente, when  a Committee for the Campesino Federation  of  Nap0 was formed.' The committee received guidance from the Ecuadorian Center for ClassBased Organizations (CEDOC) and the National  Federation  of Campesino Organizations ( FENOC), both state-sanctioned syndicalist organizations. Corporatist organizing of this sort, common throughout Latin America during the i95os, 1960s and i97os, guaranteed certain social benefits to popular sectors, with the condition that they organize according to state-approved  models (Yashar 1998, 1999). The committee  was  responsible  for  managing the organizational  activities  of  the peasant farmers in Nap0 Province. It was from this committee that the Provincial Federation of  Peasant Organizations of  Nap0 ( FEPOCAN) emerged later that year.

In the early 1970s FEPOCAN was occupied with three overriding concerns: legalizing indigenous land claims, which were threatened by colonization and economic activity;  recruiting  community-based organizations;  and defending the civil and human rights of indigenous peoples in Nap0 Province. During this time the federation received  financial assistance from CEDOC and FENOC to cover administrative costs and managed a number of rural development projects with funding from the Ecuadorian Center for Agricultural  Services ( CESA, affiliated with CEDOC), the Ecuadorian Fund for Popular Progress ( FEPP, associated with the Catholic Church), and the Shuar Federation, based  in  the town of  Sucua, in the southern Oriente. These projects primarily involved the production and marketing of cacao and  coffee, as well as some small-scale infrastructure  and service projects such as the construction and staffing of health clinics and schools and the provision  of basic water and electricity service. Since its inception FEPOCAN has been linked to networks involving relationships with state agencies and advocacy groups. Its activities, promoted by these organizations, helped  to consolidate the presence of indigenous communities in both the physical and institutional  landscapes.

Although it was sanctioned by the national government, the formation of politicized  campesino organizations composed  chiefly of  the marginalized indigenous population was perceived  as a threat by both state officials and large landowners. FEPOCAN's archives from the early 1970s contain numerous documents denouncing  beatings, false imprisonment,  threats, nonpayment of wages, and other abuses suffered by indigenous people at the hands of the police, military, or members of the ruling class (Muratorio 1991). Federation  leaders wrote letters to the mayor of Tena and the governor of Nap0 Province detailing  and denouncing these abuses and,  working with lawyers, sought compensation through the courts.  These

relationships  with sympathetic attorneys and state officials were crucial to FEPOCAN'S early  efforts to  establish  itself  as an advocate  for  the region's  indigenous peoples.

Recognizing that its concerns, and those of its members, were not identical with the concerns of mestizo campesinos and colonists, FEPOCAN sought to establish its own organizational identity and address problems unique to Amazonian indigenous peoples. By  1973 FEPOCAN documents began  referring to the federation as 'FOIN,' thus explicitly identifying itself as an ethnically based, rather than class-based, federation. In this way, the federation sought to shift the symbolism of its image and discourse, responding to and strengthening Ecuador's emerging indigenous rights movement. Despite these shifts in orientation, the federation maintained its close relationship with FENOC and CEDOC throughout the 1970s and expressed its solidarity with working-class struggles, while simultaneously seeking to construct an identity for itself as a representative of indigenous interests in the region.

During this time the federation was  involved  in  a  number  of  development projects aimed at improving agricultural production and marketing opportunities for members of its base communities. Of  primary importance, FOIN worked with the state land-titling  agency, the Institute  for Agrarian  Reform  and Colonization ( I E R A C ) , to obtain legal title for lands claimed by its member communities. FOIN worked  as a liaison between IERAC and Quichua communities, helping to set up meetings, provide technical assistance, and facilitate the long and complex process of land titling. At the same time, the federation broadened its institutional contacts, both nationally and internationally.  FOIN sought support for agricultural projects from a number of external sources, including the National Development Bank and the Ministry of Agriculture  and Livestock. In  1975 FOIN'S agricultural  production and commercialization efforts began receiving assistance from Bread for the World, a Protestant Church-affiliated international  aid program based in Germany. FOIN managed local operations of these projects, transporting goods and personnel, providing technical and administrative assistance, and serving as a liaison between local  communities and the national project  offices  in  Quito. The federation also organized  workshops and classes aimed at skills training, consciousness  raising, formation of cooperatives,  and rural development  planning (Figure 4). Thus, by mid-decade, the federation  had  forged  relations  with  state agencies  and national and international  development  agencies by mediating relations  between  these organizations and its member communities.

In spite of its organizational success during this period, the federation suffered a number of  setbacks owing to administrative problems. Archival documents point to occasional mismanagement of funds and associated problems with development projects.  Such problems  frequently led  to tensions between FOIN and its funding agencies, some of which, including FEPP, severed their relationship with the federation altogether. The federation's role in funding and managing community development projects has at times led to semiclientilistic relations with its constituents. In many cases, community members came to resent what they perceived as FOIN'S

FIG. 4-The 1yy8  congress of the Federation of Indigenous Organizations of Napo. Annual meetings  such  as this one bring together representatives from  the federation's leadership  and member communities. Representatives of state agencies or nongovernmental organizations with which  the federation coordinates are also frequently present. (Photograph by the author, August 1998)

<!-- image -->

failure to meet their expectations for a development project, regardless of whether those expectations matched those of the federation. This has led some communities to lose interest in the federation or to end their affiliation with it.

Throughout its history, the federation has had to manage multiple sets of relations, most notably with its member communities, funding agencies, and the state. FOIN fostered relationships with its base communities through political advocacy, the administration  of development  projects  (especially in the areas of  agricultural production,  resource  management, health, and education), and the promotion of political  and class consciousness.  As  a result  of its organizing efforts, and despite some problems administering projects and managing funds, the federation's base grew from just seven communities close to Tena in 1969  to some seventy-four community-based  organizations throughout the province by the end of FOIN'S first decade.  At the same  time, it forged connections with a variety of organizations operating at the national  and international scales, including state agencies, class-based organizations, Ecuadorian NGOS, and an international church-based organization. Collectively these relationships laid a foundation of organizational capacity, legitimacy, and political purpose that allowed the federation to expand both its base of support and its network of organizational affiliations.

## NGOS,  ENVIRONMENTALISM,  AND  INDIGENOUS  DISCOURSE

During the 1980s the focus of  Ecuador's  indigenous  organizations  began  to shift from an emphasis on syndicalist models of organization and modernizing development to more explicitly indigenist  politics.  This shift can be traced to a variety of influences, both internal and external to the federation. One crucial factor was the end of the military government, which stepped down and allowed democratic elections in 1979. The newly elected civilian government established an Office of Indigenous  Affairs  which, though hampered by limited authority and funding,  was staffed by social scientists who maintained contact  with indigenous organizations and supported indigenous rights (Macdonald 1999). The Office of Indigenous Affairs  worked with the Central Bank's Fund for the Development of Marginal Rural Areas ( FODERUMA), established in the late i97os, to direct grants and low-interest loans to indigenous communities for agricultural development. Contacts such as these with state actors sympathetic to indigenous rights allowed FOIN to gain access to institutional resources and channels of power, while simultaneously legitimating their political claims.

A  crucial  factor influencing FOIN during the 1980s was the formation of new regional-  and national-level  indigenous  organizations. These include the Organization of Indigenous Peoples of Pastaza ( O P I P ) , formed in 1979 (Sawyer 1997;  CONAIE 1989). Together, FOIN and OPIP leaders organized the First Regional Congress of the Indigenous Organizations of the Ecuadorian Amazon in 1980. It was from this congress that  the Confederation  of  Indigenous  Nationalities  of  the Ecuadorian Amazon ( CONFENIAE) emerged. CONFENIAE has taken a leading role in promoting indigenous territorial rights and political autonomy in the Oriente.  In 1980 it helped organize a national  indigenous confederation, which  in 1986 became the Confederation of  Indigenous Nationalities  of Ecuador (CONAIE), the most influential indigenous organization in  the country-and perhaps in Latin  America. CONAIE'S language and objectives are explicitly political  and represent  a clear effort  on the part of indigenous  leaders in Ecuador to move away from a corporatist  model of organizing toward one based on indigenous nationalities. In linking material, economic objectives  (such as the financing  and management of land adjudication, health, education,  and housing projects) with symbolic, cultural objectives (for instance, the valorization  of  language, customs, and lifeways), CONAIE, CONFENIAE, FOIN, and OPIP helped  shape political debate in Ecuador. They accomplished this result by challenging official state conceptions of citizenship and the nation and by opening the way for debates over indigenous  political  and territorial  rights  that were to dominate indigenous discourse in coming years.

FOIN leaders were active in organizational activities in the Oriente  and the highlands and maintained contacts with indigenous groups elsewhere in Latin America throughout this period. Such contacts not only broadened  and deepened the federation's network of organizational relationships but also, no doubt, helped foster a sense of solidarity and shared identity among these groups. A broad diversity of locally based indigenous organizations emerged in Nap0 Province and through-

out the country during the 1980s,  reflecting the growing confidence and capacity of Quichua  leaders. These organizations  included carpentry cooperatives, music and dance groups, women's groups, and youth groups, as well as new federations that sought to compete with  FOIN  for project  funds and the allegiance of  indigenous communities. FOIN  remained  the predominant federation  in  the region, but the formation of competing federations, including one for Evangelical Christian communities, led to occasionally bitter disputes, as communities shifted their membership from one federation to another in response to the availability of project funds.

In the 1980s the federation's image as a defender of Quichua resources and culture was of central importance in attracting funding agencies, and project agendas came increasingly to reflect international concern for environmental conservation and indigenous rights. Such concerns underlay projects that FOIN  administered  for Oxfam, Cultural Survival, and the World Wildlife Fund  (WWF). The development agenda promoted by these organizations drew heavily on transnational discourses of environmentalism and human rights that connect indigenous peoples and tropical rainforests  (Conklin and Graham 1995; Rogers 1996; Sawyer 1997). Environmentalist  imagery of indigenous peoples as the natural  caretakers of tropical forests were used by FOIN to legitimate Quichua resource claims and political rights. Moreover, the increasingly  transnational character of FOIN'S organizational relationships helped shape political discussion within  Ecuador regarding issues of territory, citizenship rights, and development  (Hyden 1997).  Consequently, the social and cultural capital produced and mobilized by  FOIN during this period  reflected  these ideological and organizational  shifts.

An example of this is the federation's Program for the Use and Management of Natural  Resources ( PUMAREN)  project, initiated  in  1988 and funded primarily  by the US-based NGOS Cultural Survival and WWF, with technical assistance provided by an organization  of Panama's Kuna indigenous  people. The aim of this project was to assist communities in gaining title to their land and to promote sustainable resource  management and community-based forestry. PUMAREN  successfully obtained legal title for  nearly all of  the communities in  the project  area but was markedly less successful in promoting sustainable income generation. Within a year the project  had become  a large, important, and at times problematic  focus of the federation. It had its own directorship and field staff, as well as a budget that was a source of envy and resentment for some of  FOIN'S leaders who were not involved with the project. By 1989, staff members complained of not receiving their salaries, a problem at least partly the result of diversion of PUMAREN funds to other federation priorities, such  as administrative costs and office equipment (Macdonald  1999). FOIN's waning interest in the day-to-day management of the project and PUMAREN'S diversion  of funds to other priorities had the effect  of  slowing the work and discouraging the staff. Although PUMAREN lasted until 1997,  and despite some organizational successes, the project ended with dissension among participating communities, project  staff, and FOIN. Cultural Survival withdrew from the project  in  1994 (owing to unforseen  internal funding cutbacks), followed  by  WWF'S  planned de-

parture in 1 9 9 6 , amid frustration with  the project's chronic  administrative  problems, as well as the growing frustration of many base Communities involved with it. In 1 9 9 7 the FOIN leadership forced the last director of PUMAREN to resign, signaling the project's end.

PUMAREN  exemplifies  the symbolic significance ascribed to development projects. FOIN valued the project  for its role in attracting funds, training, and resources for the federation, in enhancing the international  image of the federation (in particular its environmental credentials as the administrator of a resource management and sustainable development project),  and in maintaining the federation's legitimacy vis-A-vis its base communities.  At the same time, FOIN viewed the project as being from another era, one that placed emphasis on demonstrating land rights through occupation and use, rather than the more politically  current notions of legitimizing  ethnic territories  (Macdonald 1 9 9 9 ) . As  demonstrated by the decline and ultimate  collapse  of  the project, the success of I WMAREN was less important than what  it  represented  for FOIN: a source of  status, legitimacy, and influence. In the context of development organizations and indigenous politics, the project was a valuable  source of  cultural  capital. This  is not to argue  that the project  failed  to achieve  its stated  goals. Project  personnel  were  able to help  several communities gain land title and had some success in promoting forestry as an alternative source of income. This case does demonstrate, however, how FOIN'S development projects can become imbued with a symbolic quality quite apart from the projects' material effects and how the federation's  objectives are often  divergent  from those  of  the community members who are the intended beneficiaries of those efforts.

For FOIN, the decade of the 1980s was a period of political change, during which the federation's discursive orientation shifted from a class-based, corporatist model to one rooted in ethnic identity and indigenous nationalities. Its organizational relations became  more diversified and more transnational, contributing to the federation's visibility and prestige as an administrator of development projects among its member communities. Crucially, the federation's ability to attract international funding and technical support rested largely on its image as an indigenous organization  and  its  role  in  sustainable development.  That is, FOIN'S success depended largely on its ability to link ethnicity with nature. With its expanded role in community development, from agricultural projects  to education, health  care, and infrastructure, the federation's role became  immensely  more complicated-and more difficult to evaluate. As a result, FOIN experienced numerous problems in administering projects, as exemplified by the collapse of PUMAREN. In spite of these difficulties, the federation  continued to grow (to some 114 communities by the decade's end), and it remained a prominent part of the increasingly visible national  indigenous movement.

## THE RISE OF  PLURINATIONALISM

FOIN's changing priorities  during the late 1 9 8 0 s and early 1990s reflects broader shifts in the focus of indigenous politics at the regional and national scales. In re-

sponse to the growing threat of oil development on indigenous lands, CONFENIAE mounted a campaign to defend the territory  of  the  Huaorani  people, the indigenous group least integrated  into Ecuadorian  national  society (CONFENIAE 1988). As part of this effort, teams representing FOIN and OPIP began to demarcate Huaorani territorial claims in the eastern Oriente by cutting a 600-kilometer perimeter through the rain forest. Although the task was never fully completed, it did much to render visible (both literally and figuratively) indigenous territorial claims in the Amazon. Following this process, FOIN, and more particularly OPIP, began  to define its own territorial  claims (Macdonald 1999).  Within indigenous politics in Ecuador, political claims to indigenous space as cohesive ethnic territories belonging  to  indigenous nationalities, as opposed to diverse and disconnected community land claims, was associated with a change in political direction and claims on the part of indigenous organizations  throughout the country during the 1990s. This shift was related  to increasing recognition  of  indigenous  rights  internationally, including  the International Labor Organization's adoption in 1989 of Convention 169  on the Rights of Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries and the United Nation's International Year  (and then Decade) of Indigenous People, declared in December 1992 (Nelson 1999; Brysk 2000). In Ecuador, as throughout much of Latin America, these events helped to stimulate and lend political legitimacy to mobilization around expanded  rights for indigenous peoples.

In  1994, FOIN leaders were invited  to Quito to help  organize  the  Pachakutik Movement of Plurinational Unity (hereafter referred to as 'Pachakutik'), a political movement that seeks to represent the interests of indigenous peoples and, to a lesser extent, Afroecuadorians, workers, and labor.'  One of  Pachakutik's primary social and political platforms is its call for a 'plurinational' state that would recognize Ecuador's various indigenous ethnic groups as nationalities, with distinct territorial rights and a degree of political autonomy. During  the national constitutional assembly in 1997-1998,  Pachakutik campaigned  for the incorporation  of  the concept of plurinationalism into the new constitution. Although the new constitution grants indigenous groups collective rights to lands and certain resources and recognizes Ecuador as a 'pluricultural and multiethnic' society, it stops short of adopting the language  of  plurinationalism. The notion was considered  too divisive by many in Ecuador, particularly among the political and economic elite, who feared that  it would lead to bitter  territorial  disputes and the possible dissolution  of the nation  (Nelson 1999). Nevertheless, Pachakutik and CONAIE succeeded in inserting the concept into national debate, and it remains a central element of CONAIE'S discourse and political  projects (CONAIE 2001). One of the federation's leaders, who wished to remain anonymous, talked to me about the shift within FOIN toward the discourse  and politics  of  plurinationalism  and ethnic territories:  '[Territory] is important for maintaining  our ancestral  customs. And  therefore  we  defend  our territory so as not to be manipulated by other political interests, or by colonists, or any other group of people  that  can damage the organization.  For that  reason  we have to be united .  .  . to defend ancestral customs and defend the territories, and

maintain our own politics.' This statement connects understandings of nationality, territory, culture, and political autonomy, a conceptual linkage central to the political debate over ethnic territories and indigenous nationalities.

By the late iggos, FOIN  priorities  clearly began  to reflect  national  indigenous politics, which it helped to shape. As a result, some community members expressed resentment at what they perceived as an emerging federation elite, more concerned with national politics than with local development needs. Interviews I conducted in 1998 indicated that residents of communities affiliated with FOIN have positive opinions of the federation in the abstract. That is, when initially asked their opinion of the federation, residents almost always responded by saying that FOIN helps indigenous communities. 'It is our mother,' responded one man. However, when asked to specify ways in which  FOIN  had benefited indigenous peoples, residents became more critical, and many of  them asserted that the federation had not helped them in  any way.  Thus FOIN'S relations  with  community members are complicated by differing expectations and contradictions  between the benefits that are abstract and symbolic and those that are immediate and material (Perreault 2000, 2001).

During the decade the focus of FOIN'S projects shifted from land titling to sustainable  development and environmental management. The federation  signed a final agreement  with  IERAC for the demarcation and adjudication  of community lands in 1990. It also administered a number of community development projects, one of the longest-standing of which was an integrated health program funded by a number of national and international donors including UNICEF, the Swiss Red Cross, the Spanish NGO Medicus Mundi, and the provincial health directorate. Other notable activities included a marketing  project  for naranjilla,  manioc, and plantain, funded by  the Italian  NGO  Terra  Nuova,  as well  as a women's group funded by SWISSAID.  Additionally, FOIN coordinated  environmental  conservation projects with the Ecuadorian NGOS PROBONA and Sinchi Sacha. For these projects, the federation played a largely administrative role, acting as an intermediary between local communities and national and international project staff. It also provided technical and logistical assistance and facilitated community-based educational and organizational workshops.  FOIN's membership continued to grow, and by 1999 it comprised 169 community organizations. By the end of the decade FOIN'S use of symbols reflected the political turn taken by Ecuador's indigenous movement. This was evident in the federation's 1998 decision to change its name to the Federation of Organizations of the  Kichwa  Nationality of  Nap0  (FONAKIN).' The name change reflects  the federation's effort to construct and legitimate a Quichua (Kichwa) nationality, spatially rooted in ethnic territory. Far from being at odds with FOIN'S role as a modernizing organization, its cultural politics  and its appeal to the discourse of plurinationalism  are fundamental to it.

## THE  SYMBOLIC CAPITAL OF DEVELOPMENT

FOIN mediates relations between Quichua communities and the political and economic institutions  of the broader national society. As such, the federation facilitates

the transitional process of cultural articulation,  both on the collective scale and the individual  scale. Many of FOIN'S leaders have  left the federation  to pursue more powerful  and prestigious positions with  indigenous  confederations, development agencies, or the state, both as elected officials and as bureaucrats. For these leaders, association  with FOIN bestows cultural  and political currency and facilitates their involvement with national or international  development  organizations  concerned with what the  World Bank terms  'ethnodevelopment' (Uquillas  and Aparicio Gabara 2000; Radcliffe 2001). FOIN's role is one of modernizer, mediating for its members the process of transition toward full citizenship in the nation (Radcliffe 1996; Radcliffe and Westwood 1996).

In  this  context  the development project, as a nexus of institutional linkages, power relations, and economic integration, is ascribed with symbolic meaning and becomes a source of cultural  ~apital.~ The development  project, abstracted  from intended  material benefits, becomes a source of status, social differentiation, and access to resources (institutional  contacts, training,  money, and social mobility) that otherwise are unavailable  (Ferguson 1990; Perreault 2003). In  many instances it is the ability  to secure development projects,  and the cultural capital  attached to them-and not the projects' final outcome-that becomes most important. This is true on an individual scale, as the cultural  capital of  those involved with FOIN increases through contact with and participation  in development projects, as well as on an organizational scale, as the federation's status is enhanced through the management  of  these  projects.  This  has contributed to numerous problems,  as  illustrated by the case of PUMAREN, in which the federation placed greater emphasis on the symbolic capital  contained in capturing highly visible  (and internationally funded) development projects than on their day-to-day management or their longterm success.

Central to FOIN'S ability to work with funding agencies and administer development projects  has been its status as a state-sanctioned, modern organization.  Not only is this the sine qua non for receiving legal recognition  and state development funds, but the federation's acknowledged role as cultural intermediary makes possible its political legitimacy among member communities. But the symbols mobilized by the federation  in order to attract development  projects and legitimate  its political claims have shifted over time. Although the federation's role as a mediator of development is still fundamental,  this role has come to be seen through the optic of traditional Quichua culture, revalued  and reconstructed  as socially and politically linked to ethnic territory. As with  indigenous  movements elsewhere in Latin America, the symbolism on which FOIN'S cultural capital is built has in many cases been inverted. Symbols of former marginalization  have been  newly invested with prestige and influence. Traditional or ceremonial dress, such as feather headdresses, long  skirts, or ponchos-nce symbols of low status  and cultural backwardness-now symbolize increasing political  influence and a resurgence of ethnic identity, albeit within particular social and cultural contexts. In Amazonia, ethnic identity and the cultural capital that resides within  it may now represent  indigenous peoples' most

potent source of political power (Brown 1993; Conklin and Graham 1995). The cultural capital that is constructed and mobilized by FOIN and other indigenous organizations in  Ecuador has come to reflect the transnational discourses of environmentalism and human rights, refracted  through the Ecuadorian project  of ethnic (pluri-)nationalism.

FOIN's  material  and discursive practices  must be seen  as a form of  cultural politics in which cultural meanings not only reflect material struggle but are themselves constitutive  of  it  (Escobar 1998; Moore 1999). FOIN's discourse brings together the symbols of  territory,  identity, and political  autonomy in ways that, implicitly  or explicitly, seek to redefine structures of  social power.  The indigenous promotion  of  plurinationalism,  which  emerged in Ecuador during the 1997-1998 constitutional assembly, is based on claims to territory and political autonomy that seek to disrupt official narratives of citizenship and the nation. Localist claims rest on a notion of identity as organically tied to place, that is, of indigenous peoples as inextricably  linked  to territorial  claims. 'Territory' in this  sense must be understood not only as a spatial unit but also as a political project. Similarly, 'identity' and 'citizenship,' both central to FOIN'S discourse, are not merely descriptive categories, reflective of  an external reality; they are symbolic concepts that are themselves constitutive of  the federation's material struggle. However chaotic and impermanent these conceptual categories may be, they serve both to facilitate and to structure the relational networks within which the federation engages. In this sense, FOIN'S organizational relations and the social capital that inheres in them cannot be isolated  from the symbolic system, or cultural capital, that gives those relations meaning.

## RETHINKING SOCIAL AND CULTURAL &lt;:APITAL

The formation of  social capital  must  be viewed within  the context  of  the shared symbolic  understandings-the cultural  capital-that gives meaning to social relations. Over the past thirty years, FOIN has forged a dense network of relationships with community-based organizations, national and international NGOS, the church, the state, and other indigenous federations.  In  spite of administrative problems that have periodically diminished some of the federation's effectiveness, this organizational  network  has allowed FOIN to access and manage a variety  of development projects throughout the province, thereby enhancing the livelihoods  of  its members and increasing its own political legitimacy. It has also been successful in making demands against local and national state institutions  for legalization of land title, provision of bilingual education,  and administration of development projects. These projects,  together  with  the regional, national, and transnational networks that brought them into being, have helped to consolidate indigenous communities organizationally  and spatially, which  in turn provides  a basis  for further political mobilization.

FOIN's social capital and the organizational practices it has facilitated are best understood, however, in the context of the cultural capital within which  it is em-

bedded. The ability of the federation to organize its base communities, its success at political  mobilization,  its ability  to forge  institutional  relationships  with higherscale organizations, and its capacity to make claims against the state must be considered  in  light  of  the symbolic  meanings  that  infuse  such concepts  as territory, identity, and citizenship. This is not to discount the material benefits of the social capital contained within FOIN'S organizational relationships. But an examination of social capital apart from cultural context provides only a partial view. FOIN mediates a process of interaction between Quichua and national  society, not least through its role as  a modernizing organization and its ability  to mobilize the symbols  of Quichua cultural traditions: ethnic territory, language rights, and resource practices.

Such considerations  are of concern  to geographers  inasmuch as the environmental struggles and patterns of resource use we seek to understand are integrally related to social movements and the modes of cultural politics they enact. A socialcapital framework sheds light on the instrumental value of social relations, viewing relationships as resources that can  facilitate  access to, and management of, other resources (Bebbington 2002). Individuals and groups with greater access to certain types of  relational  networks  may have  greater  capacity to enhance their  income, access markets, or sustainably manage productive  resources.  These concepts have been recognized  and quickly adopted by development agencies and international donors, most notably the World  Bank. Caution is warranted, however. The social capital that accumulates in indigenous organizations and the transnational development networks of which they are a part cannot be understood in isolation from the symbolic systems that give them meaning.

Organizations  such as FOIN facilitate development  projects, with  implications for  resource use  and environmental conflict. As such, they play  a crucial  role  in mediating processes of  modernization and cultural  integration, a process  that  is symbolic as well as material. FOIN is as engaged in constructing meaning-of identity, of territory, and of  citizenship-as it is in improving agricultural  production and health  care. These  symbolic  meanings are not merely  reflective  of resource struggles; they are themselves integral to them. From this perspective, FOIN'S inauguration ceremony in Tena's central square  was not merely another federation meeting. Rather, it symbolized the achievement of the  federation's collective  organizational relationships embodied in this gathering of representatives from the state, the church, other indigenous organizations, and national  and international NGOS in common space. In the context of plurinationalism  and related  ethnic discourses current at the time, the ceremony celebrated the federation's social and political influence and reaffirmed its role as mediator of indigenous interests and identities.  Understanding FOIN'S material achievements in resource management and rural development, made possible by its network of social relationships, necessitates an understanding of the cultural context from which those relationships and practices draw meaning.

## NOTES

1. This article is based on fifteen months of fieldwork in Ecuador, from January 1998 through March 1999, as well  as on shorter field visits in zooo and 2001.  Field  methods combined in-depth

- interviewing, household  surveys, documrnt  analysis, and  participant  observation  in  communities and indigenous federations.
2. 'Mestizo' refers to 'mixed  race' peoples  of Amerindian  and  European descent.  It should be recognized that ethnic identity is complex and fluid and that distinctions between 'indigenous,''mestizo,' and 'white'  are not static and cannot be reduced  to biology. For detailed discussions of cthnicity in  Latin America, consult Stutzman (1981), Nelson (1999), and Perreault (2001).
3. These statistics  are for  the  forty-four  respondents  (twelve women  and thirty-two men) for whom home community was identified. The respondents were residents  of  FoiN-affiliated Quichua communities who were visiting  the federation for a scheduled meeting or in search of FOIN'S assistance.
4. Unless othcrwisc indicated, inforniation  for the case study is based on document research  in FOIN'S archives and o n  interviews with FOIN leaders.
5. Pachakutik  began participating in elections in 1996 as a popular movement after the constitution was amended to allow the participation of  such movements. It functions as a de facto political party of the indigenous peoples of  Ecuador, in that its principal  constituency is the indigenous population.  In 2003 Pachakutik  formed part of a coalition with the government of newly elected President Lucio Gutierrez, and  two  Pachakutik  representatives  were  appointed to cabinet posts.  It  should be noted, however, that some conflicts do exist hetween some indigenous organizations and Pachakutikincluding frequent  disagreements and conflicts with CoNAia-and that thc movement does not enjoy unanimous support  among the country's  indigenous population.
6.  'Kichwa' is i i dehispanicized  spelling of 'Quichua' (Spanish has no k or w). but in this article I  use 'Quichua' brcausr  it  is  more commonly accepted.  Also, I  use 'FOIN' rather  than 'FONAKIN' throughout  thr article because the namc change did not take effect until 2002, after  I  had  conducted my research.
7. This refers particularly  to specific  projects  (such as those focused on infrastructure, training, marketing, credit, or agricultural production)  funded by  development organizations at the state or international  scale.  Hut  in  a broader  sense, this  is true also of  the  project  of  development  and the ideologies  and  powrr  relations  expressed  in  the narratives  of  modernization,  progress,  poverty,  and capitalist  integration  (Perreault 2003).

## REFERENCES

- Rebbington,  A. 2000. Reencountering Ilcvclopment: Livelihood  Transitions and Place Transformations in the Andes. Ailrials of t h Association ofAiiiericari Geographers 90 ( 3 ) : 495-520.
- . ~002. Sharp Knives and  Blunt  Instruments:  Social Capital  in  1)evelopnient  Studies. Antipode 34 (4):  8otr803.
- Bebbington, A., and T. Perreault. 1999. Social Capital, Development and Access to Resources in Highland Ecuador. Economic Geography 75 (.+): 395-418.
- Bourdieu, I? 1977. Oirtlirie ofa Theory  o f Practice. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. . 1984. Ilistinction: A Social C r i t i q u e   o f  the ]ndgement of Taste. Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University  Press.
- Brown, L. A., K. Sierra, D. Southgate, and L.  Labao. 1992. Complementary Perspectives as a Means of Understanding Regional Change: Frontier Settlement in the Ecuador Amazon. Etivirorirnerit arid Plarinirig A 24: 939-961.
- Brown, M. F. 1993. Facing the State, Facing the World: Amazonia's Native Leaders and the New Politics o f   Identity. L'Hornme 33 (2-4): 311-320.
- Brysk, A. 2000. From Tribal Village to Global Village: Indian Rights arid International Relations in Latin America. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University  Press.
- Coleman, J. S.  1990. Foiiridatioris ofSocial Theory. Cambridge, Mass.: Iklknap Press of Harvard University  Press.
- CONAIE [ Confederacion de Nacionalidades  Indigenas  del Ecuador]. 1989. La5  naciorralidades indigenns en el Ecirciduc Nuestro proreso organizntivo. Quito: Editorial TINCUI/CONAIE / Ediciones Abya-Yala.
- . 2001. h s rincirrtralidndes y  plreblos y sus derechos  efi la /qislrIciijn nariond c iriternacional. Quito:  CONAI F . .

- CONFENIAE [ Confederacidn de Nacionalidades  Indigenas  de la  Amazonia  Ecuatoriana].  1988. La nacionalidad Huaorani y la defensa de su territorio: Pedido de solidaridad. Unpublished booklet.
- Gmklin, B. A., and L.  R. Graham. 19 9 5 . The Shifting Middle Ground: Amazonian Indians and EcoPolitics. American Anthropologist 97  ( 4 ) : 695-710.
- DeFilippis,  J. 2002. Symposium on Social Capital: An  Introduction. Antipode 34  (4): 790-795.
- Escobar, A. 1998. Whose Knowledge, Whose Nature? Biodiversity,  Conservation, and the Political Ecology of Social Movements. lournal ofpolitical Ecology 5 ( 1 ) : 53-82.
- Ferguson, J. 1990. The  Anti-Politics Machine: 'Development,'  Depoliticization, ar i d Burmircrrh-  Power in Lesotho. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University  Press.
- FernandezKel1y.M. P .  1 9 9 4 . Towanda'sTriumph: Social and Cultural Capital in the Transition to Adulthood in the Urban Ghetto. International loicrnal o f Urban and Regional Research 18 (1 ) : 88-111.
- Fine, B. 1999. The Developmental State Is Dead: Long Live Social Capital? Development arid  Cliarrge 30  (I): I-iy.
- . 2001. Social Capital versus Social  Theory: Politicd Economy and Social Scierrce at the ' h i of the Millennium. London: Routledge.
- Foley, M. W., and B. Edwards. 1999. Is It Time to IJisinvest in Social Capital? l o u r d   ofPitlilic Policy 19 (2): 1 4 1 - 1 7 3 .
- Fox, J. 1996. How Does Civil Society Thicken? The Political Construction of Social Capital  in Rural Mexico. World Development 24  (6): 1089-1103.
- . 1997. The World  Bank  and Social  Capital: Contesting the Concept  in  Practice. loitrrinl of International Development y ( 7 ) : 963+71.
- Harriss, J. , and  P .   De Renzio. 1997. 'Missing  Link' or Analytically  Missing? The Concept  of  Social Capital. Ioicrnal  oflnternationd Developnrent y (7): 9 1 ~ 3 7 .
- Hyden, G.  1 9 9 7 . Civil Society, Social Capital, and Development: Dissection  of a Complex Discourse. Studies in Comparative International Development 32  (I): 3-30.
- Macdonald, T., Jr. 19 9 2 . From Reaction to Planning: An  Indigenous Response to Deforestation and Cattle Raising. In Development or Destruction: The Conversion of Tropical Forest to Pastirre i n  Lntiri America, edited by T.  E.  Downing, S. B.  Hecht. H. A.  Parson,  and  C. Garcia-Downing, 21 3 - 2 3 4 . Boulder, Colo.: Westview.
- . 1999. Ethnicity and Culture amidst  New 'Neighbors': The Ritnn of Ecicador's Airiazon Basin. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
- McCarthy, J. 2001. States of Nature and Environmental Enclosures in the American West. In Violent Environments, edited by N. L.  Peluso and M. Watts, 117-145. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
- Mohan, G., and J. Mohan. 2002. Placing Social Capital. Progress in Hitnian Geography 26 ( 2 ) : iy i - z i o .
- Moore, D.   1 9 9 9 . The Crucible of  Cultural Politics:  Reworking 'Development' in  Zimbabwe's  Eastern Highlands. American Ethnologist 26   ( 3 ) : 654-689.
- Muratorio, B. 1991. The Life and Times of Grandfather Alonso: Culture arid History itr  the Upper  A m zon. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University  Press.
- Nelson, I). M. 1999. A Finger in the Wound: Body Politics in Quincentenninl Guatetnaln. Berkeley: University of California  Press.
- Peet,  K.,  and M. Watts. 1996. Liberation  Ecology:  Development, Sustainability  and Environment  in an Age of Market Triumphalism. In Liberation Ecologies:  Environment, Developtnerit, Social Movements, edited by R.  Peet and M. Watts, 1-45. London: Routledge.
- Perreault,  T .   A. 2000. Shifting Ground: Agrarian  Change, Political  Mobilization, and  Identity Construction  among Quichua  of the Alto  Napo,  Ecuadorian  Amazonia.  Ph.D.  diss.,  University  of Colorado, Boulder.
- . 2001. Developing Identities:  Indigenous Mobilization,  Rural Livelihoods, and Resource Access in Ecuadorian Amazonia. Ecrrrnene 8 (4): 381-413.
- . 2003. 'A  People  with  Our Own  Identity': Toward  a Cultural  Politics of  Development  in Ecuadorian Amazonia. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 21 (5 ) : 583-606.
- Perreault, T. A,, A. J.  Bebbington,  and T. F .   Carroll. 1998. Indigenous Irrigation Organizations and the Formation of Social Capital in Northern  Highland Ecuador. Corgerenre of Latiti  Americanist  Geographers  Yearbook 24:  1 - 1 6 .
- Portes, A.,  and  P .   Landolt. 2000. Social  Capital: Promise and  Pitfalls of  Its  Role  in  Development. Iournal of Latin American Studies 32 ( 2 ) : 52~547.
- Putnam, R. 19 9 3 . Making Democracy Work:  Civic Trnditions iti Modern Italy. Princeton, N.  J.:  Princeton University  Press.

- Radcliffe, S. A. 1996. Imaginative Geographies, Postcolonialism,  and National Identities: Contemporary Discourses of the Nation in Ecuador. Ecitniene 3 (I): 23-42,
- . ZOOI. Indigenous Movement Representations in Transnational Circuits: Tales of Social Capital and Poverty. Paper presented at the Association of American  Geographers Annual  Meeting, New York.
- Kadcliffe, S. A.,  and  S.  Westwood. 1996. Remaking the Nation: Place, Identity  and  Politics  in  Latin Anrericu. London: Routledge.
- Kangan,  H. 1996. From  Chipko to  Uttarahchal:  Development, Environment,  and  Social Protest  in the Carhwal Himalayas,  India.  In Liberation  Ecologies: Environmmt, Development, Social Movements, edited by R. Peet and M. Watts, 205-226. London: Routledge.
- Rogers, M. 1996. Beyond Authenticity:  (hnservation, Tourism, and the Politics of Representation  in the Ecuadorian Amazon. Identities: Global Studies in Culture 15 Paver 3 (1-2):  73-125.
- Rubenstein, S. 2001. Colonialism, the Shuar Federation, and the Ecuadorian State. Environment and Planriitig D: Society arid space 19 (3): 263-293.
- Salazar,  E. 1981. The Federacion  Shuar and the Colonization  Frontier.  In Cicltural Transformations nnd Ethriicity iti  Modern Ecuador, edited by N. E. Whitten Jr., 589-613. Urbana: University of Illinois  Press.
- Sawyer, S. M. 1997. Marching to Nation across Ethnic Terrain: The Politics of Identity, Territory, and Resource Use in the Ecuadorian Amazon. Ph.D. diss., Stanford University.
- Seregeldin, I., and A. Steer, eds. 1994. Making Development Sustainable: From Concepts to Action. Environmentally Sustainable Development Occasional Paper Series, No. 2. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
- Stutzman, K. 1981. El  Mestizaje: An All-Inclusive  Ideology of  Exclusion.  In Cultural Transformations arid Ethnicity iti  Mudern Ecuador, edited by N. E. Whitten Jr., 4534. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- Sundberg, 1. 1998. NGO Landscapes  in  the Maya  Biosphere  Reserve, Guatemala. Geographical  Review 88 ( 3 ) :   38X-412.
- Unupi, J., N. Wray, J. Alvarado,  and  E.  Flores. 1993. Cambios en  la  economia  de las comunidades Quichuas, Area del sumac0 sector Hollin-Loreto, en 10s liltimos treinta aAos (Informe final). Unpublished  report, CONFENIAE-Equipo Ecuador / COICA / OXFAM America.
- Uquillas,  J.  E..  and  T.  Aparicio  Gabara. 2000. Strengthening Indigenous Organizations: The World Banks Indigenous Capacity-Building  Program in Latin America. LCR Sustainable Development Working Paper No. 10. Washington,  D.C.: World Rank.
- Whitten, N. E., Jr. 1976. Sacha Runn: Ethnicity and Adaptation ofEcuadorian lutigle Quichlca. Urbana: University  of Illinois Press.
- . 1981. Amazonia Today at the Base of  the Andes: An  Ethnic Interface  in Ecological, Social, and Ideological Perspectives. In Cultural Transformations  arid Ethnicity in Modern Ecuador, edited by N. 1: . Whitten Jr.. 121-161. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- World Bank. 2001. World Devclopriient  Report, zooo/zoo~: Attacking Povurty. New York Oxford University Press for the World  Bank.
- Yashar, D. J. 1998. Contesting Citizenship:  Indigenous Movements and Ilemocracy in Latin America. Comparative Politics 31  ( I ) :   23-42.
- . 1999. Democracy, Indigenous Movements,  and the Postliberal Challenge in  Latin America. World Politics 52 ( I ) :  76-104.