## Spatial Accessibility to Health Care Facilities in Suhum District, Ghana

Joseph R. Oppong University o f North Texas

## M. John Hodgson

University o f

Alberta

To improve geographical accessibility to health  facilities in rural Ghana, it has been recommended  that additional health  facilities be  built.  Resource  constraints  make  this  recommendation  infeasible. Using  location-allocation models, this paper demonstrates that in the Suhum District of Ghana substantial improvements in accessibility  can be  achieved  with  better locational choices and  without additional facilities. Also, additional facilities will  produce little  improvement  in  accessibility if  location  is  not  explicitly  considered.  The paper  demonstrates  the  utility  of location-allocation  models  for  improving  accessibility  to  services  in  the  Third  World. Key  Words:  Ghana, geographical accessibfiq, location-allocation  models, rural health, Third World.

## Introduction

eveloping countries  face the problem  of D improving their health  care delivery systems  but  lack  the  necessary  resources  to  do this.  Health  facilities are  often  geographically inaccessible to the majority of the rural population  (Freund  1986; Lasker  1981; McEvers 1980; Stock  1985). Women  and  children,  in particular, experience difficulties in reaching a source  of  care (Phillips  1990),  but  the  explosion of  health  care costs makes it increasingly difficult to improve  geographical accessibility to  services.  Attempts  to  extend  care  are  frequently hampered by financial and human resource  shortages  and  other  barriers  (Phillips 1990).

Given this problem, better spatial organization of existing health care delivery systems is a  logical  strategy  to  follow.  Rushton  (1984, 1988)  has argued strongly for the role locationallocation models might play in using limited resources more efficiently  to provide access for those currently without access. In their work in Nigeria,  Ayeni et al.  (1987) show that accessibility to maternal and child health clinics could be improved substantially through careful location  of new facilities. Yet, critics such as Phillips (1990) question the usefulness of  locationallocation models in the Third World. Phillips (1990,  145), citing  the problem  of  data availability and reliability, states that 'optimally designed spatial health  delivery systems are not practical in the Third World.' In response to such  criticism,  Rietveld  (1  990)  has  correctly noted  that  critics tend  to  exaggerate the  data requirements of location-allocation models.

This paper contributes to this debate by applying a simple location-allocation model using readily available local data to evaluate a recent public health  policy recommendation  for improving accessibility to health facilities in rural Ghana. The results indicate that simple applications  of  location-allocation models  provide important information for general spatial decision making and data limitations do not preclude  their  application  in  the  Third  World. Furthermore,  location-allocation models may be used to improve spatial accessibility  without increasing  the  number  of  facilities  and  with minimum disruption to the existing system of facilities.

The  paper  is  organized  in  the  following manner. First, there is a brief description of the geographic  inaccessibility  problem  in  Ghana and the rationale  for  the  latest policy recommendation. This is followed by a brief description  of  the  study area  and  the  modelling  approach used. The analysis  begins by evaluating, using the p-median  criterion,  the  accessibility provided by the system of facilities in place. It demonstrates  how  accessibility might  be  improved, and evaluates  the potential for improving accessibility by providing additional facilities. This is  followed by  an  evaluation, using the maximum coverage criterion, of the ability of  mid-level facilities to supervise low-level facilities. The paper  considers the potential  for

enhancing  supervisory  capability  by  adding more facilities and the costs that would be involved in relocating facilities. It concludes  with a discussion of how location-allocation modelling might be included in primary health  care planning in Ghana.

## The Geography of Health Services in Ghana

Historically,  the Ghana Ministry of Health has grappled with  an  'unacceptable disparity between  service  coverage  and  quality  in  urban areas compared with rural  areas' (Adjei et al. 1984). In 1972,149 of 298 government doctors worked in the Accra-Tema metropolitan  area which  contained  about  8%  of  the  country's population (Sharpston 1972). In 1978, an estimated  70%  of  the  population were unable to use the official  health  system  (Ministry  of Health  1978) because of  prohibitive distances to rural  facilities.

The  dilemma  of  the  Ghana  Ministry  of Health  has  been  how  to  provide an  efficient and equitable system of service throughout the country with a highly constrained budget. To accomplish  this,  Ghana  adopted  a  Primary Health  Care  (PHC)  policy  in  1978 with  a stated goal to 'maximize the total health of the Ghanaian people' (Mmistry of Health 1978,9). Details of Ghana's PHC  are presented in Morrow (1983). In brief, the system is based  on a three-level  hierarchical structure  (Ministry of Health  1978) of  A-level,  B-level,  and  C-level facilities. Each A-level facility is usually staffed with  a  minimally trained  health  worker. This level  provides  first  level  curative  measures, pregnancy management, child health  promotion,  environmental protection,  and mobilization for health-related community projects. Blevel facilities are usually staffed with  a  community  health  nurse  and  a  trained  midwife. They provide technical supervision of A-level workers, routine  immunizations,  and  care  of patients including those referred from A-level facilities. C-level facilities are based on the district  hospital,  have  at  least  one  doctor,  and provide mostly curative services including inpatient care  and some  preventive  services. Within each district, a  District  Health Management  Team  (DHMT)  is  responsible  for identifylng  locations  to  host  PHC  facilities and overall  health  care  programming  in  the district.

Ghana's PHC policy has three aims (Ministry  of  Health  1978,  10):  (1)  to  improve  the accessibility  (coverage) of health services  by setting  up  a village-based system of  health  care; the aim will be for everyone to obtain essential basic services rather  than  for a few to receive sophisticated care; (2) to improve the quality of PHC at the point 'where it is most needed in the  village and peri-urban  areas . . . to meet priority health problems of all the people; and (3) to improve and strengthen the management capacity to support the PHC system at all levels; the aim will be to make more effective use of existing resources.

Between  1978  and 1988  it  appears  that Ghana's PHC policy had  little  effect  on  the spatial  imbalance  in  accessibility to  services. Only 20% of doctors served the rural population (80%) in  1982 (Ministry of Health  1982). In 1984  more than 605 of the 818 government doctors  in  Ghana were found in  the  Greater Accra  and  Ashanti regions  (Fig.  1).  Furthermore,  54%  of the 262  private practitioners in the country were in the Greater Accra region. Two of 11 districts surveyed by the Ministry of Health had no physicians. The population per doctor ranged from 20,944 to 113,322 in districts with doctors (Adjei et al.  1984).

In 1986,  Dr.  Moses  Adibo,  Director  of Health  Services, observed  that  'of  the  1031 physicians in  Ghana, one-third  were at Korle Bu Teaching Hospital, another one-third were in  Kumasi  and  Sekondi, the  remaining  onethird in the other communities. An analysis of the  distribution  of  some other  health  professional groups would  reveal a similar pattern' (Adibo 1987, 154). Similarly, in 1987 only 186 (28%) of the 665 government physicians  served the rural population. The two teaching hospitals accounted for 47% of the total number of doctors (Adjei et al.  1988).

Ten years  after  the  adoption  of  the  PHC program, spatial accessibility  to health facilities was still a major problem, especially  in the rural areas. A PHC Review  Committee within the Ministry  of  Health  recommended  that  many more  facilities  be  set  up  with  consideration given to 'the geographical coverage and population  of  the  c o ~ n t r y ~ ' (Adjei et al.  1988, 15). This paper refers to this approach as the 'addmore'  strategy.  It  was  assumed  that  establishing additional facilities in rural areas would increase both accessibility  and coverage. There are two major problems with this recommen-

dation. First, the resources available  to the government are limited  and  preclude  locating  a health facility, or even a health worker, in every village.  Even  if  this  were  possible,  the  additional cost o f  equipping, staffing,  and supplying these additional facilities would still be  a large obstacle. Second, additional facilities may not provide the greatest potential increase in coverage and accessibility if location is not explicitly  considered.  Furthermore,  evidence  from the locational analysis literature questions such an  approach.  For  example,  in  their  work  in Nigeria,  Ayeni  et  al.  (1987,  1093) show that 'the  proliferation  o f locations  of  the  health service delivery facilities of maternity and child welfare centers cannot eliminate the inefficiencies of location.'

This  study  examines  the  'add-more'  prescription to determine if it is based on a correct evaluation  of  the  accessibility  problem.  The rationale  is  that if  the diagnosis is wrong  the prescription w i l l also be wrong and is unlikely to fiu the problem. It is essential to determine the  extent  to which  the  spatial inaccessibility problem is a result of an inadequate number of health  facilities  or  of  deficient  locations. To accomplish this objective, the study will evaluate  the  'add-more'  recommendation  in  the Suhum District of Ghana (Fig.  1) and explore other alternatives to improving accessibility. In effect, the study uses location-allocation models as tools for measuring spatial accessibility.

## Studv Area

The Suhum District is in the Eastern  Region of Ghana (Fig. 1). It is  one  of  10 pioneering districts which  the government  of  Ghana  selected  to  implement  the  PHC policy in  the country.  Consequently,  it is  the  focus  of  ongoing research into the planning and delivery of health services in Ghana. In fact, at the time of  fieldwork for this research, the district was involved in a World  Health Organization  assisted project to delimit the catchment areas o f health  facilities  and  identify  gaps  in  service delivery.

According to the latest available (1  984) census, Suhum has  a  population  of  146,100 and encompasses  about 877.5 sq km (District Health Management Team 1987). The district is located  on the  edge of Ghana's forest belt. The district capital, Suhum, has a population of 19,298  and is 60 km from Accra, the national

Figure 1: Ghana and location of Suhum District.

<!-- image -->

capital. Suhum has several central place functions, including education, administration, commerce,  and  health.  Besides  Suhum,  only Nankese has a population exceeding  3,000  people  (3,414),  and  just  14 communities  exceed 1,000. The remainder of the population is located predominantly in small rural farming villages (Fig. 2). Because of  this skewed  population  distribution,  Suhum  is  the  hub  of  most activities in the district.

The district has 30 government health facilities altogether:  the  C-level  facility at Suhum, six B-level  facilities, and  23 A-level  facilities. The system is  successively inclusive; higherlevel facilities offer all the services provided at lower-level facilities in addition to services that are not provided at lower levels. Thus  there are 30 facilities providing A-level services, seven of which  provide  B-level  services,  and  Suhum hospital provides all three levels  of service. Like most other districts in Ghana, health facilities

Figure 2: Population size of villages and towns in Suhurn District

<!-- image -->

are located primarily in the larger centers with very few in the remote rural centers. Access to government health services is quite limited for rural residents.

Walking is the most popular means of travel in  the  district  because  few  people  own  any mode of transportation including bicycles. Access  to  commercial passenger vehicles is  limited. Where access is not a problem, the high fares charged, especially during the rainy season when the roads become difficult to travel, restrict use.

## Accessibility and the Goals of Ghana's PHC Strategy

I n  location-allocation modelling, geographical accessibility  may be conceptualized  in  two main  ways-proximity and  coverage.  When defined in terms of proximity, accessibility has a  distance minimization connotation  and may be measured using the average travel distance. As a locational goal, proximity translates into the simple  p-median problem which selects facility locations to minimize average travel distance  for  users.  Previous  research  has  found distance to be a major determinant  of  facility use (Stock 1982). Accessibility  may also be expressed using a coverage distance. If  a  facility is within the specified coverage distance from a person, it is considered accessibie to the person and the person is said to be covered. Those people beyond  this  distance are not  covered. The measure of accessibility in this context is the  proportion  of  people covered. As a locational  goal,  this  approach  translates  into  the maximal covering location problem (MCLP).

The first  goal  of  the  Ghana  government, improved accessibility,  may thus be seen as reducing  the  distance  between  health  facilities and users. The goal can also be viewed in coverage terms, i.e.,  improving the proportion of

people who are within a specified distance of a health care facility. The  second goal,  improving the quality o f   PHC, is not as easy to interpret or deal with because location-allocation models do not explicitly address quality issues. Therefore, this goal is not directly addressed in this study. It  could  be  argued,  as  has  the  Ghana government,  that by  improving other aspects of  the  system,  supervision  for  example,  the quality of service would be improved.

The third goal emphasizes management and interfacility  relationships including referral. There are  many  dimensions to management, but the government has isolated supervision of low-level  facilities  for  special  attention.  The government's a i m is to ensure that all facilities work effectively, and it has stressed that supervision  of  rural  health  workers  is  absolutely critical  (Adjei  et  al.  1988). To facilitate this, there must be a B-level facility  within eight km of  every  A-level facility.  Location-allocation models can address this problem effectively.

From the government's goals, therefore, two central locational problems emerge: accessibility of facility locations to users (involving distance minimization and coverage) and accessibility for suppliers (coverage considerations for supervision, supplies, and referral). This paper uses  the  p-median  and  maximum  coverage models  to  measure  the  level  of  accessibility provided by the existing system of facilities and to determine if this level of accessibility can be provided  without  considerable  additional  resources. Using these  results, the  paper  evaluates  the  'add  more'  recommendation and shows  how  location-allocation  models  could help to improve accessibility.

## Data Requirements and Modelling Approach

Essential data for this study included population  and locational information  for each community.  Population  data  were  obtained  from the  1984 population  census.  Because  Ghana does not have  a  digital spatial database, locations  were  digitized  as x and  y  coordinates from the Ghana  1:50,000 map series obtained from  the  Ghana  Geologic  Survey  in  Accra. There were no major problems with the maps, but the population  data of some smaller communities had been aggregated with larger centers  close  by.  Another  minor  problem  was communities with different locations but simi- lar  names.  These were carefully organized to avoid assigning the wrong population figure to any location. A simple distance generating algorithm  was  used  to  generate  Euclidean distances between locations.

The analysis involves 150 population centers in the Suhum district as demand points and the population  at each center as the proxy for demand.  Euclidean  distances  are  used  because walking is the main mode o f   travel in Suhum district.  This  avoids the  problem  of  seasonal inaccessibility  along  different  types  of  roads. The Tietz and Bart (1968) heuristic algorithm was  used. The modelling approach treats  the three  levels  of  service  independently  and  locates an optimal system of 30 facilities in keeping with the successively  inclusive nature of the system.  Seven  of  these  will  provide  B-level services, and  one  of  these  seven will  provide C-level services.

## Proximity to Health Facilities

The  immediate  question  is  proximity to Alevel  services. How  does  the  existing (actual) system of facilities compare with an optimally located set of 30 facilities? The optimal p-median system  @=30)  results in an average weighted  distance ( A m ) of  1.09 km compared  to  1.38 km  in  the  existing system,  the latter involving 26%  more travel distance than the  optimal  system (Table  1). Thus, A-level services are not as accessible as they could be. Figure 3 presents proximal (nearest facility) allocations for the actual system while Figure 4 illustrates the optimal p=30 system.  The shorter allocations and evenly spaced facilities

Table 1 Accessibility  Results from Optimal p-Median Solution

| P    | Average Weighted Distance (kml   | P           | Average Weighted Distance (krnl   |
|------|----------------------------------|-------------|-----------------------------------|
| 1    | 9 70                             | 17          | 1 73                              |
| 2    | 7 16                             | 18          | 166                               |
| 3    | 5 61                             | 19          | 1 59                              |
| 4    | 4 59                             | 20          | 152                               |
| 5    | 4 04                             | 21          | 145                               |
| 6    | 3 60                             | 22          | 1 40                              |
| 7    | 3 24                             | 23          | 135                               |
| 8    | 2 95                             | 24          | 131                               |
| 9    | 2 75                             | 25          | 127                               |
| 10   | 2 56                             | 26          | 123                               |
| 11   | 2 40                             | 27          | 119                               |
| 12 3 | 2 25                             | 28          | 116                               |
|      | 2 13                             | 29          | 112                               |
| 14   | 2 02                             | 30          | 109                               |
| 15   | 1 92                             | F rctual 30 | 1 38                              |
| 16   | 1 82                             |             |                                   |

Figure 3 : Proximal allocations for actual system of facilities (p=30).

<!-- image -->

in the optimal system contrast  with  relatively longer  and  uneven  allocations  in  the  actual system.  Also  peripheral  communities  travel much  longer  distances in  the  actual  system than  they  would  in  an  optimal  system.  For example, the maximum distance in the optimal system is 5.86 km but is 8.36 km in the actual system.

Next,  the possibility of providing the  same level  of  accessibility to  A-level  services with fewer facilities is considered. How many optimally located facilities would provide the same level of  accessibility? In  order  to  answer this question, the level of accessibility for different values of p (i.e., numbers of facilities) needs to be determined. Table 1 presents the results for p ranging between 1 and 30. The level of  accessibility provided  by  the  actual  system (a n average travel distance of 1.38 km) can be provided with only 23 facilities.  This suggests that it is possible to reduce the travel distance  in the actual system (improve accessibility) even with fewer  facilities.  Unquestionably,  therefore,  a higher  level of accessibility could be  obtained

Figure 4 Optima/ p-medium system of  facilities (p=30)

<!-- image -->

for the same amount of investment as the actual system of A-level facilities.

## Proximity to Facilities: Quantity or Location?

Optimally located  facilities exhibit decreasing accessibility returns to the number of facilities (Table l), a known  characteristic of p-median optimality. After initially huge increases in accessibility, additional  facilities  produce  rather marginal improvements. Accessibility improves  from 9.7 km  with p=1 to 2.56 k m at p=lO, an average 0.79 km reduction in average travel distance with each additional facility. Between p=11 and p=20, accessibility improves from 2.4 km to 1.52 km but the reduction  in average  travel  distance  per  additional  facility declines to 0.11  km. Beyond p=20 the  reduction in average travel with  additional facilities is  rather minimal. In fact, 10 additional facilities  only  reduce the AWD from 1.45  to

Table 2 Accessibility in Actual and Optimal B-Level Systems

| Criterion                 | Actual System   | Bottom-up   | Open System   |   Bottom-uplopen |
|---------------------------|-----------------|-------------|---------------|------------------|
| Total Weighted Distance   | 384454          | 335863      | 332558        |             1009 |
| Average Weighted Distance | 3 75            | 3 28        | 3 24          |                  |
| Extra Travel              | 1145            | 1 00        |               |                  |

1.09 km, about 0.036 km per facility. The decline  in  accessibility improvement  with  additional  optimally  located  facilities  is  gradual, with  no  discernable break  point.  It  is  clear, however, that  the  benefit  from  adding  more facilities, even optimally located ones, has become minimal for considerably fewer than  30 facilities.  This basic characteristic of spatial accessibility leads us  to question the wisdom of the 'add more' recommendation.

## pMedian Accessibility to Higher-Level Services

Next, the provision of higher-level services beginning with B-level  is  considered. Because it is successively  inclusive, seven of the 30 facilities in the actual system provide B-level  services.  In  order  to confomi  to  this  hierarchical structure, the optimal model must select seven facilities from the 30 providing A-level services to maximize proximity to users. The results are presented in Table 2. Hodgson (1  984) demonstrated  that  such  a  bottom-up  approach  can result  in  suboptimal  higher-order facilities. This effect is  evaluated by  selecting seven facilities  freely  from  the  open  system  of 1.50 demand points. This system, however, differs from the bottom-up  solution by less than 1% (Table 2). The optimal p=7 system would provide an AWD of 3.28 compared to 3.7.5  in the actual system. The actual B-level system is thus not as accessible  as it could be, since it involves 1. 5   % more  travel  distance than  the p-median system. In  fact, six optimally located facilities would provide an AWD of 3.6 km and involve less travel than  the actual system (Table  1).

Finally,  the  location  of  C-level  services  is considered. Only one facility, Suhum, provides C-level services. To conform with  this structure, one facility  to provide C-level services  will be  selected from  the  seven providing  B-level services. The  goal  is  to  verify  whether  it  is possible  to  improve  accessibility  to  C-level services. In  this  analysis, the  bottom-up  approach identified the same location, Suhum, as the  best  location  for  C-level  services. When one facility is  selected freely from the  150 demand points, however, only a  slight improvement  in  efficiency  (less  than  1%) could  be achieved.

## Modelling the 'Add More' Recommendation

To model the recommendation that additional facilities  be established to improve accessibility requires the retention  of all 30 actual facilities and establishing  additional facilities.  The result of  this  approach  is  presented  in  Table  3.  It shows that, even if they were optimally  located, five  additional  facilities would  be  required  to provide  the  same  level  of  proximity  that  30 optimally located facilities would provide (AWD=1.09). If  additional  facilities were  not located  optimally,  many  more  might  be  required.

Achieving an optimal 30-node system would involve  relocating  11  of  the  actual  facilities. This brings up the question of relocation costs: would it be more costly to construct five new facilities  than it  would be to relocate 11  existing facilities? In  the  absence of  accurate data  on cost, it is  impossible to  provide a precise  answer. In  the  Suhum  district,  existing A-level facilities have  very  little  in  the  way  of  infrastructure.  Most  facilities have  little  furniture and  only  one  health  worker  with  minimum training.  Relocation would  mean  transferring

Table  3 Accessfbflrty lrnprovernent with Addrtional  facd/t/es

| Number of Facilities   | Average Weighted Distance (kin)   |   Marginal Improvement |
|------------------------|-----------------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual 30 + 1          | 1 34                              |                        |
| Actual 30 + 2          | 126                               |                    064 |
| Actual 30 + 3          | 1 20                              |                    055 |
| Actual 30 + 4          | 113                               |                    056 |
| Actual 30 + 5          | 108                               |                    051 |
| Actual 30 + 6          | 103                               |                    046 |
| Actual 30 + 7          | 099                               |                    040 |
| Actual 30 + 8          | 0 95                              |                    036 |
| Actual 30 + 9          | 0 92                              |                    035 |
| Actual 30 + 10         | 0 897                             |                    030 |

the  affected  health  worker  or  recruiting  and training  a  new health worker at the new location.  Relocation would certainly involve some social costs for health workers and users of the system; these costs might be politically contentious. Currently, however, many of these facilities exist in name only because they lack supervision and inputs; the closure of some A-level facilities might  not  even  be  noticed  by  many users. The  extra cost of staffing  and supervising five additional  facilities  must  also  be  considered.

This study shows that 'add more' is not the only way to improve accessibility to services in Suhum  district.  Depending  on  the  premium placed on the political and other costs of relocation, decision makers may then decide which is  the  best  option.  The  Ghana  government, under  Rawlings,  has  established a  reputation for implementing difficult decisions, especially those  that  ensure  efficient use of  national  resources.

## Supervision Coverage

Coverage models are based on the simple notion that there is a distance (travel time or cost) within which patrons are served (covered) and beyond which  they  are not (Church and  ReVelle 1974). The amount of coverage provided by  a  system of  facilities depends  critically on the  coverage  distance. A small coverage distance requires many facilities whereas a larger distance requires few. The Ghana government has  not  explicitly stipulated  a  coverage criterion  for A-level  facilities, but  desires a  B-level facility within eight km of  every A-level  facility.  This  would  ensure  that  B-level  workers supervise and  hold  clinics in  A-level facilities much  more  easily.  In  turn,  A-level  workers could  visit  B-level facilities  for  consultation when necessary with little effort.

The maximum  coverage model  is  used  to deal with the problem of covering the 30 existing  facilities.  The  objective  is  to  determine what proportion of existing  A-level facilities  are within  eight  km  of  a  B-level  facility. Also,  if facilities  were located optimally, how many facilities would  provide  complete  coverage  for existing  A-level facilities?  This  analysis  involves choosing only from the 30 existing facility locations.  Coverage  distances ranging  between four and 10 k m will be considered.

Table  4 Supervision Coverage  of  Exlsting  ALevel Faah  ties

|        | CoverageDistance   |   CoverageDistance | CoverageDistance   |   CoverageDistance |   CoverageDistance |   CoverageDistance |
|--------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| ~ 4    | 5                  |                  6 | 7                  |                  8 |                  9 |                  1 |
| 1 375  | 453                |                486 | 496                |                569 |                641 |                660 |
| 2 462  | 564                |                603 | 66 5               |                747 |                846 |                903 |
| 3 542  | 664                |                702 | 792                |                906 |                965 |                984 |
| 4 620  | 759                |                797 | 887                |                986 |                100 |                100 |
| 5 683  | 837                |                872 | 963                |                100 |                    |                    |
| 6 740  | 897                |                935 | 100                |                    |                    |                    |
| 7 783  | 940                |                983 |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 8 81 7 | 970                |                100 |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 9 848  | 98 1               |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 10 878 | 991                |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 11 908 | 100                |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 12 932 |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 13 951 |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 14 966 |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 15 979 |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 16 989 |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 17 100 |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |

The  existing  B-level  facility  system @=7) provides 95.4% coverage within  eight km  for A-level facilities. Yet four optimally located facilities  would provide 98.6% coverage, and five would provide complete coverage within eight km (Table 4). The latter solution would entail  the  relocation  of  four  B-level facilities, possibly  a  politically  contentious  move.  Furthermore,  the  actual B-level  system provides complete coverage at nine  km, but  this could be  provided with  only  four  optimally located facilities. If  the  relocation  of  B-level  facilities was not possible, the alternative would be  the provision  of  additional  B-level  facilities. The analysis indicates that  two  additional facilities would raise coverage to 100%. Thus, building upon  the  present  system would  require  that nine  facilities  be  provided  whereas  complete coverage could be  provided with  only five facilities if  four were relocated.

Frequently, decision makers require help in formulating  their  location  goals. When  they see the locational outcome of specified decision criteria,  they  may want  to revise  the  original location  goals.  For  example, the  government has  specified a  coverage distance of eight  km for B-level facilities without knowing the exact number of facilities that would be necessary to achieve that goal. It is likely that if they knew the costs involved in achieving this goal, they might  want  to  choose  a  different  goal.  This situation is where modelling is most useful and supports Rushton's (1989) contention that location-allocation models can be used as spatial decision support systems.

0

Table 4 illustrates the trade-offs of different coverage distances  with the number of facilities required to achieve total coverage of the existing system of 30 facilities. T o  provide  100% coverage within  eight  km  would  require  five facilities. Only four facilities would  be  necessary to provide total coverage within a nine k m coverage distance. T o  provide  total  coverage with a  four km coverage distance, 17 facilities would be required. If resources were restricted to only  10 facilities and the coverage distance was four km, only 87.8% of total demand could be covered. Through this type of analysis, location-allocation  models can be useful for identifymg  decision  alternatives,  trading  off  resource inputs against alternative locational outcomes, and  even  in  defining  or  refining  the locational objectives.

## Conclusions

A systematic evaluation of proximity to health facilities in Suhum district using the p-median and coverage models as the bench mark consistently shows that  accessibility could be improved without  additional facilities. Providing additional facilities is not the only way to improve  accessibility to  services in  Suhum  district.  Depending  on the relative costs of  relocation,  greater  accessibility  can  be  provided with  the  same amount  of  resources currently employed. The relocation costs of  A-level  facilities would  probably be  minimal,  while the gains in accessibility could be substantial.

Regardless of what action the Ghana government takes, these results confirm that data lirnitations do not preclude the use of simple location-allocation analysis to support spatial decision making in the Third World. Rather, performing simple analysis using readily available data can provide invaluable inputs for making difficult spatial decisions.

The results also show the importance of location-allocation models as objective tools for measuring spatial  accessibility.  Without  satisfactory  measurement  tools,  it  is  difficult  to evaluate policy  options  effectively.  Moreover, there is no way of telling when adequate accessibility  has been established. A large number of facilities does not necessarily imply greater accessibility.  Rather,  as  Rushton  (1984) has  argued, the selection of optimal locations might be an important, but neglected, key in the effort to improve accessibility to health facilities in  the  Third World.  Spatial efficiency at  the district  level  could  be  the  key  to  an  efficient national system of facilities.

One of the difficulties of improving accessibility to health facilities in the Third World is that  'health care  delivery systems have  often grown up in a fragmented manner, provided by public, private, charitable and aid  sources and they have frequently been non-complementary or even competitive in their functions and locations' (Phillips 1990, 145). This problem is at the root of the redundancy and present day maldistribution  of  facilities,  especially where government facilities have not sought to maintain a spatial balance. The decentralization of decision making being promoted under Ghana's PHC program  provides an  excellent opportunity to address and solve this problem.

Under Ghana's PHC program, the District Health  Management  Team  (DHMT) is  responsible for all health planning and programming  within  the  district. A team  member, trained in the use of simple optimization models, could work with the DHMT  to identify an 'optimal' and desirable set of facility locations for  the  district. This  could  be  the  basis  of  a health facility location plan for the district, and the selected locations could be prioritized for development. District resources for additional facilities could be allocated based on these priorities. In addition, any organization seeking  to develop  a  health  facility  within  the  district could be encouraged to select one of the priority locations. Improved accessibility and efficiency at the district level will surely be the basis of a more accessible  and efficient national health care system. W

## Literature Cited

~

~

Abido,  M.  1987. Population growth  and  access  to health  facilities. Proceedings o f the  Ghana National Confirence on Population and National Recanrwtion, 151-59.  Legon, Ghana: Population Impact Project, University of Ghana.

- Adjei, S., W.  Osei, W.  Sampson, and A.  Adamafio. 1984. Primary Health  Care h i m ,   Ghana-1984. Accra, Ghana: Ministry of Health.
- Adjei, S., G.  Owusu, J.  Adamafio,  and  S.  Akyeh. 1988. Primary Health  Care Review, Ghana-1988. Accra, Ghana: Ministry of Health.
- Ayeni,  B., G.  Rushton, and M.  L. McNulty.  1987. Improving the geographical accessibility  of health care in  rural  areas: A Nigerian case study. Social Science and Medicine 25:1083-94.

- Church, R.  L., and C. ReVelle.  1974, The maximal covering location problem. Papers of the  Regional Science hsociation 32:lOl-18.
- Dismct Health Management Team.  1987. Primary health  care  report.  Unpublished  report.  Suhum, Ghana.
- Freund, P.  J.  1986. Health care in a declining economy: The case of Zambia. Social Science and Medicine 232375-88.
- Hodgson, M. J.  1984. Alternative approaches to hierarchical location-allocation systems. Geographical Analysis 16:275-81.
- Lasker, J.  N.  1981. Choosing  among therapies: 111ness behavior in the Ivory Coast. Social Science and Medicine 1SA:157-68.
- McEvers, N. 1980. Health  and the assault on poverty in  low  income  counmes. Social  Science  and Medicine 14G:41-S 7.
- Ministry of Health, Ghana.  1978.  A Primary Health Care Strategy for Ghana. Accra, Ghana: Ministry of Health.
- Ministry of Health, Ghana. 1982. The Health Policy of Ghana. Accra, Ghana: Ministry of Health.
- Morrow, R. H. 1983. A primary health care strategy for  Ghana.  In Practicing  Health  For  All, ed.  D. Morley,  J.  Rohde,  and  G.  Williams,  272-99. Toronto:  Oxford University Press.
- Phillips, D.  R.  1990. Health and  Health  Care in the Third World. New  York:  Longman  and  John Wiley and Sons.
- Rietveld, P.  1990. Infrastructure planning and rural development  Reflections on the urban  functions approach. Intmationul  Regiaal Science Review 13:249-55.
- Rushton, G. 1984. Use of location-allocation  models for  improving geographical accessibility of  rural services in  developing countries. International Regional Science Review 9:2 17-40.
- Rushton, G. 1988. Location theory, location-allocation models and service development planning in the Third World. Economic Geography 64:97-120.
- Rushton, G.  1989. Applications of location models. Annals of  Operations Research 18:25-42.
- Sharpston, M. J.  1972. Uneven geographical distribution  of  medical  care.  A Ghanaian  case  study. Journal of Development Studies 8:205-22.
- Stock, R.  1982. Distance  and  utilization  of  health facilities in rural Nigeria. Social  Science and Medicine 17:563-70.
- Stock, R.  1985. Health  care for some: A Nigerian study of who gets what, where and why. I n t m a tional3ournal of Health  Services 15:469-84.
- Tietz, M. B.,  and P.  Bart.  1968. Heuristic methods for estimating the generalized vertex median of a weighted graph. Operations Research 16:95541.

JOSEPH  R.  OPPONG  is  Assistant  Professor  of Geography at The University of North Texas, Denton,  TX 76203-5277. His research interests center on  medical geography and  include location-allocation modelling, geographic information systems,  and health care delivery in the Third World.

M. JOHN HODGSON is Professor of Geography at The University of  Alberta, Edmonton,  Canada T6G 2H4. His research interests are in location-allocation modelling and geographic information systems.