<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Labor Networks Connecting Peripheral Economies to the National Innovation System

## Kirsten Martinus

To cite this article: Kirsten Martinus (2018) Labor Networks Connecting Peripheral Economies to the National Innovation System, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 108:3, 845-863, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2017.1374163

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2017.1374163

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 27 Nov 2017.

Submit your article to this journal C

Article views: 80

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Labor Networks Connecting Peripheral Economies to the National Innovation System

Kirsten Martinus

Center of Regional Development, The University of Western Australia

Understanding the characteristics of innovation in peripheral regions is critical to enhancing economic competitiveness and productivity in remote or rural communities worldwide. Metropolitan innovation success stories have limited application or policy relevance in peripheral areas due to a lack of critical mass in industry and population. This has seen an emergent body of literature consider the different dynamics of innovation in these areas. This article contributes both methodologically and conceptually to current academic discourse and debates by exploring innovation across the sparsely populated large spatial divides of regional Australia through the novel use of social network analysis and econometric modeling. It employs commuting data and a regression of 2000 to 2013 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development patent data against select socioeconomic variables and commuting indexes. It finds that innovative activity is positively linked to population, commuting, and professional employment for smaller communities. This points to the movement of labor as an important factor, playing a role as an interregional conduit of tacit knowledge by extending the social capital networks of smaller peripheral communities. Key Words: innovation systems, long-distance commuting, peripheral economies, proximity, social network analysis.

理 解 边 陲 地 区 的 创 新 特 徵 , 对 于 增 进 全 球 偏 远 或 乡 村 社 区 的 经 济 竞 争 力 而 言 至 关 重 要 。 因 为 边 陲 区 域 缺 乏产业与人 口 的 关 键 多 数 , 因 此 大 都 会 创 新 成 功 故 事 的 应 用 有 限 , 抑或 缺 乏 政 策 关 联 性 。 已 有 越 来 越 多 的 文 献 , 考 量 这 些 地 区 中不 同 的 创 新 动 态 。 本 文 透 过 社 会 网 络 分 析 以 及 计 量 经 济 模 型 的 崭 新 运 用 , 探 讨 在 澳 洲 少 数 人 散 居 的 大 型 空 间 分 隔 中 的 创 新 , 以 此 对 当 前 的 学 术 论 述 与 辩 论 , 作 出 方 法 论 与 概 念 上 的 贡 献 。 本 研 究 运 用 通 勤 数 据 和 2000 年 至 2013 年 经 济 合 作 与 发 展 组织 之 面 板 数 据 相 对 于 选 定 的 社 会 经 济 变 因 与 通 勤 指 标 的 迴 归 。 本 研 究 发 现 , 对 较 小 型 社 区 而 言 , 创 新 活 动 与人 口 、 通 勤 和 专业 工 作 之 间 具 有 正 向 连 结 。 该 发 现 指 向 劳动力 移 动 作 为 重 要 的 因 素 , 透 过 延 伸 较 小 型 边 陲 社 区 的 社 会 资 本 网 络 , 扮 演 着 跨 区 域 的 隐 性 知 识 导 管 之 角 色 。 关 键 词 ： 创 新 系 统 , 远 距 通 勤 , 边 陲 经 济 , 邻 近 性 , 社 会 网 络 分 析 。

Entender las caracter  ısticas de la innovaci  on en regiones perif  ericas es crucial para mejorar la competitividad y la productividad econ  omica de las comunidades rurales apartadas en todo el mundo. Las historias del  exito de la innovaci  on metropolitana tienen aplicaci  on limitada o poca relevancia pol  ıtica en  areas perif  ericas debido a la falta de masa cr  ıtica en la industria y la poblaci  on. De esto da cuenta un emergente cuerpo de literatura dedicado a considerar la din  amica de la innovaci  on en estas  areas. Este art  ıculo contribuye tanto metodol  ogica como conceptualmente a los discursos y debates acad  emicos actuales explorando la innovaci  on en las grandes divisorias espaciales escasamente pobladas de las regiones australianas, por medio del uso novedoso del an  alisis de redes sociales y el modelado econom  etrico. En el art  ıculo se emplean datos sobre movimientos pendulares de la gente y una regresi  on de los datos sobre patentes de la Organizaci  on para la Cooperaci  on y el Desarrollo Econ  omico de 2000 a 2013 contra una selecci  on de variables socioecon  omicas e  ındices de lo viajes pendulares. Se descubre que la actividad innovadora en las comunidades m  as peque ~ nas est  a relacionada positivamente con la poblaci  on, el viaje pendular y el empleo profesional. Esto apunta hacia el movimiento laboral como factor de peso, que juega un papel importante como conducto interregional de conocimiento t  acito, extendiendo las redes del capital social de las comunidades perif  ericas m  as peque ~ nas. Palabras clave: sistemas de innovaci  on, viaje pendular de gran distancia, econom  ıas perif  ericas, proximidad, an  alisis de redes sociales.

P roximity has long been a key aspect of the economic geography and regional science research agenda, increasingly associating innovation with a variety of factors other than geography. This has facilitated broader understandings of how different actors and environments might engage across time and space to form an overarching system of innovation for a region or nation (Morgan 2004; Boschma 2005; Lagendijk and Lorentzen 2007; Torre 2008). The connectedness of these actor networks and their

institutional frameworks is continually constituted and reconstituted through time and space by the various practices and relations that occur in response to pathdependent processes and economic shocks (Sheppard 2002; Martin and Sunley 2006; Plummer and Tonts 2015).

Research has generally found that the propensity to innovate is highly geography specific and unevenly distributed across regions. This is in part because innovation is supported by the strength of industry clustering, social capital networks, and knowledge spillovers (Doloreux 2003; Simmie 2003; Howells 2005; Lambooy 2005; Abreu et al. 2008; Torre 2008) as well as the tendency for research support and funding to be directed into locations that are already innovation success stories (Morgan 2007). This has meant that highly urbanized cities are more obvious sites of innovation than sparsely populated and low-industrialized areas (North and Smallbone 2000; Virkkala 2007; Doloreux and Dionne 2008). This assumption mirrors those in the related field of urban studies, where research agendas have also focused on key global metropoles in the Global North, leaving a geography of structural 'black holes' where peripheral cities and towns are located (Robinson 2002).

Likewise, there is limited knowledge regarding innovation processes and mechanisms in peripheral areas such as regional Australia 1 despite the large amount of wealth it generates and number of people both working and residing there (Tonts, Martinus, and Plummer 2013; Martinus 2016). As in other rural and remote communities around the world (e.g., Morgan 2007), the Australian government policy response has been to address issues of unemployment rather than capacity building (Enright and Roberts 2001). Research in regional Australia has focused on understanding industries best suited to regional economic growth and opportunities (e.g., Mardaneh 2012) primarily through grassroots-specific case studies (e.g., Enright and Roberts 2001; Woodhouse 2006; Thompson et al. 2011). Top-down policy approaches to the national innovation system (e.g., Webster 2009; Dodgson et al. 2011) tend to concentrate on Australia's most urbanized cities with little to no attention paid to the nation as a whole, including regional areas.

This study aims to address this lacuna given the critical role that innovative activity plays in improving productive capacity and competitive advantage. The significance of this study is weighted by the struggle of peripheral towns, such as those in regional Australia, to remain economically competitive and viable in an environment of declining population and service provision (Beer and Keane 2000; McGuirk and Argent 2011). The research focuses on long-distance labor commuting as a connector between regions. This provides a novel perspective, as the link between labor mobility and innovation in studies to date primarily relates to worker migration rather than commuting per se (see Cooper 2001; Williams, Balaz, and Wallace 2004; Boschma, Eriksson, and Lindgren 2009; Kaiser, Kongsted, and Ronde 2011; Poschl and Foster 2013).

This article is organized as follows. First, it reviews literature on innovation systems and its relevance to peripheral economies with particular attention to the concept of proximity. Subsequently, it describes the Australian policy approach to innovation as well as the unevenness of development across regional areas specifically in the context of its growing long-distance commuting workforce. Next, it details a methodology that first maps labor commuting using social network analysis (SNA) and patents across regional Australia local government areas (LGAs) and then regresses innovative activity against several different socioeconomic factors and SNA-derived commuting indexes. Finally, it presents findings that population, commuting, and professional employment are significant contributors to innovative activity in regional Australia in areas with smaller populations. It concludes that labor commuting might facilitate the transfer of ideas between regions by extending labor networks, making spatial distance less relevant. By doing so, it could act as a mechanism for less populous areas to overcome proximity barriers generated by geographically sparse populations and industry.

## Innovation Systems and Regional Economies

The concept of national innovation systems (NIS) first emerged in the work of Freeman and Lundvall, who drew on the Schumpeterian innovation and economic development links embedded in evolutionary economics and Perroux's growth pole model. Defined as the relational networks of 'the national education system, industrial relations, technical and scientific institutions, government policies, cultural traditions and many more national institutions' (Freeman 1995, 5), NIS formed the base for the development of the alternative concept of the regional innovation system (RIS). The latter emphasizes regional and local publicand private-sector clusters and their links to the national system.

Focusing on the geographic local 'stickiness' of knowledge (Maskell and Malmberg 1999; Ashiem and Isaksen 2002), RIS literature sought to balance the topdown perspectives of NIS and the shortcomings of 'technopole' literature where a linear innovation approach downplayed the role of agent networks (Cooke 2001). Its focus on face-to-face contact reflected Porter (2000), who suggested that dynamic regional clusters of agglomerated industrial specialization most efficiently facilitated knowledge transfer or spillovers. He contended that clusters leveraged intraregional untradeable interdependencies of actors and the knowledge tied to territorially specific human assets and social capital (Storper 1997; Morgan 2007). In this way, RIS follows a more location-specific regional capability approach than NIS (cf. Asheim and Isaksen 2002; Bilbao-Osorio and Rodriguez-Pose 2004), better incorporating concepts of path dependency as related to the processes driving regional economic development (Fagerberg, Mowery, and Verspagen 2009). Nonetheless, some cautioned against the conflation of clusters and RIS being separate albeit interrelated concepts where RIS constitutes different industry sectoral clusters (Asheim and Coenen 2005).

Despite difficulties in knowing the most appropriate unit of analysis for the region (cf. Doloreux and Parto 2005), RIS has provided a useful analytical framework for national and regional development and policy given its capacity to model the complexity of interlinked and interdependent actor networks at different spatial levels (see Howells 2005; Todtling and Trippl 2005). Nonetheless, the implementation of innovation policy is complicated by the various competitive advantages of regional or industry sectorial differences arising from actor collaborations in knowledge creation and organization (Davenport 2005; Todtling and Trippl 2005). Subsequently, research has explored the critical contribution of actor geographic or spatial proximity (Morgan 2004; Boschma 2005) and formal and informal local learning environments (Simmie 2003; Lambooy 2005) to the efficient operation of the innovation system through knowledge spillovers and university, industry, and government actor links (Audretsch and Feldman 2004; Asheim and Gertler 2006). The greater concentration of these factors makes highly urbanized cities-rather than organizationally and network 'thin' peripheral or remote towns-the preferred focus for the majority of innovation studies (North and Smallbone 2000; Todtling and Trippl 2005; Virkkala 2007; Doloreux and Dionne 2008; Martinez-Fernandez and Potts 2008).

Indeed, although innovation is recognized as a critical component in the health and sustainability of peripheral communities, understanding how they link to a regional system is challenging. As noted by Todtling and Trippl (2005), innovation policy tends to apply a 'one size fits all' model of regional development, drawing on a variety of regional development and innovation literature with varying degrees of applicability in different regions. These models tend to focus on how the interplay of actors, historic factors, and territorially embedded socioeconomic competitive advantages form successful innovation regions.

These 'innovation' success stories have only limited applicability in less favorable peripheral regions with very different innovation barriers and capabilities as well as development trajectories and pathways (Doloreux 2003; Todtling and Trippl 2005). Such regions are typically overreliant on traditional industries dominated by innovation time-deficient small and medium enterprises and characterized by 'weakly developed firm clusters, few knowledge providers and a weak endowment with innovation support institutions' (Todtling and Trippl 2005, 1215). As such, there is a need for deeper consideration of regional variations in 'industrial specialization and their innovation performance,' the geographic constraints and limitations of knowledge spillovers, the high relevance of tacit knowledge for innovation success, and place-bound 'political competencies and institutions' (Todtling and Trippl 2005, 1205). Although this is true, the RIS analytical framework is fraught with inherent conceptual bias regarding the links between innovation and geography. This makes it difficult to translate to regional environments.

First, the RIS emphasis on formal institutional or 'organizational' channels of innovation has led to a research and policy focus on the connectivity of actors, namely, government, education, and industry (e.g., Mytelka and Smith 2002; Todtling and Trippl 2005). There is little on the influence of labor and its social networks outside of organizational boundaries (e.g., Williams, Balaz, and Wallace 2004; Miguelez and Moreno 2013; Poschl and Foster 2013). Consequently, peripheral economic areas are seen as operating largely outside the 'innovation' system of highly connected dynamic actors, supporting institutions, and critical mass of industry found in core economies or knowledge-intense sectors (Vikkala 2007; Doloreux and Dionne 2008).

The second issue relates to the studying of innovation 'systems' as isolated case studies or success stories,

primarily in highly populous areas and in science and high-tech industries (cf. Ashiem and Coenen 2005). Although numerous case studies have unpacked the untradeable characteristics of 'sticky' knowledge and actor clustering in peripheral regions (Vikkala 2007; Doloreux and Dionne 2008; Torre 2008), they have yet to document the complexity of socioeconomic lives playing out across a wider spatial network. Periphery economies are often not well endowed with technology-related or science-based industries where there are greater levels of formal research and development (R&amp;D expenditure, patents, etc.), allowing innovation to be more easily mapped. Instead, they tend to have traditionally resource-intense industries and require alternative human resource arrangements. Innovative activity then often draws on very different ways and means to acquire information and knowledge than metropolitan centers (cf. Castellacci et al. 2009). This includes external sources of knowledge where auxiliary benefits are gained vis- a-vis various forms of temporary spatial proximities (cf. Torre 2008). As a result, many advocate broader understandings of different types of proximity (Boschma 2005; Davenport 2005; Cant  u 2010) to better connect regions to global 'pipelines' of knowledge (cf. Bathelt, Malmberg, and Maskell 2004). For periphery economies, this includes consideration of external knowledge sources outside of firm-based boundaries, locational constraints, and high-tech science industries.

A third and related point to those just given is on the role of proximity in the transfer of 'tacit' knowledge that is spatially bound at some level given the designated government-industry-R&amp;D 'actors' of significance. Growing research evidence that peripheral regions demonstrate albeit small innovation systems has led some to argue that proximity must be viewed outside of its geographic dimension (Lagendijk and Lorentzen 2007; Vikkala 2007). Despite identification of different proximity dimensions (e.g., organizational, cognitive, social, institutional, and geographic; cf. Boschma 2005; Lagendijk and Lorentzen 2007), the RIS discourse is almost exclusively focused on the bricks-and-mortar agents of firms as representative of the actions of an innovative workforce (cf. North and Smallbone 2000; Bathelt, Malmberg, and Maskell 2004; Vikkala 2007). As such, the playground for labor interactions at various proximity dimensions occurs in the physical or geographic space dictated by the location of organizations, which is primarily in larger cities. As noted by Boschma (2005), 'Empirical studies tend to confirm that knowledge externalities are geographically bounded: firms near knowledge source show a better innovative performance than firms located elsewhere' (69). This raises questions regarding the self-perpetuating nature of innovative activity when assumptions on the source of knowledge are based on the fixed physical location of organizations rather than labor interactions that might occur within and across space.

Indeed, as noted by Lagendijk and Lorentzen (2007), regional success for peripheries depends more on building 'localized capacities' through 'global connections' and a 'local resource base' rather than 'local networking and clustering' (462). Noting the lack of studies examining the relationship of regions to their broader operational environment, Moreno and Miguelez (2012) found external sources of knowledge to be key drivers of regional innovation. Similarly, North and Smallbone (2000) observed that small and medium enterprises in rural communities drew knowledge from whatever sources were available. Doloreux (2003) added that knowledge extraction occurred across a variety of local, regional, and global networks and that the diversity of connections outside of the 'local' was critical to increasing innovation in peripheral economies that inherently had uneven access to knowledge sources. Vikkala (2007) described these knowledge sources as coming from a range of 'clients, non-local knowledge institutes and national technology programmes' (511).

Building innovative periphery regions therefore is partly the result of strategies aimed at overcoming the spatial boundedness of organizational knowledge spillovers; this can be through the social proximity provided by virtual or physical social networks. For example, North and Smallbone (2000) found that firms used the Internet to overcome lack of networking opportunities and were 'shaped by various aspects of the rural environment' (87). Monge, Hartwich, and Halgin (2008) noted the links between social capital and adoption of innovation, and Sobels, Curtis, and Lockie (2001) noted the positive multiplier effect that the cumulative social capital of collaborating networks had on achieving group outcomes. Research in general reports positive links between social capital and regional development (cf. Bryden and Munro 2000; Callois and Aubert 2007), with links between sports and social capital in rural or disadvantaged communities (Atherley 2006; Skinner, Zakus, and Cowell 2008) pointing to the role of temporal social proximity in generating pipeline connections to regions outside of a community's immediate operating environment

(cf. Bathelt, Malmberg, and Maskell 2004; Lagendijk and Lorentzen 2007).

This article aims to explore innovation in periphery economies by examining labor commuting as an additional dimension in the social proximity discourse for regional communities. That is, can worker mobility assist in transporting ideas between locations (and bringing back ideas to the firm), particularly when there are large long-distance commuting workforces (cf. Faggian and McCann 2009), and how might this change our perception regarding the contribution of peripheral areas to the overall RIS? The remainder of this article explores how extended labor networks might facilitate innovation in regional Australia.

## Framing Innovation across Regional Australia

Australia has followed global policy trends with knowledge development and innovation becoming critical platforms for improving its productivity and, in turn, global economic competitiveness (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 2003, 2004; Dodgson et al. 2011). Innovation policy in Australia has undergone considerable changes in the last fifteen years, moving from a primarily nationally driven system 'sponsoring grand 'technology citadels'' to one where the states have increasingly taken a 'bottom-up approach to building intense innovation environments, local clusters and knowledge hubs' (Garrett-Jones 2004, 3). Despite this, questions regarding Australia's capacity to innovate have persisted, causing concern over growing metropolitan-regional socioeconomic disparities and the need to remain globally competitive. This has led to increased policy efforts to more broadly understand the overarching NIS (see Dodgson et al. 2011).

A2011 report (Department of Industry 2011) found that although Australia was increasingly productive relative to the United States, manufactured products tended to be low value-added and specialized in lowto medium-technology sectors, such as basic metals (upstream processing; e.g., primary aluminum and steel) and food and beverage (final stage processed food). The report noted that collaboration significantly contributed to Australian business productivity (more than triple), with businesses that collaborated 78 percent more likely to record rises. This figure rose to 242 percent more likely to increase productivity for businesses collaborating with research organizations (or similar). Furthermore, a greater diversity in knowledge sources was found to substantially affect Australian business innovation levels across all innovation types: goods and services, operation processes, organizational and managerial methods, and marketing methods. Although the report highlighted the features of Australia's innovation system, its lack of geographically disaggregated data does little to allow an understanding of the relational dimensions within the urban system itself. Indeed, the highly urbanized nature of the Australian urban system (McGuirk and Argent 2011) implies that the majority of data were gleaned from businesses and institutions located in major cities.

Increasing interest in understanding Australia's RISs has generated calls to take innovation outside of its standard 'science and technology' realm to recognize the substantial contribution to innovation of other industries, such as humanities, arts, and social sciences (Haseman and Jaaniste 2008), as well as the range of community, industry, and institutional actors and processes (Cutler 2008). Such a position is further justified with observations that innovation processes in peripheral locations are highly subject to the local characteristics. Many of these have resulted from the need to overcome 'barriers' in the traditional RIS sense, making it more difficult to draw from the experiences of larger metropolitan regions or the peripheries of other countries (cf. North and Smallbone 2000; Doloreux and Dionne 2008; Martinez-Fernandez and Potts 2008). Garrett-Jones (2004) highlighted the disadvantaged nature of many rural areas in terms of innovation, with state and federal governments allocating financial resources according to population, in particular to the most populous states of New South Wales and Victoria.

Settlement across regional Australia is characterized by uneven patterns of development, with some cities and towns absorbing the bulk of population and wealth at the expense of others (Tonts, Martinus, and Plummer 2013; Martinus 2016) as well as the population decline of economically productive remote or rural locations (see Haslam-McKenzie 2011; Morris 2012). From an economic perspective, the uneven patterns of development appear to be worsening, with observations that the two-speed dichotomy between the haves and have nots (Stimpson 2001) is shifting to a three-speed one producing the fast moving, the slow moving, and the rest (Corden 2012). Research has debated and ascribed observations of Australia's regional urban geography to various ideological and theoretical constructs such as postproductivism

landscapes, amenity- or resource-led development, the sponge cities hypothesis, and sea/tree change movements (Smailes 2002; Argent, Rolley, and Walmsley 2008; Luck, Race, and Black 2010; Connell and McManus 2011; Tonts, Martinus, and Plummer 2013). This development unevenness is compounded by an increasingly long-distance commuting labor force (LDC) or, as colloquially known, FIFO (fly in/fly out), BIBO (bus in/bus out), and DIDO (drive in/drive out).

The LDC option enables highly paid labor (primarily highly specialized) to live far from work locations in comparatively amenity-rich regional towns (see Argent et al. 2009), reflecting in part the vast remoteness and low infrastructure provision across much of regional Australia (Argent, Rolley, and Walmsley 2008; Martinus 2016). As such, the use of LDC hinders regional development in resource-endowed areas that, in an earlier era, would have injected human and capital resources into towns (cf. Storey 2001; Martinus 2016). Coined 'cancer of the bush,' its erosion of communities has sparked a national inquiry into broader industry and regional impacts (Commonwealth of Australia 2013). Indeed, LDC has enabled an environment where regions are not only unable to tap into resource wealth by attracting worker families, but their small and declining populations do not fit the criteria for government funds to improve community socioeconomic infrastructure and amenities (Storey 2001; Morris 2012).

Introduced in the 1970s and often associated with the mining industry, in Australia, LDC is entering the labor arrangements of other industries, such as agriculture, construction, and social and health services. It is providing essential services to rural communities that otherwise have limited labor pools and poor levels of infrastructure, services, and amenities compared to Australian capitals and major cities (Commonwealth of Australia 2013). Although greater access to specialized labor markets might suggest resource efficiency and productivity, Australia is experiencing decreasing productivity since the 2000s primarily due to declines in mining, agriculture, and utilities industries (Koutsogeorgopoulou and Barbiero 2013). Concern that Australia could begin to fall behind globally has generated considerable policy and academic debate on the development of factors influencing productivity such as human capital (leadership, higher education, skills), innovation (knowledge exchange systems, stimulation), and infrastructure (Green, Toner, and Agarwal 2012; Koutsogeorgopoulou and Barbiero 2013). The increasing reliance of rural communities on innovation to raise productivity, remain economically viable, and promote sustainability in Australia's harsh environmental conditions and under increasing global competition builds a strong policy case for better understanding the role of peripheral economies in the broader innovation system.

## The Data and Regression Variables

Acknowledging the complexity of factors contributing to innovative activity, this research explores the relationship of various independent variables to innovative activity through a regression analysis of data from regional Australia. It uses the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) spatial unit of the LGA as this most closely fits the RIS concept of a region being 'meso-political unit[s] set between the national or federal and local levels of government that might have some cultural or historical homogeneity but which at least had some statutory powers to intervene and support economic development, particularly innovation' (Cooke 2001, 953). The study area of regional Australia was defined as those areas outside the seven Australian capital cities and their extended metropolitan regions. This aligns with postcodes provided by the federal government as 'regional Australia/low population growth metropolitan areas' for purposes of general skilled migration (Australian Government 2014).

LGAs in the Northern Territory and Australian Capital Territory were excluded as outliers as they did not significantly contribute to Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) patent statistics used to measure innovative activity. This left a total of 398 regional LGAs across the states of Western Australia (WA), Queensland (QLD), New South Wales (NSW), Victoria (VIC), Tasmania (TAS), and South Australia (SA). These LGAs are diverse in structure, composed of regional towns of various sizes and different industrial structures from diverse economies with high levels of amenities to single industry resource towns (Martinus 2016). Despite this, the towns in each LGA are typical regional communities characterized by low populations, low-density urban development, and low levels of industry agglomeration. The wide dispersion of population and industry across the vast Australian regional landscape also contributed to the choice of the LGA as the most appropriate spatial unit encapsulating the broad social network of residents living and working in constituent towns and surrounding areas.

An ordinary least squares multiple regression was employed as the outcome (dependent variable) of 2000

to 2013 historic cumulative (summed) patent (number of persons) data were continuous. The regression of thirteen-year cumulative data against contemporary 2011 ABS socioeconomic data was based on two related assumptions. First, an LGA's unique mix of contemporary social, economic, and political factors taken at any particular time period (in this case 2011) was not an isolated snapshot with no relation to past social, institutional, political, and economic dimensions and influences (cf. Amin 2002; Martin and Sunley 2006; Tonts, Martinus, and Plummer 2013; Martinus 2016). Second, an LGA's potential for future innovation (cf. Olaru and Purchase 2015) is related to cumulative urban and economic development path-dependent processes shaped by this unique mix of factors and best captured by independent variable data taken toward the end of the 2000 to 2013 patent activity period (in this case, 2011 ABS data).

For example, labor mobility as embodied by the various independent commuting variables of the model can be viewed as a product of the well-worn paths between places of residence and work associated with generations of interchange based on some initial first connection (cf. Sheppard 2002; Warf 2008). Nonspatial proximity in sparsely populated LGAs is therefore created as spaces are pulled together through the gradual and continual exchange of commuters. As carriers of ideas, information, and knowledge, commuters shape the 'social, institutional, political, and economic dimensions' of 'territorially bounded spaces' and 'change the relative position of places and actors located within them' (Lagendijk and Lorentzen 2007, 460). This model assumes that measuring the outcome of this influence is best understood at the end of the period rather than the beginning and that this outcome is related to the processes at play that influence a region's innovation levels.

Table 1 outlines the dependent and independent variables for the regression, which can be expressed by the following equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Regression independent variables were constructed using various indicators from ABS 2011 census data, where X 0 is the constant, b jXj represents the coefficients ( b j ) and associated independent variables ( Xj ) where j is a number between 1 and 18, and e is the residual error.

Acknowledging difficulties in measuring innovative activity and 'economically useful new knowledge' (Acs, Anselin, and Varga 2002, 1069) and that not all inventions are patented, the regression dependent variable acting as the innovation proxy was constructed using patent data. Patent data have been consistently identified as a good indicator of innovative activity (Hagedoorn and Cloodt 2003) and employed in a variety of studies on innovation (Bottazzi and Peri 2003; Bilbao-Osorio and Rodriguez-Pose 2004; Fritsch and Franke 2004; Miguelez and Moreno 2013). The LGA locations of innovations were gleaned from the postcode information of addresses filed on patent applications in the January 2014 edition of the OECD REGPAT database (OECD 2014) covering the period 2000 to 2013 (see Maraut et al. [2008] for OECD database construction method). This database represents high-value patents that might generate regional bias in the data, producing limitations to this analysis. It was still deemed most appropriate, however, as (1) it was used to provide an indicator of regional innovation (rather than an exact measure) and (2) this research is part of a larger global cross-national comparative study requiring comparable country patent information. There were 2,340 persons who filed sole and collaborative patent applications across the 398 regional LGAs during the thirteen-year period.

The number of persons involved in patent activity over the thirteen years ( Y ) was chosen as the dependent variable representing innovation patterns across regional Australia capturing instances of collaboration between different and within the same LGAs. It was assumed that these cumulative totals would highlight regional differences in innovative capacity given that, in any one year, data were sparse and therefore did not necessarily represent the relative potential of LGAs to innovate (or not). That is, the model assumed that more innovative LGAs produced more patents in the thirteen years than less innovative LGAs. Y was normalized by calculating the percentage each LGA contributed to total number of persons involved in patent applications across the whole of regional Australia. Z -score standardizations were also tried. Inherent differences in how the variables (dependent and independent) were distributed or clustered around their respective means, as well as the possibility of both negative and positive z scores, made interpreting model outputs difficult. The simple percent rank order proportion (on a 0-100 scale) was found to improve interpretation and legibility of regression results, providing a more useful model.

Table 1. Regression variable descriptions

| Variable   | Abbreviation   | Variable description                                                                                                                                             |
|------------|----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Y          | %PER           | Independent variable Percentage of regional Australia persons involved in patent applications, 2000-2013 (Source: OECD 2014) Dependent variables                 |
| X 1        | %OUTLAB        | Percentage of regional Australia out-commuting labor force of total 2,928,867 persons (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence)                               |
| X 2        | %INLAB         | Percentage of regional Australia in-commuting labor force of total 393,585 persons (Source: ABS 2011; place of work)                                             |
| X 3        | %OUTLGA        | Percentage of regional Australia outflow LGAs of total 10,196 connections; measure of connection diversity (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence)          |
| X 4        | %INLGA         | Percentage of regional Australia inflow LGAs of total 10,165 connections; measure of connection diversity (Source: ABS 2011; place of work)                      |
| X 5        | %POP           | Percentage of regional Australian population of total 398 regional LGAs (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence)                                             |
| X 6        | %MAN           | Percentage of persons in LGA in manufacturing (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence)                                                                       |
| X 7        | %MIN           | Percentage of persons in LGA in mining (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence)                                                                              |
| X 8        | %AG            | Percentage of persons in LGA in agriculture, forestry, and fishing (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence)                                                  |
| X 9        | %ARTS          | Percentage of persons in LGA in arts and recreation services (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence)                                                        |
| X 10       | %HEAL          | Percentage of persons in LGA in health care and social assistance (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence)                                                   |
| X 11       | %ED            | Percentage of persons in LGA in education and training (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence)                                                              |
| X 12       | %ICT           | Percentage of persons in LGA in information, media, and telecommunications (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence)                                          |
| X 13       | %PROF          | Percentage of persons in LGA in professional, scientific, and technical services (Source: ABS 2011)                                                              |
| X 14       | %POSTBACH      | Percentage of persons in LGA with postgraduate degree, bachelor's degree, graduate diploma, or graduate certificate (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence) |
| X 15       | %CERT          | Percentage of persons in LGA with certificate, advanced diploma, or diploma (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence)                                         |
| X 16       | %INT           | Percentage of persons in LGA with broadband or dial-up Internet (Source: ABS 2011; dwellings, location on census night)                                          |
| X 17       | %NONOCE        | Percentage of non-Oceania-born in LGA (Source: ABS 2011; place of usual residence)                                                                               |
| X 18       | ARIA           | Accessibility/Remoteness Index of Australia measuring road distances between populated localities and service centers. Index normalized to fit 0-100 range.      |

Notes: OECD = Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development; ABS = Australian Bureau of Statistics; LGA D local government area.

Regression independent variables were chosen to represent factors associated with knowledge development and innovation, specifically ethnic diversity, connectivity (physical and virtual), industrial structure, and education levels (cf. Martinus 2010), as well as an index of remoteness. Labor commuting profiles for the regression analysis were derived from a 568 £ 568 matrix of ABS 2011 journey-to-work regional and metropolitan LGA data detailing where labor resides and works throughout Australia (ABS 2011). SNA was applied to this matrix to unpack the geography of commuter movements across the total

568 LGAs, as well as construct several commuting variables to allow regional LGAs to be interpreted within a national commuting framework of workplace and residence LGAs. There were four separate commuting variables used. The first two summed all work movements between LGAs allowing the total commuters residing ( X 1 or OUTLAB ) and working ( X 2 or INLAB ) in each LGA. The second two represented the sum of LGAs associated with these commuter movements; that is, the SNA 2 metrics of in-degree ( X 3 or INLGA ) and out-degree ( X 4 or OUTLGA ) centrality. These variables were indicators of an LGA's

extended network of ideas and social capital given the relationship between labor connectivity and innovation (Cooper 2001; Bottazzi and Peri 2003; Simmie 2003; Fritsch and Frank 2004; Howells 2005; Kaiser, Kongsted, and Ronde 2011; Moreno and Miguelez 2012), as well as an understanding of the implicit competitive advantages enabling each region to become a place of work or residence (Tonts, Martinus, and Plummer 2013; Martinus 2016).

Drawing on links between urban density (agglomeration), innovation, and regional growth (cf. Martinus 2010), the population size variable ( X 5 or POP ) explored whether low populations were a disadvantage in generating innovation. It reflected the unevenness of population distribution across regional Australia that has occurred over decades of migration and regional economic restructuring (Martinus 2016), such that high populations generally reflected high amenity areas along the coast or inland tree-change locations.

The variables of X 6 , X 7 , X 8 , X 9 , X 10 , X 11 , X 12, and X 13 (or MAN , AG , MIN , ARTS , HEAL , ED , ICT , and PROF , respectively) relate to industries of employment of residents given the large role industry and economic competitive advantage play in driving innovative activity (Porter 2000; Bathelt, Malmberg, and Maskell 2004) as well as the relationship between places of work and residence resulting in the historic redistribution of wealth (Tonts, Martinus, and Plummer 2013; Martinus 2016). An index of regional industrial diversity (RDI) using these variables was initially considered, but it was replaced by the normalization of individual industry sectors (as percentage of employment in each LGA; see Table 1), as the RDI did not add to the fit of the model. AG and MIN sectors are employed in the regression as the industries driving the majority of regional Australia's historic development (Tonts, Martinus, and Plummer 2013) and other sectors (MAN, ARTS, HEAL, ED, ICT, and PROF) for their value-add component or the innovation-support services they performed.

The education variables of X 14 (or POSTBACH ) and X 15 (or CERT ; see Table 1 for breakdown of qualifications) test the links between education attainment and innovation (Martinus 2010; Stadler 2012), with previous research noting that innovative regions attract the largest numbers of educated persons (Dakhli and De Clercq 2004). The research hypothesized that regions with the highest levels of education in 2011 would also have the most patents over the thirteen-year period. The Internet connectivity variable ( X 16 or INT ) examined the relationship between innovation and access to global information and social networks (North and Smallbone 2000; Martinus 2010). The model assumes that historically more connected communities had higher levels of connectivity in 2011 given their earlier access to communications infrastructure than highly remote communities.

The X 17 (or NONOCE ) variable investigates the relationship between non-Oceania overseas-born residents and innovation, given links between ethnic diversity and innovation (Niebuhr 2010). The NONOCE variable was chosen as it increased the models' statistical significance more than an initially constructed regional ethnic diversity index variable, perhaps due to the low numbers of non-Australians in regional towns. The model assumed that migrant populations were highest in regions with a history of migrant attraction due to the availability of work, cultural support, and a migrant welcoming community (Jordan, Krivokapic-Skoko, and Collins 2010; Lyas et al. 2013). The normalized variable (placed on a 0-100 scale) of Australia's remoteness and accessibility index ( X 18 or ARIA ) was included to test whether more regions with better road connectivity and access were also more innovative.

Other ABS variables of employment type (owner, employee, contributing family member) were also considered to explore the links between entrepreneurship and innovation. They were excluded, however, as they were not statistically significant and did not improve the overall fit of the model. The remainder of the article documents the findings of the regression analysis.

## Labor Connectivity and Innovation across Regional Australia

Table 2 summarizes population and patent data by state share, highlighting a pattern of more populous states being the most innovative. This is confirmed by patents per head of population, with the densest states generating more innovation per person (VIC and NSW have twenty-four and nine persons per square kilometer, respectively). VIC and NSW also had the highest gross expenditure on R&amp;D (GERD), with 30 and 26 percent of total national expenditure, compared to WA, QLD, and SA, which had 17, 14, and 7 percent, respectively (the latest figures being for 20082009; ABS 2010). Innovation per person for the remaining states appeared to have little relationship to density (TAS, QLD, SA, and WA having 7.5, 2.6,

Table 2. Summary of state share of population and patent data

| Percentage of Australia    |   State share of population (%) |   State share of patents (%) |   Patents per 100 population | Area of Australia   |   Patents per 100 population |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|---------------------|------------------------------|
| TotalNSW                   |                            33.2 |                         37.4 |                         0.18 | RegionalNSW         |                         0.06 |
| Total QLD                  |                            20.6 |                         16.2 |                         0.13 | Regional QLD        |                         0.06 |
| Total VIC                  |                            25.5 |                         28.5 |                         0.18 | Regional VIC        |                         0.05 |
| TotalWA                    |                            10.8 |                         10.6 |                         0.16 | RegionalWA          |                         0.06 |
| Total SA                   |                             7.5 |                          6.5 |                         0.14 | Regional SA         |                         0.02 |
| Total TAS                  |                             2.4 |                          0.7 |                         0.05 | Regional TAS        |                         0.05 |
| Total regional Australia a |                            28.2 |                          9.6 |                         0.06 |                     |                         0.06 |
| Total Australia            |                           100   |                        100   |                         0.16 |                     |                              |

Notes: NSW D New South Wales; QLD D Queensland; VIC D Victoria; WA D Western Australia; SA D South Australia; TAS D Tasmania. a

Using selected states only (excluding Northern Territory).

1.7, and 0.9 persons per square kilometer, respectively, in 2011; ABS 2015). The regional areas of each state had considerably lower patents per head and exhibited a different pattern, with regional LGAs in NSW, VIC, and WA generating the highest number of patents per 100 population.

Figure 1 illustrates the network of labor commuter flows (both in and out) between regional and metropolitan LGAs across Australia, where larger spheres denote LGAs of work (i.e., higher in-commute) and smaller shapes denote LGAs of low in-commute. There is a concentration of workers traveling to regional LGAs adjacent to the capital cities as well as to the north of Western Australia and Queensland. In contrast, the areas with the largest out-commute workforce are found along the coast (many are residential locations) and in remote inland locations (many are both work and residential locations).

Table 3 displays information similar to that in Figure 1 for the top thirty LGAs by patent levels (of total 398 regional LGAs). Regional NSW was by far the most innovative, having 53 percent of the top innovative LGAs. QLD and VIC occupied 20 and 17 percent of the top spots, respectively. Although the top three LGAs by patent activity also had some of the highest populations and outcommuting labor (indicating residential locations), there was no clear relationship among population, patent levels, and commuting.

Table 4 summarizes the descriptive statistics for the variables. The gap between minimum, maximum, and standard deviation values highlights the considerable variation in the variables between regions. Where all LGAs were connected to the national network of mobile workers, there were large differences in the economic structure, with some LGAs more dominated by a single industry. This is evident in the regional percentage share of MAN, MIN, and AG, with mining most dominant in the LGA of Laverton, Western Australia (34 percent of its employment structure), agriculture in the Wheatbelt shire of Kent, Western Australia (39 percent), and manufacturing in the mining shire of Wiluna, Western Australia (16 percent). Accordingly, %INT is assumed to reflect levels of historic connectivity given the links of Internet uptake to infrastructure provision and general residential or cultural attitudes to being 'globally' connected. The lowest connected LGA (only 13 percent of residents) was the Indigenous community of Napranum, Queensland, and the highest was the mining LGA of Roxby Downs, South Australia (86 percent).

Similarly, %NONOCE reflected the attraction of LGAs to overseas migrants for work, family, or cultural reasons, with the highest non-Oceania-born levels (29 percent) found in the opal mining LGA of Cooper Pedy, South Australia, and the lowest (0 percent) associated with various remote and Indigenous communities. The education variables of %CERT and %POSTBACH demonstrate general education levels of the community resulting from the specific needs of industry, presence of education facilities, or the attraction of place to educated workers (see Faggian and McCann 2009). The outliers in these variables also represented the smallest LGAs. The highest and lowest %CERT were, respectively, Cherbourg, Queensland (96 percent), as the only Indigenous community with a vocational education facility and the small mining and agricultural LGA of Sandstone, Western Australia (43 percent), with the highest and lowest %POSTBACHbeingSandstone, WesternAustralia,and Cherbourg, Queensland,respectively.

Figure 1. Labor inflows (larger disk denotes greater number of commuter inflows; lines denote connecting local government areas).

<!-- image -->

Table 5 gives the results for different regression models, where M1 uses all 398 regional LGAs and M2 and M3 and use populations under 70,000 (384 LGAs) and 50,000 (372 LGAs) persons, respectively. The p value for all models is close to zero, indicating their statistical significance. The relatively large F statistic (critical F value is around 3) signifies that at least one of the variables is not zero and the models explain some of the total variability (i.e., some statistical usefulness). The null hypothesis was therefore rejected. Although the majority of the variables were insignificant, they were included as they improved the fit of the model (adjusted R 2 ). The adjusted R 2 value demonstrates that the variables account for 56 to 68 percent of the overall variance, although the fit of the model decreased as higher population LGAs were removed.

The variables of %POP and %PRO were significant in all models, suggesting their high value (positive correlation) to regional innovation. %PRO was consistently significant across all models, with other variables demonstrating different significance levels. Interestingly, %POP was highly significant in highand low-populous LGAs but only slightly significant in moderate-size LGAs (M2). In the latter, both the number of other outgoing LGAs' connections and incoming labor flows were highly significant, suggesting that the number of workers and diversity in LGA connections might compensate for the lower population in facilitating innovation. Diversity in LGA outgoing connections and incoming labor numbers was also significant in small LGAs (M3). Whereas the lower value of %POP between M1 and M2 pointed

Table 3. In-commute, out-commute, patent levels, and population: Top 30 regional LGAs, ranked by population size

| Patent level   | LGA                   |   Labor in |   Labor out |   Population |   Distance to nearest capital city (km) |
|----------------|-----------------------|------------|-------------|--------------|-----------------------------------------|
| 121-140        | Townsville, QLD       |      1,721 |      67,634 |      180,114 |                                   1,354 |
| 81-101         | Toowoomba, QLD        |      4,430 |      62,826 |      155,473 |                                     124 |
| 61-80          | Mackay, QLD           |      1,811 |      45,410 |      115,960 |                                     971 |
| 61-80          | Wingecarribee,NSW     |      2,692 |      22,558 |       46,126 |                                     152 |
| 61-80          | Great Lakes,NSW       |      1,820 |      21,608 |       35,737 |                                     251 |
| 41-60          | Orange,NSW            |      4,044 |      16,342 |       39,419 |                                     257 |
| 41-60          | Busselton,WA          |      1,046 |      13,971 |       31,523 |                                     226 |
| 41-60          | Maitland,NSW          |     10,051 |      39,760 |       69,924 |                                     167 |
| 41-60          | Blue Mountains,NSW    |      2,532 |      47,002 |       78,553 |                                     106 |
| 41-60          | Cairns, QLD           |      2,541 |      62,304 |      162,178 |                                   1,701 |
| 41-60          | Shoalhaven,NSW        |      2,217 |      49,681 |       96,203 |                                     200 |
| 41-60          | Hawkesbury,NSW        |      7,961 |      35,421 |       64,353 |                                      50 |
| 41-60          | Macedon Ranges, VIC   |      2,487 |      24,838 |       42,883 |                                      69 |
| 41-60          | Greater Bendigo, VIC  |      2,804 |      45,796 |      101,995 |                                     153 |
| 21-40          | Armidale Dumaresq,NSW |      1,763 |      11,055 |       25,158 |                                     474 |
| 21-40          | Coffs Harbour,NSW     |      2,354 |      32,416 |       70,972 |                                     530 |
| 21-40          | Port Stephens,NSW     |      8,927 |      38,190 |       67,214 |                                     183 |
| 21-40          | Ballina,NSW           |      3,255 |      21,744 |       40,747 |                                     186 |
| 21-40          | Goulburn Mulwaree,NSW |      1,228 |      13,700 |       28,363 |                                     194 |
| 21-40          | Mildura, VIC          |      1,405 |      22,885 |       51,822 |                                     542 |
| 21-40          | Rockhampton, QLD      |      1,273 |      46,590 |      112,333 |                                     635 |
| 21-40          | Lismore,NSW           |      5,490 |      21,126 |       44,348 |                                     738 |
| 21-40          | Singleton,NSW         |      6,872 |      10,023 |       23,523 |                                     200 |
| 21-40          | Ballarat, VIC         |      6,893 |      43,219 |       95,185 |                                     114 |
| 21-40          | Baw Baw, VIC          |      2,372 |      22,435 |       43,389 |                                     212 |
| 21-40          | Bunbury,WA            |     10,668 |      16,781 |       32,580 |                                     173 |
| 21-40          | Wagga Wagga,NSW       |      2,580 |      23,265 |       61,781 |                                     461 |
| 21-40          | Byron,NSW             |      2,520 |      15,395 |       30,712 |                                     161 |
| 21-40          | Cassowary Coast, QLD  |        869 |      12,292 |       28,636 |                                   1,546 |
| 1-40           | Latrobe, TAS          |      1,301 |       6,565 |       10,275 |                                     274 |

Notes: LGA D local government area; QLD D Queensland; NSW D New South Wales; WA D Western Australia; VIC D Victoria; TAS D Tasmania.

to the declining influence of population as larger populations were excluded, there appeared to be a critical mass of population needed under which %POP (or agglomeration factors) began to matter. The lower significance of %POP in M2 suggested that innovation is driven by other sources (e.g., the number of LGAs workers are commuting to and the size of the incoming labor force). The significance of %INLAB suggests that there is an advantage gained via commuting, either through direct collaboration in patent activity or in the increase of worker ideas to which a community has access. Surprisingly, Internet connection and level of remoteness are insignificant in all models. In terms of industry of employment, %PRO had the largest positive impact on innovation activity in all models, and %MAN was found to negatively affect innovation in M2 and M3 size LGAs.

Figure 2 highlights several interesting points in the relationship between the most significant variables of share of population and labor in-commuting against share of persons involved in patent applications. First, the leading regional innovators appear to be either residential LGAs with some of the largest populations and relatively low numbers of in-commuting workers (Townsville, Toowoomba, Cairns, Mackay, and Greater Bendigo) or have moderate populations and share of worker inflow (Port Stephens and Hawkesbury). A second tier of innovators has relatively low shares of populations and in-commuters, suggesting seaor treechange lifestyle locations (Busselton, Wingecarribee, Great Lakes, and Armidale-Duresque). Second, the uncertain relationship among innovative activity, commuting, and population with some moderately populated LGAs recording little to no

Table 4. Regression variable summary statistics (398 local government areas)

| Variable   | Variable   |     M |    SD |   Minimum |   Maximum |
|------------|------------|-------|-------|-----------|-----------|
| X 1        | %OUTLAB    |  0.25 |  0.37 |      0    |      2.31 |
| X 2        | %INLAB     |  0.25 |  0.42 |      0    |      2.93 |
| X 3        | %OUTLGA    |  0.25 |  0.23 |      0.01 |      1.39 |
| X 4        | %INLGA     |  0.25 |  0.23 |      0.02 |      1.51 |
| X 5        | %POP       |  0.25 |  0.38 |      0    |      2.94 |
| X 6        | %MAN       |  2.98 |  2.21 |      0    |     15.76 |
| X 7        | %MIN       |  2.37 |  5.08 |      0    |     33.85 |
| X 8        | %AG        |  8.38 |  7.56 |      0    |     39.02 |
| X 9        | %ARTS      |  0.39 |  0.43 |      0    |      5.49 |
| X 10       | %HEAL      |  4.26 |  1.52 |      0    |      8.8  |
| X 11       | %ED        |  3.49 |  1.06 |      0.03 |      9.65 |
| X 12       | %ICT       |  0.25 |  0.2  |      0    |      0.99 |
| X 13       | %PROF      |  1.17 |  0.71 |      0    |      4.71 |
| X 14       | %POSTBACH  | 26.05 |  6    |      4.47 |     57.14 |
| X 15       | %CERT      | 73.95 |  6    |     42.86 |     95.53 |
| X 16       | %INT       | 63.76 | 11.35 |     13.19 |     85.95 |
| X 17       | %NONOCE    |  8.73 |  4.64 |      0    |     28.85 |
| X 18       | ARIA       | 37.61 | 27.5  |      0    |    100    |
| Y          | %PER       |  0.25 |  0.55 |      0    |      5.6  |

innovation and high in-commute (e.g., Isaac and East Pilbara) and other LGAs with low shares of population and in-commute having a moderate share of persons involved in patents (Esperance).

## Discussion

Given that lack of population is often cited as the reason that rural or remote communities are not considered in conversations of innovation generally, it is not surprising that population size had an influence in all models. Understanding the variables that were both significant and insignificant generates insight into the key factors driving the numbers of persons involved in patent applications as a proxy for innovation across regional Australia. One of the more surprising findings to emerge was the insignificance of Internet connectivity and remoteness levels and the significance of the size of the labor force and diversity of outgoing worker connections to other LGAs. This indicates that the extended social network of regional LGAs through

Table 5. Regression models of number of persons engaged in patent applications, 2000-2013 using Australian regional LGAs at different 2011 population size cutoffs

| Variable coefficient   | Variable coefficient   | All (M1)        | Under 70,000 population (M2)   | Under 50,000 population (M3)   |
|------------------------|------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| b 0                    | Constant               | ¡ 0.12 (0.15)   | ¡ 0.07 (0.12)                  | ¡ 0.05 (0.11)                  |
| b 1                    | %INLGA                 | ¡ 0.00 (0.11)   | ¡ 0.06 (0.09)                  | ¡ 0.08 (0.08)                  |
| b 2                    | %OUTLGA                | 0.12 (0.22)     | 0.93 *** (0.20)                | 0.91 *** (0.19)                |
| b 3                    | %INLAB                 | 0.10 (0.05)     | 0.20 *** (0.05)                | 0.18 * (0.05)                  |
| b 4                    | %OUTLAB                | ¡ 0.41 (0.26)   | ¡ 0.14 (0.24)                  | ¡ 0.26 (0.25)                  |
| b 5                    | %POP                   | 1.44 *** (0.21) | 0.48 * (0.22)                  | 0.83 *** (0.22)                |
| b 6                    | %MAN                   | ¡ 0.01 (0.01)   | ¡ 0.02 * (0.01)                | ¡ 0.02 * (0.01)                |
| b 7                    | %MIN                   | ¡ 0.002 (0.00)  | ¡ 0.002 (0.00)                 | ¡ 0.001 (0.00)                 |
| b 8                    | %AG                    | 0.003 (0.00)    | 0.002 (0.00)                   | 0.004 (0.00)                   |
| b 9                    | %ARTS                  | 0.02 (0.04)     | ¡ 0.01 (0.03)                  | ¡ 0.01 (0.03)                  |
| b 10                   | %HEAL                  | ¡ 0.02 (0.01)   | ¡ 0.01 (0.01)                  | ¡ 0.01 (0.01)                  |
| b 11                   | %ED                    | 0.02 (0.02)     | 0.01 (0.02)                    | 0.01 (0.01)                    |
| b 12                   | %ICT                   | ¡ 0.06 (0.12)   | ¡ 0.08 (0.09)                  | ¡ 0.08 (0.09)                  |
| b 13                   | %PROF                  | 0.05 ** (0.02)  | 0.09 ** (0.03)                 | 0.08 ** (0.03)                 |
| b 14                   | %POSTBACH              | 0.003 (0.00)    | 0.002 (0.00)                   | 0.003 (0.00)                   |
| b 15                   | %CERT                  | 0 (omitted)     | 0 (omitted)                    | 0 (omitted)                    |
| b 16                   | %INT                   | ¡ 0.002 (0.00)  | ¡ 0.002 (0.00)                 | ¡ 0.004 (0.00)                 |
| b 17                   | %NONOCE                | ¡ 0.00 (0.00)   | 0.00 (0.00)                    | 0.003 (0.00)                   |
| b 18                   | ARIA                   | ¡ 0.00 (0.00)   | 0.00 (0.00)                    | 0.00 (0.00)                    |
|                        | F                      | 51.32           | 32.44                          | 28.69                          |
|                        | P                      | 0.000           | 0.000                          | 0.000                          |
|                        | Adjusted R 2           | 0.68            | 0.58                           | 0.56                           |
|                        | No. of LGAs            | 398             | 384                            | 372                            |

## Martinus

Figure 2. Relationship of share of persons involved in patent applications for all local government areas with (A) share of regional population and (B) share of regional in-commuting flows.

<!-- image -->

LDC is a resource for innovation, with traditional forms of problem solving, such as face-to-face consultation, just as important in less connected and remote LGAs as they are in large metropolitan centers.

Unpacking drivers of innovation in peripheral communities is critical to moving beyond preconceptions that innovation does not occur in regional LGAs. The significance of the various commuting and PROF variables not only suggests that regional LGAs find economic advantage in the extended networks of labor but that commuting works to increase innovation through the whole regional and metropolitan system. This could be either through direct collaborations with workers from other LGAs or the transfer of ideas between workers of connected communities with the employment sector of professional, scientific, and technical services playing a large role in knowledge dissemination and the generation of innovative outcomes. Furthermore, smaller LGAs appear to derive benefit from not only the size of extended social structures of in-commuters but from the numbers of different LGAs to which their workers are traveling. This aligns with previous Australian and international research findings that diversity in knowledge sources increases innovation (Department of Industry 2011) in peripheral areas (Doloreux 2003), suggesting that knowledge sources for small regional

LGAs are related to both their overall workforce and the LGAs they come from.

Although the high population coefficient in M1 reflects positive industry and population agglomeration effects in facilitating innovation, it is not affected by worker movements. This implies that the benefits of extended labor networks have no impact on amenity-rich LGAs (where there are large resident populations commuting elsewhere for work), although working residents commuting elsewhere for work increase the innovative capacity of destination LGAs. Commuters then appear to act as knowledge conduits between two LGAs, such that the knowledge resources (or capital) in LGAs where workers live are developed and commercialized in LGAs where they work. The insignificance associated with the extended labor networks of larger regional LGAs is most likely because they already have the critical population mass and social network structure to support patent 'selfgeneration.'

Such findings point to the capacity of commuting labor to transfer ideas between regions, allowing tacit knowledge to transcend 'time, space, and organizational boundaries' (see Nonaka and Toyama 2003, 2). This produces positive feedback mechanisms for innovation in all regional communities where commuting labor generates 'social network effects' in both work and residential LGAs (cf. Kaiser, Kongsted, and Ronde 2011). The interactions of commuters from different LGAs at the workplace allow knowledge to travel between regions, enhancing the RIS or NIS as local knowledge capacity increases via inflows of external knowledge. In this way, commuting as a subset of labor mobility can facilitate innovation and technological progress by increasing knowledge dissemination in the same way that 'jobhopping' does (see Cooper 2001; Poschl and Foster 2013). Thus, as suggested by Morgan (2007) and Williams, Balaz, and Wallace (2004), research on innovation should look beyond the usual measures of institutional capacity and R&amp;D expenditure when evaluating innovation systems to include an understanding of labor's role, mobility, and networks. Doing so will better capture the function of social networks in mediating production relationships and shaping landscapes of uneven development (cf. Williams, Balaz, and Wallace 2004). This will improve understandings of how global pipelines might connect clusters of different sizes to drive regional development (cf. Bathelt, Malmberg, and Maskell 2004).

## Concluding Comments

Understanding the complexities of a nation's innovation system has become a key factor in the formulation of effective policy targeting national productivity and global competitiveness for both metropolitan and regional areas. Nonetheless, the importance of proximity in facilitating knowledge spillovers and innovation has meant a research focus on the dynamics of agglomerated urban centers of major metropolitan regions, with little attention paid to the different mechanisms in sparsely populated peripheral regions. This is highlighted through the Australian case study where overall higher levels of government and business investment in R&amp;D are reflected in more patents per head of population in NSW and VIC overall yet not in the regional areas of VIC where patent levels in other less populated states are higher (namely, WA and QLD). Given the contribution of peripheral areas to Australia's gross domestic product (often through their resource endowments), further exploration of the unique factors driving the innovation process in these regions and the industry sectors with which they are associated is both warranted and well overdue.

A rising feature of Australia's economy is its mobile labor force. This mobility acts to exacerbate uneven geographies of development between regions with amenity- and infrastructure-endowed locations absorbing the bulk of regional population and economic investment at the expense of poorly serviced ones. This has major implications regarding the perception of a region's capacity to generate knowledge spillovers and innovation. This study challenges assumptions that remote and rural economies either operate external to the NIS or do not contribute to innovation in core urban areas by exploring the relationship of commuting and other variables with innovative activity. It finds that population, labor in-commute, diversity of out-commuting LGAs, and professional, technical, and scientific services were significantly correlated to the numbers of people involved in patent applications. Manufacturing was negatively correlated. This led to the conclusion that the extended labor networks in peripheral communities provide a resource for innovative activity in LGAs where workers worked rather than where they lived. This effect was found to be stronger in smaller LGAs that also derived more benefit from the diversity of LGAs their workers were traveling to than their own population size. This latter effect was slightly less significant in very small LGAs.

Through the innovative application of SNA and econometric modeling, this article provides deeper insight into the role of labor commuting and how it appears to extend the innovative capacity of sparsely populated regions over and above what would be expected based on population size. This is hypothesized to occur as the flow of workers decreases the distance or geographic proximity between regional communities, with the temporary worker exchange of ideas becoming a resource for innovative activity. Incorporating the labor dimension into the institutional and organizational proximity discourse of innovation studies is therefore important for peripheral communities as the long-distance mobility of labor provides a mechanism to transfer 'sticky' knowledge and ideas between regions and across large geographic distances. The external networking activities of commuters act as critical interregional conduits to overcome barriers of organizational 'thinness' associated with the inherent lack of industry and population in peripheral areas. This implies that further research is needed on the contribution of regional place-based advantages to differences in the innovative under- or overperformance of regions based on population size, as well as the lag effects of socioeconomic variables during different periods of invention. Such understandings are critical in learning how less populous peripheral communities might form part of the innovation system; the implications of this reach far beyond Australia into other agglomerationchallenged remote or rural communities worldwide.

## Acknowledgments

I thank the reviewers for their insightful comments, as well as my colleagues at The University of Western Australia, Professor Matthew Tonts for our preliminary discussions that lay the foundations for this article, and Professor Paul Plummer for his statistical guidance.

## Funding

This work was supported by Australian Research Council Early Career Discovery Award (DE17 0100727).

## ORCID

Kirsten Martinus 9727-7310

<!-- image -->

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-

## Notes

1. This article adopts the Australian definition of regional as being rural and remote areas outside of key metropolitan areas and their surrounds.
2. Conducted using NodeXL.

## References

- Abreu, M., V. Grinevich, M. Kitson, and S. Savona. 2008. Absorptive capacity and regional patterns of innovation . London: Department for Innovation, Universities, and Skills.
- Acs, Z., L. Anselin, and A. Varga. 2002. Patent and innovation counts as a measure of regional production of new knowledge. Research Policy 31 (7):1069-85.
- Amin, A. 2002. Spatialities of globalization. Environment and Planning A 34 (3):385-99.
- Argent, N., F. Rolley, and J. Walmsley. 2008. The sponge city hypothesis: Does it hold water? Australian Geographer 39 (2):109-30.
- Argent, N., M. Tonts, R. Jones, and J. Holmes. 2009. Rural amenity and rural change in temperate Australia: Implications for development and sustainability. Journal for Geography 4 (2):15-28.
- Ashiem, B., and L. Coenen. 2005. Knowledge bases and regional innovation systems: Comparing Nordic clusters. Research Policy 34 (8):1173-90.
- Asheim, B., and M. Gertler. 2006. The geography of innovation: Regional innovation systems. In The Oxford handbook of innovation , ed. J. Fagerberg and D. Mowery, 291-317. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Ashiem, B., and A. Isaksen. 2002. Regional innovation systems: The integration of local 'sticky' and global 'ubiquitous' knowledge. Journal of Technology Transfer 27 (1):77-86.
- Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). 2003. The drivers of new economy in APEC: Innovation and organizational practices . Singapore: APEC Secretariat.
- ---. 2004. Realising innovation and human capital potential in APEC . Singapore: APEC Secretariat.
- Atherley, K. 2006. Sport, localism and social capital in rural Western Australia. Geographical Research 44 (4):348-60.
- Audretsch, D., and M. Feldman. 2004. Knowledge spillovers and the geography of innovation. In Handbook of regional and urban economics , ed. J. Henderson and J. Thisse, 2713-39. Burlington: Elsevier Science.
- Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS). 2010. Research and experimental development, all sector summary, Australia, 2008-09 .

Cat. No. 8112.0. Canberra: Australian Bureau of Statistics.

- ---. 2011. Census of population and housing . Canberra, Australia: ABS.
- ---. 2015. Regional population growth, Australia . Cat. No. 3218.0. Canberra: Australian Bureau of Statistics.
- Australian Government. 2014. Regional Australia/low population growth metropolitan areas. Accessed October, 25, 2014. https://www.immi.gov.au/skilled/generalskilled-migration/regional-growth.htm
- Bathelt, H., A. Malmberg, and P. Maskell. 2004. Clusters and knowledge: Local buzz, global pipelines and the process of knowledge creation. Progress in Human Geography 28 (1):31-56.

- Beer, A., and R. Keane. 2000. Population decline and service provision in regional Australia: A South Australian case study. People and Place 8 (2):69-76.
- Bilbao-Osorio, B., and A. Rodriguez-Pose. 2004. From R&amp;D to innovation and economic growth in the EU. Growth and Change 35 (4):434-55.
- Boschma, R. 2005. Proximity and innovation: A critical assessment. Regional Studies 39 (1):61-74.
- Boschma, R., R. Eriksson, and U. Lindgren. 2009. How does labor mobility affect the performance of plants? The importance of relatedness and geographical proximity. Journal of Economic Geography 9 (2):169-90.
- Bottazzi, L., and G. Peri. 2003. Innovation and spillovers in regions: Evidence for European patent data. European Economic Review 47 (4):687-710.
- Bryden, J., and G. Munro. 2000. New approaches to economic development in peripheral rural regions. Scottish Geographical Journal 116 (2):111-24.
- Callois, J.-M., and F. Aubert. 2007. Towards indicators of social capital for regional development issues: The case of French rural areas. Regional Studies 41 (6):809-21.
- Cant  u, C. 2010. Exploring the role of spatial relationships to transform knowledge in a business idea-Beyond a geographic proximity. Industrial Marketing Management 39 (6):887-97.
- Castellacci, F., T. Clausen, S. Na  s, and B. Verspagen. 2009. Historical fingerprints? A taxonomy of Norwegian innovation. In Innovation, path dependency, and policy: The Norwegian case , ed. J. Fagerbeger, D. Mowery, and B. Verspagen. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Commonwealth of Australia. 2013. Inquiry into the use of 'fly-in, fly-out' (FIFO) workforce practices in regional Australia . Canberra: House Standing Committee on Regional Australia.
- Connell, J., and P. McManus. 2011. Rural revival?: Place marketing, tree change and regional migration in Australia . Surrey, UK: Ashgate.
- Cooke, P. 2001. Regional innovation systems, clusters, and the knowledge economy. Industrial and Corporate Change 10 (4):945-74.
- Cooper, D. 2001. Innovation and reciprocal externalities: Information transmission via job mobility. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 45 (4):403-25.
- Corden, W. 2012. Dutch disease in Australia: Policy options for a three-speed economy. The Australian Economic Review 45 (3):290-304.
- Cutler, T. 2008. Venturous Australia: Building strength in innovation . Canberra: Australian Government.
- Dakhli, M., and D. De Clercq. 2004. Human capital, social capital, and innovation: A multi-country study. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 16 (2):107-28.
- Davenport, S. 2005. Exploring the role of proximity in SME knowledge-acquisition. Research Policy 34 (5):683-701.
- Department of Industry. 2011. Australian innovation system report. Canberra: Australian Government.
- Dodgson, M., A. Hughes, J. Foster, and S. Metcalfe. 2011. Systems thinking, market failure, and the development of innovation policy: The case of Australia. Research Policy 40 (9):1145-56.
- Doloreux, D. 2003. Regional innovation systems in the periphery: The case of the Beauce in Quebec
- (Canada). International Journal of Innovation Management 7 (1):67-94.
- Doloreux, D., and S. Dionne. 2008. Is regional innovation system development possible in peripheral regions? Some evidence from the case of La Pocatiere, Canada. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development: An International Journal 20 (3):259-83.
- Doloreux, D., and S. Parto. 2005. Regional innovation systems: Current discourse and unresolved issues. Technology in Society 27 (2):133-53.
- Enright, M., and B. Roberts. 2001. Regional clustering in Australia. Australian Journal of Management 26 (2): 65-85.
- Fagerberg, J., D. Mowery, and B. Verspagen. 2009. Innovation, path dependency, and policy: The Norwegian case . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Faggian, A., and P. McCann. 2009. Human capital, graduate migration and innovation in British regions. Cambridge Journal of Economics 33 (2):317-33.
- Freeman, C. 1995. The 'national system of innovation' in historical perspective. Cambridge Journal of Economics 19:5-24.
- Fritsch, M., and G. Franke. 2004. Innovation, regional knowledge spillovers and R&amp;D cooperation. Research Policy 33 (2):245-55.
- Garrett-Jones, S. 2004. From citadels to clusters: The evolution of regional innovation policies in Australia. R&amp;D Management 34 (1):3-16.
- Green, R., P. Toner, and R. Agarwal. 2012. Understanding productivity: Australia's choice . Sydney: The McKell Institute, University of Technology.
- Hagedoorn, J., and M. Cloodt. 2003. Measuring innovative performance: Is there an advantage in using multiple indicators? Research Policy 32 (8):1365-79.
- Haseman, B., and L. Jaaniste. 2008. The arts and Australia's national innovation system 1994-2008: Arguments, recommendations and challenges. CHASS Occasional Papers 7 . Canberra: Council for the Humanities, Arts &amp;Social Sciences (Australia).
- Haslam-McKenzie, F. 2011. Attracting and retaining skilled and professional staff in remote locations of Australia. The Rangeland Journal 33:353-63.
- Howells, J. 2005. Innovation and regional economic development: A matter of perspective. Research Policy 34 (8):1220-34.
- Jordan, K., B. Krivokapic-Skoko, and J. Collins. 2010. Immigration and multicultural place-making in rural and regional Australia. In Demographic change in Australia's rural landscapes: Implications for society and the environment , ed. G. Luck, R. Black, and D. Race, 25980. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Springer.
- Kaiser, U., H. Kongsted, and T. Ronde. 2011. Labor mobility, social network effects, and innovative activity . Bonn, Germany: Institute for the Study of Labor.
- Koutsogeorgopoulou, V., and O. Barbiero. 2013. Boosting productivity in Australia . Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
- Lagendijk, A., and A. Lorentzen. 2007. Proximity, knowledge and innovation in the peripheral regions. On the intersection between geographical and organizational proximity. European Planning Studies 15 (4):457-66.

- Lambooy, J. 2005. Innovation and knowledge: Theory and regional policy. European Planning Studies 13 (8):1137-52.
- Luck, G., D. Race, and R. Black. 2010. Demographic change in Australia's rural landscapes: Implications for society and the environment . New York: Springer.
- Lyas, S., J. van der Waag, R. Pritchard, and C. Beck. 2013. Acase study of Katanning: Innovation for cultural dividend. In Regional advantage and innovation , ed. S. Kinnear, K. Charters, and P. Vitartas, 217-31. Berlin: Springer.
- Maraut, S., H. Dernis, C. Webb, V. Spiezia, and D. Guellec. 2008. The OECD REGPAT database: A presentation. STI Working Paper 2008/2. Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
- Mardaneh, K. 2012. A study of population change via clustering of Australian regional areas: An optimization approach. Australasian Journal of Regional Studies 1 (2): 257-80.
- Martin, R., and P. Sunley. 2006. Path dependence and regional economic evolution. Journal of Economic Geography 6 (4):395-437.
- Martinez-Fernandez, C., and T. Potts. 2008. Innovation at the edges of the metropolis: An analysis of innovation drivers in peripheral suburbs of Sydney. Housing Policy Debate 19 (3):553-72.
- Martinus, K. 2010. Planning for production efficiency in knowledge-based development. Journal of Knowledge Management 14 (5):726-43.
- ---. 2016. Regional development in a resource production system: Long distance commuting, population growth and wealth redistribution in the WA Goldfields. Geographical Research 54 (4):420-32.
- Maskell, P., and A. Malmberg. 1999. Localized learning and industrial competitiveness. Cambridge Journal of Economics 23 (2):167-85.
- McGuirk, P., and N. Argent. 2011. Population growth and change: Implications for Australia's cities and regions. Geographical Research 49 (3):317-35.
- Miguelez, E., and R. Moreno. 2013. Mobility, networks and innovation: The role of regions' absorptive capacity. Growth and Change 44 (2):321-54.
- Monge, M., F. Hartwich, and D. Halgin. 2008. How change agents and social capital influence the adoption of innovation among small farmers: Evidence form social networks in rural Bolivia . Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
- Moreno, R., and E. Miguelez. 2012. A relational approach to the geography of innovation: A typology of regions. Journal of Economic Surveys 26 (3):492-516.
- Morgan, K. 2004. The exaggerated death of geography: Learning, proximity and territorial innovation systems. Journal of Economic Geography 4 (1):3-21.
- Morgan, K. 2007. The learning region: Institutions, innovation and regional renewal. Regional Studies 31 (5):491-503.
- Morris, R. 2012. Scoping study: Impact of fly-in fly-out/drive-in drive-out work practices on local government . Sydney: Australian Center of Excellence for Local Government.
- Mytelka, L., and K. Smith. 2002. Policy learning and innovation theory: An interactive and co-evolving process. Research Policy 31 (8-9):1467-79.
- Niebuhr, A. 2010. Migration and innovation: Does cultural diversity matter for regional R&amp;D activity? Papers in Regional Science 89 (3):563-85.
- Nonaka, I., and R. Toyama. 2003. The knowledge-creating theory revisited: Knowledge creation as a synthesizing process. Knowledge Management Research and Practice 1 (1):2-10.
- North, D., and D. Smallbone. 2000. Innovative activity in SMEs and rural economic development: Some evidence from England. European Planning Studies 8 (1): 87-106.
- Olaru, D., and S. Purchase. 2015. Innovation network trajectories: The role of time and history. Journal of Business Industrial Marketing 30 (3-4):342-53.
- Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 2014. OECD REGPAT DATABase: EPO and PCT patent application at regional level . Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
- Plummer, P., and M. Tonts. 2015. Path dependence and the evolution of a patchwork economy: Evidence form Western Australia, 1981-2008. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 105 (3):552-66.
- Porter, M. 2000. Location, competition, and economic development: Local clusters in a global economy. Economic Development Quarterly 14 (1):15-34.
- Poschl, J., and N. Foster. 2013. Productivity effects of knowledge transfers through labor mobility. FIW Working Paper No. 117, University of Bonn, Bonn.
- Robinson, J. 2002. Global and world cities: A view from off the map. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 26 (3):531-54.
- Sheppard, E. 2002. The spaces and times of globalization: Place, scale, networks, and positionality. Economic Geography 78 (3):307-30.
- Simmie, J. 2003. Innovation and urban regions as national and international nodes for the transfer and sharing of knowledge. Regional Studies 37 (6-7):607-20.
- Skinner, J., D. Zakus, and J. Cowell. 2008. Development through sport: Building social capital in disadvantaged communities. Sport Management Review 11 (3):253-75.
- Smailes, P. 2002. From rural dilution to multifunctional countryside: Some pointers to the future from South Australia. Australian Geographer 33 (1):79-95.
- Sobbels, J., A. Curtis, and S. Lockie. 2001. The role of Landcare group networks in rural Australia: Exploring the contribution of social capital. Journal of Rural Studies 17 (3):265-76.
- Stadler, M. 2012. Engines of growth: Education and innovation. Review of Economics 63:113-24.
- Stimpson, R. 2001. Dividing societies: The socio-political spatial implication of restructuring in Australia. Australian Geographical Studies 39 (2):198-216.
- Storey, K. 2001. Fly-in/fly-out: Mining and regional development in Western Australia. Australian Geographer 32 (2):133-48.
- Storper, M. 1997. The regional world: Territorial development in a global economy . New York: Guilford.
- Thompson, L., M. Gliding, T. Spurling, G. Simpson, and I. Elsum. 2011. The paradox of public science and global business: CSIRO, commercialization and the national system of innovation in Australia. Innovation: Management, Policy and Practice 13 (3):327-40.

- Todtling, F., and M. Trippl. 2005. One size fits all? Towards a differentiated regional innovation policy approach. Research Policy 34 (8):1203-19.
- Tonts, M., K. Martinus, and P. Plummer. 2013. Regional development, redistribution and the extraction of mineral resources: The Western Australian Goldfields as a resource bank. Applied Geography 45:365-74.
- Torre, A. 2008. On the role played by temporary geographical proximity in knowledge transmission. Regional Studies 42 (6):869-89.
- Vikkala, S. 2007. Innovation and networking in peripheral areas-A case study of emergence and change in rural manufacturing. European Planning Studies 15 (4):511-29.
- Warf, B. 2008. Time-space compression: Historic geographies . London and New York: Routledge.
- Webster, E. 2009. Policy forum: Enhancing the national innovation system: Does Australia have a 'national
- innovation system'? Australian Economic Review 42 (1): 84-87.
- Williams, A., V. Balaz, and C. Wallace. 2004. International labor mobility and uneven regional development in Europe: Human capital, knowledge and entrepreneurship. European Urban and Regional Studies 11 (1):27-46.
- Woodhouse, A. 2006. Social capital and economic development in regional Australia: A case study. Journal of Rural Studies 22 (1):83-94.

KIRSTEN MARTINUS is a Senior Research Fellow in Human Geography at the Centre of Regional Development, School of Agriculture and Environment at The University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia 6009. E-mail: kirsten.martinus@uwa.edu.au. Her research interests include the uneven distribution of resources and productivity, as well as labor and corporate networks.