<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## The Effects of Sociodemographic Characteristics on Divorce Rates in Oman: Spatial Modeling of Marital Separations

Shawky Mansour, Emad Saleh &amp; Talal Al-Awadhi

To cite this article: Shawky Mansour, Emad Saleh &amp; Talal Al-Awadhi (2020): The Effects of Sociodemographic Characteristics on Divorce Rates in Oman: Spatial Modeling of Marital Separations, The Professional Geographer, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2020.1730196

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2020.1730196

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 23 Mar 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 25

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## The Effects of Sociodemographic Characteristics on Divorce Rates in Oman: Spatial Modeling of Marital Separations

Shawky Mansour

<!-- image -->

Sultan Qaboos University and Alexandria University

## Emad Saleh and Talal Al-Awadhi

Sultan Qaboos University

Divorce and family dissolution are global issues linked to various socioeconomic, demographic, and spatial variables. In the last decade, the divorce rate has increased dramatically across the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) states (Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, and Saudi Arabia). Rapid economic development, social transformation, and modernization have directly led to deep cultural changes in marriage and marital instability. Although the geographic perspectives of family formation and divorce risks have received considerable global attention, the spatial variations of divorce rates have not been examined across Arab countries or GCC communities. This study uses univariate and bivariate local indicators of spatial association (LISA) as well as Moran ' s I and spatial econometric regression models (spatial lag and spatial error) to examine the geographic distribution of divorce rates in Oman at a subnational level. Data sets from the 2010 census were used for the modeling and geospatial analysis and a range of statistical variables, including women ' s employment, female educational levels, urban residence, economically inactive females, and polygamous marriage, was examined. Spatial autocorrelation patterns and clusters of divorce rate associations were calculated and causal influences of sociodemographic characteristics on divorce were modeled. The findings revealed that the effects of sociodemographic variables on divorce and family instability across Omani subnational boundaries vary spatially. Hence, urban, suburban, and rural differences are significant predictors explaining the outcomes of family dissolution. There were high divorce rates, particularly in the northwest and northeast areas. Females ' educational level was a negative predictor of divorce, whereas other variables were positively correlated with divorce rates. Although many global nonspatial studies have investigated divorce rates, there is a lack of research on family formation and dissolution in the Arab world and GCC states. This study fills the gap in the literature by contributing to the understanding of the role that the spatial structure of various sociodemographic variables plays in affecting divorce rates within local Omani communities. Key Words: demographic characteristics, divorce rates, GIS, Oman, spatial modeling.

离 婚 和 家 庭 解 体 是 与 社 会 经 济 学 、 人 口 和 空 间 变 量 相 关 的 全 球 性 问 题 。 过 去十 年 中 , 海 湾 合 作 委 员 会 (GCC ） 成 员 国 （ 巴 林 、 科 威 特 、 卡 塔 尔 、 阿 曼 、 阿 拉 伯 联 合 酋 长 国 和 沙 特 阿 拉 伯 ） 的 离 婚 率 急 剧 上 升 。 经 济 的 快 速 发 展 、 社 会 转 型 和 现 代 化 直 接 引 发 了 婚 姻 文 化 深 刻 变 革 , 并 导 致 了 婚 姻 不 稳 定 。 尽 管 全 球 都 很 注 重 从 地 理 角 度 了 解 家 庭 结 构 和 离 婚 风 险 , 但 尚 未 深 入 调 查 阿 拉 伯 国 家 和 海 湾 合 作 委 员 会 国 家 不 同 地 理 位 置 社 区 间 的 离 婚 率 差 异 。 为 审 查 阿 曼 地 方 一 级 离 婚 率 的 地 理 分 布 情 况 , 本 研 究 采 用 单变 量 和 双变 量 局 部 空 间 关 联 指 标 （ LISA ） 和 莫 兰 和 空 间 计 量 经 济 学 回 归 模 型 （ 空 间 滞 后和 空 间 误 差 ） 。 建 模 和 地 理 空 间 分 析 采 用 了 2010 年 起 的 人 口 普 查 数 据 集 , 并 审 查 了一 系 列 统 计 变 量 , 包 括 女 性 就 业 、 女 性 教 育 水 平 、 居 住 城 市 、 不从事 经 济活 动 的 女 性 和 一 夫多妻 制 婚 姻 。 作 者 计 算 了 离 婚 率 相 关 的 空 间 自 相 关 模 式 和 聚 类 , 为 社 会 人 口 学 特 征 对 离 婚 的 因 果 影 响 建 模 。 研 究 结 果 显 示 , 在 阿 曼 各 地域 之 间 , 社 会 人 口 学 变 量 对 离 婚 和 家 庭 不 稳 定 性 的 影 响 因 空 间 位 置 而 异 。 因 此 , 城 市 、 郊 区 和 农 村 差 异 是 解 释 家 庭 解 体 结 果 的 重 要 预 测 因 素 。 该 国 的 离 婚 率 很 高 , 西 北 和 东 北 地 区 尤 其 严 重 。 女 性 受 教 育 程 度 与 离 婚 率 呈 反 比 , 其 它 变 量 与 离 婚 率 呈 正比 。 全 球 曾 在 非 空 间 领 域 对 离 婚 率 问 题 进 行 过 很 多 研 究 , 但 很 少 关 注 阿 拉 伯 世 界 和 海 湾 合 作 委 员 会 国 家 的 家 庭 结 构 和 婚 姻 解 体 问 题 。 本 研 究 填 补 了 这 一 空 白 , 有 助 于了 解 各 种社 会 人 口变 量 空 间 结 构 对 阿 曼 当 地 社 区 离 婚 率 的 影 响 。 关 键 词 : 人 口 学 特 征 , 离 婚 率 , GIS , 阿 曼 , 空 间 建 模 。

El divorcio y la disoluci  on de la familia son cuestiones globales relacionadas con diversas variables socioecon  omicas, demogr  aficas y espaciales. En la  ultima d  ecada, la tasa de divorcios se ha incrementado dram  aticamente a trav  es de los estados del Consejo de Cooperaci  on del Golfo (GCC) (Bahr  ein, Kuwait, Qatar, Om  an, los Emiratos  Arabes Unidos y Arabia Saudita). Un desarrollo econ  omico r  apido, la transformaci  on social y la modernizaci  on han llevado directamente a cambios culturales profundos en el matrimonio y en la inestabilidad marital. Si bien las perspectivas geogr  aficas de la formaci  on de la familia y los riesgos del divorcio han recibido considerable atenci  on global, las variaciones espaciales de las tasas de divorcio no han sido examinadas a trav  es de los pa  ı ses  arabes o las comunidades del GCC. Este estudio usa indicadores locales univariados y bivariados de asociaci  on espacial (LISA), lo mismo que modelos Moran I y de regresi  on econom  etrica espacial (rezago espacial y error espacial) para examinar la distribuci  on geogr  afica de las tasas de divorcio en Om  an a nivel subnacional. Para el modelaje y el an  alisis geoespacial, se usaron conjuntos de datos del censo de 2010 y se examin  o un rango de variables estad  ı sticas, que incluyeron empleo de las mujeres, niveles de educaci  on femenina, residencia urbana, mujeres econ  omicamente inactivas y matrimonio polig  amico. Se calcularon patrones de autocorrelaci  on espacial y agrupamientos de asociaciones de tasas de divorcio, y tambi  en se modelaron las influencias causales de las caracter  ı sticas sociodemogr  aficas sobre el divorcio. Los descubrimientos revelaron que los efectos de las variables sociodemogr  aficas sobre el divorcio y la inestabilidad familiar a trav  es de los l  ı mites subnacionales oman  ı es var  ı an espacialmente. Por tanto, las

diferencias urbanas, suburbanas y rurales son predictores significativos que explican las consecuencias de la disoluci  on de la familia. Se registraron altas tasas de divorcio, en particular en  areas del noroeste y nordeste. El nivel de educaci  on de las mujeres fue un predictor negativo del divorcio, en tanto otras variables estuvieron positivamente correlacionadas con las tasas de divorcio. Aunque muchos estudios globales no espaciales han investigado las tasas de divorcio, falta investigaci  on sobre formaci  on y disoluci  on de la familia en el mundo  arabe y los estados del GCC. El presente estudio llena ese vac  ı o en la literatura contribuyendo a entender el papel que juega la estructura espacial de diversas variables sociodemogr  aficas en la afectaci  on de las tasas de divorcio dentro de las comunidades oman  ı es locales. Palabras clave: caracter  ı sticas demogr  aficas, modelado espacial, Om  an, SIG, tasas de divorcio.

T he phenomenon of divorce is a major indicator of family cohesion and the social structure of any society. Divorce patterns are associated with a variety of factors, such as cultural changes, female education, female labor force participation, age at first marriage, social support of divorced women, men ' s economic status, and religious principles.

Pronounced social changes have been taking place across the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) communities. Since the discovery of oil and the prosperity of its financial revenues, GCC societies have undergone profound changes and transformations that have affected the social and cultural life of the family. Essentially, these socioeconomic changes can be correlated to the development of the oil industry, which brought great financial profits that provided extraordinary and rapid prospects for comprehensive development, rapidly changing the physical and cultural environment of society.

In Arab societies, consanguineous marriages are culturally preferred (Islam 2012), so divorce usually leads to the breakdown and disintegration of the family, with a negative impact on the family ' s role within the community. According to the divorce statistics of the GCC countries (GCC-STAT 2018) the general divorce rate varied among the GCC states in the period from 2010 to 2015. For instance, the general divorce rate was higher in Kuwait than in Bahrain (7.1 in comparison to 3.6) in 2014, whereas in Oman and Saudi Arabia, the rates were lower (2.4 and 2.8, respectively) compared to Kuwait and Bahrain (Figure 1).

Like other Muslim societies, Omani society considers forming a family a crucial part of social life. The family is the cornerstone of individuals and nation building and key to achieving sustainable development across the cultural and religious system, with the typical Omani family being an extended, tightly knit unit. Nevertheless, 2016 witnessed the lowest number of registered marriages and the highest number of divorces in the most recent five years across Omani governorates (National Centre for Statistics and Information [NCSI] 2018). The crude divorce rate was 0.8 per 1,000 population, and the general divorce rate was 1.08 per 1,000 population aged fifteen and above. The Muscat governorate had the highest number of divorces in 2016, with 926

Figure 1 General divorce rates among local populations in four countries of Gulf Cooperation Council states. Note: KSA ¼ Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

<!-- image -->

registered certificates, indicating an increase of 3 percent compared with 2015.

The spatial pattern of single-parent families in low-income districts has been investigated (Jargowsky 1997); specifically, unemployment, household income, educational status, and occupational status have been examined as predictors of family formations and stability. Moreover, the causes of the increasing rate of single-parent families, particularly dissolution of marriages through divorce and separation, were investigated in studies of the causal roles of spatial socioeconomic status in explaining variation in marital instability (Rendall 1999).

Although marital dissolution has been linked to geographic and sociodemographic influences, neither spatial structure nor geographic patterns of divorce rates in the Arab world or the GCC states have been investigated. Overall, studies that explain the geographical impacts on marital dissolution are still very rare. Consequently, the main aim of this research is to model and investigate spatial variation patterns of marital dissolution at a subnational geographic scale to determine whether there are spatial effects of places on divorce rates. In other words, the study attempts to answer this fundamental question: What is the nature of relationships between divorce rates and spatial structure of local communities?

This research contributes to the literature on divorce patterns in different ways. First, the aggregated data set at the subnational level was used to examine to what extent divorce rates are influenced by spatial variations and diffusions. Second, within an advanced geographic information systems (GIS) modeling platform, spatial econometric models were employed to investigate the association between divorce rates and various socioeconomic, cultural, and demographic covariates. As GCC states are experiencing massive social changes, policymakers and decision makers have expressed a strong interest in understanding what the spatial explanatory variables of divorce rates are. Given this concern with how the divorce rate is influenced by spatial dependence and geographic structure of neighborhoods, it is surprising that no studies have yet spatially modeled the impacts of various socioeconomic and demographic factors on marital dissolution.

The outline of the article is as follows. We first introduce the theoretical framework and review the literature and then present the data sets, methods, and our empirical approach. We then present the main results and robustness checks. That is followed by a discussion, with the concluding remarks after that.

## Literature Review and Theoretical Framework

Recently, the divorce rates in Arab countries have been increasing dramatically and will continue to rise, which will influence families, children, and society structure (Al Munajjed 2010). In the United Arab Emirates (UAE), although oil revenues have led to many positive changes on the quality of life, there has also been an increase in social problems such as divorce and dissolution of the family unit (Bromfield 2014). It was estimated that 60 percent of divorce cases in Abu Dhabi Emirate were registered in the first year of marriage for various demographic and socioeconomic reasons, particularly polygamous marriage, age difference, and couple ' s educational levels (Mohamed and Alkhyeli 2016). Although the Emirati government provides divorced women with financial support, a large percentage of divorced women in Sharjah often face difficulties and obstacles in social integration (Sharjah Supreme Council for Family Affairs Development Center 2008).

Rashid, Al Kasady, and Tahboob (1998) investigated the causal relationship between divorce rate and socioeconomic factors, including financial problems, parental involvement, alcoholism, polygamy, and lack of compliance with family obligations. Similarly, educational differences between spouses and females marrying at an early age were reported as predictors of divorce in the UAE (Alabbar 2004). A large percentage of divorced Emirati were characterized by low income, low educational level, and age under forty for men and twenty-five for women. In addition, divorce among Emirati is common early in their marriage, at a young age (Al Gharaibeh and Bromfield 2012).

In Japan, there are two types of divorces: divorce by mutual agreement, which is the easiest way to dissolve a marriage, and divorce by legal suit. Sakata and McKenzie (2009) found that divorce rates have been gradually increasing in Japan over the last two decades, with legal changes, the female labor force participation rate, and unemployment rate accounting for this increase. Duato and J  odar (2013) used a mathematical model to examine the propagation of divorce rates among Spanish married couples, showing that the divorce rate is expected to increase according to several future economic scenarios. Substantial mathematical modeling of divorce rates in Turkey was conducted by Pamukcu, Colak, and Halisdemir (2014) using generalized Poisson, quasiPoisson, and negative binomial regression, indicating that the average age of the first marriage, employment among married women, and university education significantly influenced the divorce rate.

In the vast majority of Muslim countries, several factors have played considerable roles in shaping the degree to which women have been participating in modernization processes. In addition, what makes the investigation of female empowerment difficult in such communities is the entanglement and intersection between these factors, particularly religious, economic, social, and cultural drivers (Kongar, Olmsted, and Shehabuddin 2014). The rapid

development in the GCC states has led to significant positive impacts on women ' s political participation in the government and business sectors (Krause 2013). During the last two decades, the potential socioeconomic changes as well as the intellectual feminist movements caused substantial changes in women ' s education and thus the majority of young women prefer joining the labor force rather than being household oriented (Sidani 2005).

Indeed, there has been much emphasis on the idea that increasing female labor force participation causes various pressures and tensions within the family, ultimately resulting in higher divorce rates. Most of this research, however, has been conducted in developed countries and the geographic effects were ignored in nonspatial methods. Theoretically, the higher the labor force participation rate among married women, the higher the likelihood of divorce; that is, working married women are more likely to divorce. Nevertheless, most studies that investigated the relationship between participation in the labor force and divorce rate reported that the increase in the likelihood of divorce increases a female ' s willingness to enter the labor market.

Over the last fifty years, the divorce rate in the United States has increased, which is associated with increasing independence, income, and employment among married women (Bremmer and Kesselring 2004). In the United States, the marriage rate has declined and the divorce rate has risen, with people tending to marry from the same socioeconomic class and educational level. Consequently, most divorcees are not college educated or were not in socially well-matched partnerships (Greenwood et al. 2016). Preliminary work by Parkman (1992) addressed the relationship between married female employees and unilateral divorce in the United States, arguing that unilateral divorce increased married women ' s employment. Using U.S. census microdata, another study (Ruggles 1997) investigated the impact of participation in the labor market on increases in divorce, finding that increased employment rates of married women are associated with a high divorce rate and marital instability, particularly among black women.

Examining the relationship between divorce and unemployment from 1969 to 2005, Amato and Beattie (2011) analyzed data from fifty states and the District of Columbia in the United States. The output of a bivariate analysis in this study indicated a significant positive relationship between the unemployment rate and dissolution of marriage. From an economic perspective, the Becker-type model is a well-established model for explaining marital dissolution (Becker, Landes, and Michael 1977). In this model, the decision of the husband or wife is often made to divorce or continue the marriage based on the expected values of marriage or divorce. The options and the cost of dissolving the marriage postseparation and possibly remarrying vary due to socioeconomic conditions such as education and employment. For instance, educated and employed women are more likely to be independent from their husbands and, thus, their response to divorce is easier than that of dependent women. Nevertheless, the impacts of economic independence of married women on divorce are a controversial issue, because more economically dependent wives usually are family oriented with less work experience (Greenstein 2000). By contrast, economically independent wives potentially rely on their education, qualification, earnings, and occupation. For men, however, employment and lack of full-time employment are strongly associated with a higher risk of divorce (Killewald 2016).

Jensen and Smith (1990) fitted a dynamic model to a sample of Danish married couples to estimate the likelihood of marital dissolution due to the effects of unemployment. The findings showed that controlling for other predictors, such as education, economic status, presence of children, age, and place of residence, unemployment was an important explanatory variable for marital instability. This fact was supported by Bellou (2017), who measured the length of marital relationships and found that male wage inequality affects marriage stability. Various studies provide clear evidence that the relationship between women ' s education and divorce is negative (e.g., Hoem 1997; Amato and Cheadle 2005; H € ark € onen and Dronkers 2006). Martin (2006) measured trends in marital dissolution rates in the United States according to educational level, using data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation. The results revealed that divorce rates decreased among those with a college degree and above, whereas they remained higher among women with lower educational levels. According to the exchange theory on divorce, however, the relationship between women ' s educational level and divorce is negative or positive based on economic independence as well as alternative values and resources, particularly financial status, qualifications, and employment (Kreager et al. 2013). Furthermore, educated women were also more likely to marry later, have lower fertility, and have lower divorce rates compared to women without a college degree (Isen and Stevenson 2010).

In the United States during the last two decades, overall the divorce rates among younger couples have been stable or declining, whereas the rate has increased among those aged thirty-five and older. The main reason for this decline is the rise of marriage selective pattern with the absence of pressures to marry (Kennedy and Ruggles 2014). Goli (2014) studied the divorce rate in Iran and found that it was influenced by women ' s employment and educational level in metropolitan areas.

The spatial variations in divorce rates across Japanese prefectures were also investigated (Sakata and McKenzie 2011), and it was found that in many

Figure 2 Location of the study area. U.A.E. ¼ United Arab Emirates.

<!-- image -->

prefectures, married couples tend to dissolve their marriage to become eligible for social security benefits. In addition, female and male income as well as birth rate were considerable predictors of divorce rates in the United States (Bremmer and Kesselring 2004) and Taiwan (Huang 2003). A seminal study conducted by Gautier, Svarer, and Teulings (2009) analyzed the effect of living in urban areas on divorce rates in Denmark, showing that the divorce risk was higher in the city compared to rural areas. Other studies from China reported that urbanization and residential modernization are major influences on marital dissolution (Xiaohe and Whyte 1990; Yi and Deqing 2000). In rural areas, spatial variations and mobility provide comfortable and stable choices for marriage and family stability. As a result, the crude divorce rate was lower than the national average in rural communities. In contrast, population density, household overcrowding, and urbanization have considerable positive impacts on divorce rates (Zhang, Wang, and Zhang 2014).

## Study Area and Data Sets

Study Area

The study area covers the north of the Sultanate of Oman, including forty wilayats, which are subnational administrative boundaries below the governorate level. The whole country is divided into

eleven governorates and the study area is administratively distributed within eight governorates (Muscat, Al Batnah North, Al Batnah South, Al Sharkya North, Al Sharkya South, Al Dakhliyah, Al Buraymi, and Al Dhahra; Figure 2). Physically, the study area includes the Al Batnah coastal plain, which is considered one of the most important coastal plains, not only in Oman but also in the southeast Arabian Peninsula. It stretches between the Oman Mountains and the Gulf of Oman, with a length of about 270 km and a width of 10 to 30 km. Although the agricultural land is limited, the plain is the agricultural heart of the Sultanate of Oman, with various urban and semiurban centers located over almost 3 to 5 km of coastal plain. The 2010 Omani census statistics show that the Al Batnah coastal plain has the highest Omani population density among the Sultanate ' s governorates and regions, whereas the Muscat governorate is the highest in terms of Omani and non-Omani population density. Overall, the population of the Sultanate of Oman was approximately 4,592,115 in 2017, with a general population density of 8.3 people per square kilometer, and it is estimated that the population size will reach 5.1 million inhabitants in 2020 (NCSI 2018).

## Data Sets

The analysis draws on data from the 2010 Omani census. Demographic and socioeconomic variables, particularly education, unemployment, female labor force participation, urban residence, and polygamous marriage, were calculated to model spatial variations and effects on divorce rates and family dissolution. The dependent variable is the divorce rate among married couples, and it was calculated as the number of divorce cases divided by the total number of married population multiplied by 1,000. Table 1 illustrates the dependent and independent variables that were used to spatially model marriage dissolution in Oman.

Figure 3 describes the geographical distributions of dependent and independent variables across the study area. There are significant subnational variations in the divorce rate, ranging from 11.62 in Bidiyah to 151.9 per 1,000 married couples in Wadi Al Maawal. There was a remarkably higher divorce rate in specific wilayats, particularly in Shinas, Liwa, Sohar (Al Batnah North governorate), Qurayyat, Muscat (Muscat governorate), Mahadah (Al Burami governorate), Wadi Al Maawal (Al Batnah South governorate), Nizwa, Manah (Al Dakhliyah governorate), Wadi Bani Khaled (Al Sharkya South governorate), Sur, and Jaalan Bani Bu Hassan (Al Sharkya North governorate; Figure 3A).

Figure 3B shows the number of married women with a bachelor ' s degree and above. The proportion of married women with a bachelor ' s degree or postgraduate university degree is lower in Al Amrat, Qurayyat (Muscat governorate), Nakhal and Barka (Al Batnah South), Al Burami wilayat, and Wadi Bani Khaled (Al Sharkya South), with a higher percentage of universityand postgraduate-educated women in Liwa, Shinas (Al Batnah North), Bahla, Al Hamra (Al Dakhliyah governorate), Dama Wa Tayyin, and Al Kamal Wil Wafi in Al Sharkaya North and South governorates.

Figure 3C presents the percentage of employed women in public sectors. Seven wilayats have high public-sector employment: Mahadah and Al Burami (Al Burami governorate), Shinas (Al Batnah North), Dank and Yanqil (Al Dhahra governorate), and Al Kamal Wil Wafi and Jaalan Bani Bu Ali (Al Sharkya North). Public-sector employment rates are generally lower than the average across most wilayats of Al Sharkya South and Muscat governorates.

Overall, a large percentage of divorced women employed in both the government and private sectors is found in the Muscat governorate in the middle and Al Burami in the northeast. Similarly, there is a higher percentage in the wilayats of Al Sharkya North (Figure 3D). Apart from the urban zone (four wilayats within the Muscat governorate), the percentage of married women in urban areas is higher in the southeast and most of the Al Batnah North governorate (Figure 3E), with a low percentage of married women in the northeast, especially in the

Table 1 Description of dependent variable (divorce rate) and independent variables

|                                     | Description                                                       | Calculation                                                                                               |
|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Dependent variable                  |                                                                   |                                                                                                           |
| Divorce rate                        | The divorce rate among married couples                            | Total number of divorce cases/Total number of married population  1,000                                  |
| Independent variables               |                                                                   |                                                                                                           |
| Educational level                   | Percentage of married women holding bachelor ' s degree and above | Total number of married women holding a bachelor ' s degree and above/Total married women  100           |
| Unemployment                        | Percentage of women who are not economically active               | Total number of females aged 15 - 64 who are not working/ Total number of married women  100             |
| Polygamy marriage                   | Percentage of married men who have more than one wife             | Total number of men married to more than one wife/ Total number of married men  100                      |
| Employment in public sectors        | Percentage of employed married women in governmental jobs         | Total number of employed married women in governmental jobs/Total number of employed married women  100  |
| Married women living in urban areas | Percentage of employed married women living in urban areas        | Total number of employed married women living in urban areas/Total number of employed married women  100 |

Figure 3 Geographic distributions of divorce rates (dependent variable) and selected independent variables. Note: BC ¼ bachelor ' s degrees.

<!-- image -->

Shinas, Liwa, and Mahadah wilayats. Likewise, there is a low percentage of married women living in urban settlements in the south of the Al Burami and Al Batnah governorates. Figure 3F shows the geographic distribution of polygamous marriage. There is a higher percentage in the central and southern parts of the study area, particularly Samail, Mudaybi, Bidbid, and Barka wilayats, whereas polygamy is less common in the east, primarily in Bidiwah, Sur, and Al Kamal Wil Wafi wilayats.

## Methods

Local indicators of spatial association (LISA) and spatial econometric models were used to investigate spatial patterns and model the impacts of various sociodemographic factors on divorce and family dissolution.

## Local Moran ' s I Univariate and Bivariate LISA Analysis

The first part of the analysis applied local Moran ' s I , univariate, and bivariate LISA. Local Moran ' s I statistic is a measure of spatial autocorrelation (SA). It assumes the existence of a linear relationship and is used to identify local locations, where the deviations in relationships among observations is minimum or maximum. Moran ' s I is a Pearson coefficient used to measure the spatial correlation among several geographic units (Moran 1950). The local Moran ' s I for spatial association is computed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where xj denotes the variation between the value of a spatial unit in the variable under consideration and the mean value of that variable, and wij is a spatial weight between features i and j according to neighboring status. The value of I i ranges from þ 1 (indicating positive autocorrelation and clustering) to   1 (denoting negative autocorrelation and dispersion), and a value of zero specifies a random spatial pattern. This means that when the value of I i is positive, all values at neighboring locations are similar, whereas a negative value of I i denotes dissimilar values of neighboring locations.

Univariate analysis considers any value of a spatial location compared with its surrounding places rather than looking at the value of any variable in a specific signal spatial location. First-order contiguity was chosen to calculate and produce univariate maps. The queen ' s weight matrix, which includes all boundaries and vertices, was selected to calculate the significance of the local Moran ' s I values. A randomization test on the z score with 9,999 was implemented to achieve more significant values.

## Bivariate LISA Analysis

As an explicit generalization of the concept of SA, a bivariate measure of spatial association relates the value of a variable at a specific location to that of a different variable at adjacent locations. Bivariate LISA is appropriate to measure the level of linear association between two variables. It measures the local correlation between the divorce rate (dependent variable) and the average of another independent variable (e.g., unemployment) across the study area. The bivariate statistics can be calculated as follows:

Table 2 Moran ' s I coefficients for independent variables

| Variable                           |   Moran ' s I coefficient |   p Value |
|------------------------------------|---------------------------|-----------|
| Married female employment          |                     0.258 |     0.001 |
| Married female in urban residences |                     0.145 |     0.003 |
| Married female educational level   |                     0.515 |     0     |
| Female not economically active     |                     0.17  |     0.004 |
| Polygamous marriage                |                     0.104 |     0.013 |

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where B i 1, 2 denotes the bivariate value of variable (1, 2) at location i, x i 1 is the degree of linear association between the values of variable 1 ( x ) at a specific location i, and x j 2 specifies the average value of the second variable at the neighboring location j.

The LISA outputs represent the nature of SA so that they can be categorized into four maps: Two maps illustrate spatial clustered values of high -high or low -low indicating positive spatial association, defining the values that are geographically surrounded by neighboring locations with similar values, whereas the other two maps demonstrate high-low or low-high values denoting negative spatial correlations (spatial outliers) relating to values whose neighboring zones are dissimilar.

## Spatial Econometric Models

This analysis uses the locations of the variables ' observations to test for spatial heterogeneity and dependence. Spatial heterogeneity that might arise from the classical ordinary least squares (OLS) regression reflects a lack of stability of the predicted relationships over spaces. Therefore, three regression models were applied and compared to examine the spatial relationship between the divorce rate and a set of sociodemographic and cultural explanatory variables.

In addition to OLS regression, two spatial regressions that account for spatial weights, the spatial lag model (SLM) and the spatial error model (SEM), were employed. The OLS regression takes the following form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where y is the divorce rate among married couples or the dependent variable, a implies the intercept, b indicates the vector of the regression parameters, x represents the set of predictors, and e refers to the vector of the error term.

The equation of the SLM is as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The SEM includes a spatial autoregressive error term and is calculated as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where y denotes an element vector of observations of the dependent variable and a is the intercept; Wy indicates the spatially lagged dependent variable for weighting contiguity matrix W ; q demonstrates the spatial autoregressive parameter of Wy , which is estimated for the whole model; e refers to the vector of error term; k indicates the coefficient of spatially lagged autoregressive errors, W ð Þ e ; and u is the vector of independent identically distributed errors.

## Results

Spatial Autocorrelation and Univariate Maps

Table 1 presents local Moran ' s I statistics for all independent variables used in the analysis. SA scores (Moran ' s I coefficients) revealed significant spatial clustering of independent variables by subnational geographic zone. A positive significant autocorrelation was identified for each of the five variables (Table 2), with the coefficient of female educational level being the highest and polygamy being the lowest.

LISA maps were created to measure the magnitude and direction of SA, and the univariate LISA results for the explanatory variables are presented in Figure 4. Regarding the percentage of married women living in rural settlements, there are areas of high -high association clustered in the middle of the study area, particularly Nizwa, Samail, and Izki wilayats (Figure 4A). In contrast, places of low -low spatial clustering are in Buwshar and Mutrah (within the Muscat governorate), where many urban communities are located. There are wilayats with low percentages of married women living in rural areas that are surrounded by wilayats with higher percentages (outlier), especially in the Al Batnah South governorate. The percentage of married women holding a bachelor ' s degree and above is higher, and there was a spatial cluster (hot spot) covering specific areas, mainly within the Al Burami governorate (Figure 4B). In contrast, there were wilayats with substantially lower percentages of such educational levels, predominantly in urban areas of the Muscat governorate.

A spatial cluster of high percentages of employed married women was observed in urban settlements of the Muscat governorate (Figure 4C). The northwest part of the study area was characterized by a low percentage of employed married women, and an outlier cluster of high -low pattern was found in the Al Burami wilayat. There were fewer females who are not economically active in the northwest of the study area, and a cluster of low values was observed in areas west of the Al Burami and east of the Al Dakhliyah governorates (Figure 4D). A low -high cluster (outlier) was observed in Jaalan Bani Bu Ali, indicating that this wilayat has fewer employed divorced women but is surrounded by areas with more such women.

The urban wilayats within the Muscat governorate exhibit a higher percentage of married women living in urban areas, whereas the central region of Al Sharkya South showed clusters of low-low values (Figure 4E). A positive cluster (hot spot) of polygamy was observed in the middle of the study area, specifically in Al Dakhliyah and Al Sharkya South governorates, and the northwest of the study area was also characterized by low rates of polygamous marriage (Figure 4F).

## Bivariate LISA Statistic

The bivariate LISA maps in Figure 5 illustrate the pattern of spatial changes in the relationship between the divorce rate and a set of explanatory variables. The findings indicate that there were several wilayats in the northwest part of the study area that show a positive autocorrelation between the divorce rate and married women living in rural areas (high -high; Figure 5A). A negative spatial cluster of low divorce rates that are surrounded by low percentages of married women living in rural areas (low -low) appears in the central regions of the study area.

The association between divorce rate and educational level of married women is depicted in Figure 5B. Areas of positive spatial association (high -high) are generally located in the southern part of the Al Dakhliyah governorate (Nizwa, Bahla, and Al Hamra wilayats). Cold spots include a spatial cluster of low -low located in the Aseeb and Barka wilayats. Regarding the spatial association between divorce rate and employed married women, regions with a positive index (high -high) are generally located around urban wilayats within the Muscat governorate (Figure 5C). The associated low divorce rate with employed women (cold spot) is highly clustered and located in the northwest part of the study area.

A hot spot cluster of high divorce rates surrounded by neighbors with a high percentage of economically inactive women was apparent in the northeast (Figure 5D). In contrast, a cold spot (low -low) pattern is generally observed in the southeast, particularly in the Al Sharkya North governorate. Figure 5E depicts the relationship between urbanization (married women living in urban settlements) and divorce rate. The positive autocorrelation pattern (high -high) was significantly observed in the northwest, especially in Sohar, Shinas, and Mahadah. The cold spot pattern (low -low) appears mostly in the Al Sharkya South governorate. A few statistically significant (at the 0.05 level) low -high wilayats (outliers) were in the northeast (Sur) and the central region (Nizwa). This pattern showed that a high prevalence of divorcees coexisted with a

Figure 4 Local indicators of spatial association univariate cluster maps of selected independent variables across subnational level.

<!-- image -->

low prevalence of married women living in urban areas. For divorce rate versus polygamous marriage, there was a high -high cluster in the Al Kamal Wal Wafi wilayat, whereas low -low clusters were found in the northeast (Shinas) and Bidbid in the northern part of the Al Dakhliyah governorate (Figure 5F). The low -high outliers found in the central southern area clearly showed that a low prevalence of divorce

Figure 5 Local indicators of spatial association bivariate cluster maps of selected independent variables across subnational level.

<!-- image -->

coexisted with a high prevalence of polygamy. Overall, the association between divorce rate and polygamy is geographically located in the marginal regions across the study area.

## Spatial Regression and Diagnostics

The analytical processing of univariate and bivariate LISA indicated the presence of local SA of dependent variables at the subnational geographic level.

The spatial dependence structure of the divorce rate across the Omani wilayats suggests the possibility of unbiased coefficients of divorce rate to various explanatory factors. Consequently, in addition to an OLS model, the effects of spatial dependence were fixed by employing two spatial models, SLM and SEM.

Table 3 presents the main diagnostic indicators of the OLS model. Considering the existence of SA and dependence structure, it can be inferred that the residuals of the OLS regression are spatially correlated. There are two measures included to maintain comparability with the fit of the spatial regression models, namely, log-likelihood and Akaike ' s information criterion (AIC). Log-likelihood interprets the higher the value, the better the fit, whereas AIC is the opposite: The lower the value, the better the fit. The values of these indicators reveal that the SLM and SEM models are a better fit than OLS (Tables 4 and 5). The Lagrange multiplier (Lag) and Lagrange multiplier (error) pertain to the spatial lag and SEM as proper alternatives

Table 3 Results of global model (ordinary least squares) estimation

| Variable                             | Coefficient   | SE                | t Statistic                | Probability                |
|--------------------------------------|---------------|-------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| % Married female employment          | 0.213         | 0.073             | 2.910                      | 0.006                      |
| % Married female in urban residences | 0.077         | 0.061             | 1.256                      | 0.217                      |
| % Married female educational level   |   14.285      | 1.127             |   12.667                   | 0.000                      |
| % Female not economically active     | 8.385         | 1.111             |   7.542                    | 0.000                      |
| % Polygamous marriage                | 0.929         | 0.527             | 1.760                      | 0.001                      |
| Constant                             |   78.484      | 12.83             |   7.375                    | 0.000                      |
| Model fit AIC ¼ 217.487              | R 2 ¼ 0.69    | R 2 ¼ 0.69        | Log-likelihood ¼   102.743 | Log-likelihood ¼   102.743 |
| Multicollinearity                    |               |                   |                            |                            |
| Condition number ¼ 26.044            |               |                   |                            |                            |
| Normality of error                   | df 2          | Value 23.14 Value | Probability 0.001          |                            |
| Jarque - Bera test                   |               |                   |                            |                            |
| Heteroskedasticity                   | df            |                   | Probability                |                            |
| Breusch - Pagan test                 | 2             | 4                 | 0.002                      |                            |
| Spatial dependence                   | Value         | Probability       |                            |                            |
| Moran ' s I (error)                  | 2.641         | 0.000             |                            |                            |
| Lagrange multiplier (lag)            | 3.963         | 0.000             |                            |                            |
| Lagrange multiplier (error)          | 16.590        | 0.000             |                            |                            |

Note: AIC ¼ Akaike information criterion.

Table 4 Results of spatial lag model estimation

| Variable                             | Coefficient   | SE       | z Value        |   Probability |
|--------------------------------------|---------------|----------|----------------|---------------|
| % Married female employment          | 0.228529      | 0.068037 | 3.35889        |         0     |
| % Married female in urban residences | 0.081181      | 0.056438 | 1.4384         |         0.001 |
| % Married female educational level   |   14.2518     | 1.02706  |   13.8763      |         0     |
| % Female not economically active     | 8.17447       | 1.03275  | 7.91527        |         0     |
| % Polygamous marriage                | 1.06508       | 0.498646 | 2.13593        |         0.032 |
| Model fit                            |               |          |                |               |
| AIC ¼ 213.188                        | R             | 2 ¼ 0.72 | Log-likelihood |       107.248 |
| Normality of error                   |               | Value    |                |               |
| Jarque - Bera test                   |               | 28.61    |                |               |
| Heteroskedasticity                   |               | Value    |                |               |
| Breusch - Pagan test                 |               | 3.1325   |                |               |
| Spatial dependence                   |               | Value    |                |               |
| Likelihood ratio                     |               | 3.991    |                |               |

Note: AIC ¼ Akaike information criterion.

Table 5. Results of spatial error model (SEM) estimation

| Variable                             | Coefficient   | SE                            | z Value                    | Probability                |
|--------------------------------------|---------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| % Married female employment          | 0.280         | 0.041                         | 2.92373                    | 0.003                      |
| % Married female in urban residences | 0.072         | 0.054                         | 1.31833                    | 0.018                      |
| % Married female educational level   |   14.823      | 0.990                         | 14.8233                    | 0.000                      |
| % Female not economically active     | 8.564         | 0.939                         | 9.115                      | 0.000                      |
| % Polygamous marriage                | 3.989         | 0.460                         | 2.147                      | 0.031                      |
| Lambda ( k )                         | 0.370         | 0.184                         | 2.011                      | 0.044                      |
| Model fit AIC 196.411                | R 2 ¼ 0.77    | R 2 ¼ 0.77                    | Log-likelihood ¼   114.617 | Log-likelihood ¼   114.617 |
| ¼ Heteroskedasticity                 | Value         | Probability 0.502 Probability |                            |                            |
| Breusch - Pagan test                 | 4.82          |                               |                            |                            |
| Spatial dependence                   | Value         |                               |                            |                            |
| Likelihood ratio                     | 9.27          | 0.002                         |                            |                            |

Note: AIC ¼ Akaike information criterion.

(Table 3). The Jarque -Bera test (Jarque and Bera 1987), a test for normality, depicts a problem with nonnormal errors and revealed that the errors were not normally distributed.

Furthermore, in the test for multicollinearity, the value of the condition number suggests that multicollinearity does not exist among independent variables, where values less than 30 suggest an absence of multicollinearity. The Breusch -Pagan test indicates the presence of heteroscedasticity as a result of spatial effects. To examine the spatial dependence of the model, Moran ' s I score was found to be highly positive and significant, indicating the presence of spatial dependence.

To investigate the effects of explanatory variables on divorce rates among the three spatial regression models, the set of explanatory variables was found to be statistically significant in all models. In addition, the direction of the impacts of the five variables is similar in the three models. Female participation in the labor market, females living in urban areas, and polygamous marriage are significant positive predictors. An increase in the percentage of each of these variables is associated with increasing divorce rates. In contrast, married female educational levels and unemployment are negative predictors of divorce rates. It was expected that the SEM model, which takes into account the effect of spatial dependence, might provide the larger coefficient for variables such as female employment and educational level. The results of both the SLM and the SEM models (Tables 4 and 5) show significant SA. The coefficients of the spatially lagged dependent variable ( q ) and of the lagged error ( k ) are all statistically highly significant, indicating that the study areas are affected by neighboring and spatial structure of regions.

## Discussion

One of the main goals of this research was to model the spatial variation patterns of marital dissolution on a subnational geographic scale and to investigate whether there are relationships between divorce rates and the spatial structure of local communities. Although a substantial body of recent theory and research implicates the spatial context of socioeconomic factors as a key determinant of divorce and family-related behaviors (e.g., Xiaohe and Whyte 1990; Yi and Deqing 2000; Sakata and McKenzie 2011; Zhang, Wang, and Zhang 2014), there is a lack of research across the GCC states and Oman regarding the spatial effects on marital instability. This study fills a gap in the literature by contributing to the understanding of the role that spatial structure of various sociodemographic variables plays in affecting divorce rates in the GCC states generally and specifically in Omani communities.

In the past and across most traditional Arabic communities, the divorced woman was subjected to social criticism and blame for marital dissolution. Nowadays, however, various significant social changes have taken place across GCC countries that have influenced social life, cultural attitudes, and personal ideologies toward marriage and separation. The increased rates of women ' s educational attainments provide women with an essential privilege to work and earn their own living. Hence, well-educated and qualified women have the advantage of financial independence, even supporting their own children.

The key findings of this analysis indicated that the effects of socioeconomic characteristics of married couples on divorce and family disruption vary geographically. Hence, urban, suburban, and rural differences are significant predictors and explanatory outcomes of family dissolution. The effects of sociodemographic variables on divorce exhibit spatial dependence over space. This study identified several areas within Oman with higher rates of divorce, particularly in the northwest (e.g., Al Burami, Mahadah, and Sohar) and northeast (e.g., Sur and Jaalan Bani Bu Ali).

In addition to the LISA approach, the spatial econometric models employed in this study produced a clear picture of spatial effects and divorce determinants in Oman. Four sociodemographic variables (women ' s employment, polygamous marriage, unemployment, and urban residence) were significantly positively associated with divorce rates in all three models. In contrast, female educational level was a negative predictor of divorce rates. The employment of married women in Omani society intersects with many socioeconomic issues, particularly the demographic transition and changes from extended to nuclear families that depend on the authority of the husband. In most traditional and patriarchal communities, wives are more likely to be economically dependent on their husbands, particularly those who are less educated and qualified. In Oman, however, since the transformational development era, which began in 1970, the female employment rate has increased recently due to the remarkable progress in female educational attainments and qualifications.

Despite the fact that female educational attainment increases the income and financial independence of women, our findings indicate a negative impact of female education on divorce. This finding, however, is in agreement with previous studies (Amato and Cheadle 2005; H € ark € onen and Dronkers 2006; Martin 2006), confirming this negative relationship. There are several possible explanations for why higher female educational levels are associated with lower divorce rates. Women ' s education is strongly related to economic status and financial resources, so higher education increases their qualifications, employment opportunities, and family

income. Furthermore, educated women are more likely marry later, to have fewer children, to have greater financial security, and, correspondingly, to have higher rates of marital stability (Harkonen and Dronkers 2006).

Although employed females are more desirable to marry because of their financial support, which could contribute effectively to the family, some female employees might neglect their household responsibilities as their career increases their duties. Our analysis showed that participation of married females in the labor market contributes significantly toward the rise of marriage instability and divorce rates. This finding is consistent with several reports that predict positive effects of employed married women on divorce and separation (e.g., Parkman 1992; Ruggles 1997; Killewald 2016). Women with a higher level of education who are economically active and financially independent might be more likely to leave an unhappy marriage than those who are unemployed.

By contrast, although consanguineous marriage has been culturally preferred in Oman (Islam 2012), weighting certain costs and benefits when choosing a partner is a common and practical action. According to the expected economic values of marriage (Becker, Landes, and Michael 1977), unemployment has become one of the predominant factors behind divorce because of the high costs of daily life. The increase in unemployment often leads to stress, making divorce a way out of nervous tension. The multivariate analysis confirmed the dominant influence of females who are not economically active on divorce, because the divorce risk was higher in all areas with higher proportions of unemployed females. This is consistent with previous studies (South and Spitze 1986; Jensen and Smith 1990; Amato and Beattie 2011) that reported a significant positive association between unemployment and divorce and marital instability.

Polygamous marriage shows a strong association with marital instability and divorce, particularly in urban areas where an extended family pattern is limited. Polygamy is a sociocultural phenomenon across Omani communities, often associated with religious and social motives such as marrying widows and divorcees, bringing up orphans, and reducing the number of spinsters. Over time, however, this is no longer the case. Indeed, a powerful reason explaining why the higher rate of polygamy is correlated with a higher rate of divorce is that a large proportion of married women refuse a second marriage, especially because the laws guarantee them the right to know whether their husband wants to marry another. Consequently, more wives prefer divorce if their husband wishes to marry another woman.

The risk of divorce across the Omani wilayats varies spatially and significantly and is explained by the place of residence. There was a substantial association between higher divorce rates and a high percentage of married women living in urban settlements in the northwest. This finding supports the significant urban -rural differences in the risk of marital dissolution found elsewhere (Gautier, Svarer, and Teulings 2009; Sakata and McKenzie 2011; Zhang, Wang, and Zhang 2014). A possible interpretation for this relation is that in Oman, there are fewer social norms and cultural constraints, such as intervention and responsibility of parents and close relatives in marriage, in urban areas compared to rural and Bedouin places. Furthermore, in most urban communities, a shift from a patriarchal to a nuclear family has significantly taken place. Similarly, pronounced shifts in the sharing of authority, the wife ' s participation in decision making, and the sharing of responsibility in raising children between wife and husband have occurred in urban areas.

## Conclusion

The geography of divorce in the GCC communities raises many questions about the influences of the latest social changes and welfare on marital dissolution and how local authorities and decision makers can respond. The risk of divorce has enormous negative impacts, predominantly poverty among female single-parent households, negative influences on children, and psychological pressures. This research has provided insights into the spatial patterns of divorce rates across local Omani communities. The empirical evidence clearly shows geographic variations of sociodemographic variables, demonstrating that there was a significant spatial variation of marital dissolution over local administrative boundaries. The bivariate LISA analysis revealed that higher divorce rates were associated with higher percentages of educated married women, particularly in the central areas, with a substantial positive autocorrelation pattern between urban residence and divorce risk within the Muscat governorate. Likewise, the spatial econometric model indicated the strength of married women ' s employment, educational levels, and residential places in predicting divorce risk.

Divorce and separation in Omani wilayats are increasing at fast pace. The spatial clustering of divorce rates depicts target areas that need more attention from policymakers to reduce the rate of divorce and to save marriages. There is a great need to establish government agencies and volunteer organizations, particularly in rural areas and villages, to offer national programs about the sanctity of marriage and family structure. This analysis was limited due to data availability, particularly household income, longitudinal data to analyze trends in divorce over time, and data sets about ages of the divorced and married population across subnational geographies. Further research might include such ancillary

data sets either by conducting a demographic survey or using other secondary data sources. These data could be used to usefully create additional covariates that strengthen the modeling process and contribute more to the understanding of divorce risk and marital stability spatially. Nonetheless, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate and model the spatial patterns of divorce rates across the GCC countries and Oman at a subnational scale. /H17039

## ORCID

Shawky Mansour http://orcid.org/0000-00016969-9188

## Literature Cited

- Alabbar, M. 2004. Divorce: A field study to the community of the UAE . Dubai, United Arab Emirates : Association of Awareness and Care of Juveniles.
- Al Gharaibeh, F., and N. F. Bromfield. 2012. An analysis of divorce cases in the United Arab Emirates: A rising trend. Journal of Divorce &amp; Remarriage 53 (6):436 -52. doi: 10.1080/10502556.2012.682896.
- Al Munajjed, M. 2010. Divorce in Gulf Cooperation Council countries: Risks and implications . Dubai, United Arab Emirates: Ideation Center. Accessed June 22, 2019. https:// www.hashdoc.com/documents/4439/divorce-in-gulf-cooperation-council-countries-risks-and-implications.
- Amato, P. R., and B. Beattie. 2011. Does the unemployment rate affect the divorce rate? An analysis of state data 1960 -2005. Social Science Research 40 (3):705 -15. doi: 10.1016/j.ssresearch.2010.12.012.
- Amato, P. R., and J. Cheadle. 2005. The long reach of divorce: Divorce and child well-being across three generations. Journal of Marriage and Family 67 (1):191 -206. doi: 10.1111/j.0022-2445.2005.00014.x.
- Becker, G. S., E. M. Landes, and R. T. Michael. 1977. An economic analysis of marital instability. Journal of Political Economy 85 (6):1141 -87. doi: 10.1086/260631.
- Bellou, A. 2017. Male wage inequality and marital dissolution: Is there a link? Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue Canadienne D'  economique 50 (1):40 -71. doi: 10.1111/caje. 12250.
- Bremmer, D., and R. Kesselring. 2004. Divorce and female labor force participation: Evidence from times-series data and cointegration. Atlantic Economic Journal 32 (3): 175 -90. doi: 10.1007/BF02299436.
- Bromfield, N. 2014. Interviews with divorced women from the United Arab Emirates: A rare glimpse into lived experiences. Families, Relationships and Societies 3 (3): 339 -54. doi: 10.1332/204674313X13842674567773.
- Duato, R., and L. J  odar. 2013. Mathematical modeling of the spread of divorce in Spain. Mathematical and Computer Modelling 57 (7 -8):1732 -37. doi: 10.1016/j. mcm.2011.11.020.
- Gautier, P. A., M. Svarer, and C. N. Teulings. 2009. Sin city? Why is the divorce rate higher in urban areas? The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111 (3):439 -56. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9442.2009.01571.x.
- GCC-STAT. 2018. Marriage and divorce statistics. Accessed June 15, 2019. https://gccstat.org/en/statistic/ publications/marriage-and-divorce.
- Goli, A. 2014. An exploratory spatial data analysis of socioeconomic indices affecting divorced people: Iranian divorcee in 2006 census. The International Journal of Humanities 20 (2):1 -21.
- Greenstein, T. N. 2000. Economic dependence, gender, and the division of labor in the home: A replication and extension. Journal of Marriage and Family 62 (2):322 -35.
- Greenwood, J., N. Guner, G. Kocharkov, and C. Santos. 2016. Technology and the changing family: A unified model of marriage, divorce, educational attainment, and married female labor-force participation. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8 (1):1 -41.
- H € ark € onen, J., and J. Dronkers. 2006. Stability and change in the educational gradient of divorce: A comparison of seventeen countries. European Sociological Review 22 (5): 501 -17. doi: 10.1093/esr/jcl011.
- Hoem, J. M. 1997. Educational gradients in divorce risks in Sweden in recent decades. Population Studies 51 (1): 19 -27. doi: 10.1080/0032472031000149696.
- Huang, J.-T. 2003. Unemployment and family behavior in Taiwan. Journal of Family and Economic Issues 24 (1): 27 -48. doi: 10.1023/A:1022431003513.
- Isen, A., and B. Stevenson. 2010. Women ' s education and family behavior: Trends in marriage, divorce and fertility . Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
- Islam, M. M. 2012. The practice of consanguineous marriage in Oman: Prevalence, trends and determinants. Journal of Biosocial Science 44 (5):571 -94. doi: 10.1017/ S0021932012000016.
- Jargowsky, P. A. 1997. Poverty and place: Ghettos, barrios, and the American city . New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
- Jarque, C., and A. Bera. 1987. A test for normality of observations and regression residuals. International Statistical Review 55 (2):163 -72.
- Jensen, P., and N. Smith. 1990. Unemployment and marital dissolution. Journal of Population Economics 3 (3): 215 -29. doi: 10.1007/BF00163076.
- Kennedy, S., and S. Ruggles. 2014. Breaking up is hard to count: The rise of divorce in the United States, 1980 -2010. Demography 51 (2):587 -98. doi: 10.1007/ s13524-013-0270-9.
- Killewald, A. 2016. Money, work, and marital stability: Assessing change in the gendered determinants of divorce. American Sociological Review 81 (4):696 -719. doi: 10.1177/0003122416655340.
- Kongar, E., J. C. Olmsted, and E. Shehabuddin. 2014. Gender and economics in Muslim communities: A critical feminist and postcolonial analysis. Feminist Economics 20 (4):1 -32.
- Krause, W. 2013. Gender and participation in the Arab Gulf. In The transformation of the Gulf , ed. D. Held, and K. Ulrichsen, 105 -24. London and New York: Routledge.
- Kreager, D., R. Felson, C. Warner, and M. Wenger. 2013. Women ' s education, marital violence, and divorce: A social exchange perspective. Journal of Marriage and Family 75 (3):565 -81. doi: 10.1111/jomf.12018.
- Martin, S. P. 2006. Trends in marital dissolution by women ' s education in the United States. Demographic Research 15:537 -60. doi: 10.4054/DemRes.2006.15.20.

- Mohamed, R. I. A., and M. K. Alkhyeli. 2016. Early divorce prediction in Abu Dhabi. Paper presented at the IAOS Conference 2016, June 1, 2016, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
- Moran, P. A. 1950. Notes on continuous stochastic phenomena. Biometrika 37 (1 -2):17 -23. doi: 10.1093/biomet/37.1-2.17.
- National Centre for Statistics and Information (NCSI). 2018. Marriage &amp; divorce statistics. Accessed January 21, 2019. https://data.gov.om/veevcid/marriage-divorcestatistics?tsId=1000180&amp;lang=en.
- Pamukcu, E., C. Colak, and N. Halisdemir. 2014. Modeling of the number of divorce in Turkey using the generalized Poisson, quasi-Poisson and negative binomial regression. Turkish Journal of Science &amp; Technology 9 (1):89 -96.
- Parkman, A. M. 1992. Unilateral divorce and the laborforce participation rate of married women, revisited. The American Economic Review 82 (3):671 -78.
- Rashid, M., A. Al Kasady, and O. Tahboob. 1998. Divorce in the UAE society: Causes and social effects. Dubai, United Arab Emirates: Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs.
- Rendall, M. S. 1999. Entry or exit? A transition-probability approach to explaining the high prevalence of single motherhood among black women. Demography 36 (3): 369 -76. doi: 10.2307/2648059.
- Ruggles, S. 1997. The rise of divorce and separation in the United States, 1880 -1990. Demography 34 (4):455 -66. doi: 10.2307/3038300.
- Sakata, K., and C. R. McKenzie. 2009. The impact of divorce precedents on the Japanese divorce rate. Mathematics and Computers in Simulation 79 (9):2917 -26. doi: 10.1016/j.matcom.2008.10.002.
- Sakata, K., and C. R. McKenzie. 2011. Social security and divorce in Japan. Mathematics and Computers in Simulation 81 (7):1507 -17. doi: 10.1016/j.matcom.2010.05.015.
- Sidani, Y. 2005. Women, work, and Islam in Arab societies. Women in Management Review 20 (7):498 -512. doi: 10.1108/09649420510624738.
- South, S. J., and G. Spitze. 1986. Determinants of divorce over the marital life course. American Sociological Review 51 (4):583 -90. doi: 10.2307/2095590.
- Xiaohe, X., and M. K. Whyte. 1990. Love matches and arranged marriages: A Chinese replication. Journal of Marriage and the Family 52 (3):709 -22. doi: 10.2307/ 352936.
- Yi, Z., and W. Deqing. 2000. A regional analysis of divorce in China since 1980. Demography 37 (2):215 -19. doi: 10. 2307/2648123.
- Zhang, C., X. Wang, and D. Zhang. 2014. Urbanization, unemployment rate and China ' s rising divorce rate. Chinese Journal of Population Resources and Environment 12 (2):157 -64. doi: 10.1080/10042857.2014.910881.

SHAWKY MANSOUR is an Assistant Professor of GIS in the Geography Department, College of Arts and Social Sciences, at Sultan Qaboos University, P.C. 123 Muscat, Oman. E-mail: shmansour@squ.edu.om. He is a specialist in GIS with particular interests in GIScience and spatial modeling. His research focuses on developing and using advanced geospatial techniques to model and analyze the interrelationships between environmental, socioeconomic, and demographic phenomena.

EMAD SALEH is Assistant Professor in the College of Arts and Social Sciences at Sultan Qaboos University, P.C. 123 Muscat, Oman. E-mail: emdf@squ.edu.om. He is a specialist in social work fields and his research interests mainly involve social work education, voluntary work, humanitarian communication, and development fields.

TALAL AL-AWADHI is an Associate Professor of GIS and Head of the Geography Department at Sultan Qaboos University, P.C. 123 Muscat, Oman. Email: alwadhi@squ.edu.om. His main research interests focus on GIS applications, urban growth modeling, land use change, spatial databases, and urban climate change.