This article was downloaded by: [Ohio State University Libraries]

On: 30 May 2013, At: 10:47

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## Mapping Spaces of Environmental Dispute: GIS, Mining, and Surveillance in the Amazon

Samuel J. Spiegel a , Carlos A. A. S. Ribeiro b , Rodolfo Sousa c &amp; Marcello M. Veiga d

a School of Social and Political Science, University of Edinburgh

b Department of Forest Engineering, Federal University of Viçosa

c Department of Forest Engineering, Federal University of Jequitinhonha and Mucuri Valleys

d Norman B. Keevil Institute of Mining Engineering, University of British Columbia Published online: 17 Jan 2012.

To cite this article: Samuel J. Spiegel , Carlos A. A. S. Ribeiro , Rodolfo Sousa &amp; Marcello M. Veiga (2012): Mapping Spaces of Environmental Dispute: GIS, Mining, and Surveillance in the Amazon, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 102:2, 320-349

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2011.641861

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

## Mapping Spaces of Environmental Dispute: GIS, Mining, and Surveillance in the Amazon

Samuel J. Spiegel, ∗ Carlos A. A. S. Ribeiro, † Rodolfo Sousa, ‡ and Marcello M. Veiga §

∗ School of Social and Political Science, University of Edinburgh

Department of Forest Engineering, Federal University of Vic ¸osa

†

Department of Forest Engineering, Federal University of Jequitinhonha and Mucuri Valleys

Norman B. Keevil Institute of Mining Engineering, University of British Columbia

‡ §

Recent scholarship has urged increased attention to how advances in geographical information systems (GIS) technology can more equitably help to bridge gaps between the theory and practice of environmental protection and dispute resolution. This study brings new evidence to burgeoning debates in the Amazon, examining how a United Nations (UN) development initiative developed mapping systems in a shifting political climate for environmental governance while conducting campaigns with peasant miners to address environmental management. Amendments made in 2002 to the Brazilian Forest Code established natural preserves according to the geographic features of watersheds. The laws deter commercial land use on preserves, imposing strict penalties where artisanal mining is widely prevalent as a livelihood. The UN program utilized GIS and Shuttle Radar imagery to map the contested areas according to legal definitions and engaged stakeholders to discuss political implications. In 2006, new reforms made such mapping tools even more controversial-and urgent-with amendments that created opportunities for bringing 'informal' mining into the legal sphere, theoretically allowing 'spaces of exception' where mining can be legitimated. Our multimethod study underscores the need for appreciating diverse understandings of ecologically sensitive zones and empowering rural communities to take ownership over geospatial technologies in addressing environmental challenges. Although maps produced using the proposed methods could be useful, dominant advocacies that champion GIS as an enforcement tool often undermine local trust, inflame tensions, and render alternative 'grassroots GIS' strategies impracticable. We examine the contexts, powers, limitations, and risks of the UN's technical intervention, exploring how competing views of environmental controversy lead to divergent perspectives on the politics of GIS 'knowledge translation' and mapping itself. Key Words: Brazilian Amazon, crime mapping, critical GIS, environmental monitoring, geospatial technologies, political ecology, small-scale mining.

近期的学术呼吁更多地关注地理信息系统（GIS）技术的进步可以如何更公平地帮助弥合环境保护的理论和实践 以及争端解决之间的差距。这项研究给亚马逊河流域蓬勃发展的辩论带来了新的证据，它审查一个联合国 （UN）的发展举措，在不断变化的政治气候中，是如何发展对环境治理的制图系统，同时开展针对环境管理的 农民矿工的运动。2002 年制定的巴西森林法修正案，根据流域的地理特点，建立了自然保护区。该法律阻止在 保护区里使用商业用地，对在个体开采作为一项民生广泛盛行的地方实行严格处罚。UN计划利用GIS 和航天飞 机雷达图像来绘制有争议的地区，依法律定义和利益相关者来讨论政治的影响。在 2006 年新的改革已使这样的 让开采合法化的"例外空间"。我们的多方法研究强调，对生态敏感区的多样化的理解和使农村社区在解决环境 挑战时使用地理空间技术的需要。虽然使用建议的方法制作的地图可能是有用的，把 GIS 作为王牌执法工具的主 导宣传，往往破坏当地的信任，激化紧张的局势，使替代的"基层GIS"的战略不可行。我们研究了情景，权 力，限制，和UN技术干预的风险，探索环境争议的竞争观点如何在GIS"知识翻译"的政治和图绘本身上导致 了分歧的观点。关键词：巴西亚马逊河流域，犯罪图绘，关键的GIS，环境监测，地理空间技术，政治生态， 小规模开采。

En el ´ ambito cient´ ıfico reciente se ha estado reclamando mayor atenci´ on sobre c´ omo los avances en tecnolog´ ıa de los sistemas de informaci´ on geogr´ afica (SIG) pueden ayudar de manera m´ as equitativa a salvar las brechas entre la teor´ ıa y la pr´ actica de la protecci´ on ambiental y a la resoluci´ on de disputas. Este estudio trae a cuento nueva evidencia sobre debates en auge en el Amazonas, examinando c´ omo la iniciativa de desarrollo de las Naciones Unidas (ONU) emprendi´ o sistemas de mapeo en medio de un clima pol´ ıtico cambiante para la gobernanza

ambiental, mientras adelantaba campa˜ nas sobre cuestiones de manejo ambiental entre los mineros campesinos. Las reformas que se hicieron en 2002 al C´ odigo de Bosques brasile˜ no establecieron reservas naturales de acuerdo con los rasgos geogr´ aficos de las cuencas. Las leyes proscriben el uso comercial de la tierra en las reservas, imponiendo sanciones dr´ asticas donde la miner´ ıa artesanal es ampliamente practicada como medio de vida. El programa de la ONU utiliz´ o SIG e im´ agenes remotas del Shutle Radar para cartografiar las ´ areas en disputa, siguiendo las definiciones legales, y comprometi´ o a los interesados a que discutieran las implicaciones pol´ ıticas. En el 2006, nuevas reformas hicieron a´ un m´ as controversiales aquellas herramientas cartogr´ aficas - y m´ as urgentes con enmiendas que dieron a la miner´ ıa 'informal' la oportunidad de acceder a la legalidad, te´ oricamente permitiendo 'espacios de excepci´ on' donde la miner´ ıa pod´ ıa ser legitimada. Nuestro estudio multimetodol´ ogico pone al descubierto la necesidad de adoptar diversos modos de entender zonas ecol´ ogicamente sensibles y de empoderar a las comunidades rurales para apropiarse del uso de tecnolog´ ıas geoespaciales para enfrentar retos ambientales. Aunque los mapas que se produjeron mediante el uso de los m´ etodos propuestos podr´ ıan ser ´ utiles, la manera incondicional como se promueven los SIG como una herramienta de aplicaci´ on imprescindible a menudo menoscaban la confianza local, inflaman las tensiones y hacen impracticable la alternativa de la estrategia del 'SIG de base'. Se examinaron los contextos, poderes, limitaciones y riesgos de la intervenci´ on t´ ecnica de la ONU, explorando la manera como puntos de vista en competencia de la controversia ambiental conducen a perspectivas divergentes en las pol´ ıticas de 'traducci´ on del conocimiento' SIG y del propio mapeo. Palabras clave: Amazonia Brasile˜ na, cartograf´ ıa criminal, SIG cr´ ıtico, monitoreo ambiental, tecnolog´ ıas geoespaciales, ecolog´ ıa pol´ ıtica, miner´ ıa de peque˜ na escala.

O ver the past few decades, researchers and policymakers have been expressing growing concerns about the need for strategies to counter the alarming increase in the rate of deforestation of tropical forests. Although accounting for only approximately 7 percent of the total area, the tropical forests contain over 50 percent of the Earth's biodiversity (Ravikanth, Shaanker, and Ganeshaiah 2000). Between 1990 and 2000, the average rate of deforestation of tropical forests worldwide was estimated at 15.2 million ha/year (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations [FAO] 2001). In this same decade, deforestation rates in South America averaged 3.7 million ha/year; Brazil saw its forest cover reduced from 567 million ha to 544 million ha (FAO 2001). The major direct causes of deforestation worldwide relate to logging, agriculture, and mining (Houghton 1994)-activities that have only grown, indeed at fast pace, in more recent years (Peterson and Heemskerk 2001; Asner et al. 2005; Rodrigues et al. 2009). Diverse and rapidly growing lists of advocacies have thus emerged to promote sector-specific sustainability strategies (Aldrich et al. 2006; Caldas et al. 2007; Bauch et al. 2009); meanwhile, conversely, more stringent advocacies have favored outright bans on all commercial resource use in protected areas, based on location and regardless of sector-specific resource strategy (Laurance 2005; Soares-Filho et al. 2006; Tollefson 2008). As debates unfold to confront these mounting challenges, recent advances in geographical information systems (GIS) have been heralded as a promising development for the fate of equitable planning and creating opportunities for more effectively understanding, localizing, and confronting challenges for environmental management. By deepening geographical awareness in the discussion of socioenvironmental debates, it is often said that GIS has the power to map threats, visualize the challenges of sustainability, locate 'hot spots,' and assist in productive environmental planning (Brivio et al. 2002; Arima et al. 2005; Telmer et al. 2006; Caldas et al. 2007).

In contemporary geographical literature on deforestation, a widespread assumption has been that GIS can enhance environmental governance through 'participatory' usages of information technology. However, as GIS has been celebrated for its increasing technological powers, skeptical and critical geographical perspectives have also emerged, calling into question the narrowness of technology-centered science that frequently overshadows the perspectives of 'local people' in research and practice (Elwood 2006a). Wright, Duncan, and Lach (2009) examined how 'GIS technology might contribute to, or detract from, confrontational environmental policy discussions' (254). A growing body of literature over the past decade has questioned the lack of equity and effectiveness in promoting 'crime mapping' as a point of emphasis for environmental governance in peasant communities (Williams and Dunn 2003; Kwaku Kyem 2004; Elwood 2006b; Dunn 2007). AsWilliams and Dunn (2003) articulated, 'The view of GIS, adopted by many, as an undemocratic and divisive technology is perhaps most poignant in settings where

financial and skills-based resources are limited, notably in lower-income countries' (393). As scholarship on GIS has questioned the degree to which the so-called technological progress leads to any meaningful improvements for societies and environments, some critics leave the impression that not sharing GIS technology is a better strategy than sharing in some cases due to political controversy. Unraveling the popular enthusiasm for GIS, critical scholarship has also given a provocative indictment of the very scholarly complicities by which researchers and practitioners can worsen situations of inequality or conflict through myopic disciplinary analysis. Cinderby (1999) emphasized how GIS research itself has 'undemocratic' properties in addressing environmental issues by 'avoiding the social dimensions of issues' (304). A significant body of research published in the Annals has given particularly strong credence to the notion that GIS discourses seems to be on a precarious path of oscillation between 'geographies of hope and fear,' suggesting how narrow disciplinary trends might be prone to fear-mongering in ways that ultimately hurt marginalized groups (Klinkenberg 2007). It is against the backdrop of these deepening concerns and tensions that this article examines how GIS-based research can provide technologically important-but also politically risky and complex-dimensions that should challenge geographers, environmentalists, and development planners to explore how peasant livelihoods can be more fruitfully engaged. Our study examines how a six-year United Nations (UN) initiative developed GIS-based mapping systems in the Brazilian Amazon, confronting technical and political challenges in addressing concerns about environmental protection and livelihoods where deforestation is rampant. While investigating the technological and political power of GIS, the study explores the need for a reflexive and interdisciplinary approach in appreciating the role of international GIS interventionism. It underscores the dynamic relationships among development planners, governments, geographers, environmentalists, and peasant gold miners-also known as 'artisanal and small-scale gold miners' or garimpeiros -agrowing rural labor force in many parts of the Amazon since the gold rushes of the 1990s (Sousa and Veiga 2009; Sousa et al. 2011).

Respondinglargely to a wave of critical GIS literature that began in the mid-1990s, Baker and Williamson (2006) have urged more empirically grounded critical analysis on how 'satellite imagery activism' has emerged as a fashionable development strategy internationally for nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), governments, and intergovernmental institutions. As Kwan (2002) articulated, 'Despite considerable progress in recent geographic information systems (GIS) research (especially on public-participation GIS), the critical discourse on GIS in the 1990s does not seem to have affected GIS practices in geographic research in significant ways. Development in critical GISpractice has been quite limited to date, and GIS and critical geographies remain two separate, if not overtly antagonistic, worlds' (645). Similarly, geographers have suggested the need for more 'reflexive' approaches to the study of GIS (Mclafferty 2005), suggesting that researchers and planners need to be far more open to self-critical analysis. Although partly seeking to probe into Kwan's noted idea of 'two separate, if not overtly antagonistic worlds,' and in part exploring what a 'semi-reflexive approach' might look like in engaging environmental debates, our study grew out of something initially quite different than a critical research endeavor; it was, initially, an international collaboration project sponsored by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), with support from the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) and the Global Environment Facility (GEF), to make maps for monitoring gold mining activity while assessing law enforcement options. The authors, as consultants to this project, specifically sought to bring together multifaceted geographical knowledge bases to address governance challenges in managing mining risks while playing a role in a development campaign that facilitated local capacity building in artisanal mining areas (Spiegel and Veiga 2005; Sousa and Veiga 2009).

In a common technocratic view, the UN itself might be considered to be an icon of 'neutrality' and 'above the fray of politics'-as international consultants often articulate. Much to the contrary, we emphasize the inescapable political ambiguities of the UN's involvement in building a GIS mapping and monitoring system-and the need to carefully appreciate Crampton's (2007) argument that 'more attention be paid to the mutual relationships between geospatial technology and politics, rather than on assessments of the value of individual surveillant technologies' (389). Crampton's binary in the 'rather than' phraseology here, however, also deserves critical reassessment; it assumes not merely the need for interdisciplinary scholarship but, rather, much more radically, the need for a clean departure from academic trends whereby GIS experts provide narrow technical discussions without considering their socio-political implications. Our analysis,

in notable contrast, stresses not merely the need for politicizing technology-which might suggest a strange sort of one-to-one enlightenment of physical geographers by human geographers-but rather, the need for technical geographers and political geographers to mutually learn from each other. Changing political-environmental contexts have implications for technology ethics, but interesting nuances in technological advances also have implications for environmental politics. It is easy for technicians to ignore political contexts, but it is equally easy-perhaps even easier-for critical geographers to dismiss GIS technicalities without actually understanding GIS itself, condemning technologies as 'anti-democratic' and failing to connect discursive critiques with material realities in ways that inform the culpable decision makers. Unless critical geographers explicitly engage with the highly technical geographers when presenting new methodologies and vice versa, our research experiences, as explored in this article, lead us to suggest that Kwan's caution about the 'two separate, if not overtly antagonistic worlds' will always prevail as the dangerous, omnipresent reality.

Following Ferguson's (1994) famous criticism of UNdevelopment culture as an 'anti-politics machine' that decontextualizes 'technical development,' there is serious cause for rethinking the political contexts in which UN experts operate. Development planners would do well to recognize that 'self-reflexive' approaches-those that are purposefully open to critically rethinking one's own mandate and the potential implications of one's intervention-offer important opportunities for exploring the social context surrounding the use of GIS technologies to address serious threats of deforestation and deforestation-related controversy. Although in part intended as an exposition of new technical methods for using GIS to map ecological features of the Amazon (features that have been defined by the law to combat ecological degradation), this article's narrative necessarily resists the conventional academic mold of portraying an 'objective' environmental policy and technology analysis. The analysis probes into the political questions that arise along the planning process. As four consultants to the UN initiative that is profiled in this article (one a GIS specialist, one a political geographer, and two mining specialists), we provide a narrative in this article that charts a multimethod study process that rethinks the project's precarious assumptions about mapping the Amazon as a straightforward way of building knowledge for development. This story of UN intervention, which remains ongoing and open to numerous interpretations, necessarily requires more thanatechnicalanalysis of the new mapping techniques that UN agencies sought to create-but also of the political contexts, short-lived enthusiasm, and deepened ambivalences surrounding the mainstream advocacies about the use of GIS. GIS in this narrative might impact indigenous laborers in the Amazon in diverse ways, as explored with different stakeholders-planners, NGO activists, researchers, hostage-takers, and other constituents whose positions can affect decision making. Just as Kwan (2007) has urged for a turn toward feminist geography to emphasize multiple heterogeneous scholarly understandings of GIS intervention, practitioners need to be more sensitive to the myriad possibilities, risks, and interpretations when navigating even the most technical, materialistic problems that might seem to define deforestation and environmental management.

The first section of the article examines the geographical contexts and goals of the UN involvement in the Amazon's garimpeiro communities, suggesting how spaces of intervention have been increasingly ambiguous politically, for planners, academics, and all stakeholders. The second section examines the geographical implications of reforms to the Brazilian Forest Code, in which conservation laws emerged to create legally codified spaces for protection. Third, the potential of GIS mapping is examined to see where protected areas occur and where mining activity might impinge on the law; we present the findings of our UN mission in the form of a highly technical methodology, showing how Shuttle Radar technologies provide new opportunities for bridging the divide between policy abstractions ('on paper') and material geography. In the final section, the political implications of mapping technologies are reassessed, inviting the reader to explore the circumstances and pressures of various interventionist advocacies, to ask what roles, if any, UN interventions should play when it comes to the use of GIS to resolve environmental disputes. Notably, Clark (1998), while asking whether GIS is promoting 'democracy or delusion,' has suggested the need for a code of ethics and a more rigorous self-assessment by GIS technical experts. A reflexive geographical approach, we suggest, has begun to take shape within UN institutions, although we ultimately suggest that developing a UN code of ethics for GIS would also be appropriate for navigating the techno-political dilemmas of mapping.

## Contextualizing the Geographical Goals of a UN Initiative

The past decade has produced dramatic advances in GIS-based technologies that have made visual monitoring systems far more feasible, accessible, and powerful than ever before (Elwood 2006a, 2006b; Ghose 2007; Goodchild, Fu, and Rich 2007). Recognizing this potential, UN agencies have begun to undertake a number of GIS-based initiatives as part of their technical development services to poorer nations. It warrants mention at the outset of this article, however, that the role of GIS was added into our UN project's mandate midway through its implementation-in 2005-and was not initially part of the program mandate. According to initial plans, the project sought to 'assist gold miners to reduce environmental impacts' while serving as 'a platform upon which knowledge gaps in the complex interrelationships among social and environmental factors could be addressed' (Spiegel and Veiga 2005, 362). In particular, it was envisaged that the project would spearhead the global search for opportunities to reduce negative ecological impacts caused by mining through a series of multistakeholder consultation processes and capacity-building campaigns in affected communities.

Partnering with government ministries, local authorities, health organizations, and miner associations, the project undertook assessments of ecological, health, social, economic, and technological factors in participating communities (Spiegel, Yassi, Spiegel, and Veiga 2005; Spiegel and Veiga 2010). This knowledge, it was hoped, could be effectively utilized to design and implement intervention strategies that target the causes of poor environmental practices-with the particular mandate of 'removing barriers to the adoption of cleaner practices of artisanal and small-scale mining' (UNIDO 2002, 1). The project, launched by the UN agencies in 2002, was a global initiative to improve artisanal gold mining policies and practices, focusing on Brazil, Indonesia, Laos, Tanzania, Sudan, and Zimbabwe, with other programs in Ecuador, Guinea, Mozambique, and Senegal. During the course of the project, donors became increasingly interested in supporting a GIS mapping 'pilot project' in Brazil in light of burgeoning concerns about environmental degradation in the Amazon as well as increased knowledge of the power of GIS to inform environmental governance. 1 A pilot project in Brazil was also seen by donors as a potential model that could be adapted in the future to inform GIS projects and interventions in other countries.

In Brazil as well as some fifty other countries across South America, Africa, and Asia, increasing levels of poverty and inequality, combined with rising gold prices, have been associated with a burgeoning informal (nonlegalized) small-scale gold mining industry (Telmer and Veiga 2008). In many ways, illegal smallscale mining is associated with the aforementioned 'geographies of fear'-to reinvoke Klinkenberg's (2007) aforementioned phrase-insofar as mainstream media have often tended to narrowly focus on miners' identities as environmental destroyers, polluters, and criminals (Tschakert 2009a, 2009). As Hilson (2006) argued, most literature and development aid addressing small-scale mining focuses on 'effects-based research and environmental monitoring' rather than on fundamentally altering the socioeconomic vulnerabilities and political inequities that drive poor practices of smallscale mining. Tschakert and Singha (2007) build on political ecology literature to underscore this concern vividly; they argue that miners have been marginalized and criminalized, over and over, by insensitive research and policy discourses that emphasize dangerous labor practices and land intrusions without seeking to understand the underlying livelihood pressures. Although critical geography scholarship has recently begun to offer critiques of popular artisanal mining representations, the far more extensive and robust body of literature on mining in the Amazon still documents how artisanal miners disturb land, contribute to deforestation, trigger disruption of critical habitats, and leave profound social impacts on neighboring communities (Peterson and Heemskerk 2001; Mol and Ouboter 2004; Tollefson 2008). Contamination and degradation are both central fixtures in mainstream environmental discourses and, meanwhile, UN reports have stressed that mercury pollution due to small-scale mining is rising at a historically unprecedented scale (UNIDO 2008). Various environmental concerns are documented in countless countries and have resulted in numerous restrictive laws fostering the development of land conservation strategies (Biller 1994; Mol and Ouboter 2004; Tollefson 2008).

In many cases, GIS, by creating visual mapping of land covers, offers powerful opportunities for monitoring environmental effects in artisanal mining sites. As research literature frequently emphasizes the dual power of GIS to support both knowledge acquisition and law enforcement, often with little contextual attention on

how this would occur in low-income jurisdictions, GIS has been singled out abstractly not only as a means for mapping threats but also for promoting 'strict environmental regulations' (Manu, Twumasi, and Coleman 2004, 574). In Brazil's mining sector, GIS has also provided key information to serve industrial mining companies in their successful efforts at expanding large-scale extraction activities (Machado and Figueirˆ oa 2001), which has in some cases led to the displacement of artisanal miners from contested geologically rich areas (Graulau 2001). Meanwhile, GIS technologies have very rarely been designed to focus on artisanal miners' concerns. Telmer and Stapper (2007) provided a notable exception to this trend in the natural sciences; although they focused on GIS as a way of determining the scale of mercury pollution and environmental degradation from artisanal mining, they offered an approach that is part of a smaller, although significant, analytic trend that emphasizes the need to appreciate artisanal mining as a source of poverty alleviation before condemning it as a hazard. With an estimated 100 million people who depend on such mining for their livelihoods (Telmer and Veiga 2008), can GIS be an instrument that can productively assist artisanal miners? Or does this technology become necessarily dominated by antipeasant interests in the mining world? Narrow scientific discourses risk alienating peasant-centered perspectives, particularly as calls for greater enforcement of laws are often met with murky preconceptions about the role of the central government. The role of the UN itself might be called into question, and readers of this journal might question two dimensions in particular (we examine both later): how the UN program sought to intervene by conducting an assessment of Brazilian environmental laws and policies for protection of natural reserves and also how the UN used GIS and Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SERTM) data to 'identify conflicts of interest in regards to environmental compliance' (Ribeiro 2006, 5), raising hopes and fears about the geographies of knowledge development and knowledge application.

As the case has been with many international environmental interventions, the UN team was working closely with the government authorities on a broad suite of training and monitoring campaigns in highly contested ecological regions. The project's capacitybuilding component chiefly aimed to reduce mercurycontaminated sediment mobility into streams-where an estimated 1 million indigenous Brazilian small-scale miners operate, by promoting appropriate technologies and policy frameworks to support minimal impacts and native vegetation in the riparian zone (Sousa and Veiga 2009). Riparian areas, zones neighboring surface or subsurface water, constitute a profoundly unique habitat; besides providing sustenance for amphibian species, they also connect aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. The flood-prone area, a gradual transition zone between these two different worlds, forms an ecotone with rich biodiversity (Andelman and Fagan 2000). Riparian habitats extend well beyond the floodplains, being strongly dependent on rainfall and hydrological regimes, which in turn dictate the associated water levels (Verry, Dolloff, and Manning 2004). For the Global Environment Facility, the central funding source for the UN project, riparian zones were understood as 'hot spots' for mercury pollution because they tend to be located where artisanal miners work, as rivers serve as key areas for gold panning and digging, thus attracting strong interest for funding and study. The resilience of these special ecosystems is strongly influenced by upstream land use, as water resources and land maintain a very close relationship, and the riparian vegetation is one of the last natural barriers to waterway contamination from surface runoff (Ribeiro 2006). Watersheds also serve as a demarcating political feature of the changing structures for environmental governance in Brazil, which we also examine in the next section of this article in the context of understanding the evolving political context for invoking GIS approaches.

Although riparian zones remain a contentious point of geographical debate, recent developments in GIS meanwhile provide new potential for arming antimining activists with ways of combating negative geographical effects. Hearn (2007) discussed Google Earth as a key example of a technology being extended in the Amazon to promote enforcement-oriented activities that seek to 'battle developers' (1). We examine how spatial analysis based on sophisticated hydrographically conditioned digital elevation models (HC-DEMs) offers uniquely important opportunities in the design of sounder surface-mine reclamation strategies as well as the design of priority areas for implementing environmental regulations. For the team of UN project coordinators, accurately modeling surface water runoff, along with strategic stream water sampling for mercury concentration determination, have been seen as critical to identify potential hot spots in upstream sample points and estimate downstream water and riparian zone contamination levels from known mercury hot spots (Telmer and Stapper 2007). An integrative mapping approach, using SRTM data from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) as well as

digital hydrography Brazilian data sets from the Brazilian Institute for Geography and Statistics (IBGE), was envisaged to produce a hydrographically accurate digital elevation model (DEM) that could be used for automating the process of delineating protected areas. The Tapaj´ os River, located in the Amazon Basin, was chosen because of the long-standing history and extent of artisanal gold mining activities and their potential impact on international waters. A series of geo-ecological as well as socio-political mapping and investigation exercises was pursued, described next, to integrate an assessment of shifting environmental policy contexts with grassroots concerns that arose during implementation of the GIS-mapping intervention.

## Political and Ecological Contexts and Methods of Intervention

Enacted four decades ago, the Brazilian Forest Code was designed to protect the ecosystems of Brazil by regulating human impacts on environmentally sensitive areas such as riparian zones, along ridgelines and upland catchments. Permanent preservation areas, the cornerstone of the Forest Code, were meant to create a vast network of ecological corridors, shielding their biodiversity. Any and all direct economic activity in such areas was defined as a crime against the environment subjecting the offender-be it an individual or a legal person, including corporate management-to both imprisonment and fine, even when covered by a valid permit (Benjamin 1998). The enactment of this law created delicate debates-particularly as indigenous artisanal gold mining activities in Brazil occur mostly in riparian zones (Biller 1994; Dall'Agnol 1995), which violates the Brazilian Forest Code. Since the inception of the Code, artisanal gold miners-workers who are often drawn into mining due to poverty and who remain widely socially marginalized-could not be granted environmental licenses, forcing them to operate outside of the legal framework (Veiga and Hinton 2002). Veiga and Hinton suggested that excessively strict laws have resulted in even more environmental damage, as miners have been ostracized and their needs have often been ignored or poorly engaged by policymakers. In large part due to this recognition, UN advocacies have transformed in the past ten years, giving increasing emphasis to the notion of legalizing (and 'formalizing') informal poverty-driven mining activity. Graulau (2001) and Hilson (2007) both suggested that in practice, though, global institutions have generally resisted devoting substantial attention to the need for apportioning large tracts of land for artisanal miners, either because of environmental reasons or because corporate mining interests have tended to dominate mineral ownership rights in geological rich areas.

Small-scale mining in the Tapaj´ os River Basin goes back centuries, historically undertaken by indigenous people as an activity that is 'informal' (i.e., without licenses; Veiga 1997a). During the Amazon gold rush of the 1980s, to solve increasing conflicts between artisanal gold miners and commercial mining companies, the legal owners of mining claims granted by the government, on 28 July 1983 the Ministry of Mines and Energy of Brazil enacted Ministerial Order No. 882 defining precisely the limits of an area encompassing 28,745 km 2 located in the municipality of Itaituba, in the southwest of the state of Par´ a and designated as the Artisanal Gold Mining Reserve of Tapaj´ os. In this reserve, exploration of any mineral could only be carried out via small-scale mining methods. Limited spaces of 'exception' thus emerged by allowing mining if regulated under special state provision in enclosed areas. Such spaces became the legitimating basis on which the UN launched a campaign to reach out to illegal or 'semilegal' as well as legal miners to teach them better methods (Spiegel and Veiga 2005; Sousa and Veiga 2009). Permission was granted by some government agencies to allow UN training teams to work with unlicensed miners to educate them about ways of reducing pollution and protecting riverbeds while promoting a set of international mercury management guidelines (Spiegel and Veiga 2010), although there was notable resistance from the Ministry of Environment, and UN personnel reported being constricted in terms of what training areas they were allowed to operate in. This ambiguity was further deepened in 2006, midway through the UN's initiative, when the government again adopted major reforms to the Code, creating new policies that fundamentally altered the geographical context for environmental planning. Specifically, the Brazilian National Council for the Environment (CONAMA) enacted regulatory exceptions (Resolution No. 369 of 26 March 2006) to the Forest Code, authorizing certain resource uses and even vegetation removal on permanent preservation areas.

The provisions in 2006 explicitly opened new opportunities for legalizing artisanal gold mining in Brazil, moving beyond the limited spaces that had hitherto been legalized for this sector. The advancing powers of GIS technologies, combined with changing political contexts, caused ambiguous implications for peasant miners to arise. Technologies for mapping preservation

areas have provided civil society organizations and governmental agencies with powerful tools with which to oppose peasant mining interests, and given the UN's dual mandate of generating environmental policy recommendationsandpromotingproactive 'participatory' empowerment to 'assist' mining communities, the notion of legalizing spaces of illegal mining outside of the official gold mining reserves requires particular attention. Few studies have so far emerged (Sousa and Veiga [2009] provided one example of a study that has considered this). The next section examines the murky geographical implications of Brazil's forest policy reforms, exploring the increasing relevance of mapping legally codified spaces in preservation areas. The following section then provides a technical analysis of methods for using GIS to map preservation areas according to legal specifications. We suggest that this technical analysis, however, requires emotive caveats emphasizing our own anxieties about technological power (as discussed more in the final section). On the one hand, GIS can help to map areas where mining can occur and where legally 'protected' classifications might lie; yet the problem lurks that the UN's promotion of GIS can be akin to Frankenstein's short-sighted creation of a monster that assumes a life of its own, helping further to criminalize large numbers of miners, which is arguably counterproductive from both an environmental-centered and poverty-centered analysis.

## Murky Geographical Implications of Brazil's Forest Policy Reforms

Internationally recognized as a country having one of the most sophisticated-yet contentiousenvironmental legislative frameworks in light of major debates over resource management in the Amazon, Brazil has seen remarkable gaps between the realities of environmental degradation and the on-paper policies that seek to enforce measures of conservation (Drummond and Barros-Platiau 2006; Bauch et al. 2009). The country's wide-ranging system of protected areas, which form part of the National Protected Areas System (SNUC), have two main implications insofar as the 1965 Brazilian Forest Code, Law No. 4771, defined two specific categories of protected forests: (1) legal reserves , which require that every property keeps at least 20 percent of the land covered with natural vegetation (35 percent for the savannas of the Legal Amazon and 80 percent everywhere else in the Legal Amazon region), and (2) permanent preservation areas , definitions of which are based on key geographic watershed features such as divides, riparian areas, hilltops, and steep hillsides (Ribeiro 2006). Although the forests that make up a legal reserve can be managed-but never clearcut-for timber production on permanent preservation areas, the national laws have historically precluded all direct economic uses of the forested area. Violations of this law are defined as crimes against the environment subject to both imprisonment and fine. For Hirakuri (2003), low levels of environmental compliance often result from inadequate law enforcement by governmental agencies. Although specific notions of law enforcement can be debated, the Constitution of 1988 clearly denoted the Brazilian legislators' overarching concerns about environmental protection in these terms:

Article 255 : All persons are entitled to an ecologically balanced environment, which is an asset for the people's common use and is essential to healthy life, it being the duty of the Government and of the community to defend and preserve it for present and future generations . . . . § 2 : Those who explore mineral resources shall restore the degraded environment according to the technical solution required by the proper government agency, according to the law.

On 12 February 1998, Brazil enacted Law No. 9605, introducing remarkable innovations in understanding crimes against the environment, such as the provision for corporate criminal liability, 'punishing with one to four years in jail and a fine anyone who causes pollution of any nature at levels that result or may result in injury to human health or that cause animal death or significant destruction of flora.' Article 66 of this law instituted the punishment-one to three years of incarceration plus fine-of any environmental official who makes false or misleading statements, omits the truth, or does not disclose technical and scientific information or data in applications for environmental permits or licensing (Benjamin 1998). Among other legal penalties, the offender is permanently precluded from signing contracts with the government, receiving tax incentives or any kind of benefit, and taking part in any public bids. Furthermore, its activities can be partially or even totally suspended. Some notable examples of enforcement occurred, as Veiga and Hinton (2002) explored. Analysis by Graulau (2001) suggests that the Amazon has seen a systematic pattern by which neoliberal policies of modernization and liberalization have fueled the criminality of peasant workers, with particularly negative impacts for women artisanal miners. Whereas large-scale industrial extraction companies

have been able to find ways of circumventing environmental laws, Graulau argued that mainstream scholars and policymakers alike have marginalized Brazil's peasant miners, noting that 'the normative commitment of development theories to industrialization justified the absence of rigorous research on small-scale extractive production at national and regional levels of analysis' (74).

Lawenforcement processes in this context might also then be understood within broader critical geographical literatures that have sought to detangle what Radcliffe (2007) called 'Latin American indigenous geographies of fear'-involving peasant communities whose interests are eclipsed by popular discourse, 'living in the shadow of racism, lack of development, and antiterror measures' (385). The image of the miner as a rebellious, illicit, and violent agent has typified media representations in Brazil, where global visions of Amazon conservation have usually aligned with the interests of environmental protection over local peasant labor. Indeed, globally there has been a particularly notable antagonistic representation of poorer artisanal miners, not just for environmental reasons but also because of the desire to enforce property rights for commercial interests. Addressing the latter, Le Billon (2008) wrote about the territorialization of mining narratives and suggested that that popular theories of resource exploitation have perpetuated uncritical ideas about criminalization and lootability that, while privileging industrial mining models, ultimately decontextualize the interests and needs of local artisanal workers in mining areas. Some UN reports have given attention to similar critiques, suggesting that the geography of criminalization extended far beyond the culture of Brazilian government decision makers. Veiga (1997b) argued that the vision of miners established in Disney animated movies like Pocahontas has had particularly unhelpful ramifications: 'Pocahontas highlighted the negative aspects of mining. In the movie, miners are villains who destroy trees, lands and native cultures' (5), suggesting that 'colonization of the Americas was based on natural resources, confrontation with natives had tragic consequences' and that the ongoing vilification of indigenous miners unjustly carries on the tradition of injustice. 'Fantasies do not help,' the report decried, as presented at a global expert meeting. The implication of these various critiques is that differing perceptions about mining might lead to different approaches to mapping mining and 'promoting compliance,' and that popular 'military-style crackdowns'-as promoted in a 2008 Nature article (Tollefson 2008)-might be counterproductive (Spiegel 2008). At best, GIS might help create a win-win scenario where all stakeholders benefit and, at worst, GIS could be used to deploy police indiscriminately while triggering conflict with rural populations who see outside foreign GIS users and law enforcers as threatening.

Increasing international pressure to stop deforestation in the Amazon rainforest led the Brazilian governmenttocreate the National Protected Areas System in 2000, which was affiliated with the Ministry of Environment and coordinated by the Brazilian Institute for the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources (IBAMA). This highlighted the 'new' potential for geospatial mapping in multiple ways, particularly as Law No. 9.985 of 18 July 2000 defined two categories: (1) strictly protected areas, which include national parks and biological reserves, and (2) protected areas of sustainable use, such as national forests and extractive reserves. CONAMAenacted Resolution No. 303/2002, which instituted the following types of permanent preservation areas, based on geographical features: (1) on hilltops, made up of the upper third of hills and mountains; (2) along divides, encompassing the upper third of the hillsides; (3) on upland catchments, so defined by the contributing area of any given spring; (4) on the margins of natural lakes and lagoons; (5) on riparian zones, whose widths depend on the extent of their floodplains; (6) on areas with slopes equal to or greater than 100 percent; and (7) on any area situated above 1,800 m. The broad category of permanent preservation areas still included provisions for protecting environmentally sensitive sites such as those used for nesting or refuge by migratory birds, beaches, mangroves, salt marshes ( restingas ), permanent swamp areas dominated by palm trees ( veredas ), habitats of endangered species, and dunes. The geophysical mapping-let alone the monitoring-of such protected areas is not automatic, however. The historic lack of appropriate maps depicting the limits of permanent preservation areas (Ribeiro 2004) along with the shortage of resource infrastructure and governmental personnel to perform inspections in remote regions (Lele et al. 2000; Hirakuri 2003) made it virtually impossible to identify priority areas for enforcing this law over the Brazilian Amazon. In contrast to the permanent preservation areas, the boundaries of protected areas, as stated in Law No. 9.985, are subjectively defined, being much easier to map and thus, arguably, more easily enforced and even more prone to being disputed. The study of Rylands

and Brandon (2005) indicated the existence of 478 strictly protected areas spanning over 370,197 km 2 , and 436 sustainable-use ones covering 745,927 km 2 created and enforced at both federal and state levels. These values constitute, respectively, 4.3 percent and 8.8 percent of Brazil's territory (8,511,965 km 2 ).

As debates continue over appropriate policy, the endless polemic concerning the legality of extraction on permanent preservation areas might appear to have been settled to an extent by the Ministry of Environment of Brazil, when CONAMA enacted 2006 Resolution No. 369, which introduced regulatory exceptions into the Brazilian Forest Code (Ribeiro 2006). This instituted a wide range of situations in which the intervention or even the removal of vegetation on permanent preservation areas is imperative and strictly in the interest of or for the benefit of the general public. Along with other innovations, this act regulates issues of paramount importance to the mining sector. Among other activities under the policy reform, the prospecting and the exploration of mineral resources located on those areas and granted by the proper authority were legally recognized by the Brazilian government as of public utility (Art. 2, 1st part, Provision c). Our earlier UN-commissioned report (which was circulated among donor agencies, authored by one of the authors of this article) emphasized this as a radical reform, noting that 'this [legal recognition of some artisanal mining] represents the first tangible, unparalleled opportunity over the past 40 years to insert artisanal gold mining into the formal economy and to have it legitimately included in local and regional development plans' (UNIDO 2006, 9). In retrospect, and in the spirit of a reflexive (and self-critical) geography, we wish to modify this statement somewhat, recognizing that many miners involved in the training exercises have simply found the law itself to be still remarkably antagonistic to livelihoods. The illegal status of miners seems, as one miner pointed out, 'an entrenched system' and one for which political movements have yet to wield much influence. Against an earlier proclamation that this is a step toward 'governance progress,' some miners seem to believe that the system will never change, and they will always remain illegal because the government fails to be inclusive with small-scale miners. As policy analysts, our own complicity in falling into the trap of what Bridge calls 'triumphant resource geographies' has been particularly disquieting. Triumphant resource geographies promote 'a discursive dialectic which erases socioecological histories' (Bridge 2001, 2149), creating problems that internationalists have too often dealt with by, in turn, erasing their own emotional connection, choosing narrow 'scientific rigor' instead of critical engagement with locally contested narratives. Kwan's approach for understanding GIS, by challenging narrow scientific mindsets, provides a useful point of analysis for any development planner who might come to learn equally about the context of an intervention and the contentious agency of the intervener. GIS can be, she wrote, 'a site for deconstructing the binary understanding of geographical method,' and she called for 'a recovery of the critical agency of GIS users or researchers' (Kwan 2007, 22). We would agree and we stress here that asking 'What role is there for the GIS specialist in this context?' becomes far more important, arguably, than drawing new maps to satisfy the demands of producing technical consultancy reports.

As GIS applications can be debated, permitting for mining in protected areas is a parallel debate that, we argue, needs to be engaged simultaneously. As discussed in the final section of this article, NGO advocacy groups have already been voicing serious concerns in favor of revoking existing licenses, and the final section of this article considers how GIS can be (and increasingly has been) used in perilously narrow ways-especially by police in conducting raids in rural areas. Article 3 of Brazil's legal resolution states the general conditions of license issuance: nonexistence of technological and location alternatives for the proposed facilities, activities, or projects; compliance with the conditions and standards applicable to water bodies; notarized registration of the 'legal reserve area'; and absence of risking aggravation of natural processes such as floods, soil erosion, or rock sliding (Article 3, Resolution). For international development agencies and researchers, geographical implications have been ambiguous, and there was (for all the preceding reasons) notable ambiguity in the terms of reference for the UN's GIS work that led to this study, which stated that 'a map depicting the limits of the permanent preservation areas will dictate if the applicant must or not request the specific environmental license to operate' (UNIDO 2006, 10). The second phase of this study, presented next, pursues the major step of addressing the problem of discovering what exactly is covered by the legal protections of the environment. A technical method is presented here by which these areas can be mapped from existing geospatial data sources for use in the fulfillment of existing Brazilian legislation.

<!-- image -->

km

Figure 1. Location of the Crepori watershed, Brazilian Amazon.

## Mapping the Spaces of the Forest Code

To address the policy challenges associated with regulating mining, or for that matter any other activities in legally 'sensitive' areas, mapping the permanent preservation areas for the Tapaj´ os Basin, according to the Brazilian Forest Code, was deemed a prerequisite. This can, in theory, assist both artisanal gold miners and regulators in improving current legislation and adopting suitable practices toward environmental compliance in mining sites. The watershed of the Crepori River, a major tributary of the Tapaj´ os River, was initially selected to ease the tests and the necessary refinements of the proposed methodology. This watershed, located in the southwest region of the state of Par´ a, Brazil, drains an area of 13,578 km 2 (Figure 1). Next we summarize the processes of creating geographical depictions that represent various 'protected' and 'preserved' spaces of the Tapajos region.

## The Tapaj´ os Basin and Its GIS Representations

Elevations range from 52 m on its confluence with the Tapaj´ os River to 495 m above sea level in the uplands to the south, having an average elevation of 250 m ( ± 68 m). Its terrain consists of a highly complex network of numerous small rivers that cut through the ground with slopes ranging from 0 to 222 percent, with an average value of 13 percent ( ± 9 percent). Annual rainfall in this area is just over 2,000 mm and the average temperature is 280 ◦ C. The Tapaj´ os River, one of the most important tributaries of the Amazon River on account of its size and location, among other factors, is formed by the confluence of the Juruena and Teles Pires Rivers. It drains an area of 493,000 km 2 , spanning over three states of the Legal Amazon: Mato Grosso, Par´ a, and a small part of Amazonas. The elevation within this watershed varies from 0 m to 896 m, presenting an average of 304 m ( ± 136 m). The maximum slope is 250 percent and the average value is 6.7 percent ( ± 6.6 percent). Innovations in GIS technology have allowed for detailed and highly sophisticated environmental images to be developed (Alsdorf 2003). At the time of writing this article, the most recent version of SRTM data, version 2, also known as the finished version, was released by NASA for South America in October 2005. Although available at 30 m (1 arc-second) in resolution for the United States, data for areas outside were degraded to 90 m (3 arc-seconds). The corresponding data sets are sometimes referred to as SRTM1 and SRTM3, respectively, and these data can be freely downloaded from the Land Processes Distributed Active Archive Center's FTP site (ftp://e0srp01u.ecs.nasa.gov), organized into 1 ◦ × 1 ◦ tiles of geographic coordinates (latitude, longitude). The digital stream network data set, provided by the IBGE, was created by scanning and vectorizing its 1:250,000-scale maps.

## Floodplain Delineation

The first step in determining the extent of the legally protected riparian zone is to define the limits of its floodplain. The traditional approaches for mapping floodplain boundaries primarily entail the establishment of a set of straight-line cross sections along the stream network and then determining the water surface elevations for each cross section (Ackerman, Evans, and Brunner 2000). Depending on the terrain topography and the flood extension, this could lead to incorrect results because the downslope path that flood water would follow might not be necessarily perpendicular to a given stream point for a large extent (Brivio et al. 2002; Tate et al. 2002). This is the case for many rivers of the Amazon Basin, such as the Tapaj´ os. Furthermore, if any cross section intercepts the floodplain more than once, only the portion closer to the stream is reliable, with the other ones being disregarded. To circumvent these limitations, a grid-based method was developed to provide flood elevations for any grid cell, taking into account the path followed by surface runoff during the flooding

Figure 2. Delineation of permanent preservation areas on hilltops.

<!-- image -->

event and thus generating a more accurate representation. The flood heights along the stream cells were calculated using observed water levels at gauges. These values were then converted to millimeters to retain the precision of the original data, and finally to integers, to satisfy the requirements of the WATERSHED command, which dictates that the ID of the source cell must be an integer value. This command delineates the contributing area that drains to a given source cell, assigning its ID to all cells that make up the respective catchment. The WATERSHEDcommandalsorequires as input a grid depicting the direction of the flow out of each DEM cell. So, using the flood heights as IDs of the stream cells, the output grid describes the zone of influence of every stream cell, in accordance with the runoff flow path. The original DEM is subtracted from the resulting surface. The flood extent is obtained by selecting all cells with positive values; that is, areas with a depth greater than zero.

## Mapping the Permanent Preservation Areas

Corresponding with the various legal classifications pursuant to the Forest Code, specific routines for automatically mapping the following categories of protected areas were developed:

- /a114 On hilltops: The hills were isolated by inverting the reconditioned DEM. The cell associated with the peak of each hill was a sink, and the basis of its hill was defined by the boundary of the respective watershed. The minimum and the maximum elevation values of each hill were calculated and the cells corresponding to its upper third were flagged as protected areas (Figure 2).
- /a114 Along divides: The areas to be protected along the ridgelines include the upper third of the hillsides. To map them, for every cell in the landscape one needs to know the elevation of its closest cell to the divide (upper bound) and also the elevation of its closest cell to the hydrography (lower bound). These three cells must lie along the same flow path to find the relative vertical position of a given cell with respect to its base. Only after that is it possible to select the cells belonging to the hillside's upper third (Figure 3).
- /a114 On upland catchments: This category of permanent preservation areas combines the area within a 50-m radius around each spring with the respective catchment (Figure 4). A grid containing only the cells associated with the springs was used as input to the WATERSHEDcommandtoderive the contributing area, as well as to define a 50-m radius buffer around them.
- /a114 On riparian zones: The delineation of protected areas along watercourses relies on determining the width of the floodplains associated with their highest water levels reached at the peak of the rainy season. In developing this technically, the protected areas' widths must be added to the respective floodplain's width, and the main challenge of finding the floodplain's width, we found, dwells in delineating the centerline of the inundated area. Our technical approach can be summarized in the following steps: (1) identify the floodplain's extent for the stream network under analysis and vectorize the resulting grid; (2) identify the cells lying on the borders of the floodplain and convert them to a point data set; (3) create a Thiessen polygon data set for those points; (4) clip the Thiessen lines with the polygon

Figure 3. The upper third portion of a hillside. Note: PPA = permanent preservation area.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4. Upland catchment.

<!-- image -->

portraying the floodplain extent; (5) remove the Thiessen lines touching the border of the floodplain polygon to further reduce the amount of lines to work with; (6) manually select the centerlines and save them into a separate data set (we suggest using the shortest path algorithm to connect the initial segment to the final one of each major centerline to speed up this process, which tends to be very tedious and labor intensive); (7) rasterize the centerline data set and generate a Euclidean-distance surface from

Table 1. Riparian zones' width according to the extent of the floodplain

| Floodplain's width (m)   |   Riparian zone's width (m) |
|--------------------------|-----------------------------|
| < 10                     |                          30 |
| 10-50                    |                          50 |
| 50-200                   |                         100 |
| 200-600                  |                         200 |
| > 600                    |                         500 |

these cells; (8) extract the distance of each border's cell to the closest cell of the centerline and multiply the results by two, (9) reclassify the resulting grid using the ranges shown in Table 1; (10) convert those cells to a point data set and create buffers for them according to the respective riparian width values; and (11) rasterize the buffer polygon data set and finally merge the resulting grid with the floodplain one to produce the map of the permanent preservation areas. The main steps in this process are depicted in Figure 5.

- /a114 On steep slopes: Any portion of the terrain with a slope greater than 100 percent, which is equivalent to an angle of 450, is protected under the Brazilian Forest Code. One must ensure that the Z units match the data set planar coordinates to generate the correct results when applying the SLOPE command; if not, a proper Z factor must be calculated and then applied. Once delimited, the grids of all categories of protected areas were then mosaicked to produce the final map of the permanent preservation areas for the Tapaj´ os River Basin.

Figure 5. (A) Comparison between the original stream location and the centerline derived for its floodplain. (B) Buffer's width as a function of the floodplain's width. (C) Outline of the riparian zones to be protected bordering the floodplains. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 6. Digital elevation model of the Crepori Basin. (Color figure available online.)

## Results of Analysis

After identifying the Crepori stream network's characteristics with the help of SRTM data, topographic features were compiled; Figure 6 portrays the resulting DEMafter the necessary refinements along the hydrography. Using a cell size of 30 m, the rasterization of the Crepori stream network resulted in 2,911 stream

<!-- image -->

links. The extent of the longest river was equal to 438 km. The results of the delineation of the protected areas, performed for each one of the 2,911 corresponding catchments, suggest that artisanal mining areas might overlap with the delineated regions, an observation that is also supported when we compared our findings with work by Telmer and Stapper (2007).

<!-- image -->

Figure 7 depicts the environmental protection provided by the permanent preservation areas delineated for the Crepori River Basin. To ease the management of the Tapaj´ os hydrography digital data set, its segments were coded based on the Otto Pfafstetter Numbering Scheme, a self-replicating topological system for assigning IDs to watersheds (Verdin and Verdin 1999). The original method was modified to work with stream lengths instead of watershed areas. The Tapaj´ os HCDEM is presented in Figure 8. Using the same cell size, the rasterization of the Tapaj´ os stream network resulted in 77,892 stream links. Its longest watercourse spanned over 2,612 km. The results of the delineation of the protected areas, performed for each one of the 77,892 corresponding catchments, are shown in the map in Figure 9.

The overall protection values presented in Tables 2 and 3, being lower than the total sum of all individual categories' contributions, indicate the occurrence of some overlapping between two or more

Figure 8. Digital elevation model of the Tapajos Basin. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

categories of permanent preservation areas; for example, on upland catchments and along ridgelines. A map showing the extent of the overall protection provided by the Brazilian Forest Code for a small portion of the Tapaj´ os Basin is presented in Figure 10. Two categories of natural corridors emerge from the visual inspection of this illustration: one formed along the catchments' divides and another bordering the floodplains.

km

## Analysis of Major Findings and Political Dilemmas

Recent technological advances in GIS and highresolution topographic satellite imagery, such as those provided by the SRTM, along with the methodology presented here, created the necessary conditions for automatically delineating permanent preservation

<!-- image -->

km areas and thus enabling environmental monitoring of legally defined ecological spaces. This represents a solid step toward expanding the use of this methodology to a global scale, and by automating the mapping system, it represents a step toward enhancing the availability of low(or no-) cost, Internet-accessible mapping systems. Such systems are not immune from errors and they do have limitations. GIS tools, on account of their scientific nature, might give the impression that maps

'accurately' represent realities, when in fact uncertainties occur when spatially defining preservation areas, especially because water bodies are dynamic in size on account of seasonal differences in rainfall. Firestone and Souza (2002) pointed out that in some cases in Brazil, 'the severity of the dry season causes enormous variations in the widths of waterbodies' (57) and that this produces challenges for accurately mapping the spaces defined by the Forest Code, which necessarily means

Table 2. Permanent preservation areas for the Crepori River Basin

| Category           |   Area (km 2 ) | Percentage of basin's area   |
|--------------------|----------------|------------------------------|
| Upland catchments  |            289 | 2                            |
| Along ridgelines   |          2,273 | 17                           |
| Riparian zones     |          3,060 | 23                           |
| Hilltops           |              4 | -                            |
| Steep slopes       |              1 | -                            |
| Overall protection |          5,383 | 40                           |

Table 3. Permanent preservation areas for the Tapajos River Basin

| Category           |   Area (km 2 ) | Percentage of basin's area   |
|--------------------|----------------|------------------------------|
| Upland catchments  |         17,300 | 3                            |
| Along ridgelines   |         50,326 | 10                           |
| Riparian zones     |        104,344 | 21                           |
| Hilltops           |             27 | -                            |
| Steep slopes       |              5 | -                            |
| Overall protection |        164,518 | 33                           |

that any GIS techniques need to be accompanied by on-the-ground assessments when used by authorities to gain an understanding of the regional geography. At the same time, technical mapping tools have generated new and important opportunities for understanding the challenges of environmental monitoring and surveillance in contested areas. Our analysis shows that even for plain topography, the permanent preservation areas would account for approximately one third of the Tapaj´ os watershed's total area. The higher percentage of Crepori's permanent preservation areas shows that this basin has proportionally higher hills than the Tapaj´ os Basin. This is also confirmed by comparing their average slope values. As the permanent preservation areas associated with riparian zones are preferred sites for artisanal gold mining due to easy access and water availability, a series of international task force meetings and community-level discussions was held to discuss these findings and implications of this for miners, policymakers, environmentalists, and GIS users in the Amazon.

Some stakeholders interviewed in this study suggested that accurately mapping and quantifying current

Figure 10. Spatial distribution of the permanent preservation areas. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

and potential gold mining sites on permanent preservation areas on a regional basis would enable the proposition of tradable development rights (TDR) programs for fulfilling the requirement of rehabilitating degraded permanent preservation areas on alternative locations within the same watershed. The mapping of permanent preservation areas also allows for identifying areas where land use change is legally allowed and, on this point, various government interviewees expressed the view that the GIS maps show how the Brazilian Forest Code provides an intelligent framework for establishing natural preserves countrywide based on solid ecological grounds, on paper, although poorly addressed in practice. Riparian vegetation is one of the last-and yet effective-natural barriers to waterway contamination from surface runoff, and its removal constitutes a particularly problematic dimension of deforestation. Protecting and reclaiming riparian vegetation would promote one of the primary UN project goals: to reduce sediment and chemical mobility of mercury into streams from adjacent artisanal gold mining areas. Continuing to allow miners to operate in the 'preservation spaces' would, without question, require measures to ensure that such miners minimized negative impacts. For Telmer and Stapper (2007), two of the project participants and remotesensing specialists, GIS became the basis on which to discuss with miners themselves how data from 2006 show that more than 366.9 km 2 of land has been impacted in the region and, within that area, 177.2 km 2 of land has been directly mined. There were an estimated 1,000 small-scale mining operations in this region based on postclassification analyses of multispectral satellite imagery acquired between 1986 and 2006 (Telmer and Stapper 2007). A minimal estimate of 346.8 tons of mercury has been consumed between 1970 and 2006, and the annual mercury flux for the entire Crepori River is minimally 1.6 tons. Local areas of high-density artisanal mining were identified and categorized for use in mine reclamation strategies.

The results from our study offer a potential way to extend beyond other efforts, including those by the government to make Google Earth and other free Internet sources accessible to local communities for community-based monitoring. Yet numerous interviewees and people who gave feedback on our project voiced key concerns as well. On a practical note, as one critic aptly noted, 'Don't those areas also have to be demarcated on the ground in order to be enforceable?' while adding, 'particularly when the delineation has occurred in a topographically more sophisticated way (e.g., sinuous lines connecting the points two thirds of the way up hill slopes), demarcation could actually become more complex and thus more expensive.' Given the necessity to conduct on-the-ground monitoring, that critic further warned (quite rightly) that visual GIS representations of the Amazon could mislead policymakers if interpreted as guides for law enforcement, especially where satellite imagery might show that damage has been done in an area while obscuring what (and who) is responsible for that damage, as could easily be the case in mining areas where environmental changes could occur for reasons besides artisanal mining. Thus, although sophisticated GIS tools should not be seen as a replacement for demarcation and spatial learning processes on the ground, a worry expressed by various interviewees was that GIS mapping and surveillance tools, rather than clarifying realities, can reinforce existing 'top-down' views that obscure the socioenvironmental dynamics at the microlevel. This leads to a further concern: As participants in the UN's intervention insisted, the UN, which is not an advocacy campaign, needs to be careful to ensure that poorer miners do not become alienated from environmental monitoring, planning, and decision-making processes and do not suffer due to a project that was supposed to be helping miners, not hurting them.

## Politics in Transferring Knowledge into Action

During the course of the UN campaign's stakeholder consultations, a consortium of NGOs under the umbrella of Instituto Socio Ambiental (ISA) released a seminal book, Mining in Protected Areas in the Brazilian Amazon (ISA 2006), and issued policy advocacies for hundreds of mining licenses granted in federal environmental conservation areas to be revoked. In many ways, ISA provided a key ideological point of comparison to the most widely articulated spirit of participants in the UN's intervention, highlighting tensions that we examine here. The most striking difference is that the ISA report opposes all kinds of mining-large-scale or artisanal-and leaves conspicuously provocative but unclear implications for the geographies of law enforcement. We describe this ambiguity in what follows, discussing the ISA program's findings and advocacy and how the UN project team members sought to take a different approach, taking a more pluralistic view of extraction spaces as spaces of social marginalization-where an understanding of local rights struggles necessitates changes in how GIS tools are developed and used.

The creation of environmental conservation areas, ISAargued, constitutes one of the Lula administration's main proactive environmental protection policies for the region, and it argued that mining needed to cease. Out of the almost 80 million hectares that constitute the existing environmental conservation areas in the region, 15 million were established by decrees signed by the current president. The Lula administration's 'scorecard' (a term ISA used in evaluation) includes six new full protection conservation areas (totaling 57,185 km 2 ) and twenty-one sustainable use conservation areas (94,745 km 2 ), as well as the expansion of the Amazonia National Park in the state of Par´ a by a further 1,670 km 2 . Research carried out by ISA revealed that a large proportion of these areas are not in fact protected against one of the economic activities with potentially high environmental impacts-mining. Using information drawn from the Mining Register maintained by Brazil's National Department for Mineral Production (DNPM), ISA's survey shows that, of the 40,144 existing applications for mining in the Legal Amazon region, 5,283 affect federal conservation areas and 880 affect state conservation areas. Even more troubling, of the total number of valid mining applications registered by DNPM,406havealreadyreachedthe research or exploration stages in thirty-two full protection conservation areas and in twenty-three extractive reserves. These are areas where mining activities are not allowed. A further 571 applications have reached the research or exploration stages in thirty-three sustainable use conservation areas, mainly in national and state forests where such activities are subject to a series of conditions.

The ISA approach stressed that environmental legislation expressly prohibits the direct exploitation of natural resources in full protection conservation areas and criticizes how eighty-eight Amazon region conservation areas currently being surveyed or explored by mining companies might already be suffering alterations arising from a series of activities with high environmental impacts. The ISA book emphasized mining as almost exclusively a threat and a source of tension between developers and indigenous communities, emphasizing a long laundry list of harmful effects from mining. 2 The style of reporting it invokes reflects a larger trend in ecological sciences in 'mapping threats'-but there is little mention of mapping the feasibility of different livelihood options for local peasant workers. Given the considerable lack of attention to the needs of miners themselves, UNtrainers and local environmental health advocates expressed strong disagreement. Whose licenses should be revoked? This question, posed by one Brazilian miner interviewed in our study, perhaps sums up one of the most pressing questions that arise when one uses GIS mapping to delineate 'protected' and 'preserved' areas. ISA's usage of GIS led to a simple advocacy: 'For federal and for state conservation areas separately, those mining licences that should be revoked on the grounds of falling within Full Protection Conservation Areas or Extractive Reserves-a situation which is illegal' (ISA 2006). The report again makes little mention of how indigenous groups have protested on multiple grounds, demanding both the right to mine as well as the right to be free of invading miners. The very identities of indigenous peasants and miners have been at the heart of the debate and require further study-informed by a contextually sensitive understanding of land use politics, cultural identity in mining areas, and citizenship rights.

Although there are diverse ways in which vulnerable mining groups have been impacted by land use disputes in Brazil, 3 a turn toward a pluralistic understanding of land struggles thus requires recognizing that narrow understandings of illegal land transgression, property, and formal law itself can mask the heterogeneous and often highly problematic ways that spaces of exclusion are produced and reproduced (Blomley 2005; Fluri 2009). Fluri (2009) discussed the notion of a 'space of exclusion' where only an elite group is able to gain political and economic legitimacy and decide if, when, and how exceptions to the law can be justified. In such spaces, highly selective accountability systems and economic insecurities among poorer groups are masked by mainstream global development ideologies and flawed visions of a balanced legal regime. Mining zones in Brazil can be understood in this sense, particularly given the problematic connection between environmental and business advocacies in the Amazon, where the relative power of wealthier groups over poorer groups has translated into questionable 'spaces of exception' and oversimplistic advocacy in environmentally sensitive areas (Spiegel 2008). De Theije and Heemskerk (2009) explained how economic inequalities and exclusionary policies have contributed to migration patterns, examining cases where poorer Brazilian mining groups have sought to find human security across the border-by traveling to Suriname (mining and living there, away from families, in search of a better and more secure livelihood). Although garimpeiros have struggled to find 'legal' spaces for income-earning activities, our interviews in the Tapajos region suggest that mining communities are heterogeneous in their cultural and socioeconomic makeup, and underlying causes of

environmental degradation and social exclusion are not represented by conventional spatial analysis (e.g., ISA approaches or government approaches).

Garimpeiro communities have adopted increasingly sophisticated technologies in the past two decades, which might indicate why a romanticized notion of 'indigenous' mining communities as being 'close to nature' could be problematic. At the same time, simplistic perceptions of artisanal miners as problem creators have compounded social tensions and inequities. Unlike ISA reports and their emphasis on mining as a social ill, Sousa et al. (2011) reviewed a group of twenty national laws and regulations, stressing that miners-as citizens in Brazil-have been stuck in spaces of illegality due to numerous 'gaps between policy and reality' that inhibit the legalization and effective regulation of artisanal miners' livelihoods. Mining in indigenous lands, currently prohibited, is also the theme of a draft law currently being debated by Congress, which could provide a new and evolving scope for studying legal dimensions of the mining-environment interface. Our analysis in the Tapajos region, contrary to the ISA analysis, emphasizes that land use inequities are shaped by systemic socioeconomic inequalities and structural power imbalances rather than being a straightforward problem of a general lack of law enforcement. Particularly given what one interviewee called 'the deep lack of understanding of garimpeiro culture,' discussions with miners during the UN training program emphasized that the knowledge production and 'knowledge translation' phases of mappingworkneedtotakeintoaccountmorefluidlinks among spaces of marginalization, spaces of indigenous rights, spaces of conservation, and spaces of livelihood as units of analysis. 4

For its part, representatives of ISA, on 17 April 2006, delivered a letter to the president of IBAMA calling for annulment of 337 mining applications that would allow mining within federal environmental conservation areas in Amazonia. The text of the letter (available online) illustrates how ISA is calling on IBAMA to request the Brazilian Ministry of Mines and Energy and the DNPM to cancel the licenses in question. The justification for such cancellations is that these licenses allow mineral research and exploration in categories of conservation areas where, under the Law on the National System of Conservation Areas, mining activities are prohibited. The document delivered by ISA to IBAMAargues that 406 mining licenses granted by the DNPMshould be revoked. This number is the result of the research carried out by ISA and published in Mining in Protected Areas in the Brazilian Amazon. Of these 406

permits, 337 fall within twenty-eight federal conservation areas. They include 199 survey authorizations, one permit to work, 129 applications to work, three approvals for traditional working, and five licenses involving seventy mining interests-mining companies and individuals. When asked whether the UN should form a similar advocacy as ISA, one participant in our study (who requested anonymity for purposes of this article), in a written submission, articulated a considerably different perspective on how the UN should direct its attention:

They [local government agencies] are the wrong people to talk about this. IBAMA and CONAMA will not do something drastic because of this map. They know their limitations and incompetence. The usefulness of the map is, when plotted the artisanal mining site, to indicate to the miners and their associations, which operations are creating more siltation problems and need to be amended . . . . It is best for the U.N. to stay away from IBAMA and CONAMA business.

Thisperspective might seem to be undiplomatic insofar as it rejects national government involvement while suggesting that donor-funded development campaigners (not government agents) should control GIS surveillance tools and community applications. The preceding perspective also suggests that UN agents should turn away from linking formal law enforcement and GIS knowledge and implies that ramping up law enforcement using GIS is unethical.

The problem of a lack of ethical guidelines for UN project work was further brought into discussion during focus groups, and concerns were raised that international development consultants have been seriously prone to supporting centralized power structures through surveillance projects in the past while explicitly advocating for top-down law enforcement. Controversies over the role of UN interventionism became all the more alarming toward the end of this project's intervention process. Shortly after this particular project intervention ended, a UN official was in fact held hostage (along with a federal prosecutor and two other people) by a mining community in another mining area in Brazil located on an Indian reservation. This controversy garnered a wave of new international attention, and as some news media indicated, tribe membersweredemandingcontrolovertheextractionof mineral resources while also 'demanding better health care, education and job opportunities' ( Newsroom 2007). Although some Brazilian legislators have since considered changing the law to allow mining by Indians

on reservations, some Indian rights groups are opposing it, fearing that the easy money will destroy their culture. Mining companies are also lobbying to be allowed to operate on the reservations. These local tensions receive little attention from GIS planners, but local community members, some stakeholders suggest, are distrustful of UN workers because of their propensity to ally with government enforcement regimes. Problems related to illegality persist due to a combination of factors such as lack of government outreach and education services, excessively strict and complicated environmental laws, and lack of trust between mining groups and authorities.

## The Contentious Impacts of Surveillance

After the conclusion of the UN mapping project, the political tensions surrounding the use of GIS became considerably more controversial in 2008 and thereafter-particularly as the Brazilian Federal Police and IBAMA launched an extensive policing operation to fight deforestation entitled Operation Arc of Fire, which focused on surveillance, crime mapping, and law enforcement throughout the Amazon. Significantly, according to one news source, 'This was the first time GIS and remote sensing were used in both the [police] investigations and their operational planning' (Neme 2010). Specifically, Operation Arc of Fire was the first time that police squads made use of remote sensing and analysis of satellite images to guide a heavily funded campaign targeting areas for surprise raids-leading to dozens of people being arrested and punitive fines imposed. Operation Arc of Fire was, as an article in The New York Times explained, 'intended to send a message that the government is serious about protecting the world's largest remaining rain forest, but so far it has stirred controversy for its militaristic approach . . . and the initial results have been less than promising' (Barrionuevo 2008).

Public media sources and government staff we interviewed generally agree that Operation Arc of Fire was generally prompted as a response to international reports in which satellite images showed far greater deforestation levels in 2007 and 2008 than in previous years. Amid growing international pressure (many international environmental projects in addition to our UN project were involved in advocacies to the government), the operation was meant as a public show of government commitment toward environmentalism; government spokespeople indicated that U.S. $ 118 million would be devoted toward law enforcement in the next few years alone (Barrionuevo 2008). GIS technologies, in light of this, became exceedingly seen as controversial, not only because they were increasingly being used in militaristic law enforcement campaigns but also, more broadly, because stakeholders (miners and also some environmental policy analysts we interviewed) expressed contrary views about who should control surveillance tools, how GIS tools exacerbate an oversimplified view of 'degradation spaces' in rural areas, and how limited 'views' of the Amazon through GIS maps create visualizing approaches that obscure peasant struggles at the microlevel. The failure to distinguish the different types of land use activities remains a widespread problem with GIS surveillance strategies, and although some past attempts have been made to utilize GIS for doing household surveys, clarifying property lines, and collecting socioeconomic data in low-income communities (e.g., McCracken et al. 1998), this has not been done in the context of Brazil's mining communities. Given the conspicuous absence of this socioeconomic GIS work, the increasing trend of using GIS by police authorities demonstrates a deepening bias in technological power-one that favors the 'God's-eye' GIS view of environmental degradation spaces while overshadowing nuances about the 'social' dimension of these spaces, especially where government elites might already have tenuous relations with peasant workers.

Various views from our case study on GIS surveillance in mining areas thus reaffirms the caution that Wright, Duncan, and Lach (2009) considered-that 'the technology [GIS technology] can disempower communitiesbyits very nature, creating a new technical elite that commands the advanced technology' (260). As much of the criticism of Operation Arc of Fire has to do with who uses GIS and who is targeted in police campaigns, some critics have complained that politically powerful businessmen who benefit from some of the legal and illegal resource extraction activities have been systematically exempt from accountability, and different government institutions have, in fact, blamed each other for failing to involve one another in monitoring and inspection processes (Riechel and Calixto 2008). Whether local associations and cooperatives of poorer mine workers could be truly involved in a meaningful way as participants in GIS programs remains to be seen. Some critics suggest that the government is 'waging a losing battle' (Riechel and Calixto 2008) in its efforts to address deforestation precisely because different national- and state-level government institutions that jockey for control have overlooked one another's capacity to engage with communities locally while

systematically neglecting marginalized groups' concerns. Although the UN pilot project that we developed had been initiated specifically to advance GIS powers for the purposes of supporting law enforcement, the impact of this mandate itself can thus be questioned in light of all of the factors discussed herein. The impacts of GIS became exceedingly controversial in ways that warrant renewed focus on the interlinkage of technical and political knowledge. The positive impacts of the UN mapping project (e.g., increased knowledge of legally defined preservation areas, increased awareness of implications of environmental law for garimpeiros , etc.) thus need to reconceptualized within a critical understanding of how authorities have increasingly been using GIS tools for the purposes of crime mapping and top-down governance.

This case study thus reinforces the concern that 'the nature of the technology itself, entwined as it is with the characteristics of the technocracies that embrace it, tends to support existing power structures' (Wright, Duncan, and Lach, 261). Furthermore, as Radcliffe (2009, 430) explained, 'if maps are reliant on actors in a specific space and time to mobilise their potential effects, the context within which they do so entangles embedded histories of exclusion.' In an interview we conducted in May 2010, a Ministry of Environment official offered words that evidently seem to draw attention to the top-down function of maps while stating, 'We [government authorities] need to stop these illegal miners and the illegal loggers and force them to do something else [as a livelihood] . . . . The GIS technologies for monitoring are not perfect but they are crucial.' This statement reflects two important characteristics of GIS as an institutional policy tool in the Amazon. First, the policy rhetoric here reflects a growing emphasis on using GIS technology in a narrow way, to amplify law enforcement in regions where livelihoods are contested. Significantly, within this rhetoric, illegal miners and illegal loggers are lumped together as geospatial technology is portrayed as a way of eliminating extraction-regardless of the local nuances of the livelihood struggles. In fact, Operation Arc of Fire eventually gave way to a new, even larger operation called Operation Jurupari, launched in 2010 to continue this campaign of police enforcement. This trend highlights the importance of a second feature in the preceding quotation, where the mention that GIS maps are 'far from perfect' calls into question what exactly 'far from perfect' narrative actually means in a highly contentious political-ecological context. We would argue, given the controversial nature of GIS surveillance in Brazil's min- ing areas, that analytic focus needs to move far beyond the technocratic 'GIS is not perfect' narrative to a more critical and cautionary narrative that considers 'imperfections' at practical, political, and moral levels and how an imperfect visual representation can lead to imperfect ways of visualizing policy priorities at a cognitive level. Only with this recognition can geographers begin to understand, in a nuanced way, how GIS mapping processes simultaneously create potential threats for communities as well as potential avenues for communities to mobilize 'from below'-that is, to provide a balance to the technocratic mapping and visualizing 'from above.'

In light of these concerns, one should then ask these questions: Is there scope for including various kinds of social data provided by the miners themselves into a GIS program that could be utilized for purposes of sustainable resource management? Who would control this process and its outcomes? In our study, one of the most important answers to the first question was that institutional decision makers and researchers should craft policies to closely involve local associations and cooperatives of artisanal miners at the very beginning when developing environmental mapping and surveillance programs. Although such an approach has not been put into practice, the miners we encountered were more than eager to participate in training and mapping programs and expressed strong interest in learning about the regional challenges of sustainable environmental management. If policymakers ask these questions and take measures accordingly, this would go a long way toward establishing pragmatic sets of mapping strategies besides GIS as a command-and-control technology. Potentially, mapping socioeconomic and environmental data according to property lines could help to locate specific regions where licensing garimpeiro activity could be agreed on as the best policy option, and data from communities could be used to support livelihood planning at national and local levels.

Our case study, however, also demonstrates that althoughmultiple potential opportunities for GIS provide fertile ground for theorizing, often few consensus areas are reached. Some interviewees suggested that UNIDO should develop a comprehensive Web-based GIS library of geodata sets depicting updated land use and land cover, the extent of floodplains during the rainy season, the limits of permanent preservation areas as stated in the law, and the location of artisanal gold mining sites, at the level of catchments, for the watersheds associated with the UNIDO project sites. This information could then be used by the UNIDO team to analyze, propose,

and manage an international fund for promoting TDR programs toward environmental land reclamation of abandoned artisanal gold mining sites. Considering that artisanal gold mining activities in Brazil occur mostly in riparian zones, and given the new provisions of the Brazilian Forest Code, many interviewees argued that artisanal miners should be persuaded not to mine river banks or close to watercourses, reducing environmental impacts related to mercury use, land degradation, and river siltation. Recent assessments of mining dynamics in a pilot project site indicate that community-based training programs can lead-and have in some cases already led-to important reductions in mercury use and land degradation when mine workers are actively assisted by local governments and donor agencies to improve their mining technologies and planning processes (Sousa and Veiga 2009). Theoretically, GIS maps could be used to help identify priority areas for this kind of training-training that in some pilot project areas has already led to the removal of sluices from riverbeds, the elimination of mercury use on ores that have not been preconcentrated, and measures to ensure that tailings are no longer dumped in the rivers (Sousa and Veiga 2009). Notwithstanding these hopes, though, other interviewees suggested that even an emphasis on making maps publicly available for 'good purposes' can still risk exacerbating prevailing inequalities in other ways. As long as development projects explicitly develop GIS tools to map legally defined environmental spaces (i.e., our initial mandate in this study) and thus reinforce entrenched legalistic GIS mindsets, careful steps would be needed to ensure that GIS knowledge production processes do not degenerate into law enforcement campaigns by default. Our interviews stressed that involv- ing marginalized mining populations is needed from the very beginning of the intervention process as well beyond the duration of the intervention. Given the shorttern nature of most international donor projects, even a GIS user's benign intention to support peasant workers might not be enough to prevent the eventual use of a surveillance tool to bolster top-down law enforcement processes over time.

These experiences therefore reinforce what Kwaku Kyem (2004) noted-that rather than assume GIS is a solution to resource conflict, 'a more productive discussion of GIS's role in conflict management involves unpacking the links between competitive forces that sustain a conflict and the social norms and group expectations that govern human behavior in society' (37). With this spirit, some interviewees argued that UNinstitutions should fund specific programs designed to present these maps to the mining communities, engage the perspectives of miners about the potential impact and use of GIS (building on Table 4), and assist mine workers in complying with complicated legalities to best attain equitable results. Neither the Brazilian government nor UN agencies have come forward, however, to fund such types of GIS and knowledge translation usages. From our investigation it can be concluded that GIS technologies have not yet moved into the 'participatory' domain in the context of managing the artisanal mining sector, even if very preliminary participatory uses of GIS are beginning to take form in other sectors such as artisanal fishing, as described, for instance, by De Freitas and Tagliani (2009). In assessing the especially contentious context of mining and deforestation, it is apparent that GIS mapping epistemologies in the Amazon have tended to be developed

Table 4. Potential sociopolitical mapping applications with miners in the Amazon

1. Show authorities that laws are poorly understood and poorly enforced in ecologically sensitive areas.
2. Show authorities why exceptions to the law (CONAMA decree of 2006) might be appropriate to enable and regulate mining in certain designated areas.
3. Show indigenous miners the map images and discuss how they are working in sensitive areas.
4. Use the map to discuss siltation, mercury pollution, and other specific impacts with miners.
5. Show why we (the authors) have not plotted mining areas in the map (to avoid stigmatization of 'criminals' and recognizing the lack of certainty in existing information (there is evidence that many miners work on margins, or barrancos ).
6. Discuss with miners the possibility of not destroying the barrancos, working instead inland (using techniques of water filtering with straw), showing examples of 'model' mines in less sensitive areas.
7. Improve Internet access for local agencies to be able to monitor mining activities and set up grassroots institutions for environmental capacity-building.
8. Use images to show international donors why funding for local socioeconomic and environmental capacity-building is needed to improve miners' livelihood options and practices.
9. Use map to generate dialogue among nongovernmental organizations to improve policy advocacy campaigns.
10. Use maps to enforce laws through police crackdowns-as a last resort.

with top-down 'crime mapping' mentalities far more than any other mentalities of 'grassroots' mapping and open-ended policy dialogue. As no ethical rules for using GIS exist in the UN development aid system or at the level of individual government agencies, we seriously caution against the trend by which policymakers and planners seem to be prone to assuming that GIS should be used as guides for law enforcement.

## Conclusions: Institutional Dilemmas and Geographical Implications

Our study has both mapped spaces of environmental dispute and reflected on this very exercise. The study highlights a reluctance to share GIS-generated information and simultaneously a desire to share that information through the course of a UN intervention in the Amazon. The UN agencies that supported our project circulated our earlier reports to donors and wrote, in summarizing the analysis, that 'the study of environmental impacts versus environmental legislation in the Tapaj´ os river basin determined that the strict environmental legislation created in 1965 (Forest Code, Law 4771), is not effective due to the lack of awareness, education, coercion, and economic alternatives' (Chouinard and Veiga 2007, 8). Insofar as this list of problems reflects a myriad of perspectives about the challenges of environmental management in artisanal mining regions, the UN seems to have kept intact the ambiguities that planners face in contested areas. The lack of trust in GIS as a 'legal compliance' solution remains a serious concern, however, one to which development agencies need to give more focus. Likewise, there is also a growing need for geographers to play a critical role in assessing the degree to which GIS-guided surveillance programs are-or are not-equitably put into practice. In 2006, our report suggested that UN agencies and donors should use GIS maps to 'foster the development of mining cooperatives to enable artisanal gold miners to benefit from the opportunities recently provided by resolution no. 369 of CONAMA.' Such an approach, which has not been put into practice, could strengthen the trustworthiness of development campaigners among mining community stakeholders and help to curb risks from unsafe artisanal mining practices. Given the lack of focus by policymakers and researchers on grassroots approaches in this area of GIS work, however, an increasingly prevalent critical sentiment in rural areas seems to be that a more radical change in development philosophy would be needed to begin seeing the creation of projects where internationally or nationally funded map-making projects generate genuinely participatory mapping processes-processes that could help mining communities to use maps to help reduce impacts (river erosion, siltation, pollution, etc.) and cultivate effective long-term land use policies.

Four conclusions can be reached from this case study in light of these analyses. First, it can be concluded that geospatial mapping tools can help to show authorities and other stakeholders that national law is poorly enforced in sensitive areas-as well as why exceptions to the law (e.g., CONAMA decree of 2006) might be appropriate to enable artisanal mining to be regulated in certain designated areas. Although GIS mapping tools tend to give narrow focus to certain privileged technical data (creating visual representations that tend to reinforce certain simplified views of the Amazon's environment), the technical power of GIS is that it can show the extent (at an aggregate scale, even if devoid of microlevel details) of environmentally sensitive spaces as defined by law. By showing what abstract policy clauses actually mean in spatial terms, GIS mapping can be used to cast new light on evolving socioenvironmental, legal, and political debates in rural regions, which could lead in turn to new paradigms for map-makers, policymakers, researchers, and activists. This leads to a second conclusion: GIS should be seen as a potential grassroots capacity-building tool, one that could and should be developed to generate discussions within local mining communities and regional mining associations about strategies for protecting the 'barrancos' (river banks) and supporting dialogue more broadly on environmental stewardship and skill building. Given the increasing interest in GIS and riverbed protection issues at the global level, researchers have important roles to play in assessing the potential models for donor, government and rural community partnerships. Collaborative GIS mapping could serve as stimulus for policy dialogue and participatory land management (rather than an automatic stimulus for police intervention and enforcement of existing law); this requires careful background research to suit the context at hand with attention to region-specific land use patterns and disputes.

Third, however, it can be concluded from our case study that the recent technological advances in environmental surveillance capabilities do not necessarily yield equitable outcomes. Despite international programs to increase access to GIS monitoring tools by government agencies, ongoing debate about the politics of GIS should be interpreted as a sign that rural inequities can be and have been exacerbated by elite

control over geo-surveillance tools and processes. Quite aware of these risks, it is worth emphasizing that some participants in our UN project suggested that GIS images should be used, first and foremost, to show international donors why funding for local livelihood-oriented projects is needed to improve miners' livelihood planning and support safer extraction practices. Maps can, in theory, help generate dialogue to improve policy advocacy and civil society activities, harmonizing the work of human rights and environmental protection groups; yet the question of who controls GIS and with what power remains a contentious subject for researchers, along with the question of whether local associations of marginalized workers (e.g., miners) could be truly empowered when designing and developing GIS surveillance projects, which have traditionally been managed by experts with prefixed, highly focused scientific mandates.

Afourth conclusion is that, whereas eight years earlier, Firestone and Souza (2002) noted that GIS 'has yet to be applied towards forest law enforcement in the [Brazilian Amazon] region' (53), our investigation has shown that today's era is an era in which GIS is now being increasingly used precisely for such purposes. 'Crime mapping' in turn has generated new sets of questions about how GIS reinforces certain power structures in the Amazon, how GIS maps could obscure certain types of realities and possibilities in rural areas (even if GIS might illuminate certain aspects of deforestation and conservation), and, broadly, how GIS technology appears to be an increasingly politicized tool in an increasingly computerized era of environmental planning. In light of the politically complex UN 'mapping' mandate that we examined, there are many reasons for future development projects to give close attention to the work of the GIS Certification Institute (GISCI; http://www.gisci.org) on their code of ethics and rules of conduct for professional GIS tools development. Whereas normative ethical codes are limited and would not necessarily capture the numerous subjective political dimensions of GIS, adopting the principles of the GISCI Code could entail a meaningful shift in analytic focus in research processes and in how project mandates are developed. Recently emergent projects give instructive guidance on how to build in a focus on moral and ethical reasoning; for instance, 'The objective of the National Science Foundation-funded GIS Professional Ethics Project is to produce open educational resources (especially formal case studies with explicit linkages to the Code and Rules) that help professional programs prepare current and future practitioners to recognize ethical problems and to act with integrity' (DiBiase et al. 2009, 1). Such an approach suggests a turn toward research-intervention mandates that pay explicit attention to the political risks of mapping and surveillance while strengthening the moral reasoning abilities of current and potential GIS professionals. In the Amazon, as GIS specialists, political geographers, and communitylevel institutions continue to build new programs of monitoring, ethical codes should be adopted to ensure project designs that encourage reflexive learning through collaborative processes, recognizing that mapping programs need to consider and promote new opportunities for reversing entrenched patterns of social exclusion among landless, marginalized peasant groups.

To summarize, although GIS is often regarded as a powerful environment planning tool, our case study shows the need for an injection of caution when discussing the capacity of GIS mapping projects to equitably support environmental surveillance and conflict resolution agendas. As the technology's reputation as an interventionist tool has been undermined by competing claims about human factors that sustain conflicts, as well as by the frequent use of narrow data sets that perpetuate simplistic ways of 'visualizing' contentious socioecological issues in a reductive lens, our analysis has suggested that mainstream usages of GIS need to be critically assessed. We do not necessarily give up on the power of GIS mapping tools to promote social equity, but our case study does add to a growing body of critical discussion on foreign-funded GIS programs where mapping land in poorer indigenous communities proved to be contentious (Bryan 2010). The cautionary tale that we examined has illustrated why consultants, rather than making maps blindly, need to resist the inclination toward engaging in mapping that leads too easily to 'crime mapping' (unless as a very last resort), to appreciate anxieties of GIS users and developers, and to give more focus to the highly politically charged ambiguities of the UN's 'technical' involvement in natural resource governance. Rather than presenting technical mapping strategies as scientific contributions in isolation, a more productive discussion of GIS's role involves integrating technical analysis with an effort at unpacking links between competitive forces that sustain conflict and the social norms and group expectations that govern behavior in society through GIS developments.

Ultimately, the need for interdisciplinary and reflexive studies of GIS is growing-not only in the Amazon but also in other contexts around the world, as the rising prominence of surveillance technology in the

activities of academics, NGOs, governments, and international development institutions continues to generate new opportunities and risks. Balanced approaches in mapping projects and GIS research can be guided by rigorous and context-specific assessments on strategies for engaging marginalized rural populations, with implications for reimagining how local livelihood issues can be engaged through the course of GIS-related environmental planning and monitoring processes-especially where spaces of illegal activity are being codified and reviewed-and how access to 'mapped land' can be renegotiated. Mapping projects need to experiment more with innovative ways of engaging equity concerns prior to mapping, during mapping, and in postmapping knowledge translation stages. Although critical interdisciplinary research might not yield easy answers, nuance is needed in the study of land use change, governance, and surveillance technology. Researchers, practitioners, policymakers, and community stakeholders need to work together in examining how mapmaking and map using are political acts themselves, with an open-minded commitment to explore how mapping contested spaces might-or might not-serve to effectively tackle broader inequities over the long term.

## Acknowledgments

We are grateful for the very insightful and detailed comments from three anonymous reviewers, whose feedback improved this article considerably. We also gratefully acknowledge support from the GEF/UNDP/UNIDOGlobalMercuryProject, the University of British Columbia, and the University of Cambridge.

## Notes

1. Satellite images indicated that the extent of ecological risks from forest cutting and extraction were growing in 2007 (Barrionuevo 2008), which gave donors additional impetus to focus on mapping.
2. The report lists: 'Releases of gaseous, liquid and solid wastes; noise pollution; movements of waste, minerals and equipment; creation of transport and energy infrastructure; traffic of heavy vehicles such as trucks, diggers and helicopters; encampments; the opening of trails, ditches, wells and paths; waste tanks and ponds; buildings and lodgings; circulation of workers; explosions and excavations; clearing of vegetation; processing of minerals; activities in areas of permanent protection and in refuges of native fauna; and the removal of vegetation traditionally used by local populations' (ISA 2006. 1).
3. Graulau (2001) examined the identities of garimpeiro communities in relation to class politics, gender, and devel-
4. opment modernization, exploring experiences among local and migrant workers whose access to and exclusion fromlandvaries considerably. Simmons (2004) noted how Brazil's peasant miners have been victims of land use conflicts and also noted cases where miners encroached on other groups' land.
4. Wittman (2009, 120) argued that in Brazil, 'land-related policies have historically served to situate political and economic rights in the hands of an elite land-owning minority. In a citizenship regime based on property ownership, land ownership and power structured through individual social actors often absent or external to the rural community thus fractures the potential for collective social action in the countryside.' Although Wittman discussed agrarian livelihoods, spaces of exclusion in the Tapajos mining context can also be understood in similar terms, where spatial rhetoric and realities are shaped by highly contestable legal representations, often with tensions between 'external'-frequently urban-decision makers and rural groups. We suggest that in such spaces, shifting pressures on rural migration and labor activities in conservation areas need to be understood as part of a system where unequal access to basic citizenship rights (including livelihood rights) contributes to fractured social relations.

## References

- Ackerman, C. T., T. A. Evans, and G. W. Brunner. 2000. HEC-GeoRAS: Linking GIS to hydraulic analysis using Arc/INFO and HEC-RAS. In Hydrologic and hydraulic modeling support with geographic information systems , ed. D. Maidment and D. Djokic, 155-76. Redlands, CA: Environmental Systems Research Institute.
- Aldrich, E., R. T. Walker, E. Arima, M. Caldas, J. O. Browder, andS. Perz. 2006. Land-cover and land-use change in the Brazilian Amazon: Smallholders, ranchers, and frontier stratification. Economic Geography 82 (3): 265-88.
- Alsdorf, D. E. 2003. Water storage of the central Amazon floodplain measured with GIS and remote sensing imagery. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 93 (1): 55-66.
- Andelman, S. J., and W. F. Fagan. 2000. Umbrellas and flagships: Efficient conservation surrogates or expensive mistakes? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 97 (11): 5954-59.
- Arima, E. Y., R. Y. Walker, S. G. Perz, and M. Caldas. 2005. Loggers and forest fragmentation: Behavioral models of road building in the Amazon Basin. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 95 (3): 525-41.
- Asner, G. P., D. E. Knapp, E. N. Broadbent, P. J. Oliveira, M. Keller, and J. N. Silva. 2005. Selective logging in the Brazilian Amazon. Science 310 (5747): 480-82.
- Baker, J. C., and R. A. Williamson. 2006. Satellite imagery activism: Sharpening the focus on tropical deforestation. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 27 (1): 5-17.
- Barrionuevo, A. 2008. With guns and fines, Brazil takes on loggers. The New York Times 19 April. http:// www.nytimes.com/2008/04/19/world/americas/19brazil. html? r = 1&amp;th&amp;emc = th&amp;oref = slogin (last accessed 22 December 2011).

- Bauch, S., E. Sills, L. C. Rodriguez, K. McGinley, and F. Cubbage. 2009. Forest policy reform in Brazil. Journal of Forestry 107 (3): 132-38.
- Benjamin, A. H. V. 1998. Criminal law and the protection of the environment in Brazil. Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Environmental Compliance and Enforcement 1:227-34.
- Biller, D. 1994. Informal gold mining and mercury pollution in Brazil. Policy Research Working Paper 1304, World Bank, Washington, DC.
- Blomley, N. K. 2005. Remember property? Progress in Human Geography 29:125-27.
- Bridge, G. 2001. Resource triumphalism: Postindustrial narratives of primary commodity production. Environment and Planning A 33:2149-73.
- Brivio, P. A., R. Colombo, M. Maggi, and R. Tomasoni. 2002. Integration of remote sensing data and GIS for accurate mapping of flooded areas. International Journal of Remote Sensing 23 (3): 429-41.
- Bryan, J. 2010. Force multipliers: Geography, militarism, and the Bowman Expeditions. Political Geography 29 (8): 414-16.
- Caldas, M., R. Walker, E. Arima, S. Perz, S. Aldrich, and C. Simmons. 2007. Theorizing land cover and land use change: The peasant economy of Amazonian deforestation. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 97 (1): 86-110.
- Chouinard, R., and M. M. Veiga. 2007. Global Mercury Project-Results of the awareness campaign and technology demonstration for artisanal gold miners: Summary report . Vienna, Austria: United Nations Industrial Development Organization.
- Cinderby, S. 1999. Geographic information systems (GIS) for participation: The future of environmental GIS? International Journal of Environment and Pollution 11 (3): 304-15.
- Clark, M. J. 1998. GIS-Democracy or delusion? Environment and Planning A 30 (2): 303-16.
- Crampton, J. 2007. The biopolitical justification for geosurveillance. Geographical Review 97 (3): 389403.
- Dall'Agnol, R. 1995. Mining without destruction? Problems and prospects for the garimpos and major mining projects. In Brazilian perspectives on sustainable development of the Amazon region , ed. M. Clusener-Godt and I. Sachs, 205-33. Paris: UNESCO.
- De Freitas, D. M., and P. R. A. Tagliani. 2009. The use of GIS for the integration of traditional and scientific knowledge in supporting artisanal fisheries management in southern Brazil. Journal of Environmental Management 90:2071-80.
- De Theije, M., and M. Heemskerk. 2009. Moving frontiers in the Amazon: Brazilian small-scale gold miners in Suriname. European Review of Latin American and Caribbean Studies 87:5-25.
- DiBiase, D., C. Goranson, F. Harvey, and D. Wright. 2009. The GIS professional ethics project: Practical ethics education for GIS pros. Paper presented at the 24th International Cartography Conference, Santiago, Chile.
- Drummond, J., and A. F. Barros-Platiau. 2006. Brazilian environmental laws and policies, 1934-2002: A critical overview. Law and Policy 28 (1): 83-108.
- Dunn, C. 2007. Participatory GIS-A people's GIS? Progress in Human Geography 31 (5): 616-37.
- Elwood, S. 2006a. Critical issues in participatory GIS: Deconstructions, reconstructions, and new research directions. Transactions in GIS 10 (5): 693-708.
- ---.2006b. Negotiating knowledge production: The everyday inclusions, exclusions, and contradictions of participatory GIS research. The Professional Geographer 58 (2): 197-208.
- Ferguson, J. 1994. The anti-politics machine: Development, depoliticization and bureaucratic power in Lesotho . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Firestone, L. A., and C. Souza. 2002. The role of remote sensing and GIS in enforcement of areas of permanent preservation in the Brazilian Amazon. Geocarto 17 (2): 51-56.
- Fluri, J. 2009. 'Foreign passports only': Geographies of (post)conflict work in Kabul, Afghanistan. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 99 (5): 986-94.
- Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2001. Forest resources assessment 2000 main report. FAO Forestry Paper No. 140, FAO, Rome, Italy.
- Ghose, R. 2007. Politics of scale and networks of association in public participation GIS. Environment and Planning A 39:1961-80.
- Goodchild, M. F., P. Fu, and P. Rich. 2007. Sharing geographic information: An assessment of the geospatial one-stop. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 97 (2): 250-66.
- Graulau, J. 2001. Peasant mining production as a development strategy: The case of women in gold mining in the Brazilian Amazon. European Review of Latin American and Caribbean Studies 71:71-104.
- Hearn, K. 2007. Amazon tribes use latest gadgets to battle developers. National Geographic News 23 January. http:// news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2007/01/070123amazon-maps.html (last accessed 23 July 2011).
- Hilson, G. 2006. Abatement of mercury pollution in the small-scale gold mining industry: Restructuring the policy and research agendas. The Science of the Total Environment 362 (1-3): 1-14.
- ---.2007. What is wrong with the global support facility for small-scale mining? Progress in Development Studies 7 (3): 235-49.
- Hirakuri, S. R. 2003. Can law save the forest? Lessons from Finland and Brazil . Bogor Barat, Indonesia: Centre for International Forestry Research.
- Houghton, R. A. 1994. The worldwide extent of land-use change. Bioscience 44 (5): 305-15.
- Instituto Socio Ambiental. 2006. Mining in protected areas in the Brazilian Amazon . Brasilia, Brazil: Instituto Socio Ambiental.
- Klinkenberg, B. 2007. Geospatial technologies and the geographies of hope and fear. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 97 (2): 349-60.
- Kwaku Kyem, P. 2004. Of intractable conflicts and participatory GIS applications: The search for consensus amidst competing claims and institutional demands. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 (1): 3757.
- Kwan, M. P. 2002. Feminist visualization: Re-envisioning GIS as a method in feminist geographic research. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 92 (4): 645-61.

- ---. 2007. Affecting geospatial technologies: Toward a feminist politics of emotion. The Professional Geographer 59 (1): 22-34.
- Laurance, W. 2005. When bigger is better: The need for Amazonian mega-reserves. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 20:645-48.
- Le Billon, P. 2008. Diamond wars? Conflict diamonds and geographies of resource wars. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 98 (2): 345-72.
- Lele, U., V. Viana, A. Verissimo, S. Vosti, K. Perkins, and S. A. Husain. 2000. Brazil-Forests in the balance: Challenges of conservation with development . Evaluation Country Case Study Series, World Bank Operations Evaluation Department. Washington, DC: World Bank.
- Machado, I. F., and S. F. Figueirˆ oa. 2001. 500 years of mining in Brazil: A brief review. Resources Policy 27:9-24.
- Manu, A., Y. A. Twumasi, and T. L.Coleman. 2004. Application of remote sensing and GIS technologies to assess the impact of surface mining at Tarkwa, Ghana. International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium Proceedings 1:573-74.
- McCracken, S. D., E. Brondizio, E. F. Moran, D. Nelson, A. Siqueira, and C. R. Pedrazar. 1998. The use of remote sensing and GIS in the collection of survey data on households and land-use: Example from the agricultural frontier of the Brazilian Amazon. Paper presented at the Anais IX Simposio de sensoriamento Remoto, Santos, Brazil.
- Mclafferty, S. L. 2005. Women and GIS: Geospatial technologies and feminist geographies. Cartographica 40 (4): 37-45.
- Mol, J. H., and P. E. Ouboter. 2004. Downstream effects of erosion from small-scale gold mining on the instream habitat and fish community of a small neotropical rainforest stream. Conservation Biology 18 (1): 20114.
- Neme, L. 2010. The changing nature of illegal loggingand illegal logging investigations-in Brazil's Amazon . http://news.mongabay.com/2010/0708-neme amazon illegal logging.html (last accessed 2 October 2011).
- Newsroom. 2007. UN rep held hostage by Brazilian tribe in diamond region. Newsroom. http://www. idexonline.com/portal FullNews.asp?id = 29028 (last accessed 3 August 2011).
- Peterson, G. D., and M. Heemskerk. 2001. Deforestation and forest regeneration following small-scale gold mining in the Amazon: The case of Suriname. Environmental Conservation 28 (2): 117-26.
- Radcliffe, S. 2007. Latin American indigenous geographies of fear: Living in the shadow of racism, lack of development, and antiterror measures. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 97 (2): 385-97.
- ---. 2009. National maps, digitalisation and neoliberal cartographies: Transforming nation-state practices and symbols in postcolonial Ecuador. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 34:426-44.
- Ravikanth, G., R. U. Shaanker, and K. N. Ganeshaiah. 2000. Conservation status of forests in India: A cause for worry? Journal of the Indian Institute of Science 80 (6): 591600.
- Ribeiro, C. 2004. GIS for a greener Brazil: Automated delineation of natural preserves. Paper presented at the ESRI International User Conference, Redlands, CA.
- ---. 2006. Delineation of the permanent preservation areas in the Tapajos River Basin: Toward environmental compliance on artisanal gold mining areas . Vienna, Austria: United Nations Industrial Development Organization. http://www.globalmercuryproject.org (last accessed 22 December 2011).
- Riechel, A., and B. Calixto. 2008. Deforestation in the Amazon: The Arc of Fire is still generating controversies. 4 October. http://www.amazonia.org.br (last accessed 21 July 2011).
- Rodrigues, A. S. L., R. M. Ewers, L. Parry, C. Souza, A. Ver´ ıssimo, and A. Balmford. 2009. Boom-and-bust development patterns across the Amazon deforestation frontier. Science 324 (5933): 1435-37.
- Rylands, A. B., and K. Brandon. 2005. Brazilian protected areas. Conservation Biology 10 (3): 612-18.
- Simmons, C. 2004. The political economy of land conflict in the eastern Brazilian Amazon. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 (1): 183-206.
- Soares-Filho, B. S., D. C. Nepstad, L. M. Curran, G. Coutinho Cerqueira, R. A. Garcia, C. Azevedo Ramos, E. Voll, A. McDonald, P. Lefebvre, and P. Schlesinger. 2006. Modelling conservation in the Amazon basin. Nature 440:520-23.
- Sousa, R., and M. Veiga. 2009. Using performance indicators to evaluate an environmental education program in artisanal gold mining communities in the Brazilian Amazon. Ambio 38 (1): 40-46.
- Sousa, R., M. Veiga, D. Van Zyl, K. Telmer, S. Spiegel, and J. Selder. 2011. Policies and regulations for Brazil's artisanal gold mining sector: Analysis and recommendations. Journal of Cleaner Production 19 (6-7): 74250.
- Spiegel, S. J. 2008. Deforestation: Call for justice, not militarization. Nature 453 (7193): 280.
- Spiegel, S. J., and M. M. Veiga. 2005. Building capacity in small-scale mining communities: Health, ecosystem sustainability, and the Global Mercury Project. EcoHealth 2:361-69.
- ---.2010. International guidelines on mercury management in small-scale gold mining. Journal of Cleaner Production 18 (4): 375-85.
- Spiegel, S. J., A. Yassi, J. M. Spiegel, and M. M. Veiga. 2005. Reducing mercury and responding to the global gold rush. Lancet 366:2070-72.
- Tate, E., D. Maidment, F. Olivera, and D. Anderson. 2002. Creating a terrain model for floodplain mapping. Journal of Hydrologic Engineering 7 (2): 100-08.
- Telmer, K. H., M. Costa, R. S. Angelica, E. R. Araujo, and Y. Maurice. 2006. The source and fate of sediment and mercury in the Tapajos River, Para, Brazilian Amazon: Ground and space-based evidence. Journal of Environmental Management 81:101-13.
- Telmer, K., and D. Stapper. 2007. Evaluating and monitoring small scale gold mining and mercury use: Building a knowledge-base with satellite imagery and field work . Vienna, Austria: United Nations Industrial DevelopmentOrganization.http://www.globalmercuryproject.org (last accessed 28 March 2011).
- Telmer, K., and M. Veiga. 2008. World emissions of mercury from artisanal and small scale gold mining. In Mercury fate and transport in the global atmosphere: Measurements, models and policy implications . Brasilia, Brazil:

- United Nations Environment Programme. http://www. chem.unep.ch/mercury/Atmospheric Emissions/Atmosp heric emissions mercury.htm (last accessed 26 June 2011).
- Tollefson, J. 2008. Brazil goes to war against logging. Nature 452:134-35.
- Tschakert, P. 2009a. Digging deep for justice: A radical re-imagination of the artisanal gold mining sector in Ghana. Antipode 41 (4): 706-40.
- ---. 2009b. Recognizing and nurturing artisanal mining as a viable livelihood. Resources Policy 34:24-31.
- Tschakert, P., and K. Singha. 2007. Contaminated identities: Mercury and marginalization in the artisanal mining sector of Ghana. Geoforum 38:1304-21.
- United Nations Industrial Development Organization. 2002. Removal of barriers to the introduction of cleaner artisanal gold mining technologies . Vienna, Austria: United Nations Industrial Development Organization.
- ---.2006. Mapping permanent preservation areas in Brazil: Toward enviromental compliance on artisanal gold mining areas . Vienna, Austria: United Nations Industrial Development Organization.
- ---.2008. Results of the awareness campaign and technology demonstration for artisanal gold miners . Vienna, Austria: United Nations Industrial Development Organization.
- Veiga, M. M. 1997a. Introducing new technologies for abatement of global mercury pollution in Latin America . Vi-
- enna, Austria: United Nations Industrial Development Organization.
- ---. 1997b. Mercury in artisanal gold mining in Latin America: Facts, fantasies and solutions. Paper presented at UNIDO Expert Group Meeting, Vienna, Austria.
- Veiga, M. M., and J. Hinton. 2002. Abandoned artisanal gold mines in the Amazon: A legacy of mercury pollution. Natural Resources Forum 26:15-26.
- Verdin, K. L., and J. P. Verdin. 1999. A topological system for delineation and codification of the Earth's river basins. Journal of Hydrology 218 (1-2): 1-12.
- Verry, E. S., C. A. Dolloff, and M. E. Manning. 2004. Riparian ecotone: A functional definition and delineation for resource assessment. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 4:67-94.
- Williams, C., and C. Dunn. 2003. GIS in participatory research: Assessing the impact of landmines on communities in Northwest Cambodia. Transactions in GIS 7 (3): 393-410.
- Wittman, H. 2009. Reframing agrarian citizenship: Land, life and power in Brazil. Journal of Rural Studies 25 (1): 120-30.
- Wright, D. J., S. L. Duncan, and D. Lach. 2009. Social power and GIS technology: A review and assessment of approaches for natural resource management. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 99 (2): 25472.

Correspondence: School of Social and Political Science, University of Edinburgh, Chrystal Macmillan Building, 15a George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9LD, Scotland, e-mail: samspiegel@gmail.com (Spiegel); Department of Forest Engineering, Federal University of Vicosa, Edif´ ıcio Jos´ e Reinaldo de Ara´ ujo, Vic ¸osa 36571-000, Brazil, e-mail: caas.ribeiro@gmail.com (Ribeiro); Department of Forest Engineering, Federal University of Jequitinhonha and Mucuri Valleys, Rodovia MGT 367-Km 583, N ◦ 5000-Diamantina/MG-39.100-000, Brazil, e-mail: rodolfoneiva@gmail.com (Sousa); Norman B. Keevil Institute of Mining Engineering, University of British Columbia, 5th Floor, 6350 Stores Road, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada, e-mail: veiga@mining.ubc.ca (Veiga).