This article was downloaded by: [Tufts University]

On: 29 October 2014, At: 08:00

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954

Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH,

UK

<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Methodological Advances in the Spatial Analysis of Land Fragmentation

Sainan Zhang a , Abigail M. York a , Christopher G. Boone a &amp; Milan Shrestha a a Arizona State University Published online: 30 Jul 2012.

To cite this article: Sainan Zhang , Abigail M. York , Christopher G. Boone &amp; Milan Shrestha (2013) Methodological Advances in the Spatial Analysis of Land Fragmentation, The Professional Geographer, 65:3, 512-526, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2012.700501

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2012.700501

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## Methodological Advances in the Spatial Analysis of Land Fragmentation ∗

Sainan Zhang, Abigail M. York, Christopher G. Boone, and Milan Shrestha Arizona State University

This article evaluates the effect of moving window (MW) size on observed fragmentation spatial patterns and proposes a method to identify an effective MW size using Simpson's diversity index. To test the robustness of the proposed method, we demonstrate its use in six cities in the Phoenix metropolitan area that have substantial variation in land composition and configuration. Next we explore the effects of gradient observation scale and the role of scale in removing noise. We compare and discuss two popular approaches to measuring urban-torural fragmentation gradients-concentric ring- and transect-based approaches-highlighting the usefulness of each approach in an extensive and rapidly urbanizing region. This study provides a new method for selecting window size, offers insights on scale effects, and provides guidance on gradient scale selection to achieve the best representation of land fragmentation patterns for urban analysis. KeyWords:fragmentation, gradients, moving window size.

本文评估移动窗口（MW）的大小对观测到的碎片空间模式的影响，并使用辛普森多样性指 数，提出了确定有效MW大小的一种方法。为了检验该方法的稳固性，我们在凤凰城大都市 区的6个在土地的组成和配置上明显不同的城市展示了它的用途。接下来，我们探索梯度观测 尺度的影响和尺度在消除噪音方面的作用。我们比较和讨论了衡量城市到农村碎片梯度的两 个流行方法一同心圆环和断面为基础的方法一强调每种方法在广泛地和迅速地城市化的地区 的有效性。这项研究提供了一个选择窗口大小的新方法，提供了规模效应的见解，并给城市 分析中的梯度规模选择问题提供指导，实现土地碎片模式的最佳表现。关键词：碎片，梯 度，移动窗口的大小。

Este art´ ıculo eval ´ ua el efecto que tiene el tama ˜ no de la ventana desplazable (VM) sobre los patrones observados de fragmentaci´ on espacial y propone un m´ etodo para identificar un tama˜ no efectivo de la VM utilizando el ´ ındice de diversidad de Simpson. Para poner a prueba la robustez del m´ etodo propuesto, demostramos su uso en seis ciudades del ´ area metropolitana de Phoenix en las que se observa una sustancial variaci´ on en la composici´ on y configuraci´ on del terreno. Despu´ es, exploramos los efectos de la escala del gradiente de observaci´ on y el papel de la escala en la eliminaci´ on del ruido. Comparamos y discutimos dos enfoques populares para medir los gradientes de fragmentaci´ on de lo urbano a lo rural-enfoques de anillos conc´ entricos y los basados en transectos-destacando la utilidad de cada enfoque en una regi´ on extensa y en proceso de r´ apida urbanizaci´ on. Este estudio proporciona un m´ etodo nuevo para seleccionar el tama˜ no de la ventana, ofrece visiones perspicaces sobre los efectos de la escala, y provee una gu´ ıa sobre la selecci ´ on del gradiente de escala para lograr la mejor representaci´ on de los patrones de fragmentaci´ on de la tierra para el an´ alisis urbano. Palabras clave: fragmentaci´ on, gradientes, tama ˜ no de la ventana desplazable.

F ragmentation disconnects landscape corridors, affecting biodiversity and ecosystem processes. Because many species are adapted to large rather than small patches of habitat, fragmentation usually decreases species richness (Vogelmann 1995), forces species to migrate (Dyer 1994), and drives the global biodiversity crisis (Jorge and Garcia 1997; McGarigal and Cushman 2002). Besides its implications for biodiversity, fragmentation

∗ This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under grant nos. BCS-1026865 and DEB-0423704, Central Arizona-Phoenix Long-Term Ecological Research (CAP LTER).

impacts agriculture and forest production, native systems (Lawrence 1988; Carsjens and van der Knaap 2002; Carsjens and van Lier 2002; Rickenbach and Gobster 2003; Kline, Azuma, and Alig 2004), public service provision costs (Camagni, Gibelli, and Rigamonti 2002), outdoor recreation, and quality of life (Deller et al. 2001; Rickenbach and Gobster 2003; Sudhira, Ramachandra, and Jagadish 2004). Given the high social and ecological costs of fragmentation, it is imperative to develop robust methods for analyzing land fragmentation, especially in metropolitan areas that are highly heterogeneous and growing rapidly. Advanced measurements of the spatial variation of land fragmentation will assist planners and policymakers in targeting resources to curb fragmentation where it is highly detrimental rather than applying blanket approaches.

Over the past few decades, landscape metrics have been developed to interpret the characteristics of complex landscape structure and land fragmentation. Recent development of FRAGSTATS (McGarigal and Marks 1994) has increased application of landscape metrics because it can calculate more than forty landscape metrics and is compatible with geographic information systems (GIS) and remote sensing software. A common approach to characterizing fragmentation is to average fragmentation metrics over an entire area. This method could lead to incorrect interpretations of the causal dynamics of fragmentation, however (Herold, Scepan, and Clarke 2002), because averaging does not account for spatial variation (McGarigal and Cushman 2002). Moving window (MW) analysis, in contrast, uses a window at a selected scale to move across the landscape one cell at a time, calculate the specified metrics within the window, and assign the value to the center cell of the window (McGarigal and Cushman 2005). Fragmentation gradient analysis can be used in combination with the MW analysis, providing information about the directionality and location of fragmentation. Fragmentation gradients are generally analyzed by a series of equalwidth concentric rings around the city enter or a transect passing through the city center with a 'gliding box' (Gustafson 1998) moving along the transect. Urban-to-rural fragmentation gradients illustrate intensity of urban sprawl, a key dynamic in metropolitan socioecological systems (e.g., Jensen 1979; McDon- nell et al. 1997; Irwin and Bockstael 2007; Keys, Wentz, and Redman 2007; York et al. 2011).

Using a case study of the Phoenix metropolitan area, this study addresses the major methodological issues in MW and gradient analyses of land fragmentation. First, we propose a method to explore an MW size that improves the effectiveness of fragmentation analysis. Second, fragmentation gradient analysis is conducted at a certain scale of resolution, hereafter called observation scale , which is determined by the width of the concentric rings or the size of the gliding box. Weexamine the effects of observation scale on urban-to-rural fragmentation gradient analyses and evaluate the choice of concentric rings versus transects. These issues are raised because every analyst makes these selections when conducting an MW and gradient analysis, yet often the criteria for choice are not explicit and the selection consequences on fragmentation results are not adequately taken into account.

Most research on landscape structure tests various window sizes over several runs and makes a decision based on visual inspection and intuition. Without a theoretically determined window size, there is a significant difference in the MW sizes selected based on empirical trials-for instance, Langanke et al. (2005) used a 0.44-km 2 round MW in a regional study in northern Germany; Kong and Nakagoshi (2006) selected a 0.79-km 2 round MWforJinan city in China; Bielecka (2007) applied a 1-km 2 MW for identification of landscape diversity of the whole of Poland; Tole (2006) adopted a 0.02-km 2 square MW in Jamaica's Cockpit Country, UK; and Buyantuyev, Wu, and Gries (2010) chose a 0.11-km 2 square MW for a study of Phoenix, Arizona. Clearly, fragmentation results are sensitive to the selection of the window size (Openshaw 1984; Eiden, Kayadjanian, and Vidal 2000; Berling-Wolff and Wu 2004; Wu2004). Therefore, it is necessary to explore an approach to finding an MW size that can provide a clearly recognizable land distribution pattern. Eiden, Kayadjanian, and Vidal (2000) raised the hypothesis that the optimal window size for a given landscape should be indicated at the point with the greatest range of number of classes the MW detected. Land fragmentation is defined as the breaking up of land use type into smaller parcels (Forman 1995). Continuous areas of the same land class form land 'patches'-the basic components from

which all fragmentation metrics are derived (Sudhira, Ramachandra, and Jagadish 2004), so land types are the very essential precondition for fragmentation. Therefore, we agree with Eiden, Kayadjanian, and Vidal's (2000) logic that the suitable MW scale should allow identifying both single type and sufficient mixed types of land for a better measurement of fragmentation variation, making a broad spectrum of fragmentation level observable. Wedevelop a process to find the effective MW size by evaluating the diversity of number of land classes an MW can capture.

Selection of MW size is not the only important choice for fragmentation gradient analyses; the adoption of an observation scale also affects the observed fragmentation gradients. Similar to the MW selection, analysts have adopted a wide range of ring widths and sizes of gliding boxes. Examples include a 7-km concentric ring applied in a Phoenix study (Keys, Wentz, and Redman 2007); 1-km concentric rings in a comparative study of twenty-five cities worldwide (Schneider and Woodcock 2008); a 15 km × 15 km gliding box in a study of Phoenix (Luck and Wu 2002); a 4 km × 4 km gliding box in a study of Chengdu, China (Schneider, Seto, and Webster 2005); and a 5 km × 5 km gliding box in a study of Guangzhou, China (Yu and Ng 2007). For the goal of providing a guideline in choosing an appropriate scale for effective analysis, in this article we analyze the impact of observation scale for both concentric ring and transect methods on fragmentation gradients.

## Methods

Study Area and Data Set

The Phoenix metropolitan area consists of twenty-six municipalities located primarily in Maricopa County, Arizona. The basin and range geology of the Sonoran Desert has ample flat and easily developable land, and urban areas have expanded quickly here, especially in the post-World War II era (Grimm and Redman 2004). With a population of 4.4 million, the Phoenix metropolitan area is ranked twelfth in population in the United States and is an exemplar of a fast-growing urban region in the U.S. Southwest. Although growth in the Phoenix metropolitan area has been explosive in the postwar period, the pattern of growth and land use is highly varied among the incorporated cities in the region due to their individual histories, locations within the region, institutions, and social-ecological contexts (Gober 2006).

The primary data source for our analyses is the 30-m resolution U.S. Geological Survey National Land Cover Data sets (NLCD) for 1992 and 2001. We use these data to derive land cover change information and fragmentation analyses for the county. The NLCD is compiled from Landsat satellite Thematic Mapper imagery with a 30 m/pixel spatial resolution and supplemented by a relatively small number of aerial photographs as well as various ancillary data for ground truthing. The NLCD 1992 data for this region have an accuracy rating of 82 percent to 85 percent at Anderson Level I (Wickham et al. 2004).

Because we focus on human impacts on landscape structure, we classify land cover types into three categories: developed, characterized by a high percentage (30 percent or greater) of constructed materials such as asphalt, concrete, and buildings; undeveloped, characterized by water, barren, forest, shrub land, herbaceous upland, woody wetlands, and emergent herbaceous wetlands; and cultivated, characterized by herbaceous vegetation (75 percent or greater) that has been planted or is intensively managed for the production of food, feed, fiber or is maintained in developed settings for specific purposes such as parks and golf courses (Figure 1).

Effective MW Size Identification for Spatial Fragmentation Analysis

Eiden, Kayadjanian, and Vidal (2000) argued that the optimal MW size occurs with the greatest range of land classes detected (Figure 2). We develop a method for detecting the size whereby the highest diversity of land classes are detected for all the 'observations,' which means each time the MW calculates the fragmentation metrics within the window. To characterize the diversity of number of land classes within each MW observation, we apply the complementary form of Simpson's index (Simpson 1949) on the number of land classes. Here, the Simpson's diversity index ( D ) is described as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where pi equals the percentage of the number

Figure 1 Land cover of the Phoenix metropolitan area using reclassified National Land Cover Data 1992 and the selected incorporated areas, Maricopa County, Arizona. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 2 Concept of the optimal moving window size by Eiden, Kayadjanian, and Vidal (2000).

<!-- image -->

of land classes value on the total observations at a specific MW size, and n equals the number of pi values. The highest D value represents a maximum diversity of number of land classes, the effective MW size.

The proposed method of effective MW size is especially appropriate for studying regional urban areas where fragmentation characteristics are typically nonuniform and variable across space. We chose a 60 km × 50 km extent centered over the core urban area that delineates an urban to rural region to empirically test the MW sizes (Figure 1). In the sample urban to rural landscape in Phoenix, a series of MWs with side length of 90 m to 2,370 m are tested to find the most effective MW size based on the highest Simpson's diversity index.

Totest this approach in different landscapes, six cities in the Phoenix metropolitan area were selected for further study. These cities were selected along an urban-to-rural gradient representing cities with differential urban density and developed land uses. Phoenix (1,250 km 2 ) is the biggest city and is the core of the metropolitan area. Tempe and Chandler are selected along the southeast urban-rural gradient. Located only 9 km from the center of Phoenix, Tempe (103 km 2 ) has 93 percent of its area developed. Chandler (152 km 2 ) is adjacent to Tempebut extends into the urban-rural fringe. Developed and cultivated land together account for 98 percent of the area, and only 2 percent of vacant land is interspersed within

<!-- image -->

the city. In contrast, Surprise (190 km 2 ) and Goodyear (303 km 2 ) are located further from the urban core and contain less developed land: Surprise has 18 percent developed and 66 percent undeveloped land; Goodyear's land area is only 10 percent developed and 59 percent undeveloped. Fountain Hills (47 km 2 ) is a smaller city with a near absence of cultivated land: 99.6 percent of the area is developed and undeveloped land. These cases provide smaller tests of effective window size within a metropolitan region.

## Selection of Observation Scale and Approaches in the Gradient Analysis

In gradient analysis, a major challenge is how to identify the variation of gradients with strong fluctuations. Observation scale needs to be big enough to smooth out the noise to illustrate the fragmentation trends. The observation scale creates an averaging effect, as any fluctuation where the wavelength is smaller than the observation scale will be attenuated. Because fragmentation fluctuation is not one simple wave, the wave at the smallest scale is formed by the minimum mapping unit (i.e., cell value of the fragmentation metrics), and the numerous waves form a bigger wave at a larger scale. We can explain how the window filters the small-scale variation through the example in Figure 3. To simplify the waves at different scales, we assume that the fragmentation

Figure 3 Concept of appropriate observation scale that is able to filter unwanted disturbance from fragmentation variation.

<!-- image -->

fluctuation is the superposition by only two scales of waves, sin(2 π x / l 1 ) + 0 . 3sin(2 π x / l 2 ), which are shown in Figure 3A. The large-scale example has a wavelength of l 1 = 10km and the small-scale example has a wavelength of l 2 = 1km. To remove the disturbance of the small-scale fluctuation, we can set the observation size, the width of the rings or the side length of the gliding box, between the wavelengths of the two scales. Setting the wavelength at 2 km (Figure 3B) demonstrates that small-scale fluctuation has been filtered out but the desired large-scale variation is retained.

Fragmentation gradient analysis is based on the fragmentation pattern obtained from MW analysis; thus, observation scale only affects the filtering or averaging but not composition and configuration. We use two scales to investigate this averaging effect: 5-km-wide and 1km-wide rings radiating out from Phoenix's city center, approximated by Phoenix City Hall. These two scales are selected based on the commonly used scales in recent regional studies. Similarly, we test the observation scale effect on the transect approach. A 15-km-wide transect band was clipped to traverse the main ur- ban core of the Phoenix metropolitan area to the remote desert using a gliding box of 15 km × 15 km versus a 15 km × 1 km box. To make the concentric rings and transect approaches comparable, the gliding box of 15 km × 15 km moves 5 km each time, calculating fragmentation every 5 km along the gradient, whereas the 15 km × 1 km box moves 1 km each time to match the interval of 1-km rings. This selection of the two approaches might be based on a theoretical question: For instance, if directionality of fragmentation is the major concern, a transect might be the most appropriate choice, whereas if one is interested in the overall gradients of fragmentation from the city center, concentric rings might be the best choice.

## Results

Effects of MW Size on Land Fragmentation Spatial Pattern Analysis

Wepropose that the effective MW size should be selected using Simpson's diversity index as an indicator of variation of land classes. In Figure 4, Simpson's diversity index rises and falls with increasing MW size. In 1992, the

Figure 4 CONTAG metrics based on different moving window sizes from 90 m × 90 m to 2,370 m × 2,370 m in the year 1992.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5 The relation of moving window sizes and diversity index (D) value of number of land classes for the sample area in the year 1992 and 2001. NL = number of land classes.

<!-- image -->

effective window size indicated from the highest D value is 930 m × 930 m, and for the 2001 image it is 690 m × 690 m. The variation in the effective MW sizes between the two years is potentially due to the enhancement of fragmentation levels in 2001, creating a more complex spatial heterogeneity. The results imply that a well-defined peak of D values suggests a more specific MW size, whereas flatter D curves suggest a range of MW sizes are appropriate. In the case study of metropolitan Phoenix, for both 1992 and 2001, an MW size between 450 m to 930 m is effective in presenting land fragmentation pattern.

To understand the change in number of land classes, we present histograms of the land classes captured with different MW sizes in 2001 (Figure 5). At the smallest extreme with the 90 m × 90 m MW, 75.87 percent of the observations can only capture one of the three land classes when the window moves over the landscape (Figure 5A). Because all landscape metrics are calculated based on thematic land classes, the small MW does not capture the spatial relationships among different land classes and thus results in the same fragmentation value for most of the landscape. At the largest extreme of 2,370 m × 2,370 m, 66.69 percent of observations capture three classes (Figure 5C). Large windows result in an overall increase of most fragmentation metrics and loss of fragmentation variation. At the effective 690 m × 690 m size, the observations for one, two, and three land classes become nearly evenly distributed (Figure 5B), capturing the greatest diversity and producing the best distribution of land fragmentation.

Toverify the effectiveness of the determined MWsize using the proposed method, a contagion (CONTAG) fragmentation analysis with different sizes of MWs is given in Figure 6. We found that MW sizes result in a similar fragmentation pattern but different contrast across the landscape. In Figure 6, it can be seen that in most areas of the map, large and small MW sizes do not capture the variation in CONTAG fragmentation. For example, in the center of the figure where fragmentation level is low, 90m × 90m(first panel) and 2,370 m × 2,370 m (last panel) MW sizes both fail to show the detail of CONTAG variation. Because detection of fragmentation requires a large enough area to be observed, a small MW size (e.g., 90 m × 90 m case) is not capable of detecting the fragmentation. On the other hand, a very large MWcan average the fragmentation detail out, blurring the fragmentation map, as is the case with a 2,370 m × 2,370 m MW size. The effective window size 690 m × 690 m, however, clearly shows the variation detail. One can see that the gray levels have the richest distribution in the box area among the different MW sizes.

<!-- image -->

2130m×2130m

2370m×2370m

Figure 6 Examples of the number of land classes captured by three of the tested moving window sizes.

Totest this approach in different landscapes, results of MW analysis for the six small cities are shown in Figure 7. Four of the six cities have smaller effective MW sizes than the regional metropolitan area, whereas two have larger effective MW sizes. A closer look at the six cities helps to understand the relationship between the effective MW sizes and landscape pattern.

Figure 7 The relation of moving window sizes and diversity index (D) value of number of land classes for six cities in the Phoenix metropolitan area in 2001. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Smaller MW sizes are suggested for the cities of Fountain Hills (Figure 7A), Surprise (Figure 7B), Chandler (Figure 7C), and Goodyear (Figure 7D). Note that all four cities are located on the fringe of the Phoenix metropolitan region. Fountain Hills is a city dominated by a mixture of developed and undeveloped land. Its landscape is the most fragmented among all cities,

leading to a very small effective MW size of 90 m. Chandler consists mostly of developed and cultivated land. It has an effective MW size of 450 m. Surprise is situated at the urban fringe and is farther from the urban center than Chandler, with a mix of the three land classes and complex fragmentation variation, with an effective MW size of 450 m. Goodyear is a city expanding into the desert with development and cultivated land in the north. Expansion of transportation and cultivated land causes increased fragmentation in the desert in the south resulting in an effective window size of 690 m. One highly fragmented city has a very small effective MW; two cities have similar effective MW sizes, slightly smaller than the regional optimum; and the last one's optimum is similar to that of the entire metropolitan region.

Phoenix (Figure 7E) and Tempe (Figure 7F) have larger effective MW sizes than the metropolitan area as a whole. Phoenix has a nearly contiguous area of developed land stretching from the urban core to the northern and southern desert fringes, resulting in a bigger MW size of 1,650 m. Similarly, Tempe is dominated by one land class of developed area with an extremely uniform landscape, resulting in the largest effective MW size of 2,850 m.

## Effects of Fragmentation Gradient Observation Scale and Two Gradient Analysis Approaches

To evaluate the scale effect of fragmentation gradient analysis, we apply the effective metropolitan MW size of 690 m × 690 m. In Figures 8A and 8C, a 15 km × 15 km box effectively filters the small-scale spatial noise much better than the 15 km × 1 km box. The movement of the peak fragmentation outward from the city center during the period 1992 to 2001 can be more easily observed in Figure 8A. Figures 8B and 8D represent the comparison of ring widths of 5 km and 1 km. The smaller scale of 1 km causes more fluctuation in the results. With less noise compared to that in the transect, however, the peak of fragmentation is still visible with the 1-km rings.

Next, we compare the fragmentation gradients using concentric ring- and transect-based approaches. We focus on the comparison of the transect approach with the gliding box of

15 km × 15 km (Figure 8A) and the ring approach with the ring width of 5 km (Figure 8B). The selected observation scales are shown as appropriate from the previous scale effect study. First, the transect approach is capable of capturing directional information that is relevant to understanding processes where fragmentation is uneven across a landscape (e.g., urban growth along a river or interstate highway). The ring approach better captures the overall level of fragmentation as distance from the city center increases. For example, Figure 8B indicates that the highest level of fragmentation changed from 10 km to the city center in 1992 to 40 km to the city center in 2001, and fragmentation grew the fastest at 40 km from the city center. Figure 8A using the transect method shows that the fragmentation peaks spread outward at both sides of the city center, and the fastest growing area is on the east side at 150 km. Average fragmentation levels in the remote west are considerably higher than in the remote east, indicating a development trend toward the west. This is due partially to the western parts of the county having more expanses of flat land and fewer mountains, which facilitates agriculture. Second, concentric rings have a stronger averaging effect. The rings incorporate radial moving directions and average the fragmentation values in each ring over the whole angular direction. Transects, however, have only one moving direction and average the fragmentation values in a defined gliding box along the transect. Furthermore, the concentric rings applied different scales in detecting fragmentation. They have larger areas and hence their averaging effect is enhanced with increasing distance from the city center. Therefore, the transect method has larger ranges and higher fluctuations of fragmentation values than the concentric rings method. As seen from Figure 8, the CONTAG ranges from 60.98 to 99.98 in 1992 and 55.76 to 100 in 2001 in Figure 8A and ranges from 66.22 to 98.04 in 1992 and 65.67 to 95.74 in 2001 in Figure 8B. The fluctuation in CONTAG value decreases 18.41 percent in 1992 and 32.03 percent in 2001 when shifting from the transect to ring approach. As the rings continue moving outward, the increasing area further smoothes out the CONTAG values and reduces fluctuations. This effect might indicate that the transect

Figure 8 Comparison of the effect of observation scales and two fragmentation gradient methods.

<!-- image -->

is more effective at capturing fragmentation variation than the concentric ring approach due to the unchanged scale of the transect far from the center.

## Discussion

MW analysis is a useful tool for capturing the spatial variation of landscape patterns for regional studies. Intuitively one might think that smaller windows give more information on variation of the fragmentation in all cases. If the window size is too small, however, and nearly equal to the cell size, it can catch only one land class without any fragmentation or only capture fragmentation at the edges of two land classes. If the window is too big, though, it always captures all land classes, and the coverage of the window is nearly the whole landscape wherever it moves. The increase in MW creates more overlapped areas in each calculation; thus, it gradually loses the capability to present small to medium-scale fragmentation variance. Therefore, very large and very small MWs are not desirable for capturing land fragmentation. We proposed an efficient MW size based on capturing the maximum diversity of land classes for different window sizes.

In this article, Simpson's D index (Simpson 1949) is selected to measure the diversity. Simpson's D index, along with Shannon's diversity index (Shannon and Weaver 1949) is the most popular diversity index frequently employed to quantify landscape composition (Nagendra 2002). But Simpson's index is more intuitive than Shannon's index with its statistical meaning (McGarigal and Marks 1994). Both metrics evaluate the evenness and richness of diversity. Shannon's index emphasizes richness, however, whereas Simpson's index emphasizes evenness (Peet 1974; McGarigal and Marks 1994). Shannon's index is preferable when a component has a relatively small number (DeJong 1975). In land fragmentation analysis, however, a rare-portion land type usually has small effects on the overall land fragmentation, so evenness is more likely to be the major factor in selecting the MW scale and Simpson index is thus selected for this study.

Using this approach, we find that a 690 m × 690 m MW is the effective size for capturing land fragmentation in the sample region of the Phoenix metropolitan area. At a submetropolitan level, the effective MW size depends on the percentage of each land class within the sample area, whether or not a single land class dominates the landscape, and the overall fragmentation of the study sites. Because Tempe is covered largely by one land class, a larger MW is needed to increase the identification of two and three classes. In cases with a single land class dominating the landscape, large MWsizes are most likely needed. MW is also influenced by the overall fragmentation level of the landscape. Both Chandler and Phoenix are cities where developed area is over 50 percent. Unlike Phoenix, the highly fragmented pattern of Chandler results in a smaller effective MW size than Phoenix. In cases with high land fragmentation evenly distributed across the whole landscape, a smaller MW is needed. Generally, low fragmentation area results in a large MW size, and high fragmentation results in a small MW size. In the case of a region with pockets of high and low fragmentation, the effective MW balances the uneven distribution of fragmentation, which is illustrated by the Phoenix metropolitan area with an effective size of 690 m. The greatest advantage of MW analysis versus an average value for the whole area lies in its ability to detect the difference of fragmentation distribution. For cases without an obvious peak D value, such as Tempe or Fountain Hills, there is little variation in fragmentation across the landscape; thus, it might be a case where MW is not an appropriate analytical tool.

Effective MW sizes are potentially correspondent with the scale of fragmentation, such as the mean size of patches. Using the case studies of six cities, we examined the correlation between effective MW sizes and the overall landscape fragmentation of each city. We chose two metrics for measuring the size of patches: largest patch index (LPI), which is the percentage of the landscape included in the largest patch, and mean patch size (MPS), which is the average patch size of all land classes. Our findings demonstrate that the effective MW sizes are positively and strongly correlated with the two patch size metrics: LPI ( r = 0.906, p = 0.013) and MPS ( r = 0.894, p = 0.016). It is potentially possible to develop a model using sufficient sample areas, involving

fragmentation indexes such as patch size, percentage land cover, and other variables that might affect the choice of MW. This article aims to inspire further studies and model development on the MW selection.

Selection of the scale of observation in the gradient analysis impacts landscape metrics and fragmentation pattern. Generally, larger observation scales have a stronger averaging effect, smoothing the observed fragmentation, which results in a blurred image of the CONTAG results. As the width of the transect is reduced to the minimum mapping unit, the gliding box nears cell size, leading to more observable fluctuation in fragmentation.

From our comparison of the concentric ring and transect methods for land fragmentation gradient analysis, some general conclusions can be drawn. Although both methods can effectively capture and measure fragmentation gradients to the city center, the ring method averages all the directions, whereas the transect method provides better directional information, helping the researcher understand in detail how and why urban growth happens. In addition, due to the strong averaging effect of the rings, to avoid distortion of the results, a monocentric symmetric urban configuration is most appropriate for this approach; otherwise, an area with higher fragmentation level could be masked by lower levels averaged in the rest of the area within the ring, resulting in a biased fragmentation evaluation. In contrast, the transect is more flexible in capturing uneven development characteristics and more sensible for long-range directional fragmentation assessment.

## Conclusion

This article highlights methodological issues in the spatial pattern and gradient analysis of landscape fragmentation. It provides a theoretical basis and a new methodology for the selection of effective MW size using Simpson's diversity index based on the hypothesis that effective MW size captures the greatest diversity of land classes. We applied the method to the metropolitan Phoenix region and its submetropolitan region as case studies. Results from the Phoenix case study find that 690 m × 690 m is an effective MW size. At the submetropolitan scale, if we exclude the extreme cases of Tempe and Phoenix and Fountain Hills, which are highly dominated by one land type or small and highly fragmented, the range of effective MW is from 450 m to 1 km. This range provides a rough reference when selecting a suitable MW size for other regional-level landscapes.

Finally, we evaluate and compare the performance of two common gradient analysis methods-concentric rings and transects-providing guidance for researchers in selecting the appropriate method and scale. For the gradient analysis, city form is a critical factor that needs to be considered when choosing a ring- versus transect-based approach. Most fragmentation analyses treat the city as monocentric (Von Th¨ unen [1826] 1966; Alonso 1964). Polycentric forms (Papageorgiou and Casetti 1971), 'leapfrog' development over green space and open land (Razin and Rosentraub 2000), and 'edge cities' (Mieszkowski and Mills 1993), however, necessitate new approaches for measuring fragmentation. Scholars have explored the use of road networks instead of city centers for multicentered urban areas (Irwin and Bockstael 2007) or a wind rose concentric ring approach to examine the growth distances in different directions.

<!-- image -->

For analysts interested in assessing overall fragmentation in a landscape, our study proposes methodological advances to empirically develop an effective window size, appropriate observation scale, and gradient analysis method selection. It provides an approach to this complex selection issue, recognizing that there is no universal solution. We expect our results to stimulate further study through empirical testing and further theoretical and methodological development. /squaresolid

## Literature Cited

Alonso, W. 1964. Location and land use. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Berling-Wolff, S., and J. Wu. 2004. Modeling urban landscape dynamics: A case study in Phoenix, USA. Urban Ecosystems 7 (3): 215-40.

Bielecka, E. 2007. Mapping landscape diversity on the basis of land cover data. http://cartography. tuwien.ac.at/ica/documents/ICC proceedings/ ICC2007/documents/doc/THEME%205/oral% 203/5.3.4%20MAPPING%20LANDSCAPE% 20DIVERSITY%200N%20THE%20BASIS%

- 200F%20LAND%20COVER.doc (last accessed 30 November 2009).
- Buyantuyev, A., J. Wu, and C. Gries. 2010. Multiscale analysis of the urbanization pattern of the Phoenix metropolitan landscape of USA: Time, space and thematic resolution. Landscape and Urban Planning 94 (3-4): 206-17.
- Camagni, R., M. C. Gibelli, and P. Rigamonti. 2002. Urban mobility and urban form: The social and environmental costs of different patterns of urban expansion. Ecological Economics 40 (2): 199-216.
- Carsjens, G. J., and W. van der Knaap. 2002. Strategic land-use allocation: Dealing with spatial relationships and fragmentation of agriculture. Landscape and Urban Planning 58:171-79.
- Carsjens, G. J., and H. N. van Lier. 2002. Fragmentation and land-use planning-An introduction. Landscape and Urban Planning 58 (2-4): 79-82.
- DeJong, T. M. 1975. A comparison of three diversity indices based on their components of richness and evenness. Oikos 26 (2): 222-27.
- Deller, S. C., T. Tsai, D. W. Marcouiller, and D. B. K. English. 2001. The role of amenities and quality of life in rural economic growth. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 83 (2): 352-65.
- Dyer, J. M. 1994. Implications of habitat fragmentation on climate change-induced forest migration. The Professional Geographer 46 (4): 449-59.
- Eiden, G., M. Kayadjanian, and C. Vidal. 2000. Quantifying landscape structures: Spatial and temporal dimensions. In From land cover to landscape diversity in the European Union . http:// ec.europa.eu/agriculture/publi/landscape (last accessed 26 September 2009).
- Forman, R. 1995. Land mosaics: The ecology of landscapes and regions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Gober, P. 2006. Metropolitan Phoenix: Place making and community building in the desert. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Grimm, N. B., and C. L. Redman. 2004. Approaches to the study of urban ecosystems: The case of central Arizona-Phoenix. Urban Ecosystems 7 (3): 199-213.
- Gustafson, E. J. 1998. Quantifying landscape spatial pattern: What is the state of the art? Ecosystems 1 (2): 143-56.
- Herold, M., J. Scepan, and K. C. Clarke. 2002. The use of remote sensing and landscape metrics to describe structures and changes in urban land uses. Environment and Planning A 34:1443-58.
- Irwin, E. G., and N. E. Bockstael. 2007. The evolution of urban sprawl: Evidence of spatial heterogeneity and increasing land fragmentation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 (52): 20672-77.
- Jensen, J. R. 1979. Spectral and textural features to classify elusive land cover at the urban fringe. The Professional Geographer 31:400-09.
- Jorge, L. A. B., and G. J. Garcia. 1997. A study of habitat fragmentation in southeastern Brazil using remote sensing and geographic information systems (GIS). Forest Ecology and Management 98 (1): 35-47.
- Keys, E., E. A. Wentz, and C. L. Redman. 2007. The spatial structure of land use from 1970-2000 in the Phoenix, Arizona, metropolitan area. The Professional Geographer 59 (1): 131-47.
- Kline, J. D., D. L. Azuma, and R. J. Alig. 2004. Population growth, urban expansion, and private forestry in western Oregon. Forest Science 50:33-43.
- Kong, F., and N. Nakagoshi. 2006. Spatial-temporal gradient analysis of urban green spaces in Jinan, China. Landscape and Urban Planning 78 (3): 147-64.
- Langanke, T., G. Rossner, B. Vrs˘ aˇ caj, S. Lang, and J. Mitchley. 2005. Selection and application of spatial indicators for nature conservation at different institutional levels. Journal for Nature Conservation 13 (2-3): 101-14.
- Lawrence, H. 1988. Changes in agricultural production in metropolitan areas. The Professional Geographer 40 (2): 159-75.
- Luck, M., and J. Wu. 2002. A gradient analysis of urban landscape pattern: A case study from the Phoenixmetropolitan region, Arizona, USA. Landscape Ecology 17 (4): 327-39.
- McDonnell, M. J., S. T. A. Pickett, P. Groffman, P. Bohlen, R. V. Pouyat, W. C. Zipperer, R. W. Parmelee, M. M. Carreiro, and K. Medley. 1997. Ecosystem processes along an urban-to-rural gradient. Urban Ecosystems 1 (1): 21-36.
- McGarigal, K., and S. A. Cushman. 2002. Comparative evaluation of experimental approaches to the study of habitat fragmentation effects. Ecological Applications 12 (2): 335-45.
- ---. 2005. The gradient concept of landscape structure. In Issues and perspectives in landscape ecology , ed. J. A. Wiens and M. R. Moss, 112-19. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- McGarigal, K., and B. Marks. 1994. FRAGSTATS: Spatial pattern analysis program for quantifying landscape structure: Reference manual. Corvallis: Forest Science Department, Oregon State University.
- Mieszkowski, P., and E. S. Mills. 1993. The causes of metropolitan suburbanization. Journal of Economic Perspectives 7 (3): 135-47.
- Nagendra, H. 2002. Opposite trends in response for the Shannon and Simpson indices of landscape diversity. Applied Geography 22 (2): 175-86.
- Openshaw, S. 1984. The modifiable areal unit problem. Norwich, UK: GeoBooks.
- Papageorgiou, G. J., and E. Casetti. 1971. Spatial equilibrium residential land values in a multicenter setting. Journal of Regional Science 11 (3): 385-89.
- Peet, R. K. 1974. The measurement of species diversity. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 5 (1): 285-307.

- Razin, E., and M. Rosentraub. 2000. Are fragmentation and sprawl interlinked? North American evidence. Urban Affairs Review 35 (6): 821-36.
- Rickenbach, M. G., and P. H. Gobster. 2003. Stakeholders' perceptions of parcelization in Wisconsin's Northwoods. Journal of Forestry 101:1823.
- Schneider, A., K. C. Seto, and D. R. Webster. 2005. Urban growth in Chengdu, western China: Application of remote sensing to assess planning and policy outcomes. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 32 (3): 323-45.
- Schneider, A., and C. E. Woodcock. 2008. Compact, dispersed, fragmented, extensive? A comparison of urban growth in twenty-five global cities using remotely sensed data, pattern metrics and census information. Urban Studies 45 (3): 65992.
- Shannon, C. E., and W. Weaver. 1949. The mathematical theory of communication. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- Simpson, E. H. 1949. Measurement of diversity. Nature 163:688.
- Sudhira, H. S., T. V. Ramachandra, and K. S. Jagadish. 2004. Urban sprawl: Metrics, dynamics and modelling using GIS. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 5 (1): 29-39.
- Tole, L. 2006. Measurement and management of human-induced patterns of forest fragmentation: A case study. Environmental Management 37 (6): 788-801.
- Vogelmann, J. E. 1995. Assessment of forest fragmentation in southern New England using remote sensing and geographic information systems technology. Conservation Biology 9 (2): 439-49.
- Von Th¨ unen, J. H. [1826] 1966. The isolated state , trans. C. M. Wartenberg, ed. P. Hall. New York: Pergamon.
- Wickham, J. D., S. V. Stehman, J. H. Smith, and L. Yang. 2004. Thematic accuracy of the 1992 national land-cover data for the Western United States. Remote Sensing of Environment 91 (3-4): 452-68.
- Wu, J. 2004. Effects of changing scale on landscape pattern analysis: Scaling relations. Landscape Ecology 19 (2): 125-38.
- York, A. M., M. Shrestha, C. G. Boone, S. Zhang, J. Harrington, T. Prebyl, A. Swann, et al. 2011. Land fragmentation under rapid urbanization: A crosssite analysis of southwestern cities. Urban Ecosystems 14:429-55.
- Yu, X. J., and C. N. Ng. 2007. Spatial and temporal dynamics of urban sprawl along two urban-rural transects: A case study of Guangzhou, China. Landscape and Urban Planning 79 (1): 96-109.

SAINAN ZHANG is a PhD candidate in the School of Sustainability at Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ85287-5502. E-mail: sainan.zhang@asu.edu. Her research interests include urban sustainability, land use and land cover, spatial analysis, and institutions. She is especially interested in understanding the human-environment interactions within complex urban socioecological systems.

ABIGAIL M. YORK is Assistant Professor in the School of Human Evolution &amp; Social Change at Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-2402. E-mail: abigail.york@asu.edu. Her research interests include interjurisdictional governance, land use policy, housing provision, and economic development.

CHRISTOPHER G. BOONE is Professor and Associate Dean for Education in the School of Sustainability, and Professor in the School of Human Evolution &amp; Social Change at Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-5502. E-mail: cgboone@asu.edu. His expertise is in urban sustainability, socio-ecological systems, environmental justice, vulnerability, and public health. He has more than twenty years of experience in urban and environmental sciences.

MILAN SHRESTHA is working as Faculty Associate in the School of Sustainability at Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-5502. E-mail: milan.shrestha@asu.edu. His areas of research focus on the human dimensions of land use and land cover change, mountain agriculture, climate change, vulnerability and resilience, and the rural-urban interface.