<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Food Diaries to Measure Food Access: A Case Study from Rural Cuba

Federica Bono &amp; John C. Finn

To cite this article: Federica Bono &amp; John C. Finn (2017) Food Diaries to Measure Food Access: A Case Study from Rural Cuba, The Professional Geographer, 69:1, 59-69, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2016.1157499

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2016.1157499

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 14 Apr 2016.

Submit your article to this journal C

Article views: 298

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

## Food Diaries to Measure Food Access: A Case Study from Rural Cuba

## Federica Bono

KU Leuven

John C. Finn

Christopher Newport University

This article aims to make a contribution to current debates in the literature on food access by describing a mixed-methods approach to study the access to food in one rural community in Cuba. Each of the forty households in our study was asked to complete a detailed food diary in which they indicated what they ate and where they acquired each of the ingredients that they used for a full week. Although in Cuba the state plays a central role in organizing the distribution of food items, this method revealed a much more complex web of rural food access. By addressing alternative networks of food access and informal social relations, we aim to show how the use of food diaries, in combination with qualitative data from interviews and participant observation, can provide detailed insights in the complex processes and networks of food access. Key Words: Cuba, food access, food diaries, mixed methods.

本 文旨 在 透 过 描 绘 研 究 古 巴 一 处 农 村 社 区 的 粮 食 获 取 管 道 的 混 合 方 法 取 径 , 对 粮 食 获 取 文 献 的 当 前 辩 论 做 出 贡 献 。 我 们 所 研 究 的 四 十 个 家 户 , 皆 被 要 求 完 成 一个 详 尽 登 录 的 粮 食 日 志 , 指 出 整 个 礼 拜 中他们 吃 了什 麽 、 以 及 他们 在 何 处 获 取 所 使 用 的 材 料 。 尽 管 在 古 巴 , 国 家 扮 演 了 组织 粮 食 分 派 的 核 心 角 色 , 但 上 述 方 法 揭 露 出 更 为 复 杂 的 农 村 粮 食 获 取 网 。 我 们 透 过 提 出 粮 食 获 取 的 另 类 网 络 和 非 正 式 社 会 关 係 , 旨 在 显 示 粮 食 日 志 的 使 用 , 结 合 从 访 谈 和 参 与 式 观 察 所 得 到 的 质 性 数 据 , 如 何 能 够 在 复 杂 的 粮 食 获 取 途 径 和 网 络 中 提 供 详 尽 的 洞 见 。 关 键 词 : 古 巴 , 粮 食 获 取 , 粮 食 日 志 , 混 合 方 法 。

Este artículo pretende contribuir a los debates actuales de la literatura sobre acceso a los alimentos describiendo un enfoque de m  etodos mixtos para estudiar el acceso a los alimentos en una comunidad rural de Cuba. A cada una de las cuarenta familias de nuestro estudio se les pidi  o completar un diario alimentario detallado en el que ellos indicaran lo que hubiesen comido y d  onde habían adquirido cada uno de los ingredientes que ellos usaron durante una semana. Aunque en Cuba el estado juega un papel central en para organizar la distribuci  on de ítems alimentarios, este m  etodo revel  o una red mucho m  as compleja para el acceso rural a los alimentos. Abocando redes alternativas de acceso a los alimentos y las relaciones sociales informales, buscamos mostrar c  omo el uso de diarios alimentarios, en combinaci  on con datos cualitativos derivados de entrevistas y de la observaci  on participativa, puede proporcionar perspectivas detalladas de los procesos complejos y redes relacionadas con el acceso a los alimentos. Palabras clave: Cuba, acceso a los alimentos, diarios alimentarios, m  etodos mixtos.

R esearchers and policymakers increasingly acknowledge not only that present environmental problems are harmful for food production but also that the current global food system itself has signi fi cant negative impacts on the environment. In addition, the global economic and fi nancial crisis of 2008 has had a signi fi cant impact on both volatile global food prices and reducing the resources that households have for food (Brinkman et al. 2010). Agricultural productivity, depleted soils, food insecurity, and problematic diets have forced questions of food and nutrition security (FNS) into the focus of both researchers and policymakers. According to the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO), FNS exists ' when all people, at all times, have physical, social and economic access to suf fi cient, safe and nutritious food which meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life ' (FAO 2006). This multidimensional de fi nition stresses not only the availability of nutritious food but also access to it. Several factors determine a household ' s access to food. In market-based systems, the most obvious is the socioeconomic status of a household. Access to private transportation also increases access to food, and a high housing expense ratio would reduce FNS (Fillion et al. 2014). Other factors such as access to arable land (Tornaghi 2014), adequate public transportation, and political rights can also play a role.

Most geographical research on food access focuses on the physical barriers to food accessibility in cities in the Global North. By quantifying food access, much of this research aims to identify and map so-called food deserts (Apparicio, Cloutier, and Shearmur 2007; McEntee 2010). A term fi rst coined by Beaumont et al. (1995), food deserts are socially deprived areas with poor access to food outlets. Originally conceptualized as urban areas, food deserts exist in rural areas as well; as people move away from rural areas, small groceries tend to disappear under market pressure (Morton and Blanchard 2007; Sharkey 2009; McEntee

and Agyeman 2010; Hubley 2011). Food deserts are quanti fi ed, mapped, and analyzed by calculating single accessibility measures in a geographic information system (GIS) or statistical environment, such as a certain quanti fi cation of the number of food retailers -mainly supermarkets and other grocery stores -within a neighborhood or a certain radius or geographical distance to the nearest food outlet (Donkin et al. 1999, 2000; Clarke, Eyre, and Guy 2002; Smoyer-Tomic, Spence, and Amrhein 2006; Laska et al. 2010; Hallett and McDermott 2011; Kremer and DeLiberty 2011; Jiao et al. 2012). Others have calculated the distance based on the mean travel distance to a food outlet (Morton and Blanchard 2007; McEntee and Agyeman 2010). Overall, food access studies are characterized by a quantitative approach using measurable indicators. Food access, however, depends on more than geographical proximity, and some dimensions of food access are dif fi cult to uncover without qualitative inquiry.

For Shannon (2013, 249), GIS-based research on food deserts constitutes a ' spatialized form of neoliberal paternalism. ' By conceptualizing the geographical environment as the cause for unhealthy diets or obesity, it focuses on fi nding the solution in that same environment and incentivizing the people who live there to make a conscious choice for healthy food. Deeper, structural causes for low access to food are not addressed. Thus, a ' spatial-only ' method fails to account for other factors that determine food access (Donald 2013), and food deserts are treated as ' discrete, pathologized spaces outside of an otherwise healthy urban ' foodscape '' (Shannon 2013, 256). Further, these methods tend to ignore the relational nature of place, which is made up by the actual daily life of residents, their mobility, their social relations, and their relations to food and food sources (Cummins et al. 2007; Coveney and O ' Dwyer 2009). Many researchers have tried to improve the concept by bringing in other measures -Chen and Clark (2016), for instance, included the store hours of grocery stores in their analysis, and others have included economic access to food outlets (Jiao et al. 2012; Breyer and Voss-Andreae 2013). These approaches, however, remain within a quantitative framework, fail to account for complex sociospatial interrelations (Cummins, Flint, and Matthews 2014; Sadler, Gilliland, and Arku 2015), and pay ' little attention to what matters to people, or what they actually do to acquire food ' (Alkon et al. 2013, 128). Moreover, the bias toward the Global North in this literature largely focuses on access to supermarkets and is not always directly suitable in the Global South (Battersby and Crush 2014), and the focus on supermarkets is indicative of a dominant view of the food economy as regulated by market-based exchange relations. By adopting such a quantitative, GIS-based approach, a seemingly straightforward policy answer to food deserts would be the insertion of grocery stores or supermarkets in such an area, whereas other possible ways of organizing the distribution of food are not envisioned.

This article aims to make a contribution to current debates in the literature on food access by describing a mixed-method approach that we developed to study food access in one rural community in central Cuba. In a rural area where the application of GIS methods is not straightforward, we used food diaries to gain an insight into what people ate and where they acquired their food. Although food diaries and dietary recalls are widely used in health and nutrition studies, they are most commonly used to collect information on the nutritional intake of individuals (Passos et al. 2003; Schatzkin et al. 2003). They have not been used in a systematic way to study food access. Rather than an exhaustive discussion, in this article we aim to highlight examples from the research and show what the data collected via this method helped us learn for our speci fi c research project. Thus, it is our aim to show how the use of this methodology, together with qualitative data from participant observation and interviews, can provide detailed insights into the actual daily patterns of food access, consumption, and distribution.

## Cuba's Cooperative Agricultural System

The food diary method we present here fi ts within a broader project investigating local food systems and food access in rural Cuba. Many researchers, policymakers, and environmental activists argue that locally embedded food systems increase access to food. Beginning from this point of view, our research aims to test this hypothesis in a country where food systems are locally embedded by both law and history and where access to food is supposed to be equal for all (Benjamin, Collins, and Scott 1986).

After the collapse of the Soviet Union, with which Cuba had maintained strong trade relations for nearly forty years, the island nation was forced to turn to its own agricultural reserves to feed its population. With the U.S. embargo, dif fi cult access to oil resources and machinery, depleted soils due to the legacy of a heavily industrialized export-oriented agricultural system, and an urbanizing population, this proved dif fi cult. High food prices on the global market and vast fallow lands mean that food security and agricultural productivity remain pertinent issues.

In Cuba, nearly all farmers are members of the country ' s cooperative structure. Peque ~ nos campesinos, or small farmers, who are all members of the Associaci  on Nacional de Agricoltores Peque ~ nos (ANAP) can choose to be part of a Cooperativa de Producci  on Agropecuaria (agricultural production cooperative, or CPA) or a Cooperativa de Credito y Servicio (credit and service cooperative, or CCS). CPAs are formed by farmers joining their land and material together in the cooperative and thereby transforming it into collective property (Funes et al. 2002; Funes-Monzote 2009). The cooperative owns all of the land, equipment, and

resources and has full rights to the pro fi ts and fi nancial resources that come from production (Funes et al. 2002). In a CPA, the land, the means of production, and the production itself are collectivized. In addition to a basic wage, CPA members bene fi t from pro fi t redistribution in the form of both food and services (housing, social centers, access to infrastructure). On the other hand, farmers in a CCS retain ownership of their land, some of the means of production, and the agricultural production itself, but they join a CCS to achieve economies of scale (Rosset et al. 2011). The CCS delivers services for production. Every season the board of directors of the CCS visits their farmers to discuss production plans for different crops. Based on these plans, the CCS solicits inputs (e.g., fertilizers, fungicides) from the state distribution companies to provide them to farmers. The CCS markets that production to the state or to private farmers ' markets. The CCS also organizes the use of equipment (e.g., tractors, irrigation equipment) and can negotiate a bank loan for its members (Sosa et al. 2010).

Although recent studies have shown that CCSs achieve higher agricultural productivity than CPAs (Sosa et al. 2010; Rosset et al. 2011), the relationship between productivity and food security and access in the local communities remains unclear. For example, to what extent does the difference in productivity between CCSs and CPAs in fl uence access to food differently for the families linked to these cooperatives? To what extent does being a member of a cooperative in fl uence access to food for households? More generally, to what extent is the food produced by the cooperatives consumed in the rural communities where they are rooted? In other words, to what extent do these locally embedded food systems contribute to a local consumption of, and equal access to, food? These are the questions that guide our broader research and that have led us to look for methods to understand the geographical and social dimensions of food access. Indeed, although researchers have been studying urban agriculture in Cuba as a way to increase access to food (Altieri et al. 1999) and some literature notes a migration back to the countryside for producing their own food (Enriquez 2003), information about access to food in rural communities in general, including nonfarmers, is lacking.

## Food Diaries

Although food diaries have long been used in health and nutrition studies, this research method is still new and largely underused within the discipline of geography (but see Legwegoh 2012; Riley and Legwegoh 2013; Legwegoh and Riley 2014). In health and nutrition studies, for each meal, respondents are commonly asked to check food items from a predetermined food list on a daily basis for a period of time. Based on the number of meals that included a speci fi c food item, consumption frequency can be calculated, which can then be imported into nutrition software to calculate the nutrition intake or relation with other variables can be measured (Passos et al. 2003). Although this method provides important data regarding food availability, it does not provide detailed data on food access.

Thus, whereas in health and nutrition studies, food diaries largely focus on nutrition, our approach explicitly aims to use food diaries to understand and analyze food access. Wrigley et al. (2002) and Wrigley, Warm, and Margetts (2003) were among the fi rst to use food diaries in food access research, yet these studies remain highly quantitative and supermarket centered. To investigate how a healthy diet is affected by retail access, they collected food diaries and questionnaires before and after a new supermarket opened in a food desert. Zenk et al. (2011) built on food diaries by combining a seven-day food frequency questionnaire with Global Positioning System (GPS) tracking methods. Shannon (2016) combined food diaries with GPS tracking and interviews to provide a nuanced view of the role contextual factors play in the actual access to food. Crucially, this mixed-methods approach highlights how practices of day-to-day mobility and perceptions of neighborhood safety and quality of stores, which are related to processes of segregation and racialization, shape food provisioning tactics.

In what follows we describe how we designed a food diary method that, next to providing us data on food items consumed, also provided us information on where each item comes from. In March 2015 we began a pilot with fi ve core families in a rural community in the central Cuban province of Sancti Spiritus, approximately 350 km east of Havana. All households within this rural community lie directly or indirectly within the sphere of fi ve cooperatives: two CCSs and three CPAs (Figure 1). This means that either the geographical territory of the community coincides with land of a cooperative or members of another cooperative live within this community. We instructed each family to write down what they had eaten and where the food came from for an entire week. At the end of the week we collected the schemes and distilled from them the main sources of food and main ingredients. This pilot study revealed ten main sources of food: the local bodega, the state market, local private markets, nonlocal private markets, ' la shopping, ' individual gardens, individual harvests, local farmers, CPA redistributions, and gifts (Table 1). Using this information, we designed a new worksheet that we distributed to all of the households within two adjacent ' Committees for the Defense of the Revolution ' (CRDs; Figure 2). 1

There are several important points to make about our sampling of two CDRs. First, the CDRs differed in terms of their connections to local agricultural cooperatives. Whereas the fi rst CDR pertained more directly to the territory of the CCSs, the second pertained to the territory of the CPAs (although individuals in different households were much more varied in

Figure 1 Map of the sample area (houses marked with an x are included in the sample; green D households linked to a credit and service cooperative, yellow D households linked to an agricultural production cooperative. CCS D credit and service cooperative; CPA D agricultural production cooperative. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

their relations with several cooperatives in the community; see Figure 1). Second, the relatively small number of households allowed us to make daily visits. As we discuss later, this was vital to collect reliable and accurate data. Third, this area lies within the distribution area of the single local bodega, which, as we show

Table 1 Food sources

| Source                   | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Local bodega             | The bodega is a state-owned food outlet that manages governmental food rationing according to the libreta (rations card). Every household is entitled to a fixed quantity of particular deeply subsidized foodstuffs per month. For example, every household receives one piece of bread per family member per day. The libreta also takes into account age and illness; children under seven are entitled to one liter of cow's milk per day, and children up to the age of thirteen are entitled to soy yogurt. The elderly and people with certain illnesses (e.g., diabetes) are entitled to extra rations or even beef. All of these rations are distributed through the local bodega, which also provides some foodstuffs for sale at deeply subsidized prices. |
| State market             | The state market provides foodstuffs for sale at subsidized prices (but does not fulfill the libreta ). There is no state market in the community; the closest one is approximately 15 km away in a nearby town. Food sold there is domestically produced, mainly by state farms.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Local private markets    | Throughout Cuba there are private markets where cooperatives (in the case of CPAs) and cooperative members (in the case of CCS) come to sell their foodstuffs at a free market prices. In the local community there is one private market, which was mainly supplied by the two CCSs surrounding the community.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Nonlocal private markets | In addition to the one local private market, there are several more in the aforementioned nearby town.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| 'La Shopping'            | The 'shopping' are state-run stores selling mostly imported food items in the convertible pesos currency. a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Garden                   | Households frequently have their own garden where they grow herbs and fruits, and many of them also raise chickens and pigs.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Own harvest              | Weconsidered food grown and harvested on private plots, but not immediately surrounding the household (thus different from the own garden), to be the household's own harvest.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Farmer CPA               | This category comprises food bought directly from farmers known personally by members of the household. CPAs redistribute certain foodstuffs to active members as well as retired members.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Gift                     | In the community there often exist reciprocal relations with neighbors and family members resulting in the free exchange of foodstuffs.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Other                    | Vendors ( intermediarios ) selling bread, meat, and other foods occasionally pass through the community on foot or bicycle, but because we could not specifically trace where the food sold by these vendors originated, we classified these foodstuffs as 'other.' This category also contained the occasional purchasing of foodstuffs from a neighbor and from the nearby organop  onico (a local garden where vegetables are produced according to the methods of agroecology).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

in the Discussion section, has a clear impact on households ' food access and consumption. Finally, we chose this small sample to assure qualitative saturation, rather than emphasizing a statistically signi fi cant sample (Legwegoh and Hovorka 2013). Indeed, as mentioned earlier, our aim in this study was to achieve

Figure 2 Final food diary.

<!-- image -->

more depth to the issue of food access. This method allows for a clear window on the complex interrelations between the daily practices and relations surrounding food.

In the end we included forty households in the sample out of a total of forty-six family cores within the two CDRs. Over two full days we conducted a houseby-house visit with all of the households of the two CDRs to demonstrate how to fi ll out the worksheets. Next, spread over a period of fourteen days, we visited each household daily for seven consecutive days to check in, to be sure that they were correctly completing the worksheets and to answer any questions. For many of the households, especially those whose residents were elderly or suffered from poor eyesight or illness, we visited at the same time every day to help them fi ll out the worksheets. This intensive, hands-on approach allowed us to gain a 100 percent response rate within our sample area.

At the end of the seven-day sampling period we collected the worksheets along with some other basic data about each household (household size, ages, and linkages to cooperatives). We digitized the data and constructed a data set by organizing the food items by source. We also constructed a data set that contained for each family their speci fi c link with the different cooperatives and the number of times in seven days they mentioned a certain food outlet, and we sorted the households according to their occupation (Figure 3). Based on the daily observations and conversations with the families when we visited, if there were no active CPA members nor active members of a CCS in the household, the household ' s main income came from a nonagricultural job in the nearby town. One household consisted of only retired CPA members and, although not active, they are considered to have their main income from agriculture because there are no other sources of income in that household. In total there were fourteen households not working in agriculture. Of these fourteen, eight were still connected with a CPA as retired CPA associates. Of the twenty-six households working directly in agriculture, six were linked to a CPA (of which fi ve had active associates) and twenty were linked to a CCS. Of those twenty, fi fteen were active associates and the other fi ve consisted of landless agricultural laborers. Of the fi fteen households with active associates, twelve were landowners and three were non-land-owning associates (one owned a tractor that pertained to the CCS and two were members of the CCS ' s board of directors). Finally, two landowning families had a retired CPA member living in the household. Subdividing the households in each of these categories allows us to investigate how their speci fi c relation to the land and to the different cooperatives relates to their access to food.

In addition to the detailed food diaries, three additional elements in our research approach enabled us to avoid inconsistencies in data collection. First, during a three-month period encompassing the seven days during which we distributed and collected the food diaries, one of the researchers lived and ate in one household within this local community. Through this long-term participant observation, we were able to obtain an understanding of what made up a typical daily diet in this community. Second, daily conversations and re fl ections with our hosts about how they obtained certain ingredients provided for additional background information for the food diaries. In one instance they apologized for not being able to offer eggs in that day ' s meal because the local bodega had run out. This information was useful when, later that week during one of the family visits, someone stated that they had eaten eggs from the bodega that day. Participant observation made early detection of inconsistencies possible and allowed us, in the moment of data collection, to have a longer conversation with the household about this particular item and clarify the food source (it was not the bodega after all). In another

Figure 3 Households' characteristics. Note: CCS D credit and service cooperative; CPA D agricultural production cooperative.

<!-- image -->

example, we were aware that one particular family did not own land, yet they mentioned that their beans came from their own land. After a few questions it became clear that those beans were a gift from a family member outside of their household who did own land, thereby shedding light on the importance of informal networks of food access. Finally, over time, patterns emerged. When a new ingredient arrived in the local bodega, because all households in our study area were served by the same bodega, it did not come as a surprise that a large proportion of the households mentioned that ingredient that day.

In the end, this in-depth, small-scale approach to food diaries enabled us to collect data tracing the sociospatial networks of food access rather than just the nutritional value of daily food intake.

## Discussion

Nearly every day across the island, rice and beans end up together on every Cuban plate. Not surprisingly, of the 560 lunches and dinners consumed in the forty households over our seven-day study period, 414 of them -nearly 75 percent -included rice and beans. Our research shows, however, that the routes that these two ingredients take to get there is completely different. It is worth exploring this in more detail, as an analysis of their divergent paths to the Cuban dinner table demonstrates the methodological potential of food diaries.

In Cuba the right to food is included in the national constitution. 2 We thus would expect to fi nd that the state plays a central role in organizing the distribution of, and often subsidizing, staple food items. Indeed, the state ' s purchasing and distribution agency distributes food to state markets and the bodegas, the latter constituting one of the key ways by which the Cuban government aims to secure access to food via a rationing system where basic food items are guaranteed at deeply subsidized prices.

Data we collected via food diaries, however, tell a more complex story. Whereas 68 percent of the rice that was consumed during the week of our study came from the local bodega, for beans this fi gure was only 12 percent (Figure 4). Instead, the three most important sources in the community for obtaining beans were individual harvests (44 percent), direct purchases from a local farmer (24 percent), or gifts from a neighbor or family member (13 percent). Not only are these three sources all informal but they are speci fi c to the rural location of the community. These different sources of rice and beans show both how food access might differ depending on the food item and how geographical location plays a role. Not only do people living in urban areas have less access to farmers or land for cultivation than people living in rural areas, but people living in rural communities must also be able to access more urbanized areas where both state and private markets are typically located. In what follows, we try to dig deeper into this by looking at household access to the staple foods of rice and beans.

First, although not all of the households that harvested beans also harvested rice, the opposite was true: All households that harvested rice also harvested their own beans. Of the forty households in our study area,

Figure 4 Sources of rice and beans for all households and for those households that do not harvest. Note: CPA D agricultural production cooperative. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

eight harvested both rice and beans. Of those eight, six were private landowners, one was a landless agricultural laborer who worked another farmer ' s land, and the last was member of the board of directors of the CPA. 3

Eight additional families harvested beans but not rice. Half of those eight households owned and farmed their own land. Two of those households included active members of the CCS, indicating yet another way to access individual harvests. Indeed, these households explained their harvest as being the result of a friendship with nearby farmers, with whom they worked the land in their free time and in exchange received a part of the harvest. The fi nal two households did not have anyone who worked in agriculture but nonetheless had access to land for harvesting beans. In both cases these were retired members of the CPA who, in exchange for the fact that they turned their land over to the cooperative when it was founded, now have a small plot on which they can farm as a kind of informal retirement bene fi t. Clearly, the relation with land and access to one ' s own harvest is more complex than restricted to merely land ownership.

Finally, twenty-four households harvested neither rice nor beans. In fact, the majority of these households (thirteen) were not active in agriculture at all. Seven of those thirteen families had retired cooperative members living in the household, yet not everybody was still active enough or had the time or interest to work the land.

Figure 4 also shows that more than 80 percent of the rice for nonharvesting households comes from the local bodega. Another 15 percent comes from the state market in the nearby town, which makes sense, as a majority of the households not harvesting work in that town and therefore have easier access to these state markets as a source of food.

On the other hand, nonharvesting households purchase almost 50 percent of all their beans directly from the farmer; less than 25 percent comes subsidized from the bodega. 4 Gifts from family and neighbors make up another quarter. Food sources in the nearby town are not as important for beans, likely due to the high nonsubsidized market prices for beans. In conversations with local residents throughout our research, the high price of food was a popular topic. Many residents brought up the market (i.e., nonsubsidized) prices of black beans, approximately 12 pesos per pound. Considering that an average wage in that region is 250 pesos per month, one pound of black beans cost about 5 percent of an individual ' s monthly salary. Given that beans are rarely available in the bodega, these high prices push people to source beans locally, and the local social relations that exist in this rural community among neighbors, relatives, and famers are vital to families ' abilities to obtain their daily amount of beans. During harvest season, households in our study area told us that they are often able to buy beans directly from the farmers at below market prices.

In all of these data there is one local food source that is almost completely missing: the local CPA. Consistent with fi ndings from other studies of Cuban agricultural productivity (Sosa et al. 2010; Rosset et al. 2011), although sixteen families in the sample were linked with one of the three CPAs, this source did not even account for 2 percent of all food consumed.

This analysis of how households access beans and rice opens up a whole new spectrum of social relations. First, in addition to the variety of formal food outlets, the food diaries revealed many informal ways through which households acquired food, providing for more depth in food access research (Riley and Legwegoh 2013). Second, the importance of gift exchange through their relations with neighbors or families became clear. During the seven-day period of this study, the food diaries became quite the ' talk of the town ' ; many participants themselves were surprised by the quantity of foodstuffs they received merely because they were embedded within this informal social network of neighbors, family, and friends. Observations showed that this exchange of gifts goes far beyond food items. For example, one day the head of one of the households in this study returned from a neighbor ' s house with a chicken. When we asked why he had received the chicken, he answered that at some other time in the past he had given them some construction blocks that had been lying around his patio.

Third, in conjunction with food diaries, our interviews and observations revealed the complexities linked to these social relations and the variety of relationships that exist with the land that a standard quantitative approach might miss. In particular, the reciprocal gift relationships that exist within the community could easily remain hidden. These relationships depend on personal interactions that residents have with each other that are long-standing and that evolve over time. Quantitative methods that measure and map land ownership could easily miss informal access to land, which is directly related to these more complex social relations. Importantly, all of these relations differ for speci fi c food items, which are fi ndings that emerge from the data, rather than being hypothesized in advance.

Fourth, this method is able to capture the relationship between day-to-day mobility and food access. Whether someone has a job in the nearby town and therefore commutes directly affects the household ' s access to nonlocal sources.

Finally, the use of food diaries revealed that the differences between CPAs and CCSs have a direct effect on local food access. Whereas the CPAs ' share in local food consumption appears to be minimal, even for their active associates, the CCSs make substantial contributions to local food access. Not only are they the main supplier for the local private market, but there is a direct relationship between private farmers and other households that results in direct producer -consumer sales. Further, although local CPAs have become a rather insigni fi cant source of food for households in our study area, existing social networks between the

community and the CCS make informal direct sales possible, which indicates the possibility that CCS farmers produce a surplus beyond what is required according to the plan. Thus, it seems that although CPAs originally showed a stronger embeddedness in the social functioning of the community, today the CCSs have a stronger role in providing for the local community in which they are rooted.

## Conclusion

Whereas current research on food access tends to focus on the dominant market-based exchange relations, the mixed-methods approach to food diaries presented here reveals alternative networks of food access. As Polanyi (1944) long ago argued, every economy is regulated by social relations. Next to market exchange, he distinguished at least three other coexisting structuring economic principles: householding (resources are produced for one ' s ' own use ' or for providing the group), redistribution (resources are collected in a center and then redistributed again to those who contribute to the system), and reciprocity (resources are distributed in a mutual way according to the principle of ' today ' s giving will be compensated by tomorrow ' s taking ' ). Our use of the food diaries allowed us to expose all four of these relations, making clear Cuban households ' food access via reciprocal social relations with neighbors and relatives, the role of individual harvests, the role of the private local market and the state market, and the role of state-organized redistribution. In addition, our use of food diaries exposed other means of accessing food that are likely less common in more capitalist societies; for instance, access to land for harvest based on relations other than land ownership. Thus, through this mixedmethods approach combining food diaries with participant observation and qualitative analysis, we have been able to both quantify food access relationships and analyze them in their rich social contexts.

A theoretical approach to food access based on quantitative measures such as the distance to a food outlet or the number of formal markets in an area fails to account for differences among households and deeper structures in fl uencing food accessibility (Shannon 2013). Whereas a quantitative approach might look at the number of active CPA associates living in the community, our use of food diaries showed how other, more structural causes determine the role this food source has in the access to food. In addition, this approach explicitly addresses the relational nature of place (Cummins et al. 2007; Coveney and O ' Dwyer 2009) by revealing the role of each household ' s daily mobility and interactions with others. It also reveals the complex interrelations among CPAs, CCSs, and the community, showing how these relations have evolved over time and how their role in the household ' s access to food is affected not only by changing productivity but also by the different structures that characterize these different types of cooperatives. In the end, we believe that this mixed-methods approach using food diaries, in conjunction with other qualitative fi eld methods, has signi fi cant potential for food access research in both rural and urban contexts. ■

## Acknowledgments

This article bene fi ted from various discussions with Erik Mathijs and Maarten Loopmans, professors in the Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences of the University of Leuven. We want to especially thank Maarten Loopmans for thoroughly reading and commenting on a previous version of the article, as well as one anonymous reviewer for the useful suggestions. In Cuba, we want to thank Roberto Gonz  ales Sousa for facilitating the procurement of the visa and Yulia García Sarduy for her assistance during the fi eldwork. Finally, we want to thank all of the families who participated in the study.

## Notes

- 1 Since their origin in 1960 as a watchdog to detect counterrevolutionary ideas, the role of the CDRs (Comit  es de Defensa de la Revoluci  on) has evolved over time and today it is considered to be one of the main social organizations in Cuba, organized at the neighborhood block level (Buchmann 2009). Similar to a community development organization, it is charged with the security of the neighborhood and mobilization for activities or volunteer work (Uriarte 2002).
- 3 Because of the vast amount of fallow land controlled by that particular CPA, they allow active members to harvest small plots on CPA land.
- 2 According to Article 9 of the Constitution of the Republic of Cuba, ' The State . . . as power of the people and for the people guarantees . . . that here will be no child without education, food and clothing ' ( ' El Estado . . . como Poder del pueblo, en servicio del proprio pueblo, garantiza . . . que no haya ni ~ no que no tenga escuela, alimentaci  on y vestido ' ).
- 4 In the local bodega, a pound of beans was sold through the libreta for approximately CUP0.40 (i.e., forty cents of a Cuban peso, or about US$0.016). For the same pound, the state pays the farmer CUP9.00. In the state market, prices vary starting from around CUP$10.50 per pound. On the private market, prices start at CUP15.00 and can go up to even CUP20.00.

## Literature Cited

- Alkon, A. H., D. Block, K. Moore, C. Gillis, N. DiNuccio, and N. Chavez. 2013. Foodways of the urban poor. Geoforum 48:126 -35.
- Altieri, M., N. Companioni, K. Ca ~ nizares, C. Murphy, P. Rosset, M. Bourque, and C. Nicholls. 1999. The greening of the ' barrios ' : Urban agriculture for food security in Cuba. Agriculture and Human Values 16 (2): 131 -40.
- Apparicio, P., M. S. Cloutier, and R. Shearmur. 2007. The case of Montreal ' s missing food deserts: Evaluation of accessibility to food supermarkets. International Journal of Health Geographics 6:4.
- Battersby, J., and J. Crush. 2014. Africa ' s urban food deserts. Urban Forum 25 (2): 143 -51.

- Beaumont, J., T. Lang, S. Leather, and C. Mucklow. 1995. Report from the Policy Sub-Group to the Nutrition Taskforce: Low-Income Project Team . Watford, UK: Institute of Grocery Distribution.
- Benjamin, M., J. Collins, and M. Scott. 1986. No free lunch: Food and revolution in Cuba today . New York: Grove.
- Breyer, B., and A. Voss-Andreae. 2013. Food mirages: Geographic and economic barriers to healthful food access in Portland, Oregon. Health and Place 24:131 -39.
- Brinkman, H. J., S. de Pee, I. Sanogo, L. Subran, and M. W. Bloem. 2010. High food prices and the global fi nancial crisis have reduced access to nutritious food and worsened nutritional status and health. Journal of Nutrition 140 (1): 153S -61S.
- Buchmann, C. 2009. Cuban home gardens and their role in social -ecological resilience. Human Ecology 37 (6): 705 -21.
- Chen, X., and J. Clark. 2016. Measuring space -time access to food retailers: A case of temporal access disparity in Franklin County, Ohio. The Professional Geographer 68 (2): 175 -88.
- Clarke, G., H. Eyre, and C. Guy. 2002. Deriving indicators of access to food retail provision in British cities: Studies of Cardiff, Leeds and Bradford. Urban Studies 39 (11): 2041 -60.
- Coveney, J., and L. A. O ' Dwyer. 2009. Effects of mobility and location on food access. Health Place 15 (1): 45 -55.
- Cummins, S., S. Curtis, A. Diez-Roux, and A. Macintyre. 2007. Understanding and representing ' place ' in health research: A relational approach. Social Science and Medicine 65 (9): 1825 -38.
- Cummins, S., E. Flint, and S. A. Matthews. 2014. New neighborhood grocery store increased awareness of food access but did not alter dietary habits or obesity. Health Affairs 33 (2): 283 -91.
- Donald, B. 2013. Food retail and access after the crash: Rethinking the food desert problem. Journal of Economic Geography 13 (2): 231 -37.
- Donkin, A. J. M., E. A. Dowler, S. J. Stevenson, and S. A. Turner. 1999. Mapping access to food at a local level. British Food Journal 101 (7): 554 -64.
- ---. 2000. Mapping access to food in a deprived area: The development of price and availability indices. Public Health Nutrition 3:31 -38.
- Enriquez, L. J. 2003. Economic reform and repeasantization in post-1990 Cuba. Latin American Research Review 38 (1): 202 -18.
- Fillion, M., B. Laird, V. Douglas, L. Van Pelt, D. Archie, and H. M. Chan. 2014. Development of a strategic plan for food security and safety in the Inuvialuit Settlement Region, Canada. International Journal of Circumpolar Health 73:25091.
- Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). 2006. Food security. Policy Brief 2 (June). http://www.fao.org/forestry/ 13128-0e6f36f27e0091055bec28ebe830f46b3.pdf (last accessed 11 May 2015).
- Funes, F., L. Garcia, M. Bourque, N. P  erez, and P. M. Rosset. 2002. Sustainable agriculture and resistance: Transforming food production in Cuba . Oakland, CA: Food First Books.
- Funes-Monzote, F. R. 2009. Agricultura con futuro: La alternativa agroecol  ogica para Cuba [Agriculture with a future. The agroecological alternative for Cuba]. Matanzas, Cuba: Estaci  on Experimental ' Indio Hatuey. '
- Hallett, L. F., and D. McDermott. 2011. Quantifying the extent and cost of food deserts in Lawrence, Kansas, USA. Applied Geography 31 (4): 1210 -15.
- Hubley, T. A. 2011. Assessing the proximity of healthy food options and food deserts in a rural area in Maine. Applied Geography 31 (4): 1224 -31.
- Jiao, J., A. V. Moudon, J. Ulmer, P. M. Hurvitz, and A. Drewnowski. 2012. How to identify food deserts: Measuring physical and economic access to supermarkets in King County, Washington. American Journal of Public Health 102 (10): e32 -e39.
- Kremer, P., and T. L. DeLiberty. 2011. Local food practices and growing potential: Mapping the case of Philadelphia. Applied Geography 31 (4): 1252 -61.
- Laska, M. N., M. O. Hearst, A. Forsyth, K. E. Pasch, and L. Lytle. 2010. Neighbourhood food environments: Are they associated with adolescent dietary intake, food purchases and weight status? Public Health Nutrition 13 (11): 1757 -63.
- Legwegoh, A. 2012. Urban food security in Gaborone, Botswana. PhD dissertation, The University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada.
- Legwegoh, A. F., and A. J. Hovorka. 2013. Assessing food insecurity in Botswana: The case of Gaborone. Development in Practice 23 (3): 346 -58.
- Legwegoh, A. F., and L. Riley. 2014. Food, place, and culture in urban Africa: Comparative consumption in Gaborone and Blantyre. Journal of Hunger &amp; Environmental Nutrition 9 (2): 256 -79.
- McEntee, J. 2010. Contemporary and traditional localism: A conceptualisation of rural local food. Local Environment 15 (9 -10): 785 -803.
- McEntee, J., and J. Agyeman. 2010. Towards the development of a GIS method for identifying rural food deserts: Geographic access in Vermont, USA. Applied Geography 30 (1): 165 -76.
- Morton, L. W., and T. C. Blanchard. 2007. Starved for access: Life in rural America ' s food deserts. Rural Realities 1 (4): 1.
- Passos, C. J., D. Mergler, E. Gaspar, S. Morais, M. Lucotte, F. Larribe, R. Davidson, and S. d. Grosbois. 2003. Eating tropical fruit reduces mercury exposure from fi sh consumption in the Brazilian Amazon. Environmental Research 93 (2): 123 -30.
- Polanyi, K. 1944. The great transformation: The political and economic origins of our time . Boston: Beacon Press.
- Riley, L., and A. Legwegoh. 2013. Comparative urban food geographies in Blantyre and Gaborone. African Geographical Review 33 (1): 52 -66.
- Rosset, P. M., B. M. Sosa, A. M. Jaime, and D. R. Lozano. 2011. The campesino-to-campesino agroecology movement of Anap in Cuba: Social process methodology in the construction of sustainable peasant agriculture and food sovereignty. Journal of Peasant Studies 38 (1): 161 -91.
- Sadler, R. C., J. A. Gilliland, and G. Arku. 2015. Theoretical issues in the ' food desert ' debate and ways forward. GeoJournal . doi:10.1007/s10708-015-9634-6
- Schatzkin, A., V. Kipnis, R. J. Carroll, D. Midthune, A. F. Subar, S. Bingham, D. A. Schoeller, R. P. Troiano, and L. S. Freedman. 2003. A comparison of a food frequency questionnaire with a 24-hour recall for use in an epidemiological cohort study: Results from the biomarkerbased observing protein and energy nutrition (open) study. International Journal of Epidemiology 32 (6): 1054 -62.
- Shannon, J. 2013. Food deserts: Governing obesity in the neoliberal city. Progress in Human Geography 38 (2): 248 -66.
- ---. 2016. Beyond the supermarket solution: Linking food deserts, neighborhood context, and everyday mobility. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 106 (1): 186 -202.
- Sharkey, J. R. 2009. Measuring potential access to food stores and food-service places in rural areas in the U.S. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 36 (4 Suppl.): S151 -55.

- Smoyer-Tomic, K. E., J. C. Spence, and C. Amrhein. 2006. Food deserts in the prairies? Supermarket accessibility and neighborhood need in Edmonton, Canada. The Professional Geographer 58 (3): 307 -26.
- Sosa, B. M., A. M. Jaime, D. R. Lozano, and P. M. Rosset. 2010. Revoluci  on agroecol  ogica: el movimiento de campesino a campesino de la Anap en Cuba [Agroecological revolution: The farmer-to-farmer movement of Anap in Cuba]. Havana, Cuba: ANAP and La Via Campesina.
- Tornaghi, C. 2014. Critical geography of urban agriculture. Progress in Human Geography 38 (4): 551 -67.
- Uriarte, M. 2002. Cuba, social policy at a crossroads: Maintaining priorities, transforming practices . Gast  on Institute Publications Paper 115.
- Wrigley, N., D. Warm, and B. Margetts. 2003. Deprivation, diet, and food-retail access: Findings from the Leeds ' food deserts ' study. Environment and Planning A 35:151 -88.
- Wrigley, N., D. Warm, B. Margetts, and A. Whelan. 2002. Assessing the impact of improved retail access on diet in a ' food desert ' : A preliminary report. Urban Studies 39 (11): 2061 -82.

Zenk, S., A. J. Schulz, A. Odoms-Young, J. Wilbur, S. A. Matthews, C. Gamboa, L. R. Wegrzyn, S. Hobson, and C. Stokes. 2011. Feasibility of using Global Positioning Systems (GPS) with diverse urban adults: Before and after data on perceived acceptability, barriers, and ease of use. Journal of Physical Activity &amp; Health 9 (7): 924 -34.

FEDERICA BONO is a PhD Fellow of the Research Foundation -Flanders in the Division of Geography and Tourism at KU Leuven, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium. E-mail: Federica.bono@ees.kuleuven.be. Her research interests include society -nature interactions, social and ecological sustainability, and social relations in food production and consumption.

JOHN C. FINN is an Assistant Professor of Geography at Christopher Newport University, Newport News, VA 23606. E-mail: john. fi nn@cnu.edu. His research focuses on race, culture, and place, especially in Latin America.