This article was downloaded by: [Washburn University]

On: 19 October 2014, At: 22:56

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,

37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## Claiming Space, Claiming Water: Contested Legal Geographies of Water in South Texas

Wendy Jepson a

a Department of Geography , Texas A&amp;M University

Published online: 17 Jan 2012.

To cite this article: Wendy Jepson (2012) Claiming Space, Claiming Water: Contested Legal Geographies of Water in South Texas, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 102:3, 614-631, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2011.641897

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2011.641897

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## Claiming Space, Claiming Water: Contested Legal Geographies of Water in South Texas

Wendy Jepson

Department of Geography, Texas A&amp;M University

Current scholarship on poverty in the U.S. borderlands argues that limited low-income housing and unenforced land development regulations cause poor domestic water access in south Texas's predominantly MexicanAmerican rural and periurban low-income communities ( colonias ). In this article, I argue that water politics, not only poverty or failed public policy, determined the trajectory of inadequate water access. Drawing from legislative archives, legal documents, and court records, I examine two companion legal cases ( Jimenez v. Hidalgo WCID2etal. [1971] and Fonseca v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. [1971]) that challenged the ability of farmer-controlled water control and improvement districts (WCIDs) to dominate regional water governance by excluding colonias from district territory. This territorial exclusion denied colonias residents the right to vote for WCID board candidates and, thus, denied residents the political standing to change the district's operation from irrigation to domestic water supply. Drawing on current scholarship in critical legal geography, the article details how emerging legal discourses rescripted narratives about colonias residents' access to water through debates over the political territoriality of the WCIDs. Moreover, the legal process shifted the terms of debate from voting rights to historical precedent, the market, policy failure, and prospective water rights. The final legal ruling against colonias residents foreclosed any standing they had in regional water governance and shunted them into their current position of passive consumers of dysfunctional public services with limited ability to change their relationship to regional water management institutions. Key Words: colonias, critical legal geography, territoriality, Texas, water governance.

当前有关美国边疆的贫困方面的学术研究认为，有限的低收入住房和非强制的土地发展法规，造成了得克萨斯州 南部的贫困人口，主要是墨西哥裔美国农村和郊区的低收入社区（colonias）的生活用水访问的困难。在这篇文 章中，我认为，不仅是贫穷或失败的公共政策，水政也决定了缺水的轨迹。从立法档案，法律文书，和法庭记 录，我研究两个相应的法律案件（Jimenez 诉HidalgoWCID 2 等[1971]和Fonseca 诉 Hidalgo WCID 2等 [1971])，挑战了农民控制的水控和改善区（WCIDs）的能力，通过把低收入社区从区境内排除出去，来主宰区 域的水治理。这种领土排除法否认低收入社区居民对WCID董事会候选人的投票权，因此，否决了居民的改变区 内从灌溉到生活供水运作的政治地位。借鉴于当前关键的法律地理的学术研究，本文通过对VWCIDs政治属地的 辩论，详细介绍了新兴的法律话语如何重新描写叙述低收入社区居民对水的访问。此外，法律的过程把辩论的条 款从投票权转移到以历史上的先例，其市场，政策的失败，和潜在的水权。最后对低收入社区居民的法律裁决， 止赎了他们在区域水治理上的任何地位，并且把他们搁置到当前功能失调的公共服务中的被动消费者的位置，只 具有限地改变与区域水资源管理机构之间关系的能力。关键词：低收入社区，关键法律地理，属地，得克萨斯州， 水的治理。

El estudio acad´ emico sobre la propiedad dentro de los confines de los EE.UU. sostiene que la vivienda limitada de bajos ingresos y la falta de aplicaci´ on de las regulaciones sobre desarrollo de la tierra determinan un precario acceso dom´ estico al agua en las comunidades ( colonias ) predominantemente m´ exico-americanas de bajos ingresos que habitan en las ´ areas rurales y periurbanas del sur de Texas. En este art´ ıculo arguyo que las pol´ ıticas del agua, no solo la pobreza o fallidas pol´ ıticas p´ ublicas, determinaron la trayectoria del acceso inadecuado al agua. Con base en archivos legislativos, documentos legales y registros de las cortes, examino dos casos legales emparejados ( Jimenez v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. [1971] y Fonseca v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. [1971]), que desafiaron la capacidad de acci´ on de un control basado en los propios agricultores y de los distritos de mejoramiento (WCIDs) para dominar la gobernanza regional del agua, excluyendo las colonias del territorio distrital. Esta exclusi´ on territorial le negaba a los residentes de las colonias el derecho a votar por candidatos a la direcci´ on del WCID y de esa manera le negaba a los residentes la capacidad pol´ ıtica de cambiar la operaci´ on del distrito de agua de irrigaci´ on a agua para consumo dom´ estico. Con base en el actual conocimiento de la geograf´ ıa cr´ ıtica sobre asuntos legales, el art´ ıculo detalla c´ omo los nacientes discursos legales reescribieron las narrativas acerca del acceso al agua por

los residentes de las colonias por medio de debates sobre la territorialidad pol´ ıtica de los WCIDs. Aun m´ as, el proceso legal cambi´ o los t´ erminos del debate de los derechos de votaci´ on al precedente hist´ orico, el mercado, el fracaso de las pol´ ıticas p´ ublicas y los eventuales derechos sobre el agua. La regulaci´ on legal final contra los residentes de las colonias cancel´ o cualquier capacidad que ellos pudieran tener en gobernanza regional del agua y los reubic´ o en la actual posici´ on pasiva de consumidores de servicios p´ ublicos disfuncionales, con limitada capacidad para cambiar sus relaciones con las instituciones regionales de administraci´ on del agua. Palabras clave: colonias, geograf´ ıa legal cr´ ıtica, territorialidad, Texas, gobernanza del agua.

P oet Gloria Anzald´ ua described her home on the U.S.-Mexico border, the Lower Rio Grande Valley, as a place 'where the third world grates against the first and bleeds' (Anzald´ ua 1987, 25). She famously described this hemorrhage as a 'border culture.' Many have pointed to colonias as an example of this rupture. Colonias are predominantly low-income, Mexican-American rural and periurban subdivisions characterized by irregular housing and poor water and sanitation infrastructure. Despite two decades of infrastructure investment and new land development regulations, colonias have expanded rapidly. Approximately 238,000 people live in at least 1,350 colonias, with 119,000 people facing unknown deficiencies in water or sanitation in south Texas (Parcher and Humberson 2007, 2009). Colonias reflect trenchant problems that originate in the region's uneven development, and their persistence naturalizes poor water and sanitation as a cultural or historical condition of the border.

I argue that politics, not only market or public policy failures, determined the trajectory of inadequate water and sanitation service in the region's colonias. I engage scholarship in critical legal geography to examine the contested political geography of potable water access. Drawing from legislative archives, the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund (MALDEF) archives in Stanford University Libraries (Special Collections), and court records, I examine a turning point in the struggle for potable water in south Texas colonias. In 1971, colonias residents attempted to wrest authority over regional water control and improvement districts (WCIDs) through district board elections and to change the district's operation from irrigation to domestic water supply. The WCIDs resisted the political threat to their power over water by advancing a legislative change that permitted WCIDgoverning boards to unilaterally exclude 'urban property' (colonias) from their districts. I examine two legal cases ( Jimenez v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. [1971] and Fonseca v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. [1971]) that challenged the ability of WCIDs to exclude land from their territories and, thus, deny colonias residents' right to vote in elections for the WCID board of directors. A closer analysis of the legal process also reveals an evolution of legal reasoning that resulted in a rescripted narrative about colonias residents' access to water. Arguments about water access and territoriality shifted from the arena of political voting rights to the market and water service provision. The final legal ruling against the colonias residents foreclosed any political standing they had to participate in water governance. Residents were left with only a limited ability to participate in regional water management institutions.

Critical legal geography opens a new perspective on the struggle for domestic water in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. Discourses are important to understand the allocation, restriction, and use of natural resources (Bridge and McManus 2000), but some discourses are more powerful than others. The law inscribes and codifies human-nature boundaries (Delaney 2003b) and translates these meanings into material outcomes because it has the explicit backing of the state. The legal process demarcates the boundaries of water politics because the law determines who holds legitimate power to organize, distribute, and manage a region's physical water resources. In the United States, water's territoriality is increasingly important as water governance devolves to local special districts or what some have called 'shadow governments' (Mullin 2009). Therefore, attention to the legal discourses, which demarcated social and political control over the Rio Grande water, provides a framework to examine how competing narratives of water access are constructed and contested in relation to the territoriality of the farmer-controlled water districts.

This study also advances current debates in legal geography and environmental governance. I take a combined perspective to explore how power over water is challenged through competing legal practices-both legislative changes and the litigation. Rather than focus on legal rulings alone, I trace how power is exercised through contested legal reasoning as reflected in court and archival documents. I follow the evolution of legal reasoning and shifting discursive tactics employed to reconfigure the hydro-social cycle (Bakker 2003; Budds 2008; Swyngedouw 2009). The evolution of spatial

meanings in the law provides a touchstone to explore how the law not only determines material aspects of water access and control but, in effect, creates a new framework for understanding human-environment interactions. That is, I examine how the legal process and debate gradually redefined the colonias residents, transforming them from actors with voting rights to strictly water-service consumers with notably weaker capacity to participate in resource governance decisions.

First, I situate my analysis within critical legal geography. The second section reviews current scholarship on the emergence of border colonias in sociology and policy studies. Whereas previous political economic explanations of inadequate water and sanitation services have focused on the housing market, this article reframes water access in terms of water governance. In the third section, I describe the legislative exclusion of colonias from WCIDs and subsequent litigation. The final substantive section examines contested views of political territoriality that anchor legal debates over water resource allocation. The analysis highlights the evolution of legal reasoning, identifying how a case about voting rights became one determined by arguments related to water service. I conclude that spatial exclusion was one mechanism used to control the hydro-social cycle. The ensuing legal challenge undermined the political legitimacy of colonias residents as water claimants and effectively shunted them into the position of passive consumers of dysfunctional public services.

## Critical Legal Geography

Law inscribes spatial practices and orders the material landscape. It designates identities and establishes institutions of social and political life, creating bounded domains of social interaction. The law codifies what can be done where and by whom. Critical legal geography examines how law enables human territoriality through discourse and practice (Blomley 1994; Chouinard 1994; Delaney 1998; Forest 2000; Blomley, Delaney, and Ford 2001; Holder and Harrison 2003; von Benda-Beckmann, von Benda-Beckmann, and Griffiths 2009). Legal constructions of social interaction claim significant scholarly attention because, as Delaney, Ford, and Blomley (2001, xix) wrote, 'social space represents a materialization of power, and much of law consists in highly significant and specialized descriptions and prescriptions of the same power.' Allied with a larger critical project in human geography (Blomley 2007, 2008b; Schlottmann 2008; Olson and

Sayer 2009), scholars in legal geography examine discourse in legal practices to move beyond the ideology of legalism, which depoliticizes space and legitimizes actions of powerful actors (Delaney 1998, 19).

One perspective in legal geography is law-in-space, or the legalities of space whereby scholars examine the 'situated legal practices . . . [that] contribute to the shaping and reshaping of the spatialities of social life' (Delaney 2003a, 68). Groundbreaking work in legal geography demonstrates that space and legal territory reinforce racial hierarchy through the control of mobility and settlement while naturalizing socio-spatial difference (Ford 2001). For example, Delaney (1998) deftly untied the strands of social history and legal reasoning to document the century-long invention, revision, maintenance, and resistance of America's color line. He documented the geopolitics of race by examining how the law narrowed the gap between real spaces and desired geographies of power through a variety of legal practices and instruments (e.g., mobility between territories, the spatial contingency of citizenship, segregation ordinances, property and contractual relations). The law inscribes and codifies human-nature boundaries (Delaney 2001; Sax 2001; McGillivray and Holder 2007), shapes state territoriality and citizenship (Scott 1998; Varsanyi 2008), defines urban structure and governance (Mitchell 2003), and alters the range of public and private spaces and action (Howell 2004; Blomley 2005; Howe 2008).

Legal spaces also require constant maintenance and reworking because they are built on foundations of contested social practices and material realities that break down over time. Critical legal geography, then, closely examines legal activity and litigation as part of this process. Indeed, litigation is a practice of politics, or the multivalent process that mediates or deliberates across antagonistic positions (Agnew 2011, 6-7). Litigation is not exclusively political, but it is one practice to activate political or social change. Delaney (2001) explained that litigation is a 'purposive activity . . . a component of a political strategy' oriented toward bringing about social change (58-59). Litigation is part of the practical politics to reconstitute spatial meaning and material territories. In the United States, litigation over racial gerrymandering of voting districts and school district integration underscores its central role in determining political power (Forest 2001, 2004, 2005). Recently, D. G. Martin, Scherr, and City (2009) have argued that lawyers themselves, through litigation and practice, contribute greatly to the production of space.

Sociospatial concepts infuse legal reasoning. Attention to litigation and legal practice, then, necessarily requires scholars to interrogate myriad spatial discourses deployed to challenge, revise, or maintain legal geographies. The 'space-in-law' analytic (Delaney 2003a) is predicated on the idea that legal argument is a powerful form of territoriality that creates and assigns legal spaces. Drawing primarily from court rulings, this approach interrogates litigation and other legal practices to reveal the 'micro-mechanics of legal reasoning' that are imbued with spatial imaginaries and metaphor (Delaney 1998). Carefully read judgments and legal texts are central to a critical perspective in legal geography because the approach allows scholars to examine how legal reasoning naturalizes social power through the creation of new meanings or maintenance of sociospatial configuration. Therefore, closer attention to how conceptions of space, culture, and meaning are challenged, reinforced, or changed in the creation of legal texts opens new ways to understand the mechanics of sociospatial power.

Legal meanings are concretized in the material world through the exercise of state power over physical spaces and bodies (Delaney 2003a). This translation-from discursive to material-is particularly evident where the law intersects with the nonhuman world. Legal discourses are materialized through the cultural reconstruction of traditional binaries, such as nature-human, animal-human, and body-mind, and are externalized in myriad legal proceedings (Delaney 2001, 2003b). Blomley (2008a) examined property conflicts between white farmers and Native Americans (Omaha) over land that resulted from the meandering Missouri River, illustrating how nature as a legal boundary is contingent and contested in the law. He demonstrated that the simplification of nature in the law is more complicated than some might suggest.

But herein are two limitations of critical legal geography. First, critical legal geography's primary concern with cultural production and the politics of social difference overshadows how legal demarcations of space and spatial discourses constitute a struggle over the world of things, embedded within a political economy of labor processes, accumulation, dispossession, and regulation (Glassman 2006). The analytical domain is restricted to social constructions of nature with little attention to the political economy in which these legal contests are embedded (cf. Prudham 2005, 6-7). Delaney (2001) might have outlined how contested cultural notions of the law demarcate nature-human boundaries, but absent is an analysis that interrogates how political economic processes frame the cultural legal inscription of nature-human boundaries, or how the results of legal proceedings impinge, shape, or impact the actual things being 'constructed.' I contend that if litigation is understood as a practice of politics, then, in this case, legal contest is a political practice, not merely cultural ideology, that mediates the biophysical world and 'the workings of socioeconomic and administrative forms that govern it' (Agnew 2011, 3).

A second limitation is that legal geography's attention to space-in-law examines litigation as a contest of well-formed discourses that compete within court cases, rather than an iterative mode through which new legal reasoning is produced. For Blomley (2008a), property conflicts between white farmers and Native Americans were based on clearly defined scientific views that competed in court, a venue for predetermined legal discourses to hit up against one another. In this article, I argue that the legal geography also needs to focus on the process of discourse formation within legal engagement. An examination of practices and litigation through the legal process itself-from initial filing to final judgment-allows us to follow the evolution of legal reasoning , or the shifting discursive tactics, to identify more precisely the translation of geographical concepts into the terms and framework of constitutional law and state power. The legal process, emerging legal discourses, and the adjudicated result disrupt past legalsocial relations and remap how people, either individually or collectively, relate to each other and themselves.

## Colonias and Water Access in South Texas

Water and poverty are intimately linked in the historical geography of the Lower Rio Grande Valley. Poverty in the region is experienced and defined by poor access to water and inadequate sanitation. In the early twentieth century, newly arrived Midwestern farmers organized WCIDs to convey water from the Rio Grande to citrus and vegetable fields. The farming elites manipulated local politics and society along ethnic lines for decades (Anders 1982; Carroll 2003). Irrigated agriculture was predicated on cheap water, controlled by farmers on WCID boards of directors, and cheap Mexican labor controlled by poll taxes, Jim Crow segregation, substandard schools, and the Texas Rangers (Warburton, Wood, and Crane 1943; Stillwell 1947; Montejano 1987; Tiefenbacher 2001; Barrera 2004; Brannstrom and Neuman 2009).

Social and economic exclusion translated into informal and substandard housing. Colonias emerged in the

mid-twentieth century when some farmers subdivided and sold flood-prone lands to poor Mexican-American families. Historically, subdivisions were settled by migrant agricultural laborers, often called the 'poorest of Americans' (Texas Department of Human Services [TDHS]; Maril 1989). The current globalized border economy is grafted on past poverty and class divisions. Today colonias are home to an array of low-wage workers in agriculture, construction, energy, and service industries (Esparza and Donelson 2008; Donelson and Esparza 2010; Mukhija 2010). Dolhinow (2010) argued that colonias are reproduced by regional economic integration that increases the supply and demand for immigration while offering a cheap means for the social reproduction of 'disposable' immigrant labor. In Mexico, colonias are more positively viewed as self-help urban neighborhoods slowly integrated and regularized into the urban fabric (Ward 1999, 65-69). In contrast, Texas colonias are viewed as an enduring yet dysfunctional part of the border where poverty, race, and class divisions have become 'absorbed and accepted as a 'natural' part of the landscape' (P. Martin 1998, 226).

Colonias are considered informal because residents build their homes without consideration of standard codes and practices, lots might not be legal or 'platted,' and credit markets to finance housing exist outside formal credit markets and institutions (Larson 2002, 141). Poor families commonly purchase unimproved lots with a low downpayment through a contract-for-deed, referred to as a poor man's mortgage , in which the buyer pays for the lot in installments while the seller retains the title (Ward and Carew 2001). Families gradually build 'self-help' homes on the land using a mix of cement blocks, wood, metal, and recreational and residential mobile homes over many years.

Poor water and sanitation conditions in south Texas challenge the myth of universal water and sanitation coverage in the United States (Wescoat, Headington, and Theobald 2007). To address this gap, the Texas legislature passed a series of measures called the Colonias Water Bill (1989) to modify regulatory guidelines for subdivisions and create an infrastructure program to leverage federal funds to improve colonias' water and sanitation service (Wilson and Menzies 1997; Ward 1999; Hanchett 2010). The legislature also created the Economically Distressed Areas Program (EDAP) to coordinate and fund various initiatives to improve water and sanitation infrastructure along the Texas-Mexico border. Attention to the water and sanitation crisis also led nonprofit organizations to design and implement community-based infrastructure programs (Lemos et al.

2002). Despite two decades of infrastructure development and new land development regulations, colonias continued to expand. The region's population increased 20 percent between 1990 and 2000, but the population living in colonias more than doubled during the same period (Ward 1999, 2; Parcher and Humberson 2007).

Ward (1999) described the expansion of rural and periurban subdivisions as 'urbanization by stealth.' He argued that regional economic structures, such as low-wage employment and limited educational opportunities, cause poverty that limits access to affordable housing for the poor and working classes. Low-income families who want to purchase property have few options outside the informal self-help housing market. Compounding economic inequality and limited housing is the location of the available housing. Many rural and periurban subdivisions exist in a 'no-man's land,' outside municipalities where cities have little political incentive to incorporate underdeveloped areas (Ward 1999, 133-39, 142-52; Anderson 2008). In some cases, cities avoided incorporation of these poorly served subdivisions by mimicking 'municipal underbounding' of African-American communities in the U.S. South (Aiken 1987, 1990). Furthermore, weak and poorly enforced land development regulations and implementation problems with existing water and sanitation programs have contributed to the growth of underserved communities (Davies and Holz 1993; Bath, Tanski, and Villareal 1994; Wilson and Menzies 1997; Carter and Ortolano 2000; Larson 2002).

Discursive and cultural strategies also shape perceptions and, thus, public policies that influence colonias' water and sanitation access. Lopez and Reich (1997) documented symbolic and cultural strategies that limit the agenda for water access to unincorporated subdivisions. Hill (2003) described the discursive production of the label 'colonia'-from a rural neighborhood with little social stigma to 'leaky Third Worlders in a First World space north of the border' that demarcates class, ethnicity, and disease (152). Hanchett (2010) examined Texas policies toward the communities as a spatial ontology of otherness, thereby implying a deeper politics. Social marginalization of residents through the discursive constructions of illness and illegality, according to Hill (2003), eroded their political legitimacy to makeclaimsonthestate for water and sanitation service (Mukhija and Monkkonen 2007).

I argue that framing water as a 'service' rather than a commodity limits the critical analysis of colonias' water access. Ward and others have rightly focused on the

political economy, policies, and discourses of land development as the cause of colonia expansion. But in these studies, poor water and sanitation access is viewed as a symptom of policy and housing market failures. Water supply is normalized as part of a larger basket of municipal services, such as electrification, trash pickup, and paved roads that are limited in the low-income housing market. Some studies suggest that the politics of colonia water provision merit further study (Carter and Ortolano 2000; Cavanagh 2001; Olmstead 2004). Yet these studies fail to address the political dynamics in the regional water sector or explain how water supply is contingent on political will, regional power brokers, and local capacity for water management.

The remainder of this article advances current scholarship on colonias' water problems by exploring how competing legal narratives frame participation in regional water governance. Water governance refers to the array of organizations, institutions, laws, and discourses that coordinate, regulate, or manage water allocation and use (Bakker 2003, 2005, 2010; Norman and Bakker 2009). Attention to governance, as opposed to simply government or policy, foregrounds the broad range of actors and political practices that shape environmental decision making (Lemos and Agrawal 2006; Bridge and Perreault 2009). In this case, I have identified legislation, supported by the farming elite in WCIDs, and two community-based legal challenges to the legislation that transformed regional water governance. The legal proceedings and final ruling effectively assigned colonias residents to the role of water consumers, not legitimate political actors in water governance. Therefore, attention to the legal cases does not imply that politics over water access ended in 1976; indeed, the struggle for potable water continued through the 1980s and culminated in the Colonias Water Bill (1989). This analysis, however, identifies a key moment in the history of regional water governance because it examines when and how the political boundaries and participatory roles were delimited for colonias residents fighting for domestic water.

## Claiming Space, Claiming Water

The Rio Grande is the source of 97 percent of freshwater in this region, and it is allocated through complex arrangements of decentralized public and private governance institutions. Surface water is appropriated through a system of water rights and treated as private property (Schoolmaster 1991; Sansom, Armitano, and Wassenich 2008, 173-85). WCIDs hold a monopoly on the conveyance of water to the water suppliers, including water supply companies (WSCs), county or municipal systems, and special water districts.

Highly contested treaties, legislation, and litigation over water rights created a complex system of water governance in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. Competing water claims, both riparian and appropriated ('first in time, first in right'), led to an overappropriate resource. The most litigious era over water began during the 1950s drought when stored water could not fulfill all water claims for both irrigators and municipalities. The case State of Texas v. Hidalgo County Water Control and Improvement District No. 18 (1956-1969), also known as the Valley Water Suit, adjudicated competing claims for water (Smith 1976; Templar 1981). In political terms, the adjudicated regime of water governance reaffirmed the farmer-controlled WCIDs as primary stakeholders: Water was conveyed through WCID infrastructure and a majority of water rights were tied to irrigation (Smith 1976).

Significant social change took hold in south Texas during the era of water litigation. Fomented by the radicalized Chicano movement (1966-1974), the mainstream civil rights movement led to the demise of Jim Crow laws in the region (Montejano 1987). Student walkouts and farm labor unionizing addressed educational disparities and poor living conditions among Mexican Americans (Wilson and Menzies 1997; San Miguel 2001a, 2001b; Barrera 2004; Jepson 2005). Voter registration drives also began to address election violations by encouraging political engagement of the Mexican-American community (Navarro 2000). Inspired by political success in other arenas, one colonia resident living within a WCID ran for water district office with the agenda of changing the operation of the WCIDfrom irrigation to domestic water and sanitation provision for its rural residents (Weiner 1977, 750).

WCIDs advocated to change the law and allow current boards of directors to exclude the upstart colonias residents from participating in elections. On 28 April 1971, the 62nd Legislature of the State of Texas passed a bill sponsored by the state senator from Hidalgo County (James Bates) to change the law governing WCID territory (State of Texas 1971). The new statute (Article 8280-3.2) empowered the board of directors to unilaterally exclude land (defined as 'urban property') from their district. Before this new legislation, property owners were the only parties allowed to request district exclusion.

The definition of urban property in the 1954 statute and 1971 legislation affirmed a bias in favor of

agriculture. Land targeted for exclusion was urban property. Reading further, the definition of urban property remained the same between 1954 and 1971 except for one small but critical difference. The new law stated that urban property included nonagricultural land ' whether or not a plat or map . . . has been duly filed for record and recorded in the office of the county clerk of the county' (State of Texas 1971, emphasis added). Had the legislature not made this change to include informal settlements, a majority of colonias could not have been excluded from the district.

From the perspective of WCIDs, the legislation, effective 30 August 1971, could not have come too soon. Two districts, Hidalgo County Water Control and Improvement District No. 2 (Hidalgo WCID 2) and Hidalgo &amp; Cameron Counties Water Control and Improvement District 9 (H&amp;C WCID 9) planned to issue a bond for renovation of the old irrigation system and new pumping stations, respectively, but required a majority approval of eligible voters in the district (Weiner 1977, 749). With new political demands for domestic water, a vote to issue a bond for irrigation would have heightened debate over domestic water supply for colonias.

Over eighteen months, WCIDs consolidated control over water governance through exclusion of subdivisions from their districts. First, on 9 September 1971, the Board of Directors for Hidalgo WCID 2 adopted a resolution calling for a hearing to determine whether or not to exclude thirty-nine rural and periurban subdivisions (743 acres or 2,950 lots) from the district (MALDEF 1972a; Weiner 1977, 751). Eleven tracts did not have domestic water service for 325 houses. Other excluded lots were within service areas of rural water supply companies, but according to court documents, residents could not afford the high costs of service. The board posted the resolution on the door of the county courthouse door three weeks before the hearing and published a notice in the local newspaper, McAllen Monitor. On 21 October 1971, the WCID convened the hearing to exclude designated colonias, and only three persons attended other than the board of directors, district manager, and attorney for the district. One week later, the board of directors adopted the resolution to exclude the designated subdivisions from the district (MALDEF 1972a).

Asirrigators scrambled to exclude land from districts, Colonias del Valle, a new community-based organization, sponsored a water conference, 'Elimination of Barriers to Securing Potable Water for All the Rural Areas of South Texas' (24-25 August 1972). One attendee was a civil rights attorney from the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), Sanford Rosen, and his regional counterpart, attorney David Hall (Texas Rural Legal Aid). The conference proved a catalyst for the ACLU and the recently formed MALDEF (Vigil 1990) to address what they considered a civil rights issue. After the August 1972 meeting, Rosen wrote to his colleagues in New York:

By numbers the chicanos should be able to control the governing boards-and 'take over' the Water Districts . . . . Defensive litigation will be necessary to protect the right to vote. Unlawful voter qualifications may have to be challenged, and a gerrymandering process, whereby colonias (rural barrios) are excluded from Water Districts, may have to be challenged. (MALDEF 1972c, 2)

The ACLU attorneys were fully aware of the complicated political nature of this case, recognizing any litigation was directed toward political change. Rosen wrote:

I am persuaded that we are about to embrace a tarbaby. That may be o.k., but let's understand that at the start. The last water suit in the Valley for example, took 17 years to complete. Especially if we take the attitude, which I think is essential, that water litigation is to be joined with political developments to assure ultimately political resolution of the problem, we are in for a long pull. (MALDEF 1972c, 3)

The strategy to claim political space for water began several months later when the civil rights lawyers began to represent the colonias residents. On 6 September 1972, H&amp;C WCID 9 adopted a resolution calling for a public meeting to consider the exclusion of land from the district. On 6 October 1972, David Hall represented four subdivisions at a hearing held by the Board of Directors of H&amp;C WCID 9. He stated that the property owners did not want to leave, but rather exercise their right to vote in water district elections. They wanted the district to provide them with treated water (MALDEF 1973h, 4-5). The plea failed, and H&amp;C WCID 9 excluded the colonias from their district.

Hall and his legal team challenged the subdivision exclusions by filing suit on behalf of Guadalupe Jim´ enez and thirteen co-plaintiffs who were residents in nine subdivisions excluded by Hidalgo WCID 2 and H&amp;C WCID 9 in U.S. District Court (Southern District of Texas, Brownsville Division) on 16 December 1972 ( Jimenez et al. v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. ). The Jimenez suit against the WCIDs claimed that notice to exclude or 'de-annex' subdivisions from the district did not comply with procedural standards under the Due Process

clause of the U.S. Constitution. None of the plaintiffs received individual notice of the hearing to de-annex land and the notice, posted in English, was insufficient as the residents did not read, write, or understand the language. The plaintiffs also claimed that the Equal Protection clause of the U.S. Constitution was violated because railroads received direct notice on de-annexation and, thereby, were treated as a favored class over other landowners. Moreover, the plaintiffs stated that the exclusion also violated the Voting Rights Act because the intent of the exclusion was to effectively disenfranchise subdivision residents in the upcoming election for the WCID board of directors.

Filing the complaint in federal district court offered the plaintiffs a place to circumvent the power politics of local Anglo farmers. The federal district court was relatively isolated from local, elite south Texas politics. Unlike Texas state judges, who are elected, federal district court judges are appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate; therefore, it is highly unlikely that local politics would influence the federal district court or even the court of appeals, which is located in New Orleans. Moreover, at this time in the late 1960s and early 1970s, federal judicial selection was fairly insulated from the politicization we see today. It was only after 1973's Roe v. Wade that politicians actively targeted the federal judiciary as a venue for political activity (Cheek and Champagne 2005, 22); even then, the political engagement was about national issues, not local politics.

Shortly after the Jimenez complaint was filed, Hall encouraged two men, Juan Fonseca and Efren Ram´ ırez, to place their names on the general election ballot as candidates for the office of director of the water district and represent the interests of those district residents seeking water for domestic use (MALDEF 1973g, 4). The district manager denied the applicants a place on the ballot. Initially, the denial was based on the grounds that the applicants did not own land in the district as required by the Texas Water Code. Ram´ ırez contested this claim by providing documentation. The WCID subsequently argued that Fonseca and Ram´ ırez did not file on time as designated by Texas law, a contention denied by the plaintiffs.

On 26 December 1972, attorneys for Fonseca and Ram´ ırez filed a second suit in federal district court (Southern District, Brownsville) against Hidalgo WCID2to challenge the refusal of the water district to place their names on the general election ballot. They argued that exclusion from the ballot denied Fonseca and Ram´ ırez equal protection under the law ( Fonseca et al v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. ). The plaintiffs sought a temporary restraining order to postpone the upcoming election. The court denied that request but ordered the parties to submit stipulations of fact and briefs for a ruling.

The plaintiffs in Fonseca challenged the claims that blocked their petition to run for WCID director. First, the plaintiffs challenged the constitutionality of the statutory freeholder requirement to run for office in a water-district election, as Fonseca was not a landowner. Second, denial of a place on the ballot also denied voters the opportunity to elect a candidate of their choosing (MALDEF 1973c). They argued that the 'supposedly special purpose governmental unit is irrelevant' and provided a broad reading to the purpose of this political territory (MALDEF 1973c, 8):

This statute presumes that only landowners have cognizable interests in water resources policy of the community. Such reasoning not only reflects a kind of economic royalism abhorrent to our constitutional principles, but it is simply not true. The water resources policy here can be literally life and death matters [ sic ] to all the residents of the region, particularly the plaintiffs and the voters who would be their potential constituents. The property ownership requirement infringes fundamental rights and cannot be sustained.

They further made procedural challenges and questioned the claim that their applications were not filed in time.

The companion cases of Jimenez (exclusion from the WCID) and Fonseca (exclusion from the ballot) moved between Federal District Court (Brownsville) and the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals (New Orleans) over a period of four years (1972-1976). Eventually the court found Fonseca moot. The Jimenez case moved between district and circuit court but ended with a failed appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court (424 U.S. 950 [1976]). The appeal dismissed the claim ( Jimenez ) that territorial exclusion denied residents equal protection and due process. The U.S. Supreme Court affirmed the three-judge panel's ruling and, thus, ended the colonias residents' legal battle for political participation on water governance through the WCIDs.

In 1976, WCIDs consolidated their power over water governance as the law certified their political legitimacy because the state recognized the vested interests by a relatively small number of irrigators. The legal ruling bolstered their claims to space and, therefore, water. One year after the appeals court ruling, the WCIDs excluded more colonias. By 1980 large areas

of designated 'urban properties' had been de-annexed under the 1971 statute (personal communication, San Juan Irrigation District [formerly Hidalgo WCID 2], Personnel 2009).

## Contesting Water's Territoriality

The WCIDs did not simply reassert their power over water resources. The legal reasoning that advanced WCIDpreeminence in water governance rescripted the underlying geography of water and power in the region. The final ruling ended any ambiguity about the legal meaning of urban space and the territoriality of the WCIDs.In this section, I sharpen the analysis by paying careful attention to the meaning of political territoriality that emerged during the companion cases Jimenez et al. v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. and Fonseca et al. v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. 1 I analyze legal documents that include material from initial complaints, court transcripts, case filings, and the appeals court ruling years later. As with any legal case, multiple and overlapping strategies challenged legal procedures, jurisdiction, and notification (MALDEF 1973f). The legal debate also pivoted on how reality on the ground can be translated into legal standing under the U.S. Constitution. Both cases hinge on claims that the WCID violated due process, equal protection, and voting rights protected by the U.S. Constitution. I also argue that litigants drew new nature-society geographies about how different sectors of society relate to water in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. To protect elite control of water governance, the water district rescripted the legal discourse about space and territoriality. In this section, I pay particular attention to the microgeopolitics of legal reasoning that emerged during four years of litigation. In the end, the ensuing legal debate reframed the power of WCIDs, the key political territory of water governance; the new meaning and discourse about the WCID determined whocontrolled the space of water and, thus, water itself.

Litigants contested the territoriality of water and engaged in a debate over the political nature of special water districts. The argument hinged on one question: What kind of political territory is the WCID? The answer to this question addresses two issues, one operational and one constitutional. The first issue speaks to statutory qualification of the WCID: What is the WCID's power over water? Can the WCID provide domestic water? If so, can they provide treated or potable water? Second, the power of the WCID-whether it is broad enough to include domestic treated water supply for residents or narrowly limited to irrigation-frames the broader constitutional question of equal protection and due process. If the WCID was broadly defined as a general-purpose district, such as municipalities or school districts, then the franchise must be extended to all residents in the district, not only landowners; any attempt to curtail voting (e.g., through redistricting) would be a violation of the Equal Protection clause. If the WCID was narrowly defined, then only landowners would have relevant interest in water allocation; they could exclude colonias from its territory and refrain from providing domestic water to excluded communities without any constitutional violations.

Over the course of four years-from preliminary hearing to final ruling and appeal-legal arguments over the exclusion of colonias from WCID territory transformed from a debate about voting rights to a technical debate over water service. Four arguments advanced the view that the WCID was a special district with limited power: historical precedent, market efficiency, policy failure, and prospective versus real property rights. As a result, the legal debate's center of gravity evolved from one about voting rights into a debate about the technicalities of water service provision. In the end, the legal debate effectively rescripted colonias residents' position from political claimants to simply water consumers.

## Debating WCIDs

The preliminary hearing transcript reflects the contours of the debate over the legislative intent of WCIDs. The plaintiffs' attorney argued that the state of Texas gave WCIDs the authority to provide water to rural residents. According to the Texas Water Code, as presented to the court, the WCID had the right to provide water for a variety of purposes and its focus on irrigation water was a perversion of the legislature's intent.

Hall: . . . I refer the court to Section 51.121 of the Texas Water Code . . . [that Section says] water control and improvement districts . . . may provide for, on the control, storage, preservation, and distribution of its water and floodwater and the water of its rivers and streams for irrigation, power and all other useful purposes.

Court: Well, drinking water sure is a useful purpose.

Hall: It is a useful purpose your Honor . . . . It says that the Board may award the use of district water in the following order of preference and superiority: one, domestic and municipal use, two, industrial use, and the third use irrigation. It is my contention that they have perverted the statutory priority here by devoting all their resources or

almost all their resources to irrigation. (MALDEF 1973l, italics added)

The WCIDs challenged the intent of the legislation to no avail, as the presiding judge clearly read the Texas Water Code as offering first priority to domestic use 'urban people that need domestic water, by God, are the first ones you all are going to exclude. I just cannot understand that' (MALDEF 1973l, 30).

The defendant attorneys realized their weak position when arguing the primacy of irrigation water over domestic water, and they changed tactics. The defendant attorneys stated that WCIDs already provided water for domestic use but that it was outside statutory requirements to provide treated (e.g., potable) water (MALDEF 1973l, 31). At this point in the hearing, both parties accepted that domestic water could be provided through the WCID. But the debate hinged on the quality of water-raw river water or treated water. The attorney for the defendant then stated that the WCID would supply 'raw' water and runoff for domestic use that could be stored by cisterns on rural lots. He stated, 'I am not willing to concede that it [Texas Water Code] empowers a district to construct disposal plants and treatment plants for the reason that it is not at all in the law' (MALDEF 1973l, 35). The plaintiffs' attorney clarified his position when responding to the presiding judge (MALDEF 1973l, 48):

Court: . . . And these people apparently are fighting for water. That is your fight.

Hall: Yes, Your Honor.

Court: For domestic water.

Hall: Treated water.

This debate continued in the briefs after the preliminary hearing. The plaintiffs' brief argued that the WCID had statutory power to respond to the water needs of district landowners through the provision of a treated water system by citing an affidavit of a neighboring WCID that provided treated domestic water (MALDEF 1973h, 1973i, 1973k). The WCIDs contended that they would provide water to excluded land but that it would be just untreated water for 'irrigation of lawns and shrubs . . . on a contractual basis when surplus water is available for such uses' (MALDEF 1973k, 6).

The constitutional question of freeholder requirement (landowner) to participate in elections, and thus equal protection, also depended on the statutory purpose of the district-or, plainly, the powers and authority of boards of directors over water distribution to land within district boundaries. General government units or districts that served broad constituencies, such as school boards or municipalities, could not limit franchise of governing boards to one class or group (e.g., landowners) as protected by the U.S. Constitution. Special or narrowly defined districts ('special-purpose government units'), however, in which the district's activities would fall disproportionately on one class or group of constituents, could limit the franchise to that group. Therefore, WCIDs argued that their district was a special-purpose government unit for irrigation only, which would allow them to limit the franchise to landowners who cultivated land. The colonias residents argued that WCIDs were general-purpose government units, so that all district residents should elect the board of directors.

In the ensuing hearing, the judge drew parallels between the WCID in relation to other political territories, such as municipalities and city councils or school boards, where the freeholder requirement has been deemed unconstitutional. As the defendant stated clearly, 'Your Honor, we don't have any quarrel with those cases [referring to municipalities]. We simply will try to distinguish it. We think we can' (MALDEF 1973l). But in the end of the preliminary hearing, the plaintiff's attorney laid bare that this case was ultimately political (MALDEF 1973l, 40-41, emphasis added):

Hall: . . . all we are saying is that they [Board] have the power to do it [provide treated water], and if the proper representation on the Board might vote to provide the treated water. That is what we are saying . . . it is a political question as to how to allocate the priorities, and the reason they are allocated all for irrigation now is because those people have not been allowed to vote in elections, have not been allowed to run for directors and so forth and so on . . . And so in the real essence this is a political rights case as to how we are going to go about allocating resources of water districts between the competing interests of the irrigators on the one side and those that want municipal and domestic water.

## From Claimants to Consumers

Over the course of the case-from the initial filing and stipulations of fact 2 to briefs by the litigants and amicus curiaethe legal debate reframed water's territoriality by focusing on the exercised power, not the statutory power, of the WCID. Rather than debating the statutory intent, which was clearly in the colonias residents' favor, the WCIDs justified colonias exclusion by changing the debate from voting rights to water

service. The WCID attorneys argued that despite broad statutory definition, the WCID had not exercised that power. Thus, they could not provide water service because of historical precedent, market efficiency, policy failure, and problems with interpretive claim on prospective water rights.

First, WCID attorneys attempted to normalize the status quo of poor domestic water access by including a statement in the stipulation of fact that poor, predominantly Mexican-American colonias residents never had historical claims to water. One stipulation frequently referred to in the court record relies on 'custom' to explain poor access to water: 'It has been custom of the rural population of the areas to supply their domestic need for water from shallow wells or direct from irrigation canals conducted through home purification systems into cisterns, from which water would be taken for needed domestic use' (MALDEF 1973k, 15). The WCIDs tacitly accepted the broad statutory power of the WCID but remained adamant in highlighting that irrigation was the WCID's historical purpose. They argued that the districts were originally created for the 'principle purpose of, and has at all times since been principally engaged in furnishing water for the irrigation of agricultural lands within its boundaries' (MALDEF 1973d, 13). Furthermore, the defendants cited the usage of 'urban land' in the exclusionary clause of the statute to illustrate legislative intent of the WCID as irrigation (MALDEF 1973d, 13).

Second, legal arguments began to frame the legal case in terms of water service and market operation, not political voting rights. For example, court records reflect that the debate's center of gravity gradually moved away from debates about the territoriality of WCIDs to the role of other water entities that operate in the water service sector. Again, the parties acknowledged that WCIDs possessed the statutory power under the Texas Water Code to provide water and sanitation (MALDEF 1973k). The WCIDs, however, argued that other statutory entities (e.g., municipalities and water supply companies) are better equipped in the market to provide potable drinking water to colonias than the WCIDs. 3

Court documents also offered an alternative narrative that the land developers were at fault for poor water access to change the debate from political voting rights to policy failure. The defendants included a statement that land developers and 'this hiatus of regulation' as 'the root cause of the problem which the Plaintiffs seek to remedy' (MALDEF 1973b, 7-8). Therefore, the WCID argued, the remedy sought (e.g., voting rights) was not targeting the real culprit to poor water access (MALDEF 1973h, 11 and Exhibit 13): 'By exercising their voting power they would induce the Valley water districts to enter the water and sewage treatment fields to compensate for the sharp practices of rural developers' (MALDEF 1973b, 7-8).

Legal reasoning and discursive tactics in subsequent briefs cast in stark relief the tension between voting rights and WCID powers as they pertained to regional water control. The plaintiffs reiterated their position that the cases were political by returning to the question of equal protection and voting rights. In Fonseca , the attorney argued for the correlative effect of the right to vote and candidates for office. He underscored that land ownership should not be a criterion for candidacy for the board of directors because it denied voters the opportunity to vote for candidate of their choosing: 'without meaningful choices of candidates, the right to vote becomes a mere formality' (MALDEF 1973g, 6). Drawing from the lessons in Cipriano v. City of Houma (1969), which overturned the Louisiana law that required land ownership to vote in municipal utility bond votes, the plaintiffs further argued that the 'supposedly special purpose governmental unit is irrelevant' and argued that the WCIDs did not show a compelling case for the landowner requirement (MALDEF 1973g, 6).

Yet the defendant insisted on framing the problem in terms of water service and market logic. WCID attorneys used economics to justify irrigation as the sole operation for the district: 'for sound reasons of good business, economy, and public policy [the WCID] declined to enter the field of water and sewerage treatment in competition with agencies already engaged in such business' (MALDEF 1973b, 10). The WCIDs further argued that the excluded colonias were within or near other possible water entities, pointing to the stipulations of fact that indicated many of the thirty-nine subdivisions fell within the jurisdiction of a water supply company or municipal utility district. Indeed, they further portrayed the WCIDs as victim: 'One or more of these agencies could place in operation water and sewerage treatment plants much sooner than Plaintiffs could, by exercise of their full political power, force the defendant irrigation District to do so against their will' and threaten to throw the district into default (MALDEF 1973b, 10-11).

An amicus curiae brief from another WCID ('Donna District') reframed the legal question of political voting rights to one of prospective rights and water service. Indeed, the brief never mentioned voting rights as the basis for the claim of due process violation. Rather, the brief reinterpreted the plaintiffs' basis for a due process

complaint as a claim to a prospective right to water. This reinterpretation effectively redefined the case as one about water service, which is not a protected right under the U.S. Constitution. The brief interpreted that the Jimenez due process claim (insufficient notice) constituted a 'taking' of their property or 'as their potential of chance for receiving services of the District in the form of treated water' (MALDEF 1973a, 9). From this position, they argued, 'these types of services does [ sic ] not approximate the property rights involved in condemnation cases whereby personal notice is required' (MALDEF 1973a, 16). The brief marshaled the narrow definition of special governmental district to insist that prospective service is not a right for which notice is required: 'The legislature has never confused the discontinuance of services from special purpose political subdivisions with that of condemnation of property rights' (MALDEF 1973a, 16).

In supplemental briefs, the litigants responded to U.S. Supreme Court decisions on Salyer Land Co. v. Tulare Water Basin Storage District (410 US 743 [1973]; 'Salyer') and Associated Enterprises, Inc. v Toltec Watershed Improvement District (410 US719[1973]; 'Toltec'), rendered only days after the first briefs had been filed. Litigants had to engage these rulings as they related to the question of land ownership qualifications for candidacy in two other water districts. These two rulings further sharpened the debate over the territorial powers of the WCID. The plaintiffs argued that Salyer and Toltec provided a test when the strict equal protection regarding franchise need not to be met, namely, where local governmental units do not exercise normal governmental power and the exercise of its statutory power has a disproportionate effect on one class or group of constituents. David Hall explained that the defendants failed each test; the WCID had broad powers and the impacts of their statutory power (not exercised power) affected more than one class or constituency (MALDEF 1973j, 4-5).

The political tension is underscored in a subtle, but critical, contradiction within the briefs in favor of the WCIDs. On the one hand, the defendant briefs denied the political nature of the colonias de-annexation. To contrast their case with previous voting rights cases involving gerrymandering, the defendants explicitly engaged Gomillion v. Lightfoot (1960), in which the city boundaries of Tuskegee, Alabama, were redefined to deprive African Americans of the right to vote in city elections, and Cipriano v. City of Houma (1969), in which the city fenced out a sector of the population because of the way they might vote. The WCID brief was explicit: 'Here is not the slightest indication that the exclusion of property from District 2 was in any manner dependent upon the manner in which the residents of any of the excluded party might vote' (MALDEF 1973d, 15). Yet in a companion brief, the colonias residents' voting behavior was explicitly of concern. Under the heading 'Political Mischief,' the true angst of the WCID was revealed (MALDEF 1973b, 10-11):

The political facts of life cannot be ignored. Suppose the 39 urban tracts [colonias] are thrown back into the corporate limits of the district, and the 1.02% of the acreage contained therein does have the voting power to elect the Board of Directors, and that such Board attempts to build water and sewerage treatment plants. It will most certainly incite political opposition and hostility from the rural population of the District . . . and the tab for the loss passed on to the rural taxpayers [farmers].

Despite all attempts to depoliticize the case-shift the debate from voting rights to historical precedent, the market, policy failure, and prospective water rights-this quote provides a glimpse into the real political challenge this case presented to the region's irrigators.

## Ruling on Gerrymandering

The district court ruling accepted the WCID arguments and wrote one opinion for the companion cases. For Jimenez , the presiding district court judge accepted the historical and market arguments (exercised power) to define the purpose of the WCID (Opinion of the Single-Judge District Court, Appendix, Jurisdictional Statement, 424 U.S. 950 [1976], 45a; heretofore 'District Opinion'):

This Court, in considering this contention, must recognize that neither of the Defendant Districts have every exercised the power to build and operate treatment plants for the production of potable water for drinking and domestic purposes, but were organized primarily for and have restricted their activities primarily to providing irrigation water to rural areas and raw river to municipalities and industries.

The ruling continued 'it is not as if the Plaintiffs are without better alternatives' (District Opinion 1973, 45) and 'have shown no deprivation of 14th Amendment magnitude' (District Opinion 1973, 46). Moreover, he accepted the Donna District position on prospective rights, stating that there is no constitutionally protected right to potable water supply (District Opinion 1973, 44a). In Fonseca , the court ruled that

the WCIDs are similar to those in California and Colorado that were considered by the U.S. Supreme Court and that it 'cannot remove it from the scope of Sayler ' (District Opinion 1973, 55) and 'in view of the recent pronouncements of the Supreme Court concerning water districts, this Court finds that Plaintiffs' attack . . . is plainly insubstantial' (District Opinion 1973, 55).

Both cases went to appeal (Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, New Orleans), and in this process legal discourse directly addressed political territoriality. MALDEF attorneys filed an amicus curiae brief to refocus the case on political rights while addressing the question of the WCIDs' territoriality in light of the Salyer and Toltec decisions. For the first time in the legal record, the question of ethnic discrimination was explicitly outlined. MALDEF situated their engagement and interpretation in terms of the production of the colonias as a result of institutional racism (MALDEF 1974b, 2-4). The brief also argued that the two cases under litigation 'result from the efforts on behalf of impoverished Chicanos dwelling on the colonias in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas to participate in the governance of the various state created and recognized Water Districts . . . and to enjoy an adequate supply of potable water' (MALDEF 1974b, 3). They clarified that although colonias are within WCID boundaries, 'the district decided not to service the colonias' (MALDEF 1974b, 5, emphasis added), and residents 'began to seek a remedy to their water needs through the political process' (MALDEF 1974b, 14). The brief also argued that unlike Salyer or Toltec , the WCIDs are empowered to 'regulate water usages and distribution generally and they have been granted a full panoply of governmental power necessary to fulfill this authorization' and therefore have exercised 'gross neglect' of the colonias (MALDEF 1974b, 10-11).

The WCID responded to the amicus curiae brief (MALDEF 1974a, 1974c). 4 The WCID reasserted its position that other water service providers could serve the colonias, again situating the residents as consumers simply seeking a remedy for their water problem than a place at the table in water governance. Moreover, the brief forcefully denied discrimination. They argued the de-annexation was based on land use rather than ethnic discrimination:

There is not one bit of evidence in this case of any unconstitutional discrimination against the Plaintiffs or any member of the class or classes that they purport to represent and more especially on the basis of race, wealth, geographical location or any factor offensive to the Fourteenth Amendment. (MALDEF 1974c, 19)

Theplaintiffs used Gomillion v. Lightfoot to argue that the purpose and effect of the change in law was a 'political gerrymander' but they did not accept the MALDEF's racial discrimination discourse. Rather, the attorney focused on the question of discrimination based on geography. The brief states,

Here the gerrymander is not directed solely to a class defined by race or national origin, but rather a class of urban residents-a class which poses a threat to Defendants' irrigation programs when presented in the form of bond elections and a class which poses a threat to the political control of the Districts. (quoted in Ruling of the Three-Judge District Court, Appendix, Jurisdictional Statement, 424 U.S. 950 [1976], 9a; heretofore 'District Ruling 1975')

Both cases were reversed and remanded from the Fifth Court of Appeals to a three-judge panel in district court. Ultimately, Fonseca claims were eventually found moot in the Court of Appeals for two reasons. First, Ram´ ırez, who did not initially own land, became a landowner when his father deeded him a tract of property. Second, the term of office for which they were seeking the qualification expired (MALDEF 1973e). The three-judge panel focused on Jimenez. The court accepted the argument of prospective right. It ruled that due process for constructive notice was not violated because there was 'no existing, tangible property interest, as opposed to what here seems to be at best an intangible possible future of undetermined nature' (District Ruling 1975, 18a). Therefore, the 'plaintiffs have not suffered and will not suffer a loss of constitutional dimensions, and therefore, the quantum of notice to be afforded plaintiffs will be gauged accordingly' (District Ruling 1975, 17a).

But the most substantive attention was to the question of political gerrymander. The three-judge ruling maintained that political subdivisions are creatures of the state and therefore their territories are under the state legislature's absolute discretion (District Ruling 1975, 7a). They first rejected the application of Gomillion to this case: 'The Court has seemed to see the case [ Gomollion v. Lightfoot ] more as a specific instance of the general invalidity of racially-motivated office actions than as one primarily concerned with gerrymander' (District Ruling 1975, 10a). Yet, the judges seemed sympathetic to the claim of gerrymander. The court acknowledged that if they were to accept the plaintiffs'

view of the defendants' actions as a politicized drawing of boundaries to perpetuate power of the dominant body in the WCID, it would be 'odious and unfair . . . too patent to require discussion' (District Ruling 1975, 12a). But in the end, they were not persuaded. The court rejected the substitution of 'race' for 'urban.' The court also admitted that gerrymandering is an unfortunate outcome of the political process and 'finding no constitutional tool to apply and, perhaps fearing that judicial intrusion so near the heart of the political process would be a desperate remedy worse than the disease' (District Ruling 1975, 13a).

In the final analysis, the case failed because of the inability of the lawyers to argue a substantial constitutional case. Fonseca was decided on a procedural point, making the case moot, but it was further undermined by debate over the Salyer and Toltec cases. Had the plaintiffs been able to distinguish the WCID from the water districts in California and Colorado, the outcome might have been different. Indeed, the legal debate over water's territoriality concerned the defendant's attorney. Shortly after they won the case, the WCID boards changed their names and status to irrigation districts (IDs), a very narrow, special water district that would unquestionably fall within the precedents of Salyer and Toltec. Jimenez failed at the district court because the three judges accepted the narrow view of the water district and, therefore, could not accept the argument for political gerrymander. Ultimately, the plaintiffs lost the gamble not to follow MALDEF and make a case that geographical exclusion was racially based.

## Conclusion

In the face of increasing Chicano claims on water for domestic use, new legislation altered water's political geography to reassert farmers' control of the resource. The legislation changed the rules governing the physical and electoral geography of water districts in south Texas. The exclusion of 'urban property' effectively excluded poor Mexican Americans from WCIDs, leaving water governance exclusively in the hands of elite irrigators. I also explored how Jimenez and Fonseca influenced the discursive and contested material production of new political spaces through the law. These legal cases did not simply reassert the old governance regime; they created new water governance and sociospatial relations through legal discourses codified in the court cases. I paid particular attention to the microgeopolitics of legal reasoning, which anchored the analysis to contested discourses of WCID territoriality. The final rulings in Jimenez and Fonseca definitively located residents of the region's rural and periurban subdivisions in a class of water consumers, not as water users, like the irrigators.

Attention to water governance advances how scholars of social and political life on the border examine the relationship between colonias residents and water resources. Jimenez and Fonseca offer insights into the process through which the narrative of poor access to water emerged as a 'symptom' of policy failures (e.g., land development or housing markets). The law also reasserted the primacy of the state legislature to determine the political boundaries of its subdivisions; with that, the courts reaffirmed the primacy of WCIDs as productive spaces for agriculture and unplatted subdivisions as 'urban property' or spaces of reproduction. This is a critical point because subsequent attempts to gain improved access to domestic water started from an inherently weaker position of consumer, not 'user,' of water.

Beyond empirical questions of water governance and border colonias, I have offered two advances in critical legal geography. First, an analysis of the legal process, from filing to appeal, demonstrates the legal and discursive mechanics of resource capture. I have opened up the analytical domain of legal geography to the political economy in which these legal contests are embedded. I demonstrated that the social construction of space is not only a matter of culturally defined social difference, a common approach in critical legal geography, but of political economic exigencies. Agricultural elites employed various discursive strategies to retain control water, a key resource for their continued capital accumulation. For example, the legislative change that asserted the primacy of one class of landowners (farmers) in the WCID and permitted the dispossession of another class (colonias residents) is central to this conflict over water governance. In short, the ensuing legal cases demonstrated how the law and legal discourse are framed by accumulation, production, and dispossession.

Jimenez and Fonseca also demonstrate that we can trace how discourses evolve in the legal process. We can examine the discursive tactics by each party and identify the relative importance of these sociospatial framings in the final court rulings. Attention to the legal process offers critical legal geography an example whereby the legal arguments are not predetermined before the case; rather, they are iterative and emergent during the legal process. The implications are significant because it requires scholarly attention to the evolution of legal reasoning as a function of myriad ideas and ideologies and the discursive interaction during the case.

In short, this study demonstrates that the making of law (and legal geographies) is about contested sociospatial ideas as much as it is about the interaction of actors and emergent discourses within the courtroom itself.

In closing, attention to documents-from filing to appeal-reveals how the legal process unfolds, cuts off political avenues, writes new narratives, and ultimately creates new geographies. In this case, the legal process and emergent spatial discourses about political territoriality transformed colonias residents from active political agents to consumers. The legal process eroded the political foundation on which these communities could claim water. Moreover, it shunted them into their current position of passive consumers of dysfunctional public services, whereby they have had little ability to change their relationship to regional water management institutions. From this view of resident as consumer, policymakers and analysts engage problems of water provision in the colonias as simply part of a larger basket of municipal services that are limited in the lowincome housing market. Perhaps by identifying where and when the politics of potable water access were eviscerated, we can better understand the current status of poor water supply in the colonias and how this is related directly to the historical and legal geography of water governance in the region.

## Acknowledgments

I would like to thank The Melburn G. Glasscock Center for Humanities Research at Texas A&amp;M University for supporting archival research that was the empirical basis of this article. I also extend my gratitude to Kathleen O'Reilly and Elliot Tretter for their astute and helpful feedback on earlier drafts of this article. In addition, I want to thank J. Christopher Brown and the Hall Center for the Humanities at the University of Kansas for inviting me to present this work in their Nature and Society Lecture Series. Finally, I would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments.

## Notes

1. Jimenez and Fonseca are companion cases and were litigated together.
2. Astipulation of fact is an agreement between parties that certain facts are true or uncontested.
3. Court files confirmed that the litigants did not agree that all of the colonias residents excluded from the WCID could afford to pay the charges of the water supply company (MALDEF 1973k, 13-14).
4. The WCID responded with a brief only after filing a motion to reject the MALDEF amicus curiae brief.

## References

- Agnew, J. 2011. Waterpower: Politics and the geography of water provision. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 101 (3): 1-14.
- Aiken, C. S. 1987. Race as a factor in municipal underbounding. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 77 (4): 564-79.
- ---. 1990. A new type of black ghetto in the plantation South. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 80 (2): 223-46.
- Anders, E. 1982. Boss rule in south Texas: The progressive era . Austin: The University of Texas Press.
- Anderson, M. 2008. Cities inside out: Race, poverty and exclusion at the urban fringe. UCLA Law Review 55:1095-1160.
- Anzald´ ua, G. 1987. Borderlands/La Frontera: The new mestiza. San Francisco: Aunt Lute Press.
- Bakker, K. 2003. Anuncooperative commodity: Privatizing water in England and Wales. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- ---. 2005. Neoliberalizing nature? Market environmentalism in water supply in England and Wales. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 95 (3): 542-65.
- ---. 2010. Privatizing water: Governance failure and the world's urban water crisis. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Barrera, B. 2004. The 1968 Edcouch-Elsa High School walkout: Chicano student activism in a south Texas community. Aztlan 29 (2): 93-122.
- Bath, C. R., J. M. Tanski, and R. E. Villareal. 1994. The politics of water allocation in El Paso County colonias. Journal of Borderland Studies 9 (1): 15-38.
- Blomley, N. 1994. Law, space, and the geographies of power . New York: Guilford.
- ---.2005. Flowers in the bathtub: Boundary crossings at the public-private divide. Geoforum 36 (3): 281-96.
- ---. 2007. Critical geography: Anger and hope. Progress in Human Geography 31 (1): 53-65.
- ---. 2008a. Simplification is complicated: Property, nature, and the rivers of law. Environment and Planning A 40 (8): 1825-42.
- ---. 2008b. The spaces of critical geography. Progress in Human Geography 32 (2): 285-93.
- Blomley, N., D. Delaney, and R. Ford, eds. 2001. The legal geographies reader: Law, power and space. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
- Brannstrom, C., and M. Neuman. 2009. Inventing the 'Magic Valley' of south Texas, 1905-1941. Geographical Review 99 (2): 123-45.
- Bridge, G., and P. McManus. 2000. Sticks and stones: Environmental narratives and discursive regulation in the forestry and mining sectors. Antipode 32 (1): 10-47.
- Bridge, G., and T. Perreault. 2009. Environmental governance. In A companion to environmental geography , ed. N. Castree, D. Demeritt, D. Liverman, and B. Rhoads, 475-97. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
- Budds, J. 2008. Whose scarcity? The hydrosocial cycle and the changing waterscape of La Ligua river basin, Chile. In

- Contentious geographies: Environmental knowledge, meaning, scale , ed. M. Goodman, M. Boykoff, T. Maxwell, and K. T. Evered, 59-68. Surrey, UK: Ashgate.
- Carroll, P. 2003. Felix Longoria's wake: Bereavement, racism, and the rise of Mexican American activism . Austin: The University of Texas Press.
- Carter, N., and L. Ortolano. 2000. Working toward sustainable water and wastewater infrastructure in the US-Mexico border region: A perspective on BECC and NADBank. International Journal of Water Resources Development 16 (4): 691-708.
- Cavanagh, S. M. 2001. Thirsty colonias: Determinants of water service coverage in South Texas. ENRP Discussion paper, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
- Cheek, K., and A. Champagne. 2005. Judicial politics in Texas: Partisanship, money, and politics in state courts . New York: Peter Lang.
- Chouinard, V. 1994. Geography, law and legal struggles: Which ways ahead? Progress in Human Geography 18 (4): 415-40.
- Davies, C. S., and R. K. Holz. 1993. Settlement evolution of 'colonias' along the US-Mexico border: The case of the lower Rio Grande valley of Texas. Habitat International 16 (4): 119-42.
- Delaney, D. 1998. Race, place, and the law, 1836-1948 . Austin: The University of Texas Press.
- ---. 2001. Making nature/marking humans: Law as a site of (cultural) production. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 91 (3): 487-503.
- ---. 2003a. Beyond the world: Law as a thing of this world. In Law and geography , ed. J. Holder and C. Harrison, 67-83. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- ---.2003b. Law and nature. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Delaney, D., R. T. Ford, and N. Blomley. 2001. Preface: Where is law. In The legal geographies reader: Law, power and space , ed. N. Blomley, D. Delaney, and R. Ford, xiii-xxii. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
- Dolhinow, R. 2010. A jumble of needs: Women's activism and neoliberalism in the colonias of the Southwest . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
- Donelson, A. J., and A. X. Esparza. 2010. The colonias reader: Economy, housing, and public health in US-Mexico border colonias . Tucson: University of Arizona.
- Esparza, A. X., and A. J. Donelson. 2008. Colonias in Arizona and New Mexico: US-Mexico border poverty and community development solutions . Tucson: University of Arizona.
- Ford, R. T. 2001. The boundaries of race: Political geography in legal analysis. In The legal geographies reader: Law, power and space , ed. N. Blomley, D. Delaney, and R. Ford, 87-104. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
- Forest, B. 2000. Placing the law in geography. Historical Geography 28:5-12.
- ---. 2001. Mapping democracy: Racial identity and the quandary of political representation. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 91 (1): 143-66.
- ---. 2004. The legal (de)construction of geography: Race and political community in supreme court redistricting decisions. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 5 (1): 55-73.
- ---.2005.Thechangingdemographic,legal,andtechnological contexts of political representation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102 (43): 15331-36.
- Glassman, J. 2006. Primitive accumulation, accumulation by dispossession, accumulation by 'extra-economic' means. Progress in Human Geography 30 (5): 608-25.
- Hanchett, C. 2010. Colonias in the eyes of Texas: The state of Texas and spaces of inequity. Master's thesis, Department of Geography, The Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA.
- Hill, S. 2003. Metaphoric enrichment and material reality: The'making'ofcolonias.In Ethnography at the border , ed. P. Vila, 141-65. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
- Holder, J., and C. Harrison, eds. 2003. Law and geography. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Howe, N. 2008. Thou shalt not misinterpret: Landscape as legal performance. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 98 (2): 435-60.
- Howell, P. 2004. Sexuality, sovereignty and space: Law, government and the geography of prostitution in colonial Gibraltar. Social History 29 (4): 444-64.
- Jepson, W. 2005. Spaces of labor activism, MexicanAmerican women and the farm worker movement in South Texas since 1966. Antipode 37 (4): 679702.
- Larson, J. 2002. Informality, illegality, and inequality. Yale Law and Policy Review 20:137-82.
- Lemos, M. C., and A. Agrawal. 2006. Environmental governance. Annual Review of Environment and. Resources 31:297-325.
- Lemos, M. C., D. Austin, R. Merideth, and R. G. Varady. 2002. Private-public partnerships as catalysts for community-based water infrastructure development: The Border WaterWorks program in Texas and New Mexico colonias. Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 20 (2): 281-95.
- Lopez, C. M., and M. R. Reich. 1997. Agenda denial and water access in south Texas colonias. In Cultural strategies of agenda denial: Avoidance, attack, and redefinition , ed. R. W. Cobb and R. M. Howard, 158-82. Lawrence: University of Kansas Press.
- Maril, R. L. 1989. Poorest of Americans: The Mexican Americans of the lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas . Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
- Martin, D. G., A. W. Scherr, and C. City. 2009. Making law, making place: Lawyers and the production of space. Progress in Human Geography 34 (2): 175-92.
- Martin, P. 1998. On the frontier of globalization: Development and discourse along the Rio Grande. Geoforum 29 (3): 217-36.
- McGillivray, D., and J. Holder. 2007. Locality, environment and law: The case of town and village greens. International Journal of Law in Context 3 (1): 1-17.
- Mitchell, D. 2003. The right to the city: Social justice and the fight for public space . New York: Guilford.
- Montejano, D. 1987. Anglos and Mexicans in the making of Texas . Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Mukhija, V. 2010. Agricultural prosperity, rural poverty, and California's colonias. In The colonias reader: Economy, housing, and public health in the US-Mexico border colonias , ed. A. J. Donelson and A. X. Esparza, 72-84. Tucson: University of Arizona.

- Mukhija, V., and P. Monkkonen. 2007. What's in a name? A critique of 'colonias' in the United States. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 31 (2): 475-88.
- Mullin, M. 2009. Governing the tap: Special district governance and new local politics of water. Boston: MIT Press.
- Navarro, A. 2000. La Raza Unida Party: A Chicano challenge to the U.S. two-party dictatorship. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
- Norman,E.,andK.Bakker.2009.Transgressing scales: Water governance across the Canada-US borderland. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 99 (1): 99-117.
- Olmstead, S. M. 2004. Thirsty colonias: Rate regulation and the provision of water service. Land Economics 80 (1): 136-50.
- Olson, E., and A. Sayer. 2009. Radical geography and its critical standpoints: Embracing the normative. Antipode 41 (1): 180-98.
- Parcher, J., and D. G. Humberson. 2007. CHIPS: A new way to monitor colonias along the United States-Mexico border . Reston, VA: U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey.
- ---. 2009. Using GIS to assess priorities of infrastructure and health needs of colonias along the United States-Mexico border. Journal of Latin American Geography 8 (1): 129-48.
- Prudham, S. 2005. Knock on wood: Nature as commodity in Douglas-fir country. London and New York: Routledge.
- San Miguel, G. 2001a. Brown, not white: School integration and the Chicano movement . College Station: Texas A&amp;M University.
- ---. 2001b. Let all of them take heed: Mexican Americans and the quest for educational equality . College Station: Texas A&amp;M University.
- Sansom, A., E. Armitano, and T. Wassenich. 2008. Water in Texas: An introduction . Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Sax, J. 2001. Property rights and the economy of nature: Understanding Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council . In The legal geographies reader: Law, power and space , ed. N. Blomley, D. Delaney, and R. Ford, 221-36. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
- Schlottmann, A. 2008. Closed spaces: Can't live with them, can't live without them. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 26 (5): 823-41.
- Schoolmaster, F. A. 1991. Water marketing and water rights transfers in the lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas. The Professional Geographer 43 (3): 292304.
- Scott, J. C. 1998. Seeing like a state . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Smith, G. F. 1976. The Valley Water Suit and its impact on Texas water policy: Some practical advice for the future. Texas Tech Law Review 8 (3): 577-636.
- Stillwell, H. 1947. Portrait of the magic valley. The New Republic 116 (7 April): 14-17.
- Swyngedouw, E. 2009. The political economy and political ecology of the hydro-social cycle. Journal of Contemporary Water Research and Education 142:56-60.
- Templar, O. 1981. The evolution of Texas water law and the impact of adjudication. Water Resources Bulletin 17 (5): 789-98.
- Texas Department of Human Services. 1988. The colonias factbook: A survey of living conditions in rural areas of
- south and west Texas border counties . Austin: State of Texas.
- Texas, State of. 1971. Bill File, Article 8280-3. 262nd Legislature . Austin: Texas State Archives.
- Tiefenbacher, J. P. 2001. A Rio Grande 'brew': Agriculture, industry, and water quality in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. In Fluid arguments: Five centuries of western water conflict , ed. C. Miller, 178-200. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- Varsanyi, M. W. 2008. Immigration policing through the backdoor: City ordinances, the 'right to the city,' and the exclusion of undocumented day laborers. Urban Geography 29 (1): 29-52.
- Vigil, M. 1990. The ethnic organization as an instrument of political and social change: MALDEF, a case study. Journal of Ethnic Studies 18 (1): 15-31.
- von Benda-Beckmann, F., K. von Benda-Beckmann, and A. Griffiths. 2009. Spatializing law: An anthropological geography of law in society . London: Ashgate.
- Warburton, A., H. Wood, and M. Crane. 1943. The work and welfare of children of agricultural laborers in Hidalgo County, Texas . Washington, DC: Department of Labor, Children's Bureau.
- Ward, P. 1999. Colonias and public policy in Texas and Mexico . Austin: The University of Texas Press.
- Ward, P. M., and J. Carew. 2001. Tracking land ownership in self-help homestead subdivisions in the United States: The case of Texas 'colonias.' Land Use Policy 18 (2): 165-78.
- Weiner, P. H. 1977. Water, water, everywhere: Power flows in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. Detroit University Journal of Urban Law 54 (4): 743-63.
- Wescoat, J. L., Jr., L. Headington, and R. Theobald. 2007. Water and poverty in the United States. Geoforum 38 (5): 801-14.
- Wilson, R., and P. Menzies. 1997. The colonias water bill: Communities demanding change. In Public policy and community: Activism and governance in Texas , ed. R. Wilson, 229-74. Austin: The University of Texas Press.

## Court Cases

- Associated Enterprises v. Toltec Watershed Improvement District , 410 U.S. 743 (1973).
- Cipriano v. City of Houma , 395 U.S. 701 (1969).
- Gomillion v. Lightfoot , 364 U.S. 339 (1960).
- Guadalupe Jimenez et al. v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. , No. 73-3557, 496 F.2d 113 (1974).
- Guadalupe Jimenez et al. v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. , 424 U.S. 950 (1976).
- Guadalupe Jimenez et al. v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. , D.C., 68 F.R.D. 668 (1975).
- Juan Fonseca et al., v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. , No. 73-3556, 496 F.2d 109 (1974).
- Salyer Land Company v. Tulare Water District , 410 U.S. 719 (1973).
- Opinion of the Single-Judge District Court, U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Texas, Brownsville Division, Nos. 720-B0171 and 72-B-180 (1973).

## MALDEF Archives

Documents consulted and cited in this article are deposited at The Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund (MALDEF), Stanford University Libraries, Special Collections. Citations indicate the date, document description, and the manuscript collection (M), record group (RG), box (B), and folio (F).

- MALDEF. 1972a. Amended Complaint, Jimenez v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. , M0673 RG5 B11 F4.
- ---. 1972b. Legal Statement. Fonseca et al. v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al ., M0673 RG5 B771 F2.
- ---. 1972c. Letter from Sanford Rosen to Aryeh Neier and Mel Wulf (30 August), M0673 RG5 B769 F8.
- ---. 1973a. Amicus curiae brief of Hidalgo WCID 1 ('Donna District') M0673 RG5 B771 F5.
- ---.1973b. Defendant's brief (H&amp;C WCID 9), companion cases Jimenez v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. and Fonseca et al. v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. , M0673 RG5 B772 F2.
- ---.1973c. Defendants' brief, Hidalgo WCID 2, Fonseca et al. v. Hidalgo WCID et al. , M0673 RG5 B771 F3.
- ---.1973d. Defendants' brief, Hidalgo WCID 2, Jimenez et al. v. Hidalgo WCID et al. , M0673 RG5 B771 F3.
- ---. 1973e. Letter from David Hall to ACLU. M0673 RG5 M0673 RG5 F8.
- ---. 1973f. Letter from David Hall to Sanford Rosen. M0673 RG 5 B769 F8.
- ---. 1973g. Plaintiffs' brief, Fonseca et al. v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al ., M0673 RG5 B771 F3.
- ---. 1973h. Plaintiffs' brief, Jimenez v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al. , M0673 RG5 F1.
- ---.1973i. Plaintiffs' reply brief, Jimenez et al. v. Hidalgo WCID et al. , M0673 RG5 B772 F1.
- ---.1973j. Plaintiffs' supplemental brief, Jimenez et al. v. Hidalgo WCID et al. , M0673 RG5 B772 F1.
- ---.1973k.Stipulations of fact, Jimenez v. Hidalgo WCID 2 et al., M0673 RG5 B772 F2.
- ---.1973l.Transcripts,preliminaryhearing.M0673RG5 B769 F7.
- ---.1974a.Contest to Motion of the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc., to File Brief Amicus Curiae and Brief Amicus Curiae. M0673 RG5 B1234 F9.
- ---.1974b. Motion for Leave to the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc. to File Brief Amicus Curiae and Brief Amicus Curiae of Mexican American Legal Defense Fund, Inc. M0673 RG5 B722 F2.
- ---. 1974c. Reply Brief to MALDEF amicus curiae. M0673 RG5 B 772 F3.

Correspondence: Department of Geography, Texas A&amp;M University, College Station, TX 77843-3147, e-mail: wjepson@geog.tamu.edu.