This article was downloaded by: [University of Windsor]

On: 21 November 2014, At: 01:02

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,

37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## Social-Ecological Impacts of Concurrent Reservoir Inundation and Reforestation in the Three Gorges Region of China

- C. Y . Jim a , Felix Y . Yang b &amp; Liming Wang c
2. a Department of Geography , The University of Hong Kong ,

b Department of Economics , Shenzhen University ,

c Institute of Geographical Sciences and Natural Resources Research , Chinese Academy of Sciences ,

Published online: 08 Mar 2010.

To cite this article: C. Y . Jim , Felix Y . Yang &amp; Liming Wang (2010) Social-Ecological Impacts of Concurrent Reservoir Inundation and Reforestation in the Three Gorges Region of China, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 100:2, 243-268, DOI: 10.1080/00045600903550295

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045600903550295

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## Social-Ecological Impacts of Concurrent Reservoir Inundation and Reforestation in the Three Gorges Region of China

C. Y. Jim, ∗ Felix Y. Yang, † and Liming Wang ‡

Department of Geography, The University of Hong Kong

Department of Economics, Shenzhen University

‡ Institute of Geographical Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences

∗ †

The Three Gorges Project (TGP) in the mountainous middle reach of the Yangtze River entailed large dam construction and farmland inundation by reservoir. Concurrently, national policy mandated defarming and reforesting extensive erosion-prone slope farmlands in the region. This study evaluated social-ecological impacts of two parallel land-cover change projects on farmland supply, carrying capacity, resettlement, and alternative employment. The integrated research adopted field assessment, interviews, questionnaire surveys, and remote sensing and geographic information system techniques. Analysis of high-resolution QuickBird images and thematic maps generated digital maps on land use, farmland quality, and standardized farmland. The two projects, development versus conservation, accentuated and disseminated impacts on rural communities. Reservoir inundation eliminated the best farmlands in riverside villages and aggravated population pressure. Widespread poor farmlands on steep slopes required extensive defarming and reforestation. The double blow reduced carrying capacity and brought economic hardship in impoverished areas. Villages beset by farmland deficits encountered difficulty decanting the surplus population because of resistance to intervillage and nonlocal resettlement. Migrant labor, as transient rural-urban migration operating outside the official regime, offered alternative employment and supplementary income to alleviate overpopulation and poverty. This safety valve was neither equally accessible to households nor assisted by the government. The simultaneous execution of resettlement and reforestation called for a systematic rural-urban migration program, engagement of local people in policy formulation, and provision of incentives in the form of long-term market benefits and livelihood assurances. The findings offered hints and precautions on the joint implementation of major land-cover change projects in developing regions. Key Words: carrying capacity, defarming, land-cover change, land deconversion, migrant labor, population overload, reforestation, reservoir inundation, rural-urban migration.

位于多山的长江中游的三峡工程（TGP）意味着大型水库大坝的建设和被水库淹没的农田。同时，国家政策规定 在此地区的广泛容易侵蚀的斜坡耕地上退耕和造林。本研究评估两个平行的土地覆盖变化项目在包括农田供给， 承载能力，移民安置和其他工作上的社会生态影响。此综合研究采用了实地评估，访谈，问卷调查，遥感和地理 信息系统技术。通过分析高分辨率快鸟卫星图像和专题地图而生成土地利用，耕地质量和标准化农四等数字地 图。这两个项目，开发与保护，强调与宣传对农村社区的影响。水库淹没淘汰了河畔村落最好的农口并且加剧了 人口的压力。在陡峭的斜坡上的广大贫瘠农田需要广泛的退耕还林。此双重打击降低了贫困地区的承载能力，并 给这些地区造成了经济困难。被农田财赤困扰的村庄在安置过剩人口时因为对跨村庄和非本地安置的抵抗而遇到 困难。运作于官方制度之外的瞬态的从乡村到城市的移民劳动力，通过提供其他就业和补充收入，缓了人口过 剩和贫困。此种保障措施既不对所有家庭能提供同样的机会也不是政府协助的。同时执行的安置和退耕还林要求 有一个系统的农村向城市移民的程序并以长期的市场利益和生计保证的形式提供奖励。研究结果对发展地区的主 要土地覆盖项目的联合实施提供了提示及预防措施。关键词：承载能力，退耕，土地覆盖的变化，土地反变更， 移民劳动力，人口超载，造林，水库淹没，农村向城市辽移。

El Proyecto de las Tres Gargantas (TGP, por la sigla en ingl´ es) de la secci´ on monta˜ nosa media del Rio Yangtz´ e acarre´ o un vasto proceso de construcci´ on de represas e inundaci´ on de tierras agr´ ıcolas por los embalses. De manera concurrente, por pol´ ıticas nacionales se orden´ o cambiar el uso agr´ ıcola del suelo por reforestaci´ on en vastas extensiones de tierras de ladera de la regi´ on susceptibles de erosi´ on. El presente estudio evalu´ o los impactos sociales y ecol´ ogicos de dos proyectos paralelos de cambio de la cobertura del suelo, en funci´ on de la disponibilidad de tierras agr´ ıcolas, capacidad de carga, reasentamiento y empleo alternativo. En la investigaci´ on se integraron la evaluaci´ on de campo, entrevistas, cuestionarios y t´ ecnicas de percepci´ on remota y sistemas de informaci´ on geogr´ afica. Tambi´ en mediante el an´ alisis de im´ agenes QuickBird de alta resoluci´ onydemapastem´ aticos se

generaron mapas digitales sobre uso de la tierra, calidad del suelo y tierras de cultivo estandarizadas. Los dos proyectos, desarrollo versus conservaci´ on, acentuaron y diseminaron impactos varios sobre las comunidades rurales. La inundaci´ on por embalse elimin´ o las mejores tierras de cultivo en las aldeas rivere˜ nas, agravando as´ ı la presi´ on demogr´ afica. Por otra parte, el notable n´ umero de granjas en suelos pobres de las laderas empinadas demand´ o mucho trabajo para desalojar la agricultura y reemplazarla con reforestaci´ on. Este doble golpe redujo la capacidad de carga y gener´ o graves problemas econ´ omicos en las ´ areas m´ as pobres. Las aldeas acosadas por los d´ eficits de tierras de cultivo tuvieron que enfrentar dificultades para decantar el exceso de poblaci´ on, por la resistencia de la gente al reasentamiento interaldeano y translocal. El trabajo ambulatorio, a manera de migraci´ on rural-urbana transitoria operando por fuera del r´ egimen oficial, ofreci´ o empleo alternativo e ingreso suplementario para aliviar la sobrepoblaci´ on y la pobreza. Sin embargo, esta v´ alvula de seguridad no estuvo disponible para todas las familias ni cont´ o con el apoyo del gobierno. La ejecuci´ on simult´ anea de reasentamiento y reforestaci´ on demandaba un programa sistem´ atico de migraci´ on rural-urbana, involucrar a la gente de la localidad en la formulaci´ on de pol´ ıticas y la provisi´ on de incentivos en la forma de beneficios de mercado a largo plazo y seguridades de bienestar familiar. Los descubrimientos de la investigaci´ on sugieren indicios y precauciones sobre la implementaci´ on conjunta de proyectos relacionados con cambios radicales de la cobertura de uso del suelo en regiones en desarrollo. Palabras clave: capacidad de carga, eliminaci´ on de la agricultura, cambios de la cobertura del suelo, reconversi´ on de la tierra, trabajo ambulatorio, sobrepoblaci´ on, reforestaci´ on, inundaci´ on de embalse, migraci´ on rural-urbana .

C hina accommodates nearly one quarter of the world's population but less than 10 percent of the global farmland stock (Seto, Kaufmann, and Woodcock 2000; Feng, Liu, and Yang 2005). Many studies have tackled its farmland shortage and associated population pressure on lands (Brown 1995; Prosterman, Hanstad, and Li 1996; Y. Z. Yang and Huang 1997; Wu and Li 2002). The human-farmland tension could intensify due to continued farmland loss (WuandLi 2002), further tilting the disequilibrium between population and farmland. Recent alarming loss of farmlands in China was mainly associated with urban growth, rural development, and reservoir construction (Lohmar 2001; Y. C. Xie et al. 2005). Such rural retrogression has raised concerns, especially in developing countries (D¨ o¨ os 2002). The chronic strain has pushed many villagers in China to work as migrant laborers in urban-industrial regions, where the booming economy demands and attracts workers from a large rural hinterland (Wakabayashi 1990; J. S. He and Pooler 2002). The alternative employment has alleviated the pressure on land in some areas (Murphy 2002).

Farmlands in China's mountainous regions are commonly inadequate and inferior due to steep slope, high elevation, and poor soil. Massive deforestation since historical times has eliminated most natural forests and brought extensive biodiversity pauperization and ecological degradation. Human-induced soil erosion and degradation have further reduced productivity. The Global Environment Facility (GEF) has identified agriculture as the most severe force of land degradation (GEF 2003; United Nations Development Programme [UNDP] 2004). Responding to chronic poor farmland management, in 2002 the Chinese government launched a nationwide 'Grain for Green' project. It called for revegetating low-quality farmlands to bring ecological rehabilitation, a process known as defarming . It targeted farmlands on slopes steeper than 25 degrees in ecologically important areas, converting them to nonconsumptive uses such as woodlands and grasslands (State Council 2003). The consequent farmland reduction could impose economic hardship on disenfranchised villagers (Wang, Yang, and Guan 2001; Feng, Liu, and Yang 2005). Although various recent studies have explored the ramifications of defarming (D. B. He and Hu 2000; Huang et al. 2001; Q. H. Wei 2003; Zhao 2003), few focused on social-ecological problems (Ye, Chen, and Hong 2003; Z. Xu et al. 2004; Uchida, Xu, and Rozelle 2005).

In the mountainous Three Gorges region in the middle reach of the Yangtze River ( Chang Jiang ) in China, cultivation has existed for centuries and land degradation is widespread. The population pressure on farmland has reached a critical level (Liang 1994; Sheng and Gu 1996). Meanwhile, the government has earmarked many poor farmlands for defarming. The common occurrence of migrant laborers in the region denotes a powerful endogenous force pushing farmers into cities. The concurrent implementation of the Three Gorges Project (TGP) has exacerbated the human-land stress. Theworld's largest contemporary infrastructural project has generated heated debates (Weng 1997; Dai 1998;

H. M. Li and Rees 2000). The large dam and reservoir could provide flood control to the erratic river discharge, electricity generation, and enhanced navigation (Lu 2004). Like other river damming projects (Canziani et al. 2006), the TGP has brought socialecological problems due to farmland submergence, people displacement, and associated impacts (Fu 1997; Jackson and Sleigh 2000). The huge elongated reservoir will inundate 17,200 ha of farmlands and displace more than one million people, nearly half of whom are rural. Initial official research anticipated sufficient rise in population-carrying capacity around the reservoir to absorb most dislodged farmers (A. X. Xu 1995; Fu 1997; Yuan and Wei 1997). Other studies, however, indicated reduction in carrying capacity (Gu and Li 1994; Z. S. Zhu 1998; Tian and Wang 2003; Liang 2004).

The TGP has accentuated the extent, pace, and impact of farmland loss in the region, which has many badly eroded farmlands (Lu and Higgitt 2000, 2001) that continually add sediments to the river. The earnest desire to reduce silting of the reservoir and extend its useful life span also demands defarming in the surrounding slope lands, further aggravating farmland shortage (H. Yu and Huang 2001). Large-scale defarming in some places would induce involuntary resettlement (Asia Development Bank 1998; Wang, Yang, and Guan 2001). The limited studies of such issues in this difficult region (Shen 1998; Y. H. Shi et al. 1998; Y. Z. Yu, Li, and Zhang 2000; Q. R. Guo 2001; Meng, Fu, and Yang, 2001; Y. J. Guo, Li, and Liu 2004) seldom employed quantitative assessments (Wang, Yang, and Guan 2001; Tan, Bryan, and Hugo 2005). They did not assess the joint impacts of two concurrent large-scale projects on local communities that could incur notable land usecover changes (LUCC), namely reservoir inundation as deleterious LUCC and reforestation as beneficial or reverse LUCC.

We attempted a joint study of the development (TGP) and conservation (defarming and reforestation) projects. Our main research question assessed the social-ecological impacts of both projects, separately and jointly, on local communities. We investigated the effects on impoverished people and degraded ecology, using the megascale infrastructural project in a geographical time-space regime of a diversified rural mountainous and agricultural region. We envisaged that the concurrent execution of two high-impact projects on both humans and nature would engender complex social-economic-ecological issues, the understanding of which could inform policy formulation. Unlike many previous studies, we adopted a detailed quantitative analysis of the combined impacts on farmland supply, carrying capacity, population overload, resettlement, and alternative employment in the TGP area. We adopted an integrated approach that encompassed both human and natural consequences and their interactions in response to the significant land-cover changes. We employed a comprehensive package of research methods, including remote sensing (RS) and spatial analysis using geographical information systems (GIS), field assessments, interviews, and questionnaire surveys. We selected Yunyang County (in Chongqing municipality) in the middle of the TGP reservoir region for a case study (Figure 1). The area will experience extensive inundation that demands large-scale resettlement. With many slope farmlands, the government has identified the county for reforestation.

Figure 1. The location of the study area, Yunyang County, situated in the middle reach of the Yangtze River affected by the Three Gorges Project.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Study Area

Weconducted an in-depth assessment of every patch of farmland in two contiguous townships in Yunyang County, namely Baota and Dongcun (Figure 1). They are typical of the region by inundation area and reforestation obligations (Land and Resources Bureau of Yunyang County 1996). Covering 80.9 km 2 , the study area lies at the heart of Yunyang County, at 31 ◦ N latitude and 109 ◦ E longitude. In 2002, it contained twenty villages and 221 hamlets with an agricultural population of 22,280, with few engaged in local nonfarming occupations (Land and Resources Bureau of Yunyang County 1994b; Dongcun Township Government 2001, 2002a; Baota Township Government 2002).

The mountainous topography has confined flat lands to small patches on slopes and narrow strips along rivers (Land and Resources Bureau of Yunyang County 1994a; Figure 1). The highest peak at the northeast fringe reaches 1,345 m (Land and Resources Bureau of Yunyang County 1994a). The lowest elevation, at 96 m before inundation, lies at the southeast edge beside the Yangtze River. The landform is composed of three roughly east-west zones demarcated mainly by the geological structure of parallel synclines and anticlines (Office of Agricultural Zoning Committee of Yunyang County 1983a; Editorial Board of Gazetteer of Yunyang County 1999). The northern zone has high mountains beset by poor accessibility, where farmlands occur mainly as terraced paddy fields on relatively gentle slopes. The middle zone has deeply dissected and crisscrossing ridges and valleys with slope farmlands on poor soils. The southern zone has gentle slopes and riverbank lowlands with better soil and good accessibility. The subtropical to warm-temperate monsoon climate can support two to three crops each year. The significant relative relief has created a typical mountain climate that varies notably with elevation, aspect, and shelter (Office of Agricultural Zoning Committee of Yunyang County 1983b).

The study area experienced conversion to agricultural lands since ancient times, reaching a maximum coverage several decades ago (Editorial Board of Gazetteer of Yunyang County 1999). Field and questionnaire survey data helped to reconstruct farming history in the last fifty years, indicating several episodes of notable changes. The land reform and farmland privatization in the early 1950s raised farmland area and productivity (Editorial Board of Gazetteer of Yunyang County 1999). The Great Leap Forward (1958-

1960) mandated collective ownership and significantly expanded farmlands into marginal areas that are unsuitable for cultivation. The Cultural Revolution (19661976) introduced another round of land-degrading practice, pushing agriculture further into low-quality sloping lands and raising farmland acreage to a historical peak. Capital construction, often of low quality, was emphasized, such as cutting slopes into terrace farmlands, converting dry farmlands into paddy fields, and installing irrigation infrastructures. In the 1980s, the system of contracted responsibility improved farmland utilization and productivity, but population growth exerted increasing pressure on farmlands. After the 1990s, economic pluralization partly alleviated farmland pressure and induced abandonment of some poor farmlands. Nevertheless, nearly half of the farmlands still occurred on steep slopes afflicted by soil erosion.

The last two decades witnessed a progressive weakening of the people-land bonding partly due to the expansion of non-agricultural practices. The rural economy shifted from the traditional dual crop-pig system to a new agriculture-migrant labor structure, labeled the new dual economy in this study. In the traditional crop-pig system, farmland offered the sole source of income. The fields were dedicated to multiple cropping in tandem with animal husbandry, usually paddy fields for rice and wheat, dry farmlands for sweet potatoes and maize, both in conjunction with pig, chicken, and occasional goat farming. Farmers preferred paddy fields because of higher productivity and flexibility of conversion into dry farmlands in the dry season. Vegetable plots were devoted exclusively to vegetables, and orchards were similarly set aside for fruit trees, without animalkeeping. The recent evolution toward the hybrid agriculture-migrant labor mode witnessed the emergence of an increasingly important alternative means of livelihood that has improved living standards (Jim and Yang 2006). In addition, some small-scale commercial pursuits offered a limited diversion and supplementary incomes. Notwithstanding, agriculture remained the major local activity that continues to tie people to the land.

The first-stage reservoir impoundment in 2003 raised the water level in the study area from 96 m to 135 m. The second-stage inundation in 2006 lifted the level to 156 m, and the third stage in 2009 will reach 175 m. This study covered the existing inundation and potential impacts of ensuing stages. After the first flooding, total farmland acreage was 2,058 ha, half of which occurred on slopes steeper than 25 degrees that are destined for defarming (Table 1; Dongcun Township

Table 1. Farmland types and their distribution on different slopes and geographical zones

|                | Slope   | Slope      | Slope      | Slope   | Zone     | Zone     | Zone     |         |
|----------------|---------|------------|------------|---------|----------|----------|----------|---------|
| Farmland type  | < 15 ◦  | 15 ◦ -25 ◦ | 25 ◦ -35 ◦ | > 35 ◦  | Northern | Middle   | Southern | Total   |
| Dry farmland   |         |            |            |         |          |          |          |         |
| Area (ha)      | 130 . 9 | 512 . 6    | 640 . 0    | 136 . 0 | 181 . 0  | 908 . 4  | 330 . 2  | 1,419.5 |
| Area (%)       | 9 . 2   | 36 . 1     | 45 . 1     | 9 . 6   | 42 . 6   | 80 . 5   | 65 . 4   | 100.0   |
| Paddy field    |         |            |            |         |          |          |          |         |
| Area (ha)      | 150 . 5 | 256 . 4    | 131 . 4    | 14 . 9  | 244 . 0  | 186 . 3  | 123 . 0  | 553.3   |
| Area (%)       | 27 . 2  | 46 . 3     | 23 . 8     | 2 . 7   | 44 . 1   | 33 . 7   | 22 . 2   | 100.0   |
| Orchard        |         |            |            |         |          |          |          |         |
| Area (ha)      | 2 . 2   | 14 . 8     | 15 . 7     | 3 . 4   | 0 . 0    | 31 . 8   | 4 . 3    | 36.1    |
| Area (%)       | 6 . 1   | 41 . 1     | 43 . 5     | 9 . 3   | 0 . 0    | 88 . 1   | 11 . 9   | 100.0   |
| Vegetable plot |         |            |            |         |          |          |          |         |
| Area (ha)      | 24 . 6  | 18 . 9     | 5 . 2      | 0 . 3   | 0 . 0    | 1 . 6    | 47 . 4   | 49.0    |
| Area (%)       | 50 . 3  | 38 . 5     | 10 . 6     | 0 . 6   | 0 . 0    | 0 . 1    | 9 . 4    | 100.0   |
| Total          |         |            |            |         |          |          |          |         |
| Area (ha)      | 308 . 2 | 802 . 7    | 792 . 3    | 154 . 6 | 424 . 9  | 1128 . 1 | 504 . 9  | 2,057.8 |
| Area (%)       | 15 . 0  | 39 . 0     | 38 . 5     | 7 . 5   | 20 . 7   | 54 . 8   | 24 . 5   | 100.0   |

Government 2002b). About 2,641 persons needed relocation in the study area, a moderate to low level in the county (Changjiang Institute of Survey, Planning, Design and Research 1996). The three inundation stages will eventually cover 84.9 ha of farmlands, including the most fertile plots.

## Methods

In the first column of Figure 2, we provide a list of the possible land-cover changes and social-ecological impacts associated with the concurrent implementation of the two major projects. The list provides a conceptual framework to develop a group of methods to satisfy the comprehensive data requirements of the study. We collected data reflecting the present status of the rural lands and societies and made projections of the future changes. We gleaned social and opinion information by interviewing officials and using questionnaire surveys that targeted the villagers. We obtained spatial data on land cover and quality from RS images, maps, field investigations, and government documents. We employed GIS for spatial analysis and computation of farmland quality rating and land use impacts due to the two projects. Integrating different parameters (from field surveys and documents) and spatial data (from RS images and maps), we obtained a comprehensive synopsis of the recent situation as a basis to assess land-use pressure and to model future scenarios. We identified and synthesized the pertinent factors of agricultural productivity to compute the farmland quality rating (FQR) for individual patches. We then transformed the FQR of each farmland patch into a standardized farmland unit (SFU) to permit comparison on a uniform basis between farmland types and computation of carrying capacity for rural population.

## Questionnaire Surveys

Field trips and interviews of local residents and officials provided the primary data. The questionnaire survey probed complex human attitudes, behaviors, expectations, and responses of the principal stakeholders, helping to decipher the pertinent human dimension. The widely scattered population, difficult terrain, and lack of road access imposed difficulties in survey sampling, restricting the applicability of a random sampling scheme. Instead, we treated the twenty villages as sampling strata or subpopulations (Upton and Cook 2002), from which we selected twelve based on general characteristics and location to conduct the questionnaire survey.

We coached local primary school teachers as interviewers. They knew the villagers well and commanded trust and respect. They were better able to avoid subjectivity and bias in relation to government intervention and sensitive topics. In 2002, 720 questionnaires were distributed (60 to each village), of which 711 were

<!-- image -->

completed. After careful scrutiny, we discarded 88 responses (including 60 from one village and half from another village) due to errors and omissions in the responses, leaving 623 valid samples from eleven villages (Jim and Yang 2006).

The questionnaire (see Appendix) contained thirty-two questions in a logical sequence: respondent's background information, personal and family characteristics, perception of economic and ecological conditions, expected impacts of the two projects, and current and expected responses. We conducted

Figure 2. A synopsis of land-cover changes and social and ecological impacts induced by the concurrent implementation of the Three Gorges Project and defarming project in the study area.

statistical analysis with the help of the SPSSPC 11 software.

## Remote-Sensing and Land-Use Evaluations

QuickBird RS images taken in July 2003 at the beginning of the first-stage reservoir inundation provided land-cover data. They offered four-band multispectral data with a high resolution of 3 m 2 per pixel. The mountainous study area has complex geology and topography with diversified natural and human land covers. The

RS images permitted identification of the fragmented land covers, including small patches of farmlands and woodlands on steep slopes and remote areas with limited accessibility. Official maps on land use, topography, soil, and other thematic maps provided additional data. Statistical yearbooks and internal documents of local townships and state-level governments yielded supplementary data.

RSimageclassification followed a supervised method using the Image Analysis extension of ArcView 3.2 with the help of 1:10,000 land-use maps (Land and Resources Bureau of Yunyang County 1994b). We designed fourteen categories mainly derived from the official land-use map that adhered to the national land-use classification system. They included woodlands, shrublands, grasslands, several types of agricultural lands, natural and human-induced barren lands, built-up areas, and water.

Weevaluated the accuracy of our land-cover classification by comparing visually the resulting land-use map (Figure 3) with the RS images and quantitatively with

Figure 3. Land-use map of the study area produced by GIS analysis of the Quickbird remote sensing image.

<!-- image -->

the 1:10,000 land-use maps. We referenced the latter with 1:16,000 aerial photos and 1:10,000 contour maps (LandandResourcesBureauofYunyangCounty1994a) according to the national technical criteria, reckoned as quite accurate and better than the data from the Statistical Bureau (Feng, Liu, and Yang 2005). In addition, we checked the accuracy of our map in the field in Baota, which contains fourteen of the twenty villages in the study area. Dongcun was less amenable to checking because its land-use data included places lying outside the study area.

Wecompared our RS interpretation with the records of the official land-use survey conducted in the 1990s. Our water areas attained 111.3 percent, mainly due to rising levels associated with TGP inundation. The RS-derived figure should be quite accurate because the spectral character of water is unique. Our woodland and shrubland areas were 97.4 percent, despite recent increases in official registers. Our refined satellite images could discern and exclude many small grassland and barren patches embedded within woodland and shrubland areas, thus resulting in a lower but more accurate value. We recorded more farmlands. The amount of farmlands reached its historical peak during the Cultural Revolution in the 1970s due to massive conversion of steep and marginal land. Villagers subsequently abandoned some poor farmlands, especially in recent years, partly in response to government defarming requirements. The emergence of migrant labor provided impetus for this process, which helped to alleviate farmland shortage. We interpreted 91.9 percent of herbaceous lands and 116.7 percent of barren lands, because some defarmed and seriously eroded slope lands failed to support even grass growth. Overall, we believed that our RS-based interpretive map could depict correctly and quite accurately recent land-cover changes.

## Basis of Farmland Quality Rating

In the study area, farmlands occupied 25.4 percent of the total area in mid 2003, providing the dominant support to the local economy. Farmland quality hinges on a host of interrelated factors, including natural attributes of elevation, slope angle, and soil properties, and cultural conversion into different farmland types. We computed carrying capacity of a village from the combined contributions of farmland quantity and quality. This key attribute reflected mainly but not merely agricultural yield. Temporal and spatial changes in carrying capacity indicated the magnitude and pattern of the impacts imposed by reservoir inundation and defarming on the local economy. Woodlands and grasslands were not included in the computation because they contributed little to local livelihood. The fact that people had equal access to such communal lands would cancel out the intervillage differences in carrying capacity linked to these two natural vegetation types.

There is no standard method to assess land quality, but in general, most studies used a quantitative synthesis of pertinent land attributes to generate a compound index (Belanger and Grenier 2002). FQR in this research assessed the utility and productivity attributes of each farmland patch (a 3 m × 3 m grid on the maps). In the study area, the rather uniform practice of traditional agriculture reduced spatial disparities in cultivation method, crop selection, technological input, and capital input. In computing the FQR, we focused on the key natural and cultural factors, assigning different weights to each according to their relative importance. The following function encompassed the four factors to explain most variations in farmland quality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Farmland Type Factor (FQRland)

We divided farmlands into four types based on their use, with notable differences in quality, slope, and geographical distribution by the three zones (Table 1). They received differential values for productivity based on the experience of agronomists and farmers. The results of official research and interviews with agricultural experts in TGP counties provided professional opinions, which served as the basis to determine weights assigned to different farmland types. The questionnaire survey acquired collaborative information by seeking villagers' judgments of farmland productivity.

Paddy fields occurred mainly on gentle slopes or in valleys, with high and relatively uniform productivity in the TGP region. We adopted it as the reference farmland to facilitate comparison with other farmland types. A typical paddy field was assigned a benchmark value of 1.

Dry farmlands varied in quality from relatively good to very poor. Based on long-term production statistics, the local agricultural department computed a standardized raw grain yield for a typical paddy field at 9,000 to 13,500 kg/ha/a and for dry farmland at 5,250 to 9,000 kg/ha/a (Changjiang Institute of Survey, Planning,

Design and Research 1996). Such yield figures indicated that paddy field productivity was on average 1.50 to 1.71 times that of dry farmland. In the questionnaire survey, most villagers estimated that 0.091 ha of paddy field could support one person ( n = 534, SD = 0.063), but 0.115 ha was needed for dry farmland ( n = 547, SD = 0.095). Thus, villagers reckoned that paddy field was 1.26 (0.115/0.091) times more productive than dry farmland. To integrate the two sets of opinions, we adopted a dry farmland value of 1/1.5 (about the midpoint between 1/1.26 and 1/1.71) or 0.67.

Official research set vegetable fields at an average of 0.027 to 0.053 ha/capita, and 0.087 to 0.100 ha/capita for other farmlands, as the threshold for resettlement in this county (Changjiang Institute of Survey, Planning, Design and Research 1996). Thus, vegetable plots were 1.89 to 3.22 times the average efficiency of other arable lands. In the questionnaire survey, 0.055 ha of vegetable plots were considered sufficient to support a person ( n = 395, SD = 0.052), which was 2.09 (0,115/0.055) times more productive than dry farmlands. We adopted the higher end of the expert assessment value at three times that of dry farmland and assigned vegetable plots a value of 2 (3 × 0.67), which was very close to the villagers' estimates.

Orchards did not include odd fruit trees dispersed near village settlements for domestic consumption (Table 1). Official research treated orchards on par with dry farmlands. The questionnaire responses suggested that 0.134 ha of orchard land was needed to support one person ( n = 200, SD = 0.218), which was slightly less efficient than dry farmland. We adopted a comparable value of 0.67 for orchards.

The FQRland score was standardized into the [0, 1] range, with the following formula:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where LandR i is the value assigned to farmland type I , with LandRpaddy field = 1, LandRdry land = LandRorchard = 0.67, LandRvegetable plot = 2, and LandRmax = 2.

## Slope Factor (FQRslope)

The slope, soil, and altitude of each plot could modify the FQR. Slope was a key determinant that influences soil depth, fertility, moisture holding capacity, drainage, stone content, susceptibility to erosion, and ease of cultivation. For instance, paddy fields located on steep slopes had narrow and unstable terraces that are unfavorable for intensive farming. The quality of dry farmland varied greatly due to slope angle. Local agronomic experts and farmers rated gentle-slope farmlands to be about two times more productive than steep-slope lands. Yunyang County adopted a slope classification similar to the national one, with slope classes: 0 ◦ -6 ◦ = 1, 6 ◦ -15 ◦ = 2, 15 ◦ -25 ◦ = 3, 25 ◦ -35 ◦ = 4, and &gt; 35 ◦ = 5 (Land and Resources Bureau of Yunyang County 1995a, 1995b). We adopted the values of this classification as the rated slope value (SlopeR i ). The standardization of FQRslope value used the formula:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Soil Factor (FQRsoil)

Official research of soil properties in relation to productivity in the study area (Office of Agricultural Zoning Committee of Yunyang County 1983a) allocated soils into four major groups (Table 2), each divided into a maximum of five quality levels (very good, good, medium, poor, and very poor). Because soil qualities could vary greatly and are not easily amenable to quantification by an interval or ratio scale, we adopted a one

Table 2. Land area occupied by major soil groups and their quality categories and ordinal rating

|                     |                             | Soil quality   | Area    | Area    |
|---------------------|-----------------------------|----------------|---------|---------|
| Major soil group    | Soil quality classification | rating         | ha      | %       |
| Paddy soil          | Very good                   | 20             | 30.5    | 0 . 4   |
|                     | Good                        | 19             | 246.6   | 3 . 0   |
|                     | Medium                      | 18             | 106.0   | 1 . 3   |
|                     | Poor                        | 17             | 3.9     | 0 . 0   |
|                     | Very poor                   | 16             | 83.8    | 1 . 0   |
|                     | Subtotal                    |                | 470.9   | 5 . 8   |
| Dry farmland soil a | Very good                   | 15             | 188.7   | 2 . 3   |
|                     | Good                        | 14             | 90.9    | 1 . 1   |
|                     | Medium                      | 13             | 1,441.4 | 17 . 8  |
|                     | Poor                        | 12             | 509.6   | 6 . 3   |
|                     | Very poor                   | 11             | 860.6   | 10 . 6  |
|                     | Subtotal                    |                | 3,091.2 | 38 . 2  |
| Forest soil b       | Good                        | 9              | 1,868.7 | 23 . 1  |
|                     | Poor                        | 7              | 1,442.6 | 17 . 8  |
|                     | Subtotal                    |                | 3,311.3 | 40 . 9  |
| Grassland soil b    | Good                        | 4              | 690.0   | 8 . 5   |
|                     | Poor                        | 2              | 527.2   | 6 . 5   |
|                     | Subtotal                    |                | 1,217.1 | 15 . 0  |
| Total               | Total                       |                | 8,090.6 | 100 . 0 |

to twenty ordinal ranking for the rated value of each soil type (SoilR i ) to signify their disparities and hence their differential effects on farmland quality. Paddy soil was the best and ranked from sixteen to twenty, and dry farmland soil ranged from eleven to fifteen (Table 2). Forest and grassland soils were not suitable for crops. Forest soils were rated nine for good and seven for poor quality; grassland soil obtained the lowest rating at four for good and two for poor. The soil standardization formula was similar to that of FQRland:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Elevation Factor (FQRaltitude)

Highelevation usually brings poor soil, low heat gain, and harsh weather. We adopted a continuous scale using absolute altitude of the study area (from 96 m to nearly 1,345 m) for AltitudeR i . Using the maximum altitude value, the standardization formula for standard FQRaltitude value was

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Computation of Farmland Quality Rating

Based on the relative importance of the four factors, we assigned different weights to build Equation 6. We assigned 0.3 to farmland type, which determined actual use of land to yield products. The critical influence of slope received the highest weight of 0.5. Soil quality was important, but slope, farmland type, and altitude variables partly explained its contributions. The weights for soil and altitude were set at 0.1. Having determined the values and weights needed for FQR, we computed the final scores of farmland quality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The resulting FQR map contained 3 m × 3 m grids with values in the [0, 100 percent] range (actual scores ranged from 13 to 85 percent; Figure 4). Higher scores denoted better farmland quality. FQR permitted quantitative and spatial comparison of farmlands and assessment of farmland carrying capacity. We divided farmlands into four categories based on FQR scores, namely very poor ( &lt; 35), poor (35-47.7), moderate (47.7-57.8), and good ( &gt; 57.8).

Weverified the validity of the semiquantitative FQR index by comparing FQR results with (1) field assessment of farmlands, (2) responses gleaned from our questionnaire surveys in typical farming areas, and (3) opinions expressed by agricultural experts on different farmland types, slopes, and elevations. We found relatively good matches in our comparisons.

## Conversion to Standardized Farmland Unit

To make valid comparisons of the productivity of different farmland types, we developed the SFU to serve as a common land-quality yardstick. A certain good farmland could provide the standard (Changjiang Institute of Survey, Planning, Design and Research 1996). Our SFU came from a hypothetical hybrid farmland of medium quality. We averaged the values of two units of dry farmlands (LandRdry land = 0.67) and one unit of paddy fields (LandRpaddy field = 1) situated near the Yangtze River, with relatively low elevation (AltitudeR150m = 150), gentle slopes (SlopeR6 ◦ -15 ◦ = 2), and medium-quality soils (SoilRdry farmland = 13, SoilRpaddy field = 18). Equation 7 calculated the FQR score of the SFU:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The computed FQRsf was 57.82 percent, adopted as the standard to transform farmland productivity in each grid of the map into SFU:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where SFU i stands for the SFU of grid i and Area i is the area of farmland with quality of FQR i .

## Assessing Farmland Carrying Capacity

The productivity of farmlands determines the number of people that the land can support. Our SFU results provided the basis to assess the carrying capacity of farmlands for rural population in the study area and judge the social-ecological impacts of the two landcover change projects. To facilitate the evaluation, we adopted an official farmland threshold widely used in the county and other TGP inundation areas. It denoted the minimum amount of farmland required to maintain the living standard of agricultural resettlers, at 0.087 to 0.100 ha/capita of dry farmland, paddy field, or orchard (Changjiang Institute of Survey, Planning, Design and Research 1996; N. Zhu 1996). We did not

Figure 4. Farmlands in the study area classified by GIS according to farmland quality rating (FQR).

<!-- image -->

use farmers' estimates because they varied too widely and were detached from the influence of slope, soil, and elevation. Villagers commonly accepted the official figures based on yield records, which could provide a common basis for comparison with other regions.

Wetransformedthe0.087ha/capitafarmlandthreshold into SFU before using it to estimate carrying capacity. As the official threshold was designed mainly for villages dwelling beside the river, where farmland quality is relatively good, we set the FQR value between poor and moderate farmlands. It represented relatively good farmland quality in the study area at FQR of 47.68 percent. Because the FQR of SFU was 57.82 percent (Equation 8), 0.087 ha/capita of farmland with FQR of 47.68 percent was equivalent to 0.071 ha/capita of SFU. This value provided the basis to compute carrying capacity of farmlands in the study area. Comparing the farmland carrying capacity with the rural population provided data on population overload or surplus in individual villages and zones.

## Results

In the last section, we estimated the quality of each farmland patch by FQR values and converted FQR values into a unified productivity unit called the SFU. The results allowed comparison of farmland productivity in different areas with local people's livelihood needs. We translated the reduction in population-carrying capacity into population overload to indicate the pressure on the land. We evaluated the wide spectrum of social-ecological impacts on local communities and the responses of the villagers and the government to the pressure. Figure 2 condenses the findings in a synoptic chart by comparing and contrasting the effects of the two projects. It depicts the land-cover changes and the resulting impacts in three strands: (1) the divergence group in relation to pronounced differences in project objectives, inherent land traits, and the land conversion processes; (2) the relativity group with a moderate level of differences, mainly in ecological impacts; and (3) the convergence group with a high degree of affinity concerning the social and related economic impingement on local communities.

## Spatial Pattern of Farmlands

Farmlands in the mountainous TGP region occupied 25.4 percent of the land area. The physical land condition and land use accounted for most farmland variations (Figure 4). Elevation significantly affects climate and land quality. In the study area, every 100 m increase in altitude would reduce temperature by 0.63 ◦ C and shorten the frost-free period by 10.5 days (Office of Agricultural Zoning Committee of Yunyang County 1983b). Annual average temperature of the study area was 18 ◦ C (Land and Resources Bureau of Yunyang County 1995a, 1995b), but high mountains were 4 ◦ C colder than low-lying and sheltered valleys.

The GIS analysis found 41.9 percent of farmlands at low altitudes ( &lt; 500 m), 42.7 percent at middle (500800 m) altitudes, and 15.4 percent at high grounds ( &gt; 800 m; Table 1). Slope angle is the key determinant of farmland quality. Only 15.0 percent of the farmlands spread on gentle slopes ( &lt; 15 degrees), whereas steep slope ( &gt; 25 degrees) contributed 46.0 percent, which should be defarmed. The middle zone of the study area had extensive steep farmland with poor land quality (Table 1, Figure 4).

The varied parent materials (mainly of sedimentary origin: sandstone, mudstone, limestone, and limited surficial Quaternary alluvium) and rugged topography gen- erated a heterogeneous soil cover. Due to high altitude, steep slope, or severe erosion, most soils were naturally impoverished (Editorial Board of Gazetteer of Yunyang County 1999). The study area contained thirty-three soil types, subsumed under seven soil groups: forest soil, grassland soil, paddy soil, and some dry farmland soils named purple soil, yellow soil, alluvial soil, and limestone soil (Land and Resources Bureau of Yunyang County 1983). Table 2 summarized the soil quality categories adopted for this study (Land and Resources Bureau of Yunyang County 1983; Office of Agricultural Zoning Committee of Yunyang County 1983a). The major soil groups followed a clear zonation: Productive agricultural soils dominated the southern zone, relatively fertile forest soils dominated the northern zone, and the middle zone had poor agricultural and forest soils.

Our land use map indicated woodlands and shrublands covering the largest area, followed by farmlands mainly on gentle slopes in the northern and southern zones and on steep slopes in the middle zone. Official data recorded 0.072 ha/person of farmland based on net agricultural population (total farming population minus migrant laborers), a figure that was widely known to be less than was accurate (Seto, Kaufmann, and Woodcock 2000; Feng, Liu, and Yang 2005). Our RS study enumerated 0.117 ha/person, exceeding the official figure by 61.9 percent. We attributed the discrepancy to (1) exclusion of poor or slope farmlands in allocating farmlands to villagers in the early 1980s from the official statistics; and (2) the exclusion of farmlands converted afterward from the official database. Our update and synoptic RS data, deemed to be more reliable, were used in the analysis.

We recognized four major types of farmlands, which varied greatly in spatial distribution and quality (Table 1). Dry farmlands (69.0 percent) formed the most widespread group, which occurred at different altitudes, with more on steep slopes. The middle zone had more dry farmlands and the largest share of defarming (58.2 percent). Compared with the 1983 soil map, villagers voluntarily converted some slope dry farmlands mainly in the middle zone into barren lands and grasslands.

Paddy fields, ranked second in coverage (26.9 percent), increased slightly in recent years (Table 1). Farmers preferred them for high productivity and potential for multiple uses. They covered mainly gentle slopes or valleys and at midand high altitudes. As individual plots must be level for wet paddy cultivation, over the centuries the villagers had laboriously carved many slopes into terraces. Our GIS analysis found

26.5 percent on steep slopes ( &gt; 25 ◦ ) with usually narrow and unstable terraces that were destined for defarming.

Fewof the orchards aimed at commercial production, mainly due to low quality, poor market accessibility, and low prices. They did not generate much income. Commercial orchards accounted for merely 1.8 percent of the farmlands, usually at low altitudes in the middle and southern zones with suitable soil and microclimate (Table 1). Similar to dry farmlands, over half (52.8 percent) occurred on steep slopes, requiring defarming and reforestation to bring ecological restoration.

Vegetable plots, occupying only 2.4 percent of the farmlands, referred to relatively large patches of cashcrop fields devoted to vegetables. We excluded the tiny household vegetable plots planted mainly for domestic consumption. The candidate plots concentrated in the southern zone, mainly on gentle slopes at low elevation (Table 1). Most plots were concentrated near the old county town, with prosperous market-gardening activities that returned the highest earnings. For a long time such farmers have specialized in vegetable cultivation to capitalize on their locational advantage.

## Distribution of Farmland Quality

The total farmland area of 2,057.8 ha in the study area was equivalent to 1,362.9 ha of SFU (Table 3). Our classification of farmland quality (Figure 4) yielded a significant amount of very poor farmlands (41.2 percent), which contributed 30.5 percent SFU equivalent. They were mainly steep (25 ◦ -35 ◦ ) or very steep ( &gt; 35 ◦ ) dry farmlands in the middle zone, which fulfilled the defarming criteria.

Poor farmlands were the second largest category (40.9 percent, equivalent to SFU of 43.7 percent), mainly gentle-slope dry farmlands (largely in the northern zone and some in the southern zone) and paddy fields with steep slope or poor soil (in the northern and middle zones). Suffering from poor soil and high elevation, their continued use would demand improvements in soil management and crop selection. Medium farmlands (13.0 percent, equivalent to SFU of 17.6 percent) were mainly gentle-slope paddy fields in the northern zone, a few gentle-slope dry farmlands in the southern zone, and some fertile but steep paddy fields.

Good farmlands constituted only 4.9 percent but contributed 8.2 percent of SFU. They were mainly vegetable plots clustered in the southern zone plus some gentle-slope paddy fields. Villagers holding fertile paddy fields could satisfy subsistent staple needs but could hardly earn cash incomes. Farmers with vegetable plots in the southern zone obtained good cash incomes from selling fresh products, making them the most well off in the study area.

Natural and human factors jointly triggered defarming and fallowing of marginal lands. Severe soil erosion could quickly deplete natural fertility of slope farmlands shortly after cultivation, rendering them undesirable to till. Some steep and degraded farmlands were voluntarily defarmed (Land and Resources Bureau of Yunyang County 1995b). Long-term fallow, tantamount to abandonment, occurred especially in the middle zone, where farmlands occurred mainly on steep slopes with poor soils (Table 1). Increasingly, nonagricultural incomes would induce desertion of difficult lands.

## Farmland Carrying Capacity

With productivity data of individual farmland patches, we computed the population-carrying capacity

Table 3. Estimated changes in farmland and standardized farmland areas after inundation and planned defarming

|          | Farmland                   | Farmland   | Farmland   | Farmland   | Farmland   | Farmland   | Farmland   | Farmland   | Farmland   | Farmland   | Farmland   | Farmland   | Farmland   |
|----------|----------------------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
|          |                            | Very poor  | Very poor  | Poor       | Poor       | Medium     | Medium     | Good       | Good       | Total      | Total      | Per capita | Per capita |
| Zone     | Farmland type              | Recent     | Future     | Recent     | Future     | Recent     | Future     | Recent     | Future     | Recent     | Future     | Recent     | Future     |
| Northern | Actual farmland (ha)       | 97 . 1     | 1.3        | 194.4      | 169.6      | 108 . 8    | 110 . 3    | 24 . 7     | 26 . 1     | 424.9      | 307.3      | 0.115      | 0.083      |
|          | Standardized farmland (ha) | 46 . 8     | 0.8        | 139.0      | 123.4      | 97 . 5     | 99 . 3     | 25 . 6     | 27 . 1     | 308.9      | 250.6      | 0.084      | 0.068      |
| Middle   | Actual farmland (ha)       | 605 . 7    | 1.1        | 422.4      | 351.1      | 82 . 6     | 81 . 9     | 17 . 4     | 18 . 8     | 1,128.0    | 452.9      | 0.115      | 0.046      |
|          | Standardized farmland (ha) | 295 . 9    | 0.7        | 296.5      | 251.9      | 74 . 1     | 73 . 5     | 18 . 6     | 20 . 2     | 685.2      | 346.3      | 0.070      | 0.035      |
| Southern | Actual farmland (ha)       | 145 . 4    | 0.1        | 225.1      | 185.7      | 75 . 6     | 71 . 7     | 58 . 7     | 58 . 6     | 504.8      | 316.1      | 0.121      | 0.076      |
|          | Standardized farmland (ha) | 73 . 4     | 0.1        | 160.4      | 135.6      | 67 . 8     | 64 . 8     | 67 . 2     | 67 . 6     | 368.8      | 268.1      | 0.088      | 0.064      |
| Total    | Actual farmland (ha)       | 848 . 3    | 2.5        | 841.8      | 706.4      | 266 . 9    | 263 . 9    | 100 . 8    | 103 . 5    | 2,057.8    | 1,076.3    | 0.116      | 0.061      |
| Total    | Standardized farmland (ha) | 416 . 1    | 1.5        | 595.9      | 510.9      | 239 . 4    | 237 . 7    | 111 . 4    | 114 . 9    | 1,362.9    | 864.9      | 0.077      | 0.049      |

Note: 'Recent' means before the first-stage reservoir inundation and defarming in 2003, and 'Future' means after the initiation of these events.

of farmlands in the four zones (Table 3). The impacts of inundation and defarming on both recent and future scenarios and for both actual and SFU were estimated. The results have critical bearing on recent farmland pressures and future changes. The average SFU of the agricultural population was quite low at 0.061 ha/capita. The lowest occurred in the middle zone (0.055 ha/capita) and the highest in the southern zone (0.075 ha/capita). Whether such amounts were enough to support a local livelihood depends on farmland carrying capacity (Hopfenberg 2003).

The study area had an aggregate carrying capacity of 19,852 persons, which was lower than the present agricultural population of 22,280.

In all, twelve out of twenty villages, accommodating 71.9 percent of the population, had a total overload of 4,202 persons. Other studies in the TGP inundation areas generated similar overload findings (N. Zhu and Wang 1996; Lu and Fei 2001). However, the results contradicted the villagers' perceptions. In the questionnaire survey, about half of the respondents did not experience farmland overload, and 46.8 percent expressed farmland surplus and the wish to abandon some distant or poor farmlands.

## Nonagricultural Occupation

Almost all people in the study area were originally farmers, and 81.5 percent of the respondents were still engaged in agriculture. The occupation profile varied among zones, reflecting local environmental and economic realities. Fewer farmers ( F = 3.91, p &lt; 0.05) operated in the southern zone (67.0 percent), where economic and transport conditions were better. The northern zone, which was remote and poor, had a higher proportion of farmers (93.0 percent). Nonagricultural occupations demonstrated a reverse trend. In the southern zone, the common availability of local employment and trading opportunities near the town provided many nonfarming jobs. In the northern zone, migrant labor furnished the main source of nonagricultural jobs.

In the study area, migrant labor constituted the second largest job category after farming. However, most villagers engaged in this alternative occupation were not available for our interviews because they were working elsewhere. For the age group between sixteen and forty-nine, 33 percent were migrant workers with limited variations among zones. Less farmland and more slope farmland in a household induced more migrant laborers. Large family size was a push factor, supply- ing young people as migrant laborers while the elderly stayed to look after farming and children.

Deducting migrant workers from the total agricultural population of 22,280 yielded a net agricultural population of 17,666 (Table 4). The average 0.117 ha/capita farmland in the study area was converted into 0.077 ha/capita of SFU. Removing migrant laborers from the computation trimmed some farmland overload, but six out of twenty villages still experienced an aggregate overload of 1,393 persons. They occurred in the middle and southern zones, equivalent to 18.5 percent of the net agricultural population. Whereas some villages had overload, others had unfilled capacity. The middle and southern zones had ten villages with a combined spare capacity for 2,891 persons, and the northern zone could hold 689 more persons.

If people could shift freely among villages and zones, the overload phenomenon would disappear, and the study area would still have spare capacity for 2,186 persons. However, intervillage movement is difficult to achieve in practice. If we used total instead of net agricultural population, both population overload and number of overloaded villages would double (Table 4). Overall, migrant laborers have reduced the overload by 2,809 persons, corresponding to 14.1 percent of the total carrying capacity.

The population overload of farmlands without inundation and defarming was mild, accounting for 7.0 percent of the total agricultural population (Table 4). Local people tackled farmland shortage by shifting to alternative means of livelihood, including migrant labor, local nonagricultural work such as petty trading, and cultivating other villagers' idle farmlands. Reclaiming new farmlands did not offer a practical choice in recent years, as suitable sites were no longer available.

Migrant work practiced by half of the households offered the most important diversion and income subsidy (Table 5). Almost all households indicated the desire to participate given the opportunity, but macroeconomic conditions have impeded growth in this area. In evaluating the importance of migrant labor, pronounced disparities existed among regions. For the whole study area, 32.6 percent of the respondents found it essential, 56.7 percent useful, and only 10.7 percent dispensable (Table 5). The middle zone accorded the highest rating, followed by the southern zone, with a long exposure to market economy. The northern zone valued it lowest, due to its remote and secluded geography, leading to an inward-looking and subsistent outlook. The area's intermontane basins could provide a reasonable yield and hence nurtured a sense of self-sufficiency.

Table 4. Farmland carrying capacity and its overload in two representative villages and geographical zones before and after inundation and planned defarming

After inundation

Before inundation

| Final overload                            | 235                         | 446     | 136   | 5 , 085         | 1 , 042          | 6 , 263   |
|-------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|---------|-------|-----------------|------------------|-----------|
| planned defarming of Carrying             | capacity 106                | 722     |       | 3 , 557 4 , 957 | 3 , 749          | 12 , 263  |
| After                                     | Reduction carrying capacity | 158     | 30    | 777             | 4 , 586 1 , 354  | 6 , 717   |
| Post-inundation                           | overload                    | 76      | 416   | 0               | 1 , 186 549      | 1 , 735   |
| Reduction of                              | carrying capacity           | 212     | 111   | 47              | 495 330          | 872       |
| defarming Pre-inundation                  | overload 0                  |         | 305   | 0               | 1 , 030 363      | 1 , 393   |
| Before planned Number of migrant laborers | 86                          |         | 297   | 1 , 151         | 2 , 464 999      | 4 , 614   |
| Initial overload a                        | 0                           | 602     |       | 509             | 2 , 658 1 , 035  | 4 , 202   |
| Total agricultural population             | 427                         | 1 , 465 |       | 4 , 844         | 12 , 506 4 , 930 | 22 , 280  |
| Carrying capacity                         | 476                         | 863     |       | 4 , 382         | 10 , 037 5 , 433 | 19 , 852  |
| Sampling area                             | Village b Xiaohe            | Shucai  | Zone  | Northern        | Middle Southern  | Total     |

Note: All units are number of persons. The computations for villages and zones were conducted separately. a Assumed overload calculated by total agricultural population minus migrant labor contribution. b Both villages are located in the southern zone. They represent two typical conditions of inundation villages. Xiaohe was characterized by traditional agriculture on relatively steep slopes with a large

inundation area. Shucai was dominated by cash crops.

Table 5. Alternatives for villagers to cultivating their own lands and perception of the importance of migrant labor

|          |                     | Household         | Household       | Perception of migrant labor   | Perception of migrant labor   | Perception of migrant labor   | Perception of migrant labor   |
|----------|---------------------|-------------------|-----------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Zone     | Individual Commerce | Borrowed farmland | Migrant laborer | Essential                     | Useful                        | Dispensable                   | Total                         |
| Northern | 2 . 9               | 7 . 0             | 52 . 3          | 23 . 4                        | 54 . 3                        | 22 . 3                        | 100.0                         |
| Middle   | 11 . 2              | 3 . 4             | 48 . 3          | 39 . 6                        | 60 . 4                        | 0 . 0                         | 100.0                         |
| Southern | 13 . 6              | 22 . 5            | 51 . 1          | 40 . 0                        | 53 . 3                        | 6 . 7                         | 100.0                         |
| Total    | 9 . 6               | 9 . 6             | 50 . 2          | 32 . 6                        | 56 . 7                        | 10 . 7                        | 100.0                         |

Note: All units are the percentage of questionnaire survey respondents.

The perception of migrant labor in the northern zone, however, fell below the actual take-up rate, which was similar to that of other zones. The facility of modern communication had dampened the friction of distance and difficult terrain to homogenize to a certain extent the mindset of villagers dwelling in different zones.

The questionnaire results showed that nearly 10 percent of farmers conducted trading (Table 5), but only 1.6 percent had the pioneering spirit to practice it fulltime. They would rent their farmlands to other households to keep an indirect link to the soil, and 9.6 percent of the households were cultivating such released lands (Table 5).

## Inundation Impacts

Based on submergence time, we delineated two inundation periods. The RS images taken after the first-stage inundation provided evidence for its boundary. The 175 mcontour marks the upper limit of the second-stage inundation. Although only 3.7 percent of the land in total would be flooded, it included key developments such as built-up areas in towns (residences, roads, factories, etc.) and prime farmlands, causing serious consequences for affected villages and towns.

In all, nine villages would lose 84.9 ha of farmlands in three inundation episodes, equivalent to 62.2 ha of SFU. It would suppress carrying capacity by 872 persons in the affected villages (Table 4) and increase overload by 283 persons. An earlier study predicted 1,932 displaced persons by 2002 (Changjiang Institute of Survey, Planning, Design and Research 1996), which is notably higher than the lost carrying capacity. Many farmers would lose part of their farmlands and carrying capacity. Reallocation of remaining farmlands in inundation villages could accommodate the displaced people by local resettlement. If all relocatees stayed in their original villages, farmland per capita would drop.

Table 4 summarized the population and carrying capacity changes in the study area. We estimated the overload situations at the inundation and defarming stages. Two typical villages with different characteristics could illustrate the inundation impacts. In the southern zone, Xiaohe and its neighbor Shucai represented two extremes in conditions. Xiaohe had traditional agriculture on relatively steep slopes. Shucai means vegetable, and the village was named after its specialized cash-crop production, with dense population and good farmlands mainly on gentle slopes (Figure 5).

Xiaohe would suffer greatly because of extensive submergence of its better farmlands. Initially without overload, it would experience progressive reduction in carrying capacity. The remaining poor farmlands occurred on steep slopes. This represented a common scenario in the TGP region, with inundation bringing grave consequences. Shucai represented the other end of the spectrum, where most farmlands would remain above water. Before inundation, the net agricultural population in Shucai (1,168 persons) was much higher than in Xiaohe (340 persons), reflecting the high productivity of the cash crops that could support a relatively large agrarian population. Shucai's carrying capacity of 863 persons denoted an overload of 305 persons (Table 4). Xiaohe's initial carrying capacity of 476 persons showed a spare of 136 persons, which was due to population transfer to vegetable production in the neighboring village. After inundation, Shucai would lose carrying capacity amounting to 111 persons, increasing its overload to 416 persons (Table 4). Xiaohe would lose nearly half of its capacity, equivalent to 212 persons, switching from a surplus to a deficit of 76 persons.

The two villages will need a relatively large quota for nonlocal relocation (settlement in areas outside one's own village). Future pressure on farmlands will not increase if such outmigration could fully materialize. In reality, affected villagers might be unwilling to resettle

Figure 5. Farmland changes by inundation and planned defarming in two sample villages.

<!-- image -->

away from their homes. By staying, they would aggravate local pressure on farmlands. Nonlocal resettlement quotas were often insufficient and failed to be realized (Dai 1998); hence, inundation will incur farmland deficit.

## Defarming Impacts

Around the reservoir, national policy stipulates that farmlands steeper than 25 degrees should defarm and reforest (State Council 2003). In the study area, such slope farmlands covered nearly half (46.3 percent) of the cultivated lands. Full defarming would eliminate 35.5 percent of the total agricultural productivity. Besides losing almost all the very poor and some poor farmlands, some plots of medium quality in the middle and southern zones would disappear (Table 3). Figure 6 illustrates the main thresholds for defarming in terms of FQR values of around 34 to 40 percent of poor and very poor qualities.

The planned defarming could eliminate poor farmlands that are susceptible to erosion and put them

<!-- image -->

under afforestation use that matches the land capability. Such changes are tantamount to a reverse LUCC process that could bring environmental benefits. The large-scale land 'deconversion' and associated socioeconomic impacts, however, are difficult to implement. After extensive reforestation, per capita farmland in the study area would drop from 0.116 to 0.061 ha. SFU would drop from 0.077 to 0.049 ha/person, falling below the minimum threshold of 0.071 ha/person in all zones (Table 3). The carrying capacity would decrease drastically by 6,717 persons, hitting mainly the middle zone with the largest share of slope farmlands (Table 4). The total overload could reach 6,263 persons after defarming, equivalent to half of the future carrying capacity. Overall, the defarming plan will be quite impossible to implement in such areas with a high proportion of slope farmlands.

Inundation villages would suffer from dual impacts of submergence and defarming. Of the undrowned farmlands of Xiaohe, about two thirds would be defarmed according to official criteria (Figure 5). The village's carrying capacity would decrease drastically from 264 to 106 persons (Table 4). The population overload would increase from 76 to 235 persons, and the ratio of overload to carrying capacity would jump from 28.9 percent to 221.3 percent. The analysis indicated that full-scale defarming and reforestation would incur widespread hardship in such villages, which are common in the TGP region.

## Discussion

## Population Overload and Migrant Labor

Many studies evaluated land-carrying capacity, but its meaning and computation remained uncertain (Daily and Ehrlich 1992; Feng 1994; Lindberg, McCool, and Stankey 1997). The complex situation in the study area might confound understanding. In this study, carrying capacity overload means that people would have difficulty fulfilling basic requirements in Maslow's (1998) hierarchy of needs theory. If the overload is contained locally, the deficits might intensify exploitation of natural resources and conversion of marginal lands to agricultural use. If the overload could overspill beyond the local domain, the push factor would persuade more farmers to take up alternative occupations such as migrant labor.

In China, the government allocates farmland at the village and hamlet levels, and villagers expected the distribution to be equitable and fair. A household with migrant laborers and spare farmland could let other households lacking farmland cultivate them. Due to administrative and physical restrictions, such sharing of farmland is easy within a hamlet and somewhat easy within a village but difficult between villages. Thus, the population overload situation would be similar within a hamlet and a village but vary among villages. Overload evaluations therefore used the village as the basic unit.

Figure 6. Standardized farmland area and quality of full-scale defarmed lands and remaining farmlands.

The overestimation of population overload was due to inclusion of migrant laborers in the computation. Although it was well known that the TGP region, like many rural regions in China, had exceeded its farmland carrying capacity for a relatively long time, the surge in migrant labor in the last two decades had evidently alleviated the pressures. Rural people and researchers often assumed that the migrant laborers would eventually return to rely on the land for sustenance. They might not discern that it has become an entrenched phenomenon with long-term amelioration on rural population pressure.

In China, farming income in the poor countryside is often insufficient to meet household educational and medical expenses, not to mention achieve a decent living. Most respondents found earning a livelihood difficult without supplementary incomes. Some moved to coastal regions, especially the Pearl River Delta, to work in factories, restaurants, and shops as migrant laborers. They earned salaries lower than local citizens, but much higher than their farming incomes at home, and brought home most of the earnings in the family.

Migrant labor has emerged in China in the last two decades as an important nonfarming occupation for poor farmers, offering chances to improve rural livelihood (Wakabayashi 1990; Murphy 2002). The Chinese epithet dagong denotes low-ranking and nonpermanent jobs (Roberts 2001) that can bring joys and tribulations. Limited educational attainment would trap migrant workers at the low and mobile end of the job market. Due to adherence to the anachronistic official policy, these workers have little chance to settle down in the cities and can seldom take their families along. Most are obliged to return home after contract expiry. Migrant laborers have significantly alleviated pressures on farmland and ecology in source areas and accelerated urbanization in destinations. Old policies inherited from the planned economic era, however, continued to disregard these benefits (Solinger 1999). Recent reforms are beginning to recognize their contributions and facilitate such transient migration.

In the study area, migrant labor significantly relieved farmland pressure by supplementary earning and permitted others to cultivate the released farmlands. Unlike the practice of previous studies, computation of carrying capacity should exclude migrant laborers. Despite the apparently unstable and uncertain nature of the itinerant workers, they provided a critical income cushion for both inundation resettlement and defarming. Without this safety valve, farmers could not bear the substantial farmland loss. Nevertheless, farming re- mained the basic economic practice and key insurance for most villagers in both physical and psychological senses.

Migrant labor offered the main palliative to population overload on farmlands. It freed people from the traditional bondage to land, to the tune of 23.2 percent of the farmland carrying capacity. Without the relief, future population overload induced by planned defarming would nearly double. The questionnaire survey identified two intrinsic factors of migrant labor uptake. Decrease in farmlands due to inundation and defarming would push workers away. Family structure, however, would impose a limit. Only young and some middleaged people would go, and a family with children would have to have some adults staying at home to look after them. Thus, large extended families could afford to have more migrant laborers.

An ambivalent macroeconomic policy contributed an extrinsic factor to the development of the informal migrant labor sector. As the 'world's factory,' China would continue to support a huge labor force increasingly joined by farmers from the countryside. Nevertheless, state policies have hindered free migration by imposing barriers (Solinger 1999; Q. Li 2003). The guest laborers could seldom obtain approval to settle in cities with their families. This restriction has prevented notable decantation of rural population, which could otherwise provide a permanent and fundamental outlet to farmland pressure. The farmers provided pivotal support to the nation's burgeoning manufacturing base, yet official policies continued to treat them as transient and itinerant outsiders, from whom only labor was selectively tapped. They literally pushed the country's economy ahead, and yet in the process they were left behind, marginalized, and given rather raw deals. A recent policy shift might promote orderly rural-urban migration and urbanization, although its successful implementation demands the institution of many corollary policies. This fundamental change offers promises for long-term alleviation of the chronic rural overpopulation problem.

Conducting business and taking local nonfarming work provided additional alternatives to peasantry. The community-engendered elasticity that operated largely outside the official domain facilitated the development of migrant labor and trade. It helped the less adventurous to improve their livelihood and trimmed the number of idle farmers. The TGP itself provided some nonfarming employment opportunities, but the scale was too limited to have a notable impact on the local economy. Thus, most migrant workers have to take jobs

in faraway cities, which could discourage the timid and less adventurous villagers.

## Difficulties of Long-Distance Relocation

Overall, inundation had relatively less influence on carrying capacity in the study area. Local impacts on inundation villages, however, could be severe. To relieve the localized population pressure, the government prescribed long-distance relocation (Liang and Zhu 1997; Qiu, Wu, and Du 2000). The official resettlement plan used an estimate of relocatees that exceeded the actual number in the inundated areas (Changjiang Institute of Survey, Planning, Design and Research 1996). This might benefit the county because most quotas in the TGP region fell below the population overload.

Long-distance relocation, presenting the most difficult task, often failed to materialize (J. A. Guo 2002). Despite contrasting views, the government promulgated this policy in 1999 as an alternative to displacement within local villages and townships (State Council 1993, 2001; D. Z. Zhu 1998; State Council Three Gorges Project Construction Committee 1999). During the questionnaire survey, many villagers expressed apprehension and reservations about nonlocal transfers. Although inundation would eliminate a large proportion of some villagers' farmlands, some respondents strongly manifested the desire to stay. Such behavior would impose acute strains on local economy and ecology. Alternative local jobs to compensate for carrying capacity shortfall, however, might not be forthcoming. Long-distance migration, especially at the beginning, would be extremely difficult due to the lack of money, friends, or new production skills (Viegas 1992; Obosu-Mensah 1996; Wen 2002). China thus far has been unable to solve problems associated with largescale relocations (Lei 2002).

In the early stages of the TGP, the government proposed nonagricultural relocation to urban areas as a major resettlement means (Changjiang Institute of Survey, Planning, Design and Research 1996; Du 1998; Bai and Huang 2001). This plan was soon determined to be too optimistic, as it disregarded the chronic difficulties faced by cities and towns (Luo 1998; Tian and Wang 2004). Many affected farmers had to stay in their own villages (Yuan and Wei 1997) despite significant reduction in carrying capacity (Liang 1994; A. X. Xu 1995; Sheng and Gu 1996). With a gradual rise of reservoir water levels, farmland deficits would aggravate the socioeconomic and ecological problems (L. WeiandLin2001;SunandZhang2002;J. J. Xu and Shi 2002; Liang 2004). Future pressure on farmlands would further intensify, with limited prospects of relief offered by agricultural improvement and migrant labor.

## Feasibility of Full-Scale Defarming

The planned defarming could shrink carrying capacity by 35.4 percent and accentuate population overload, making it impractical. The compensation for defarming at only 2,250 kg/ha raw grains per year for five to eight years, much lower than average farm earnings, was an unattractive incentive. Moreover, the government was unable to provide alternative local employment. The farmers' cardinal concern was maintenance of livelihood after defarming and reforestation. With uncertainty about future benefits or alternatives, it is understandable that farmers were reluctant to defarm their slope lands (Ye, Chen, and Hong 2003; H. Yang 2004). Recent studies in China indicated unsatisfactory reforestation quality and limited benefits (D. B. He and Hu 2000; Huang et al. 2001; Tian and Qu 2002; Zhao 2003), although such short-term assessment could not categorically nullify the conservation-oriented program (C. Xie et al. 2006; Z. Xu et al. 2004).

A major shortcoming of the reforestation scheme was the lack of full-scale research and pilot testing of its ecological and economic feasibility before its wide implementation (Z. Xu et al. 2004; D´ emurger and Yang 2006). As an alternative to the conventional approach, China could explore the applicability of different variants of agroforestry to permit coexistence of agriculture and forestry on slope lands (Shi and Li 1999). Tangible long-term benefits to villagers are necessary to make reforestation acceptable and sustainable. Recent evidence did not project a rosy scenario (Uchida, Xu, and Rozelle 2005), and our survey found poor implementation of defarming in some areas. Farmers in the TGPregionwhoexperienced inadequate assistance and few benefits might recoil from defarming (Ye, Chen, and Hong 2003; Zhao 2003).

The questionnaire responses indicated an insouciant attitude toward large-scale defarming, suggesting that villagers might have their own agenda and countermeasures. At this stage, they would be willing to afforest their worst degraded farmlands. For other slope farmlands, some respondents said they would take the compensation first and wait to see whether they would recultivate them later. Most reforestation areas selected mulberry trees ( Morus alba ), but a large and stable market for silkworm cocoons in the region was absent, and the prospect of developing one was dim. Moreover, villagers tended to focus on economic considerations and neglect ecological issues. In terms of political ecology,

it is the villagers rather than the government who are the dominant social agent in using land resources (Batterbury and Bebbington 1999). These villagers would be forced by circumstances to cultivate the afforested lands again if their livelihood ran into difficulty.

## Political Ecology Interpretations

Farmlands in the study area, and in many rural areas in China, have faced chronic population pressure. Migrant labor that emerged after the economic reform in the 1980s has partially relieved the pressure. Meanwhile, conversion of farmlands to nonagricultural uses continues apace in China (Y. C. Xie et al. 2005), foreshadowing a looming crisis of farmland scarcity with implications for food supply. These changes would contradict China's commitment to sustainable natural resource management and a balance between nature and humans (UNDP 2005). The TGP, compounded by an ambitious concurrent defarming program, would trim farmlands drastically and detrimentally in villages affected by reservoir submergence. Inundation would nullify the prime farmlands and defarming would eliminate the poor farmlands, trimming the farmland stock at both ends and leaving mainly medium-quality lands. External forces rather than conventional population pressure or poverty triggered both processes (Lambin et al. 2001).

The rural population would have little choice but to squeeze into the remaining farmlands. The population pressure would be exacerbated in such areas, which would dampen local economies and hinder ecological rehabilitation. In most inundation villages, reforestation would be impractical. The government could consult local people during planning and implementing periods. Rural productivity needs upgrading and reform to sustain the farming economy. Internal migration policies could be relaxed to transfer farmers in an orderly manner to towns and cities to absorb the surplus rural population. Villagers could then migrate in a regulated and orderly regime to live in cities to participate as core rather than peripheral members of the industrial-commercial labor force.

The utilization of farmlands involves diversified groups of people with different characters, experience, disposition, and predilection. The discussion of farmland pressure and its possible solutions could learn from the field of political ecology. It evaluates the interplay among different political actors in understanding the social cause of resource degradation, especially in developing countries (Peet and Thrift 1989). The characters of different social agents can determine their ability in resource access and management, which could induce harmful or sustainable use of the environment. In developing countries, the emerging market economies are inclined to marginalize agriculture. Meanwhile, central governments tend to neglect farmers. A rational and more equitable partnership is thus critical for sustainable rural development.

In rural China, the market economy has blossomed recently. Nevertheless, sluggish adjustments to anachronistic policies and adherence to the plannedeconomy baggage have straitjacketed farmers and retarded rural growth. The deeply ingrained old ways continue to concentrate on the development of urban areas. As a result, in practices such as migrant labor management, reforestation, and reservoir resettlement, it is difficult to achieve a proper balance between official policies and villager aspirations. The government, however, is entrenched in its outdated role of the predominant actor. It still attempts to make policies literally in isolation with little local participation and engagement. Although farmers are the crucial players in the local resource regime, they often find it difficult to understand and follow literally alien, top-down government prescriptions. Thus, both sides of the partnership can feel frustrated, and elaborate and often well-intentioned official plans often fail to materialize. The stifled stakeholders could benefit from a more enlightened, localized, and community-based governance that emphasizes the building of a lasting partnership of mutual trust, equitable sharing of benefits, public engagement, and responsible as well as sustainable use of nature and natural resources.

## Implications and Conclusion

The study provided an example of the concurrent impacts of two large-scale projects on a rural region in China. The development project (reservoir inundation and resettlement) proceeded in tandem with a conservation project (defarming and reforestation). That the TGP development would bring some negative socioecological impacts was a foregone conclusion. In theory, the conservation facet could have ameliorated some negative aspects of the development. In practice, conservation has reinforced if not aggravated the undesirable effect of development, thus imposing a double blow to the local economy and ecology. The untimely superposition of the defarming and reforestation scheme has exacerbated these impacts. The supposedly positive conservation policy has triggered deep and wide collateral negative consequences. The implementation of the defarming project has stressed ecological benefits of soil and water conservation and ecosystem restoration

at the expense of ingrained as well as evolving socioeconomic reality. The formulation of this policy and the timing of its enforcement demonstrated a certain degree of detachment and mismatch with rural geography.

The full realization of the two large projects will impose grave pressure on farmlands and intensify the people-land conflict to bring undesirable socioeconomic and ecological impacts. The loss of good farmland due to inundation and poor farmland due to defarming has slashed the ability of the land to support people. There is little possibility of extending cultivation into undeveloped areas. The poor prospect of securing a reasonable livelihood in the prescribed receiving sites has reinforced the unwillingness of villagers to move to nonlocal places. The official plan of using decanting to relieve the population pressure could not materialize. The impacted villages had little choice but to internalize the compensation for the drastic productivity loss. The extra burden, imposed on the inherently stressed local economy and ecology, has created a pressure-cooker or implosion syndrome.

It is perhaps fortuitous that the region has found a partial solution through migrant labor. This is a self-initiated phenomenon not triggered by but subsequently fostered by the dual impacts of development and conservation. It germinated, grew, and expanded of its own accord in a virtual policy vacuum. The government played no role in initiating it, did little to facilitate its growth, and tended to shy away from it. For inundation, farmland losses would reduce income and future livelihood insurance for households with migrant laborers. For families without migrant laborers, the permanent loss of livelihood means could be devastating. Defarming would impose similarly grave livelihood consequences, with the possibility of nonpermanent farmland loss due to reversion of defarmed lands back to cultivation. This likely scenario would negate the conservation efforts and the associated compensatory expenditures.

Migrant labor has provided a valuable safety valve, notably trimming the otherwise significant reduction in population-carrying capacity. It has successfully built a rather spontaneous bridge to link the countryside to cities. By channeling a modest portion of urban prosperity into poor rural areas, it has played a useful if not pivotal role in wealth distribution and poverty alleviation. Moreover, it serves as a surrogate social security system in the absence of an official one. Unfortunately, this alternative employment is not equally accessible to all households, as only a subset could participate and reap the benefits. By reducing the population pressure on land, it has helped to contain human impacts on the natural environment. Nevertheless, their important contributions to rural economy and stability have hardly received appropriate recognition and assistance. The migrant workers largely exist on the fringe of urbansocieties and are treated as itinerants and transients. Official policies tend to stifle them rather than offering help. In the longer term, a more permanent and orderly shift of rural population to support urban-industrial growth could provide a solution to the chronic rural overpopulation problem.

The impacts of the two projects were spatially clustered and selective, concentrated mainly in inundated areas at riversides and villages with steeper farmlands. The uneven reduction in population-carrying capacity demanded shifting of people across village boundaries. Moving people from deficit to surplus areas could permit a local redistribution of relocatees, thus avoiding the disliked long-distance resettlement. The deeply ingrained and rather microscale rural demarcation in China, often jealously if not slavishly guarded, has curtailed a more equitable dispersal of the displaced population. The insistence and hence persistence of intravillage resource distribution has generated discord in the system. Effective incentives and modification of mindset are necessary to overcome this ingrained psychological barrier. Both donor and recipient communities have to accept the consequences of the population transfers and associated adjustments.

The spillover effect of defarming in a poor countryside with poor land quality beset by overpopulation could have been anticipated and treated more sensitively. Inadequate judgment in terms of method, material, approach, enforcement, monitoring, and long-term vision has not helped the well-intentioned program. The conspicuous lack of public participation and engagement in policy formulation has contributed to its disengagement from real-world expectations and limitations. Large-scale infrastructural and conservation projects in developing countries could benefit from more people-oriented planning to overcome the difficulties associated with the intimately coupled and timehonored people-land alliance.

## Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge gratefully the Committee on Research and Conference Grants of the University of Hong Kong for funding support. Special thanks are due to Professor Mao Hanying, who led the comprehensive study around the reservoir region of the Three

Gorges Project in 1999, which formed the prelude to this research. Heartfelt thanks are extended to Dr P. C. Lai, who facilitated the GIS analysis. We appreciate the efforts of local helpers who assisted us in the questionnaire survey, and the government for providing data.

## References

- ArcView, Version 3.2. Redlands, CA: Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc.
- Asia Development Bank. 1998. Handbook on resettlement: A guide to good practice. Manila, Philippines: Asia Development Bank.
- Bai, Q., and J. M. Huang. 2001. Discussion on the countermeasures for rural immigrants settlement in Three Gorges Area. Journal of Chongqing Institute of Commerce 3:12-14.
- Baota Township Government. 2002. Report of official duties by township head: Yunyang. Chongqing, Sichuan, China: Baota Township Government.
- Batterbury, S. P. J., and A. J. Bebbington. 1999. Environmental histories, access to resources and landscape change: An introduction. Land Degradation and Development 10 (4): 279-89.
- Belanger, L., and M. Grenier. 2002. Agriculture intensification and forest fragmentation in the St. Lawrence valley, Quebec, Canada. Landscape Ecology 17 (6): 495-507.
- Brown, L. R. 1995. Who will feed China: Wake-up call for a small planet. New York: Norton.
- Canziani, G. A., R. M. Ferrati, C. Rossi, and D. Ruiz-Moreno. 2006. The influence of climate and dam construction on the Ibera wetland, Argentina. Regional Environmental Change 6 (4): 181-91.
- Changjiang Institute of Survey, Planning, Design and Research. 1996. Inundation treatment and resettlement planning report for Yunyang County, the Yangtze River Three Gorges Project Reservoir Area. Wuhan, Hubei, China: Changjiang Institute of Survey, Planning, Design and Research.
- Dai, Q. 1998. The river dragon has come: The Three Gorges Dam and the fate of China's Yangtze River and its people. New York: Armonk.
- Daily, G. C., and P. R. Ehrlich. 1992. Population, sustainability, and earth's carrying capacity. Bioscience 42 (10): 761-71.
- D´ emurger, S., and W. Yang. 2006. Economic changes and afforestation incentives in rural China. Environment and Development Economics 11 (5): 629-49.
- DongcunTownshipGovernment.2001. Annualreport of comprehensive agricultural statistics of Yunyang County (Dongcun Township), 2001. Yunyang, Chongqing, China: Dongcun Township Government.
- ---. 2002a. Annual report of comprehensive agricultural statistics of Yunyang County (Dongcun Township), 2002. Yunyang, Chongqing, China: Dongcun Township Government.
- ---. 2002b. Schedule of afforestation of the de-farming project in Dongcun Township, Yunyang County. Yunyang, Chongqing, China: Dongcun Township Government.
- D¨ o¨ os, B. R. 2002. Population growth and loss of arable land. Global Environmental Change 12:303-11.
- Du, G. 1998. Considerations on non-agricultural resettlement of rural resettlers in the Three Gorges Reservoir Area. Mountain Area Development 6:15-16.
- Editorial Board of Gazetteer of Yunyang County. 1999. Gazetteer of Yunyang County. Chengdu, China: Sichuan People's Press.
- Feng, Z. M. 1994. The past, present, and future of the studies on land carrying capacity. China Land Science 8 (3): 1-9.
- Feng, Z. M., B. Q. Liu, and Y. Z. Yang. 2005. A study of the changing trend of Chinese cultivated land quantity and data reconstructing: 1949-2003. Journal of Natural Resources 20 (1): 35-43.
- Fu, X. T. 1997. Resettlement research for the Three Gorges Project. Wuhan, China: Hubei Science and Technology Press.
- Global Environment Facility (GEF). 2003. Operational program on sustainable land management (OP#15). NewYork: Global Environment Facility, United Nations Development Programme.
- Gu, S. Z., and Z. Li. 1994. Ideas and advices for developmentoriented resettlement in the Three Gorges reservoir area. Wuhan University Journal (Philosophy and Social Sciences) 5:58-68.
- Guo, J. A. 2002. Research on emigration difficulties and emigrant psychological state in Three Gorges reservoir area. Journal of Chongqing University (Social Sciences Edition) 8 (2): 11-13.
- Guo, Q. R. 2001. Bamboo forest's function and its application to Three Gorges Reservoir Area's retreated tilth and retroceded forest (grass) project [sic]. Journal of Chongqing Three Gorges University (Natural Sciences) 23 (3): 28588.
- Guo, Y. J., Y. M. Li, and L. Liu. 2004. The effects of forage planting in the region along the Three Gorges of the Changjiang River where returning farmland to forests is practiced [sic]. Journal of Southwest Agricultural University (Natural Science) 26 (2): 137-39.
- He, D. B., and Y. Hu. 2000. Existing problems and relevant countermeasures to pilot project of returning farmland to forests and pastures [sic]. Central South Forest Inventory and Planning 19 (4): 18-21.
- He, J. S., and J. Pooler. 2002. The regional concentration of China's interprovincial migration flows, 1982-90. Population and Environment 24 (2): 149-82.
- Hopfenberg, R. 2003. Human carrying capacity is determined by food availability. Population and Environment 25 (2): 109-17.
- Huang, R. Q., J. H. Dai, J. P. Xia, and Q. Chen. 2001. Opportunity and challenge: Reforestation on slope cultivated land of Three Gorges Reservoir region. Problems of Forestry Economics 21 (6): 325-32.
- Jackson, S., and A. Sleigh. 2000. Resettlement for China's Three Gorges Dam: Socio-economic impact and institutional tensions. Communist and Post-Communist Studies 33 (2): 223-41.
- Jim, C. Y., and Yang, F. Y. 2006. Local responses to inundation and de-farming in the reservoir region of the Three Gorges Project (China). Environmental Management 38 (4): 618-37.
- Lambin, E. F., B. L. Turner, H. J. Geist, S. B. Agbola, A. Angelsen, J. W. Bruce, O. T. Coomes, et al. 2001. The causes of land-use and land-cover change: Moving beyond the myths. Global Environmental Change 11:261-69.

- Land and Resources Bureau of Yunyang County. 1983. Soil map of Yunyang County. Yunyang, Chongqing, China: Government Printing House.
- ---. 1994a. 1:10,000 contour map of Yunyang County. Yunyang, Chongqing, China: Government Printing House.
- ---. 1994b. 1:10,000 land use map of Yunyang County. Yunyang, Chongqing, China: Government Printing House.
- ---. 1995a. Explanatory report on the status of land use in townships and towns of Yunyang County. Yunyang, Chongqing, China: Government Printing House.
- ---. 1995b. Lands of Yunyang County. Yunyang, Chongqing, China: Government Printing House.
- ---.1996. Collection of statistics on land use in townships and towns of Yunyang County. Yunyang, Chongqing, China: Government Printing House.
- Lei, H. S., ed. 2002. Migration in the Three Gorges in China. Chongqing, China: Chongqing University Press.
- Li, H. M., and P. Rees. 2000. Population displacement in the Three Georges reservoir area of the Yangtze River, Central China: Relocation policies and migrant views. International Journal of Population Geography 6 (6): 43962.
- Li, Q. 2003. An analysis of push and pull factors in the migration of rural workers in China. Social Sciences in China 1:125-36, 207.
- Liang, F. Q. 1994. Study on resettlement development in the Three Gorges reservoir area. Journal of Hubei Agricultural College 14 (4): 54-67.
- ---.2004. A preliminary discussion on resettlement and sustainable development of the rural resettlers in the Three Gorges reservoir area. Journal of Economics of Water Resources 22 (6): 59-61.
- Liang, F. Q., and Y. H. Zhu. 1997. On non-local resettlement of rural relocatees in the Three Gorges reservoir area. China Three Gorges Construction 8:1-4.
- Lindberg, K., S. F. McCool, and G. H. Stankey. 1997. Rethinking carrying capacity. Annals of Tourism Research 24 (2): 461-65.
- Lohmar, B. 2001. Changes in labor, land, and credit markets lead China's farmers on the path towards modernization. In China agriculture in transition, ed. H. Hsu and F. Gale, 9-12. Washington, DC: Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
- Lu, X. X. 2004. Vulnerability of water discharge of large Chinese rivers to environmental changes: An overview. Regional Environmental Change 4:182-91.
- Lu, X. X., and J. C. Fei. 2001. Study on environmental capacity of migration of Chongqing Reservoir of Three-Gorges Project [sic]. Journal of Chongqing Three Gorges University 17 (2): 14-18.
- Lu, X. X., and D. L. Higgitt. 2000. Estimating erosion rates on sloping agricultural land in the Yangtze Three Gorges, China, from caesium-137 measurements. Catena 39 (1): 33-51.
- ---. 2001. Sediment delivery to the Three Gorges 2: Local response. Geomorphology 41 (2-3): 157-69.
- Luo, H. Z. 1998. On a proper proportion of non-agricultural resettlement of rural resettlers in the Three Gorges reservoir area. Yangtze River 29 (8): 11, 48.
- Maslow, A. H. 1998. Maslow on management. New York: Wiley.
- Meng, Q. H., B. J. Fu, and L. Y. Yang. 2001. Effects of land use on soil erosion and nutrient loss in the Three Gorges reservoir area, China. Soil Use and Management 17 (4): 288-91.
- Murphy, R. 2002. How migrant labor is changing rural China. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Obosu-Mensah, K. 1996. Ghana's Volta resettlement scheme: The long-term consequences of post-colonial state planning. San Francisco: International Scholars Publications.
- Office of Agricultural Zoning Committee of Yunyang County. 1983a. Compilation of agricultural resources and zoning in Yunyang County, Sichuan Province (vol. 1). Yunyang, Chongqing, China: Government Printing House.
- ---.1983b. Compilation of agricultural resources and zoning in Yunyang County, Sichuan Province (vol. 2). Yunyang, Chongqing, China: Government Printing House.
- Peet, R., and N. Thrift, eds. 1989. New models in geography: The political-economy perspective (volume 1). London: Unwin Hyman.
- Prosterman, R. L., T. Hanstad, and P. Li. 1996. Can China feed itself? Scientific American 275 (5): 90-96.
- Qiu, Z. G., L. Z. Wu, and J. P. Du. 2000. Analysis on rural resettlement mode in TGP reservoir area [sic]. Yangtze River 31 (3): 1-3.
- Roberts, K. D. 2001. The determinants of job choice by rural labor migrants in Shanghai. China Economic Review 12 (1): 15-39.
- Seto, K. C., R. K. Kaufmann, and C. E. Woodcock. 2000. Landsat reveals China's farmland reserves, but they're vanishing fast. Nature 406:121.
- Shen, Y. C. 1998. Study on soil and water conservation benefit of agricultural technology of hedgerows in the Three Gorges Areas. Journal of Soil Erosion and Soil and Water Conservation 4 (2): 61-66.
- Sheng, X. Y., and H. Y. Gu. 1996. Rethinking the two major problems of resettlement in the Three Gorges reservoir area. Yangtze Tribune 1:19-21.
- Shi, P., and W. Li. 1999. Rehabilitation of degraded mountain ecosystems in southwestern China: An integrated approach. Ambio 28 (5): 390-97.
- Shi, Y. H., X. F. Zeng, X. Q. Liu, G. K. Liu, L. Pan, and G. Q. Huang. 1998. A preliminary result for the plant selection for slope protection in Western Hubei of the Three Gorges reservoir area. Hubei Forestry Science and Technology 4:12-15.
- Solinger, D. J. 1999. Citizenship issues in China's internal migration: Comparisons with Germany and Japan. Political Science Quarterly 114 (3): 455-78.
- SPSSPC statistical package, Version 11. Chicago, IL: SPSS, Inc.
- State Council. 1993. Immigration regulations for the construction of the Yangtze River Three Gorges Project. Beijing, China: Government Printing House.
- ---. 2001. Immigration regulations for the construction of the Yangtze River Three Gorges Project. Decree No. 299. Beijing, China: Government Printing House.
- ---.2003. Regulations on reforesting cultivated land. Decree No. 367. Beijing, China: Government Printing House.
- State Council Three Gorges Project Construction Committee. 1999. Several proposals on ensuring the immigration and resettlement of rural residents at the reservoir construction area of the Three Gorges Project. Beijing, China: Government Printing House.

- Sun, Y., and X. M. Zhang. 2002. Study on the characteristics and problems of non-local resettlement from the Three Gorges reservoir area: A case of the resettlement in Chongming County, Shanghai. Journal of Economics of Water Resources 20 (3): 38-41.
- Tan,Y., B. Bryan, and G. Hugo. 2005. Development, land-use change and rural resettlement capacity: A case study of the Three Gorges Project, China. Australian Geographer 36 (2): 201-20.
- Tian, Q., and D. R. Qu. 2002. Problems of reforestation in the Three Gorges area. Ecological Economics 10:33-34, 38.
- Tian, Q., and E. C. Wang. 2003. Sustainable development for rural local resettlers in the Three Gorges reservoir area. Rural Economy 11:44-46.
- ---.2004.Studyonthecoordinate development of economy and ecology in the Three Gorges reservoir area. Ecological Economics S1:141-43.
- Uchida, E., J. T. Xu, and S. Rozelle. 2005. Grain for green: Cost-effectiveness and sustainability of China's conservation set-aside program. LandEconomics 81(2): 247-64.
- United Nations Development Programme. 2004. Reclaiming the land sustaining livelihoods. New York: United Nations Development Programme.
- ---. 2005. UNDP country programme for the People's Republic of China (2006-2010). NewYork: United Nations Development Programme.
- Upton,G.,andI.Cook.2002. Adictionary of statistics. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Viegas, P. 1992. The Hirakud Dam oustees: Thirty years after. In Big dams, displaced people: Rivers of sorrow, rivers of change, ed. E. G. Thukral, 29-53. New Delhi, India: Sage.
- Wakabayashi, K. 1990. Migration from rural to urban areas in China. The Developing Economies 28 (4): 503-23.
- Wang, L. M., Y. F. Yang, and Q. F. Guan. 2001. Environmental emigration stress of slope farmland in the Three Gorges area [sic]. Acta Geographica Sinica 56 (6): 650-56.
- Wei, L., and J. Lin. 2001. Restriction factors of emigration resettlement in Three Gorges reservoir area [sic]. Journal of Chongqing University (Social Sciences Edition) 7 (3): 41-42.
- Wei, Q. H. 2003. Construction and efficiency analysis of reforestation project in Xiangzhou County, 2002. Central South Forest Inventory and Planning 22 (2): 28-30.
- Wen, S. H., ed. 2002. Who stole away the future of Mekong River? Revelation from one river, six countries, and hundreds of nations. Hong Kong: Oxfam.
- Weng,L.D., ed. 1997. Research on ecological and environmental effects of the Three Gorges Project. Wuhan, Hubei, China: Hubei Science and Technology Press.
- Wu, S. H., and R. S. Li. 2002. Food demand, ensure and countermeasures for China in the next 30 years [sic]. Progress in Geography 21 (2): 121-29.
- Xie, C., J. Zhao, D. Liang, J. Bennett, L. Zhang, G. Dai, and X. Wang. 2006. Livelihood impacts of the conversion of cropland to forest and grassland program. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management 49 (4): 555-70.
- Xie, Y. C., M. Yu, G. J. Tian, and X. R. Xing. 2005. Socioeconomic driving forces of arable land conversion: A case study of Wuxian City, China. Global Environmental Change 15:238-52.
- Xu, A. S. 1995. Exploring the population carrying capacity of land and the environmental capacity for resettlement in the Three Gorges reservoir area. Yangtze River 26 (5): 47-51.
- Xu, J. J., and G. Q. Shi. 2002. Probing the difficulties of social integration of non-local resettlers from the Three Gorges into the coastal resettlement regions. Journal of Hohai University (Philosophy and Social Sciences) 4 (1): 17-19, 78.
- Xu, Z., M. T. Bennett, R. Tao, and J. Xu. 2004. China's sloping land conversion program four years on: Current situation and pending issues. International Forestry Review 6 (3-4): 317-26.
- Yang, H. 2004. Land conservation campaign in China: Integrated management, local participation and food supply option. Geoforum 35 (4): 507-18.
- Yang, Y. Z., and Y. P. Huang. 1997. How should China feed itself? The World Economy 20 (7): 913-34.
- Ye, Y. Q., G. J. Chen, and F. Hong. 2003. Impacts of the 'grain for green' project on rural communities in the Upper Min River Basin, Sichuan, China. Mountain Research and Development 23 (4): 345-52.
- Yu, H., and W. Huang. 2001. Ecological and environmental construction must keep in step with resettlement. China Three Gorges Construction 12:23-24.
- Yu, Y. X., Y. M. Li, and J. H. Zhang. 2000. Suggestion of growing grass and constructing ecological grassland in the Three Gorges reservoir area. Mountain Area Development 6:36-37, 40.
- Yuan, H. R., and K. M. Wei. 1997. Immigrant environmental capacity analysis of the Three Gorges reservoir area. Chinese Journal of Applied Ecology 8 (5): 557-61.
- Zhao, W. B. 2003. Assessing the effectiveness of reforestation in Ping'an County. Science and Technology of Qinghai Agriculture and Forestry 4:21-22.
- Zhu, D. Z. 1998. Rural resettlement methods in the Three Gorges reservoir area: Also a discussion with Zheng Dengpin and Liang Fuqing. China Three Gorges Construction 8:22-23.
- Zhu, N., ed. 1996. Research on resettlement and reservoir region development of the Three Gorges Project. Wuhan, Hubei, China: Wuhan University Press.
- Zhu, N., and B. Wang. 1996. Analysis of environmental capacity of population in the Three Gorges reservoir area. Population and Economics 3:33-37.
- Zhu, Z. S. 1998. Problems and strategies of rural productive resettlement in the Three Gorges reservoir area. Reform of Economic System 1:123-26.

## Appendix: The 32 Questions Included in the Questionnaire Survey of Villagers in Yunyang County (Details of Most Multiple-Choice Responses Have Been Omitted

## A. Background of Respondent and Household

1. How many persons are there in your household?

2. How many children ( &lt;fi fteen years of age) are there in your household, and how many elders ( &gt; sixty years of age)?
3. How old are you and what is your gender?
4. What is your educational level?
5. What is your major occupation?

## B. Economic Conditions

6. Please specify the amounts of different agricultural lands cultivated by your family (paddy fields, dry farmland, vegetable plots, orchards).
7. Please specify the yields of various farm products of your household last year. How much did you sell and earn?
8. Do you borrow and cultivate some farmlands of other villagers, or do you have some of your land cultivated by others?
9. Considering the productivity and quality of various agricultural lands, if you have to depend on only one kind of land, how much is sufficient for you to make a living?
10. Howlong does it take to walk to your farthest farmland? Do you want to cultivate such land?
11. How many migrant laborers are there in your family? Could your household meet living expenses without the income from migrant labor?
12. Is it possible for the migrant laborers of your family to settle down in the places where they work?
13. Comparing with the average economic situation in your village, what is the relative level of your household?

## C. Ecological Conditions

14. Does your household collect some local products from the mountains? If so, what are they?
15. What kind of fuels does your household use for cooking? Please specify their relative proportions.
16. In your perception, would firewood or grass (for fuel) collection damage the growth of the woodlands or grasslands?
17. What is your household's longest travel distance to collect firewood, grass, and other local products?
18. Did you encounter some wild animals in the mountains, and if so, when?
19. Please list the wild animals that you or your neighbors have encountered recently and about twenty years ago.
20. Werethewoodlandslargerordenserwhenyouwere a child?

## D. Land-Use Changes

21. Are you a relocatee due to TGP reservoir inundation? If yes, please specify the time of resettlement.
22. Haveyourhousehold been resettled? If so, how long have you been resettled?
23. What part(s) of your household will be inundated?
24. What is (will be) the principal means of your livelihood after resettlement (local farming, nonlocal farming, conducting business in towns, seeking refuge with relatives, don't know yet)?
25. In practice, what would likely be your principal occupation after resettlement (student, retiree, farmer, farmer plus sideline, conducting business, migrant laborer, others)?
26. Have you heard of defarming and reforestation before?
27. What is the proportion of slope farmland (steeper than 25 degrees) in your household? What is the proportion of other poor farmland in your household?
28. Do you want to resettle in another place if little farmland is left after defarming?
29. Do you think it is easy to defarm and reforest the slope lands?
30. Whatcouldbethemajordifficulties associated with defarming (shortage in farmland, lack of alternative occupation, lack of supportive policies, others, don't know yet)?
31. What could be the potential use of your defarmed land in the future (grow some suitable fruit trees or other commercial plants, get subsidies from the government, other uses to be specified)?
32. Whatwouldbetheincometrend of your household after resettlement and defarming?

Correspondence: Department of Geography, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, e-mail: hragjcy@hkucc.hku.hk (Jim); Department of Economics, Shenzhen University, Nanhai Road, Shenzhen, China, e-mail: yangyf@szu.edu.cn (Yang); Institute of Geographical Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Datun Road, Beijing, China, e-mail: wanglm@igsnrr.ac.cn (Wang).