## American Geographical Society

Greenhouse Horticulture and Economic Transition Author(s): Mauri J. Palomaki and Allen G. Noble Source: Geographical Review, Vol. 85, No. 2 (Apr., 1995), pp. 173-184

Published by: American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/216061 .

Accessed: 08/05/2014 18:04

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

<!-- image -->

American Geographical Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## GREENHOUSE HORTICULTURE  AND ECONOMIC TRANSITION

## MAURI  J.  PALOMAKI  and  ALLEN  G. NOBLE

ABSTRACT.  Narpes Commune, South Ostrobothnia,  is the center of the  largest area of  greenhouse  horticulture  in Finland. Its  presence  is an  example  of local adjustment  to  agricultural  decline and increased  population pressure.  The empirical  horticultural  evidence is the basis for a  theory  of economic transition  for depressed  rural  areas.  Key  words: agricultural theory, Finland, greenhouses, horticulture,  regional  development.

etween Vaasa  and Kristinestad,  in the  Swedish-speaking  areas  of the South Ostrobothnia  coast of Finland,  the commune of  Narpes  is the center of the  largest  and most  important  area  of  greenhouse  horticulture in Finland  (Fig. 1).  The most  significant  in terms of volume and value of production,  it  supplies primarily  tomatoes,  cucumbers,  and lettuce  (Atlas 1982, 5.311).  The  development  of  this  agricultural specialization  illustrates a  process  of local and  regional  economic  adjustment  that is theorized for  depressed  rural  areas.  To  understand  the  relationship  of the case study  to  the  theory  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the  evolution  of  this horticultural  activity  in some detail.

## BEGINNINGS

Poverty  in Finland was  widespread during  the late nineteenth and early  twentieth  centuries,  when  the  country  was  part  of  the  Russian Empire.  Especially  in South  Ostrobothnia,  evidence of the low economic status  included  large-scale emigration during  the  first  quarter  of  the twentieth  century  to the United States,  Canada,  and Sweden  (Atlas 1993, 3.9).  More than half of  all  Finnish  emigrants originated  in  South Ostrobothnia.

Many people  who  remained existed  at a  barely  subsistence  level. Farmsteads were small, even  by  the Finnish standards of the  time, and continued subdivision of land  by  inheritance made  agriculture  increasingly  less economical  (Atlas 1993,  3.5).  Thus conditions were  opportune for a new  and  promising agricultural  venture, however  radical in  approach. During  the nineteenth  century  a few  commercial  greenhouses had been established around Helsinki and Turku  to serve their  sophisticated and affluent urban markets,  but  greenhouse agriculture  was unknown elsewhere in Finland.

DR. PALOMAKI is a  professor  of economic geography at Vaasa  University,  Vaasa, Finland SF-65200.  DR. NOBLE is a  professor  of  geography at the  University of  Akron, Akron,  Ohio 44325-5005.

Copyright ? 1995  by  the  American Geographical Society of  New  York

FIG.  1-Narpes Commune,  South  Ostrobothnia,  Finland.

<!-- image -->

Greenhouse horticulture was  initiated  in  Narpes  by  an  emigrant, Valdemar  Mattfolk,  who  returned from the United States to Finland in 1916.  Accustomed abroad to  eating vegetables  at almost  every meal, he recognized  the  potential  in Finland  for  greenhouse produce;  at that  time, because of  poorly developed agriculture  and a  generally  low standard  of living, vegetables  were  rarely  eaten.

The  greenhouse  enterprises  of  Narpes  were  greatly  aided  by  the unforeseen market that  large  numbers of German  troops,  billeted in the nearby  Vaasa  area,  created  during  World  War  II.  Growth of the domestic market, on  the  other hand,  was  slow,  yet  steady,  as Finns  generally accepted  a basic  change  in their  dietary  habits.  By  the end of the 1950s greenhouse  horticulture had  spread  to 17  villages  in  Narpes  from the original  centers in  Finby  and  Pjelax  (Hindstrom 1978,  35).  Greenhouses on 617 farms  provided  a total of 306,963  square  meters of  growing space (Figs.  2  and  3).  The  pattern  of  diffusion  depended  not  only  on  the

In  the  village  of  Finby  Mattfolk  built a  greenhouse  for  the cultivation  of tomatoes and cucumbers  (Hindstr6m  1978,23-25).  His innovation  was not immediately successful, and ten  years passed  before other local farmers adopted  the idea. In 1926  two brothers,  Uno and  Georg  Lassfolk,  from  the neighboring  village  of  Pjelax,  erected  a  150-square-meter greenhouse.  The older brother,  Uno, had received  training  as a  gardener  at the  imperial household in St.  Petersburg,  Russia, and  may  have been familiar with greenhouse  horticulture  as  practiced there  (Hindstr6m  1978,28).  The  adoption  of  greenhouse  horticulture continued  to  be  very  slow,  and  by  1943  only five or six  greenhouses  had been constructed  (Walls  1968,39,  94).

FIG.  2-Number of  greenhouses by village  1959, 1974,  and  1995.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

distance  separating  the  villages  but also on the amount of  agricultural  land in the various  villages where  much  of the total area is either  too  rocky  or too  boggy  for  farming.  Increased amounts  of  agricultural  land meant that more farmers would  consider  adopting  the new  cultivation  practices.

FIG.  3-Total area under  glass  by village  1959, 1974, and  1995.

<!-- image -->

## GREENHOUSE  HORTICULTURE

Greenhouse horticulture, which  had  achieved  considerable  acceptance  by  the  1960s,  has  brought  a measure of  prosperity  to the  Narpes area.  A  survey  conducted in 1963,  which  compared greenhouse  cultivators with  neighboring nongreenhouse  farmers, showed  a  significantly

higher  standard of  living among  the former  (Walls  1968,  78).  The difference in affluence  persists. Beginning  in 1967,  the income of  greenhouse farmers accelerated at a much faster rate than did that of  neighboring, nongreenhouse farmers,  and after 1971  the  disparity  was  sharply greater (Hindstrom  1978,203).  Although  no  specific  data  exist to confirm  presentday  income differentials, the  widely  held belief in  Narpes  is that such differences exist.

By  1974 the number of  greenhouses operating  in  thirty villages  of Narpes  exceeded  one  thousand.  Although  the number of  greenhouse farmers had risen  only minimally  since 1959,  from 617 to 636, the  space under cover had increased  almost 90  percent,  from  306,963  square  meters in  1959 to  579,698 square  meters in  1974  (Statistik 1994). Greenhouse horticulture  has continued to  expand,  but the results have been a mixed pattern  of  growth,  so much so that the term  consolidation  might  be more appropriate  than  growth.  The same  thirty villages  account for all of the greenhouses  in  Narpes  in  1995 as  in  1974, but  considerable shifts  in numbers of  greenhouses  in  villages  have  occurred.  Among  the  most pronounced  are the declines in Overmark  from 76 in 1974  to 37 in  1995, in  T6jby  from 81 to 31,  in Norrnas from 15 to 3,  in  Tjarlax from 21 to 6,  in Finby  from 61 to 34,  and in  Pjelax  from  69 to 46.  By  contrast,  increase  has been  equally  dramatic  in other  villages.  These include  Bodbacka,  from 1 to 13,  and Traskbole,  from 5 to 23.

The net  effect  has  been  to  even  out  the  distribution  pattern.  An examination of data on  greenhouses per village  for 1959, 1974,  and 1995 validates this assertion. In 1959 the  greatest  concentration occurred in Pjelax,  with 111  greenhouses,  and the smallest in  Rangsby, with 9.  By  1974 the  range  of 102  had shrunk  to 80:  the  upper  limit of 81 was in  Tojby, and the lower in the five  villages  with  only  one  greenhouse  each. In 1995  the range  had declined to 45. The  process  of diffusion was still  operating  in 1974,  but  by  1995  the  emphasis  was on consolidation rather  than  expansion.  Nevertheless,  a few  greenhouses  had been established to the northeast in  villages immediately  outside the  Narpes  commune  boundary.

Those  changes represented  a shift from  old,  small  greenhouses  to modern, much  larger  structures.  While the total number of  greenhouses in  Narpes  fell  by  almost one-third  between 1974  and  1995,  the area  under glass  increased  by  more than a  quarter.  Most affected were the  original centers of  greenhouse  horticulture,  as well as the  newest  villages  to  adopt it. In  intermediate  villages, change depended  on individual initiative and venturesome  spirit. Responding  to economies of scale,  greenhouse  farmers  have  built  ever  larger  structures. In  1974 the  average  amount of greenhouse  area  per  farm  in  Narpes  measured 803  square  meters,  and  by 1995 the  average  floor area  per  farm was  1,734  square  meters  (Statistik 1994).

Increased  size of  greenhouses  is a measure  of the  growing  influence of distant  markets.  Traversing the  commune  is  Highway  8,  a  main  north-south road that also connects  with  principal  truck-ferry ports.  The route  crosses Narpes  from Portom  through  Overmark,  Yettermark, and  Finby  to  Pjelax, all  villages  on  or  very  close  to  the  highway. Accessibility  and ease  of marketing,  together  with the fact that  the  highway  seeks the easiest route across  the  largest  lowland areas  of the  commune,  help explain  the unusual expansion  of  greenhouse  horticulture  in these  villages.

## CHANGES  IN BUILDING  AND  HEATING  PRACTICES

Significant  changes  in the  greenhouse  horticulture  of  Narpes began  in the mid-1970s.  They  were  especially  visible in  greenhouse  construction. Traditional  wooden  framing gave way  to metal, and  glass began  to be replaced by plastic. Today  about 40  percent  of all structures  are covered by  translucent  plastic (Statistik  1994).  After the mid-1970s  greenhouses became  longer  and wider, as well  as  higher  to  support  the  larger  roof necessitated  by  horizontal  expansion.  A  recently  constructed  greenhouse may  be as  long  as 70 to 75 meters and as wide as 25 meters-a very large cubic area that must be heated in both the fall and the  spring growing seasons.

The fuel of choice  today  is either  heavy  oil or  light  oil, both of which must be  imported, usually  from North Sea oil fields. Some  greenhouse operators  burn  peat,  which is  locally  obtained. Coal was  formerly  used but had to be  imported;  it  currently  is little used because it is too  expensive. The  heating  is  accomplished by large  hot-water  pipes  that are laid on the  ground  to  separate  the  planting  beds  into rows.  Space heating represents  the most  significant  cost in  greenhouse  horticulture.

## GREENHOUSE  HORTICULTURE  TODAY

Five  vegetables  are  currently  grown  in  Narpes.  Tomatoes  account for about two-thirds of the  greenhouse space,  cucumbers for about a fifth; because of market demand, tomato  production  is  increasing  faster than is that of cucumbers.  Today  68  percent  of all tomatoes and 45  percent  of all  cucumbers  grown  in  Finland come  from the  Narpes  greenhouses (Linde 1994).  Annual  yields  of tomatoes  may  be as  high  as 30  kilograms per  square  meter and  of  cucumbers as  high  as  50  kilograms.  Small amounts of lettuce, Chinese  cabbage,  and  parsley  also are  grown.  The lettuce is sold in  pots  that  are  kept  in domestic households and harvested as needed. In addition to the Finnish  market,  sales to Sweden, Germany, and Russia have been undertaken  successfully,  which is  important  in a country  hard  pressed  to  gain foreign exchange  and to broaden its economy.

Marketing operations  for  the  Narpes  greenhouse  horticulture are efficiently  organized.  A  local  growers' cooperative  and  three  private

packing plants  market the entire  production.  Tomatoes  must be  graded by  both size and color. The latter is  necessary  because Helsinki markets need new  supplies  two or more times a week. The size of the Helsinki market and the  high  turnover both  allow  and  require ripe, very  red tomatoes. In contrast,  shipments  to  Lapland  occur  only  once  every  several weeks  because  of  the  much  smaller market. These tomatoes  are shipped green  and  ripen  in transit  or at destination.  Foreign  markets  also have  specific  needs and demands that must be met  individually.

The  general prosperity produced by greenhouse  horticulture  in Narpes  has been balanced to a  degree by  the lack  of suitable  agricultural  land and  by  the  continued,  though  more  gradual,  subdivision of land  through inheritance.  Most  greenhouse  cultivators  also  practice  open-field farming to  protect  their investment  and  to  broaden their  risks,  as well  as  to augment  their incomes. The  grain yields  of these farmers  are  among  the highest  in Finland. One  long-term strategy  to solve  the  land-shortage problem  is  emigration.  Between 1951 and 1960 almost 15  percent  of the Narpes population  left for overseas, with most  going  to Sweden  (Hindstrom 1978, 126-127).  Since 1960  emigration  has slowed,  but it still continues.

The  Narpes greenhouses  also  grow  flowers for fresh  cuttings,  flowering  potted  plants,  and  seedlings  for  flower  gardens.  The market for flowers  and  plants  is  much more limited  than is  that for  vegetables, probably  because  purchases  of  flowers  and  plants  are a  discretionary expenditure.  The most  important greenhouse  flower is the rose, associated  widely  in Finland with school  graduation  and with the custom of bringing  flowers when invited to dinner or to  parties.

## CHALLENGE  OF THE FUTURE

The  probable  entry  of Finland  into the  European  Union casts  a  shadow of  anxiety  over the  greenhouse  horticultural  entrepreneurs.  Although  the Finnish market seems secure, other  potentially  lucrative  European  markets are not so.  Long  hours of darkness in late winter and  early spring, combined with the cold climate,  increase  the  production  costs of  heating and artificial  lighting,  in  comparison  with those in the Low Countries  and the Channel  Islands,  the chief  competing  areas.  For  example,  the Netherlands, the  strongest competitor,  has six weeks more  daylight  in fall and spring,  as well as  considerably higher temperatures.  The  longer  summer daylight  in Finland is not a  compensation,  because it comes at a time when field  vegetables supply  the market.  Transportation costs for  Narpes growers  to the  principal  European  urban  markets  are  also  higher  than  are those from  competing  areas.

Fuel cost is one of the  greatest  problems  for  Narpes  horticulturalists. The Dutch fuel cost is  currently  only  one-half that of the  Finns,  and the Dutch must use  only  about one-half as much fuel as do the Finns in a

normal  growing  season. Another chief  disadvantage  for Finnish  producers is that loans from the  government  for  development  and  expansion must  be  amortized in  ten  years,  whereas  Dutch  horticulturalists are permitted thirty  years  in which to amortize their  loans  (Hindstr6m  1978, 126-127).

Balanced  against  these deficiencies are several  positive aspects.  The quality  of the  greenhouse vegetables, especially  tomatoes, is  high,  and contamination  by  environmental  poisons  is lower than  in western  Europe (Horticultural  production  1993,  3).  Labor  costs are  lower in Finland than they  are  in most  competing European  areas,  and the work ethic and sense of  responsibility  are  very high  in Finland.  Another  positive  factor  for the Finns is that  expansion  of the Dutch  greenhouse  horticulture  will  require acquisition  of additional land. Because  of the  pressure  of  population  and the  fully developed  economy  of the Netherlands,  expansion  would  be very expensive,  which would add to the future  cost of  greenhouse vegetables there.  Perhaps  most  important  of  all,  the  Narpes entrepreneurs have  already  demonstrated their  ability  to  compete successfully  in the German and  Russian markets. Because of  its  proximity,  the  Russian market  appears  to be  especially inviting.

## A THEORY  OF ECONOMIC  TRANSITION

The  successful evolution and  development  of  greenhouse  horticulture in  Narpes  illustrate  a  process  that  has  been  occurring  in Finland  and some other areas of  Europe.  Two excellent  examples  from other communes in western Finland are  fur  farming,  centered  on  Jakobstad,  and Konni  clock manufacturing,  in  Ilmajoki. Each  of these industries  represents  the  adjustment of a local area to  declining agricultural  resources and  increasing population, essentially  the same conditions that once  prevailed  in Narpes.

An inductive  theory explains  the occurrence  in rural areas of  highly specialized  industrial communities formed  by  similar small-scale enterprises, originally  with  quite  low  technological  levels  (Palomaki 1983). Thus far, empirical  results have  come  from Finland and from central Europe.  The  point  of  departure  is an older  agricultural  area,  where all available  agricultural  resources  have been used, so that  expansion  in  any traditional  way  is no  longer possible (Fig.  4).  The  economy  is so one-dimensional that  virtually  no other  ways  of livelihood exist.  Transportation is slow and  expensive.  No  possibilities  for  commuting  to  adjacent,  more developed  areas  exist because the  process  of urbanization  there  is still in an initial and  rudimentary phase.  Therefore,  livelihood  necessarily  remains centered on the local area.

The  population  is nevertheless  growing.  The birthrate  remains at a high  level,  but  because  of  improved  health care and  rising  levels  of hygiene  the death rate  is  decreasing.  The  rate  of  migration  is  low,  initially

FIG.  4-Model for  regional  agrarian change.

<!-- image -->

because of these conditions. As a result of continued subdivision of  land, farms  have become smaller  and,  especially during  famine  years,  production of food remains limited and  inadequate.  These conditions lead to a continually growing  population  pressure. Because an  expanded  labor force cannot be  used  in  agriculture, unemployment  with  unfavorable social  consequences  follows.

On the  positive  side,  these  conditions  sensitize  an  area to  accept changes  to  improve living  standards and the immediate economic situation. The diffusion of information about conditions  prevailing  outside the area  performs  a  key  function.  Knowledge  of  living  conditions elsewhere and information  about  possibilities  for  expansion  there  encourage mass  emigration, despite  the difficulties of  transportation.  Mainly  the young  and  more  venturesome  segment  of  the  population  departs. Though  effective,  this  pattern  is not the  most  advantageous  way  to relieve population pressure:  the area  loses the  part  of its  population  that is most likely  to  accept changes  and to  promote  in situ modifications.

At the same time, an information flow from outside  may  include the knowledge  of new  ways  of  production,  often with  details for  specific economic activities. A  person  with  special  skills and new ideas  may  come to the area or be aware of its  surplus  labor force and  tempted  to  exploit low  wage  levels. This  entrepreneur  initiates  production,  and if the enterprise  is  successful,  additional  workers  are  needed and  hired.  The  requisite skills must be communicated to these newcomers to the  industry.

<!-- image -->

1st  generation

2nd  generation

3rd  generation of economic  growth  and diffusion  in a local area. The X ind

Workers  are local  people,  most  likely  former farmers  and their  sons, who  are used  to  working  independently.  If the  firm continues  to be successful and the  original entrepreneur  becomes  financially  secure, the boldest and most  energetic  workers  may  demand an increased share of the returns.  One  way  to achieve this outcome is for  them to establish  new enterprises.  The new  entrepreneurs'  skills are  apt  to be limited to those proved  in the  original enterprise.  Therefore,  the new firm must be of the same  type  as the  original  one  (Fig. 5a).  If the  outgrowth  is  successful, additional firms will be started. The  consequences  are the  same, and a new  generation  of  firms  emerges.  The  process  can be  repeated many times.  Although  some  failures and other  interruptions  of  growth  will occur,  the total number of firms  steadily  increases.

The first  firm will  often  be  located  in  the  most  accessible  place, because  the  entrepreneur  has no  previous  ties to the  community  and makes a rational decision influenced  by  market forces  (Fig. 5b).  For the second-generation  firms of local  entrepreneurs,  the  deciding  locational factor  usually  is  prior ownership  of  the  land,  if  the  general  location satisfies other  preconditions  for the  activity.  Therefore,  the distribution pattern may  be scattered. Much later,  if  growth  is sufficient, the intense rivalry characterizing  these  pioneering  phases  will  ease  and be  supplanted by  cooperation  in  subcontracting, marketing,  traffic  arrangements, and  repair-shop arrangements.  The  changes happen  because the cost of these activities is  beyond  the economic resources of individual enterprises,  but  their  functioning  benefits  all  of  the  enterprises.  The entrepreneurs  will  find it  profitable  to start education and  training  in the field and to take care of roads, water  supplies,  and sewer  systems, as well  as other  components  of an economic infrastructure. Thus the benefits of  agglomeration begin  to  strengthen  the  position  of the new industrial area.

At the same time, other  changes  occur in the area. The  mobility  of people  increases  by migration,  because of better  information,  closer links to outside  areas,  and  greater  accessibility  to  transportation.  These same conditions  encourage  local  commuting  of workers to outside centers of employment.  The  productivity  of  agriculture  increases with new methods and  increasing intensity  of landuse in farms and  through  the same kind of  enterprise development  as is  experienced  in  industry.  The  whole process  of economic  change  leads to lowered  population pressure  and a better-adjusted  and better-balanced  population,  and the area  shifts from a local orientation to a  regional  one.

## CITATIONS

Atlas  of Finland. 1982. Part 231, Farming.  Helsinki:  Maanmittaushallitus. 1993. Part 153, Settlement.  Helsinki:  Maanmittaushallitus. Hindstrom, B. 1978. Vaxthusodlingen i  Narpes, 1916-1976 [Greenhouse cultivation in  Narpes, 1916-1976].  Narpes,  Finland: Kasko  Tryckeri  &amp;  Tidnings  Ab.

Horticultural  production in Finland. 1993. Helsinki:  Horticultural  Information  Centre.

- Linde,  B. 1994. Letter from the  secretary  for horticulture,  Svenska  Lantbruksproducenternas Centralforbund,  Vaasa, Finland.  27 October.
- Palomaki,  M. 1983. Etela-pohjanmaan  talouselaman  tausta  ja nykytila  [The background  and status quo  of the  economy of South  Bothnia].  Etela-Pohjanmaan  Kesayliopiston  Julkaisusarja 8:24-35.
- Statistik  over  vaxthusnaringen i  Narpes ar 1993  [Statistics  of  greenhouse production  in  Narpes  for 1993]. 1994. Vaasa, Finland: Osterbottens  Svenka  Producentforbund.
- Walls, G. 1968. Elinkeinollinen  uudistaminen  maaseudun  kehityskuvassa [Entrepreneurial  innovativeness  in the  process  of rural  development]. Acta Universitatis Tamperensis  Ser. A 23.