## Wiley

## American Geographical Society

Agricultural Expansion in Northern Alberta

Author(s): Dawn Bowen

Source:

Geographical Review, Vol. 92, No. 4 (Oct., 2002), pp. 503-525

Published by:

American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/4140932

Accessed: 18-10-2015 03:47 UTC

## REFERENCES

Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/4140932?seq=1&amp;cid=pdf-reference#references\_tab\_contents

You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

<!-- image -->

Wiley and American Geographical Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## AGRICULTURAL EXPANSION  IN NORTHERN  ALBERTA

## DAWN BOWEN

ABSTRACT. Since  the  early  1980s some  40,ooo  acres of forested land  have  been  cleared and placed under  cultivation by  Mennonite farmers near  the  small town  of  La  Crete in  northern Alberta's Peace River district. This  incipient agriculture has  been  accompanied by  dramatic increases in  road building and  home  construction and  by  the  establishment of  churches and schools. The  principal force  behind  the  acquisition of land  has  been  a desire of families to have  homes  in rural  areas where  they  can  enjoy  lifestyles based  on traditional Mennonite values. Because most  new  farmers cannot  earn  a  living in  the  district from  agriculture alone, they  must  rely on  the  wood  industries to  supplement their  incomes. Demand  is  building for the  province to  open  still  more  land,  but  disagreements between  the  government and  the Mennonite community about  the  most  appropriate location for  developing new  farms has put  further expansion on hold  until  the  conflict can  be  resolved. Keywords: agricultural expansion,  Alberta,  Canada,  Mennonites.

Is the  twenty-first  century  begins, agricultural  expansion  in Canada's north is assuredly  not at an end. In the lower Peace  River  country  of northern  Alberta,  500 miles toward  the  Arctic  Circle  from  Edmonton,  families  are  busy  clearing  land and creating  farms  on the  fringes  of  existing  settlement  (Figure  1).  Such  activity  is  part of a  process  begun  in the late  1970s,  when the Alberta  provincial  government,  in response  to residents'  demands,  made available  to  beginning  farmers  better than 50,000  acres of raw land southwest of the small  agricultural  service center of La Crete.  In the  early  1980s,  thousands  of acres  of forest  were  cleared  and burned annually  in  preparation for  crop  production.  Although  the  pace  has  eased,  the  process continues.  Indeed,  prospective  farmers  are  demanding  yet  more  land,  but the  government,  citing  economic and environmental  concerns,  is reluctant  to  open  additional  tracts.

What is  taking  place  in Alberta's north is  unique.  Elsewhere  in North  America, farmers  are  giving up  as  commodity prices  sink below levels  necessary  for small family  operators  to  make  a  living  (Economist 1999;  Gorelick  2000; Lilliston  and Ritchie  2000).  In  light  of these  conditions and the  pervasive  fact  of farm  abandonment at  other  fronts  of western  Canada's forest-farmland  interface,  it is  astonishing that  people  in this northern  region  have  established  new farms  and are  urging  the government  to make  additional  land  available  (Vanderhill  1971, 1982).  I  examine  the forces  that have contributed  to  agricultural  expansion  southwest  of La  Crete,  describe  the remarkable transformation  of this area,  and assess  the  prospects  for future  development.  A critical  element of this  process,  in the  past,  at  present,  and in the future,  are  the cultural  values  of the area's Mennonite  people,  today  numbering some 6,000,  who account  for the vast  majority  of the  population  in and around  La Crete.

%  DR. BOWEN  is an  assistant  professor  of  geography  at  Mary Washington  College,  Fredericksburg, Virginia  22401.

The Peace  River  region  has been called Canada's "last  agricultural frontier." It was the southernmost  part  of the district  that first  attracted  large  numbers  of settlers,  encouraged  by  railroad  building  in the second decade of the twentieth century  (Dawson  1934). The  northern  portion  was  much  slower  to  develop.  Some settlers penetrated  the area  via riverboat  before  1930,  but numbers  were small and settler impact  limited.  After  1930,  large  numbers  of conservative  Mennonites entered  the area,  settling  on natural  prairies,  surrounded  by forest,  in the  vicinity  of La  Crete. As more Mennonite settlers arrived,  demand for farmland was met  by clearing wooded  tracts  adjacent  to  existing  farms  (Bowen  199o; Plett 2001, 156-158).  This process  satisfied  farmers' needs until the  1970s,  when  population growth outpaced the  availability  of  land,  triggered  by high  birthrates  and an influx of Mennonite migrants  from Latin  America,  in effect  completing  a  cycle  of  migration  that had taken  many  from Canada to Latin America from the 1920os onward  (Sawatsky 1971; Van  Dyke  1972).  This  presented  a serious  dilemma for the Mennonite  community, which wanted to  keep  its  young people, provide  them with  opportunities  to farm, and make it  possible  for them to raise their children in rural  settings,  insulated from outside influences.  Many  residents  believed that the  problem  could be  resolved if the  province  opened  more land for settlement.

The land  being  developed  southwest  of La  Crete  is  part  of a  nearly flat  plain  that was once the floor of a  glacial  lake.  The soils,  developed  from lacustrine  silts and clays,  are  often  poorly  drained,  and most  government  experts  consider  them marginal  for  agriculture. Indeed,  the Canada  Land  Inventory  has rated  the land as  Class 4,  which  means  that  it has  severe  limitations,  including  dense  subsurface layers, that restrict  crop production.  This evaluation  has been confirmed  by  Alberta's  Public Lands Division,  whose  studies in the  early 1980s  showed  that no more  than  70 percent of the area  contained  arable  land  and  that  many  places,  including  some  parcels that were later  opened  for settlement,  fell short of  the  50 percent  mark (AENR 1980b;  Hanus  1980, 12-13;  AENR  1981, 11;  Northern  Development Branch  1982, 4-6; Sisson  1984, 28;  Ojamaa  and McNeil  1985, 43-45).  Deficiencies  in the land base are compounded by  climatic  limitations.  The area  receives  between  12  and  15  inches of precipitation  annually  and  experiences  a frost-free  period  that seldom exceeds  seventy-five  or  eighty  days.  These  problems  are  partly  offset  by  a concentration  of  precipitation  in the warmer months and  by long  summer  days (with 18.5  hours of daylight  on  June  21), which  helps  push  the number  of  growing  degree  days  to  slightly above  the minimum needed  to  produce  cereal  grains  and  forage  crops  (Hanus  1980, 13-16; AENR 1981, 21-22; Sisson  1984, 27-30; ECA 1985, 127-128; NP 1985a).  Despite these well-documented  impediments,  farmers  in the area  have  been convinced for years  that this land is more than  satisfactory and that it would  prove  a  good place for agricultural expansion  (NP 1985a;  Friesen 1998;  Krahn 1999).

## ACQUISITION OF  LAND

Opening  the new farmland  southwest  of La Crete involved  a complex  interplay  of local initiative  and  provincial  cooperation.  The first steps were taken in 1976,  when

FIG.  1-The  Peace  River  district,  Alberta.  (Cartography by Sherry  Dowdy)

<!-- image -->

active  farmers, young  men  seeking  to establish  farms,  and La  Crete  business  leaders turned to northwestern  Alberta's Agricultural  Development  Committee  (ADC),  a board  created  in the  196os to oversee  local  land-use  issues,  for  assistance  in  opening large  blocks of land.  The  province's land-development  policy  was reactive  or  "passive,"  for under most circumstances  the  government simply  awarded  individual parcels  in  response  to  applicants' requests  (Carcajou Research  1977,  65;  Hanus  1980, 65-66).  It was  up  to the  people  of La  Crete  to demonstrate  that sufficient  demand existed  for  the  province  to allocate  land  on a  grander scale.  In October  1976  the ADC authorized  Martin  Wieler,  one of La  Crete's  representatives on the committee, to canvass  the Mennonite  community  and  prepare  a list of  people  who would establish  farms,  or  expand existing  farms,  if land were made available  (ADC  1976a).  A month later  Wieler  presented  the committee with the names of  forty people  who wanted more land  (ADC  1976b).  Although  the list was  incomplete,  the number of land seekers  was  large enough  to  persuade  D. W. Schmidt,  the Alberta  associate minister of  public  lands,  to meet with the  people  of La  Crete  in  February  1977  to determine  whether  a  large,  compact  tract  should be  opened.  Schmidt's  decision,  it was  said,  would  depend  on the size  of the turnout  of interested parties.  Anticipating a  large  attendance,  Wieler  declared  that "if a hundred  sections  [were]  opened ... there'd  be  applicants  for all of them"  (NP  1977a).'

Wieler's  prediction  was not far  off the mark.  More than  loo  farmers  and  prospective  farmers  attended  the  meeting  and  urged  Schmidt  to  open  more  land.  Correspondence  between the  ADC and the  Ministry  of Public Lands,  combined with two  follow-up meetings  with Schmidt,  reinforced  their demands  (ADC  1977,  1978; NP 1977b).  But  the  province  was not  willing  to  open large  amounts of land until it had  gathered  additional information about  prospective  farmers'  needs  through  a survey  of farmers  in La  Crete  and other  parts  of the northern  Peace  River  country. The  survey  yielded  three  major  conclusions. First,  it confirmed that demand for land was  high.  Second,  respondents  made it clear  that the  purchase  of  public  land was the  only practical  way  for  young  families,  who could not  ordinarily afford  privately  owned,  developed  land,  to  get  started.  Finally, almost  every  person  who was interviewed  agreed  that if the  government  did make land available,  it should include a  development  requirement  in its sales  agreements  to ensure  that  purchasers would use their  land for  farming  and not for  speculation  (Hanus  1980, 61-63).

With this information in hand,  the  province  was  ready  to act. Even  before the survey  results  were made available  to the  public,  it  designated  parts  of five townships  southwest  of La  Crete,  in an area  that  became  known as  Blue  Hills,2  for development,  with land to be made available  in three  phases.  Because  this was a new policy,  no  specific  guidelines  existed  for  allocating  so much  land  at  one time (Haden and Ironside  1990o, 199).  Accordingly, at the request  of the minister of agriculture, the  ADC  held a public meeting at La Crete in December 1979  to establish  procedures.  Nearly  200 people attended  the meeting,  to determine  the size of parcels  to be allocated  and the criteria  to be used in screening  applicants.  Some residents  favored  parcels  of  approximately  500  acres of  arable land,  arguing  that  at least that

much was needed for farmers  to make a  profit.  Others  supported  smaller  parcels, with no more than  300  arable  acres  per  unit  (ADC 1979;  NP  1979).  The latter  group knew that smaller  parcels  were not the best choice from an economic  perspective but insisted  that  economics should  be a  secondary  concern.  For  them,  providing  as many  young  Mennonite  families  as  possible  with a means  to have  their  own farms, and to  enjoy  a traditional  lifestyle,  was more  important (Siemens 1998).  As one observer  put it,  "farming ... in La  Crete  is as much an act of faith  as a livelihood" (Corbett  1988,  40). By  a show of hands,  the  overwhelming  majority  indicated  their preference  for smaller  units, which would be  pieced together  in such a  way  that each  contained  about  300  acres  of arable land  (ADC  1979,  1980).  With  this  issue  settled, those in attendance  unanimously  approved  a  proposal  giving preference  in the selection  process  to  beginning  farmers  from La  Crete  (ADC  1979;  NP  1979).  These decisions,  based  primarily  on  community  values,  laid the  groundwork  for  the  special land  postings  and draws  (lotteries)  that  would follow.

In  January  1980, when the first nineteen  parcels  were offered under a  special posting,  179  people  filed  applications  (Figure  2).  After  the  application  period  ended, the  ADC began  to screen  the  applicants, who were  required  to  complete  a  two-page questionnaire  and  appear  for an interview.  To  be selected  for the draw,  applicants had to  satisfy  the committee that  they  were  familiar  with the land,  understood  the time and cost involved in  creating  a viable farm, had some  farming experience, could  guarantee  that  they  had access  to  appropriate  machinery,  and had concrete plans  for  financing  the  development  of their  farming operations (ADC  198oa;  NP 1980).

On the basis  of these  criteria,  seventy-one people  were  chosen to enter  the first draw,  held in October  1980.  Seventy-one  pieces  of  paper  with  seventy-one  numbers were  placed  in a barrel.  The  person  who drew  number  one had  the first  choice of a farm  unit,  and so on,  until all  nineteen  parcels were  claimed  (NP  1980).  Rather  than selling  the land  outright,  the  government  gave  successful  applicants  five-year  Farm Development  Leases, with  options  to  purchase  after  the terms  of the lease  had  been met. Under  the lease  agreement,  farmers  were  required  to have  90  acres  in seedbed condition,  or  160  acres  cleared  and  piled,  by  the end of the third  year  and  160 acres in seedbed condition  by  the end of the fifth  year.  Each  new homesteader  was required  to establish  residence  on the leased  land or live on a farm  within a lo-mile radius  of the  property  (AENR 1980a). The  cost  of the  land  varied  because  of differences in  quality,  but in  general  it was leased each  year  for 2  percent  of its fair-market value,  and when it was sold it cost  approximately  $50  per  acre  for arable  land and about  $35  per  acre  for nonarable  land  (NP  1980).

In November  1980  the  government  made another  thirty parcels  available,  and the  process  was  repeated, with  nearly 150 people  filing applications  (NP 1980). The second  draw  was held in June  1981, and when it was  completed  all  units  were  in the hands of  beginning  farmers from La Crete, all under the  age of  thirty (AENR  1980b; NP  1980;  ADC  1981).  After that, land allocations  were  put  on  hold  until the  province could  iron out  problems  stemming  from  delays  in completing  paperwork, increases

FIG. 2-Special postings  of land,  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  1984.  (Cartography by Sherry  Dowdy)

<!-- image -->

in the cost of land,  and inconsistencies  in the  appeal  process  for individuals  whose applications  had  been  rejected. These issues  were  not  fully  resolved  until  1983  (ADC 1982a,  1983a;  NADC 1983).  By  that time  farmers were  breaking ground  on thousands of acres  annually, and  pressure  was  building  for the  government  to  open  still more land (ADC  1982b, 1983b).  This was  accomplished  in  1984, when the  province  allocated  another  thirty  parcels,  containing  more than  15,000 acres,  a few miles northwest  of  the  original  development area (ADC 1983a;  AENR  1984;  NP  1984).  With  the completion  of this  draw,  Blue  Hills contained  seventy-nine  new  farming  units.  All but one  belonged  to  young Mennonites,  with the  single exception  a non-Mennonite man of German  descent who obtained four 160-acre  quarter-sections  in the 1984  draw  (ID 1986;  Haden  1990;  Siemens  1998).

## CHANGING LANDSCAPES

Maps  based on evidence obtained from aerial  photographs,  topographic  sheets, and fieldwork  I conducted between  1998  and 2001 demonstrate  the  magnitude  of change  that  has  taken  place  since  the  1970s.  Blue  Hills  has  been transformed  from a forested  plain  to a land of  grain  and  canola,  with well-maintained  farmsteads  dotting  the  countryside.  In  1970,  cleared  land consisted  of  just  thirteen  fields,  totaling fewer  than  1,5oo  acres,  on  quarter-sections that  had  been homesteaded  in the  1960s near an east-west road that connects La Crete  with a  ferry  crossing  on the Peace River  (Figure  3).  By 1985,  more  than  25,000  acres had been  cleared,  mostly  in  the south-central  part  of Blue  Hills,  on land  acquired in the  1980  and  1981 draws  (Figure 4).  To  the  north,  the  most  significant changes  had  taken  place  on homesteads  claimed before  1970,  on  individual  quarter-sections acquired  in  the  1970s,  and  on  parcels made available  by  a  special posting  for  expansion  of  existing  farms  (Homestead Files  1964-1969; ADC  1983a;  Smith  1983).  From  1986  through 1994,  an additional  lo,ooo acres  were  placed  under cultivation. Since that time, development  has  begun  on approximately  4,000 acres,  particularly on the  periphery  of lands  made  available  in 1980  and  1981 and within the area  opened  in  1984  (Figure  5).  All  parcels  designated as "Under  Development"  in  Figure  5  have  been  logged  in  preparation  for  farming, most are  ready  or  nearly  ready  for  planting,  and  some,  logged  in  1995  and  1996,  are producing crops.

Bringing  raw  land into  production  has not been  easy,  for it can  take  up  to four years  before  a  first crop  is  planted. Land  first  is  logged,  and  debris  is  piled  and  burned (Figure  6). Next, roots are  picked, piled,  and burned  (Figure  7).  With enormous expenditures  of time and effort,  these  procedures  can be  completed  in two  years, but most  beginning  farmers  are  unable  to devote  full  attention  to them,  so  development work  is  usually  into its  third  year  before  all  of the  roots  are  picked  and  burned. Then  comes  the  time  to  plant.  Some  men  succeed  in  rushing  the  process  and,  in their  third  year, manage  to  plant  crops  between  smoldering  windrows  of  logging debris and  roots,  but  this  is not  common (Hanus  1980;  Woods  Gordon  Management  Consultants  1983;  Barber and  Taylor 1990; Unrau  1999). The  years following each land-selection drawing  witness  development  activity  almost  beyond  belief  as

farmers  work to  ready  their land for  planting.  It is estimated  that close to  20,000 acres  were  logged  in Blue Hills in the winter of  1983/1984  alone, and from  1982  through 1986  piling, picking,  burning,  or  plowing  took  place  on at least  io,ooo  acres  annually.  Most new farmers  use their own  machinery  or that of their  fathers,  but some employ  others to do this work, established farmers from La Crete who  provide custom root  picking and  plowing services (ADC 1983b;  Friesen  1989; Driedger 1999;  Schmidt 2001).  Since the  mid-198os  the  rate of  development has  subsided, but even  today  it is not unusual  to see  plumes  of smoke  rising  skyward,  indicating that someone is  burning logging  debris  or roots on still more land  being prepared for  farming.

Almost all of the  agricultural land in Blue Hills has  been  planted  to cash  crops; only  a  tiny  fraction  is in  pasture.  Considering  the  high  cost of  converting  wooded land  to  cropland,  it  might  seem  reasonable for  farmers  to  place  greater  emphasis  on raising  cattle,  but this is not the case,  primarily  because  of financial  and time constraints.  The  cost  of  creating  pasture  is  nearly as  high  as  that  associated  with  preparing  land for  crops,  and because  most  beginning  farmers  must work in the  logging industry  in winter to make ends meet, producing  cash  crops  makes more sense. Once  crops  are  harvested,  a farmer's responsibilities  are over for several  months, whereas  cattle  must be fed and  cared  for  throughout  northern  Alberta's harsh  winters. When  farmers can earn  $25,000  or  more  by working  on  logging  crews from November to March  and still  be home  every  weekend,  making  the choice between producing  cash  crops  and  raising  cattle is not  difficult  (Siemens  1998;  Wieler  1999; Peters 2001;  West  2001).  This situation  is  clearly  reflected in land-use  patterns.  In the summer  of 2001  no more  than  5  percent  of cleared  land  in Blue  Hills  was  in  pasture, with most of the remainder  planted  to  grain  or canola.

Creation of new farms in Blue Hills has been  accompanied  by  an enormous increase  of  population  and  by development  of a  community infrastructure, which includes  roads,  churches,  and schools.  In  1970,  only  8 miles  of roads  extended  from the main east-west  highway (Figure  8). By 1985,  the  province  had constructed  50 more miles of roads  (Figure  9),  with  nearly  one-third of that total built in  1980 alone  in  preparation  for the first land  openings  (NP 1980). During  the next  decade, another 20 miles were added to the road  system.  In  2002, Blue Hills was served  by  12 miles of  paved  highway  and more  than  80  miles of  gravel  roads  (Figure  io).

Similar  rates  of  growth  occurred  in the number of households,  as  young  families established  residence  on their new farms  (Figure  11).  The number of  occupied dwellings  increased  from 12 in  1970 (Figure 8),  to  74  in  1985 (Figure 9),  to  approximately 140  in 2001  (Figure lo). The dramatic increase of households  since  1985  has been due in  part  to the movement  of new farmers  and  their  families  onto their  land, particularly  in the northwest, where  parcels were first made available in 1984.  But it also  represents  the  establishment  of  homes  by  settlers' children  who  have not  yet succeeded  in  acquiring  land  of  their  own.  In  many  instances  the  children,  often recently married, live in modest  frame structures or mobile  homes  on their parents' property, just yards from where  they grew up.

FIG. 3-Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  1970.  (Cartography by Sherry  Dowdy)

<!-- image -->

The 2002  population  of Blue Hills was  approximately 800. As the number of residents  has  grown,  churches  and  schools  have  become  important  community  focal  points.  Churches serving  the area's most conservative  Mennonites  (Old  Colony and  Sommerfelder) are  situated  in the  northern  part  of Blue  Hills;  a  third,  operated by  a  somewhat  more  liberal  group  (Bergthaler), was  established less  than  a  mile  east of the  study  area.  Blue Hills has a  public  school that  provides  education  through grade  nine and  two  private  schools  run  by  the Old  Colony  and  the Sommerfelders. Those children  who continue  on to  high  school must travel  daily  to La  Crete,  some 30  miles  distant,  but  in fact  many  youngsters  complete  their  formal  education  at  the schools close  to home and  work  with their  parents  until  they  marry.

## INTEGRATION  OF AGRICULTURE  AND  FORESTRY

Creation  of new farms in Blue Hills could not have been  accomplished  without income derived  from northern  Alberta's wood industries.  Indeed,  it is  improbable that the  province  would have  made  land available  unless outside  employment  opportunities  of this sort  had existed  for  beginning  farmers  (ADC  198oa;  Hanus  1980, 40-42;  La  Crete  Chamber  of Commerce  1987,  12; Wiebe  1989).  When  the first  draw

FIG.  4-Blue Hills, Alberta, 1985. (Cartography by Sherry Dowdy)

<!-- image -->

FIG. 5-Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  2001.  (Cartography by Sherry  Dowdy)

<!-- image -->

FIG. 6-Burning  logging debris, Blue  Hills, Alberta, summer 1999. (Photograph by  the  author)

<!-- image -->

FIG. 7-Root  picking,  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  summer  1999.  (Photograph  by  the  author)

<!-- image -->

FIG.  8-Roads and  occupied  dwellings,  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  1970.  (Cartography by Sherry  Dowdy)

<!-- image -->

was  held in  1980, the cost  of  bringing  raw  land  in Blue  Hills  into seedbed  condition was at least  $115 per  acre  and  occasionally ran  as  high  as  $16o.  Two  decades  later  it was almost  $300  per  acre,  which  meant  that  preparing a  quarteror half-section  of land  for  crops  could  cost  a  beginning  farmer  between  $50,ooo  and  $1oo,ooo  (Hanus 1980, 52-53;  Corbett  1988,  38-39;  Ducharme  1999;  Zacharias  1999).  In  addition,  young farmers  needed  funds  to  support  their  families  until  the  land  was  productive and  to sustain  them if  farming  proved  unprofitable. The  cost  of  getting  started  and  staying afloat  was  high,  especially when  grain  prices  dropped in the late  1980s  (Corbett 1988,  38-39;  Haden and Ironside  199o, 199;  Siemens  1998;  Driedger 1999).  Some men received help  from  their  families or  took  out  loans  to  develop their  farms, but  most have  relied  on  earnings from  the  forestry sector: logging and  log  hauling, sawmill work,  or,  for  some, the  sale  of  timber cut  on  their  own  land.

Logging and  log  hauling  provide the  greatest amount  of off-farm income.  At present, crews  from  the  La  Crete area  supply wood  to two  large  sawmills in  High Level, to  a  pair of  moderately sized  mills  in  La  Crete and  north  of  Red  Earth, and  to six smaller local  mills,  including one in Blue  Hills.  Hundreds of men  spend  the winter  in  camps as  much  as  250 miles  from  La  Crete, returning home  on  weekends

FIG. 9-Roads  and  occupied dwellings,  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  1985.  (Cartography by Sherry  Dowdy)

<!-- image -->

....

----

FIG.  lo-Roads and  occupied dwellings,  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  2001.  (Cartography by Sherry  Dowdy)

<!-- image -->

FIG. 11-Establishing  a new  home, Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  summer  1999.  (Photograph  by  the  author)

<!-- image -->

to visit their families  and attend  church.  The  magnitude  of this business is illustrated  by  the  employment  of  approximately ioo teams  of Mennonite  truckers, each comprising  two  men,  who haul  logs only  to the two mills in  High  Level.  Most  men earn about  $25,000  for five  months in the  woods,  but some have  received  as much as  $30,000 (NP  1999; Wieler  1999; Fehr  Family  History  Book Committee  2ool, 9497,  254-261; Peters  2001;  Schmidt  2001; West  200o;  FFP-Tolko 2002).  Not all  of these individuals  are  from Blue  Hills,  of  course,  but assertions  that the  development  of farms  in this  area  could  not have  occurred  without  money  earned  from  work  in the woods and  that  every  new  farmer  is  employed  as  a  logger  or  trucker lie  very  close  to the truth  (Siemens  1998;  Driedger  1999;  Thiessen  1999;  Friesen  2oo1;  Peters 2ool; Teichroeb  2001).  Because  the annual  cycles  of  raising  cash  crops  and  logging  are complementary, this  arrangement, with men  working  part  of the  year  on the land and  part  of it in the woods, has become the foundation of economic life in Blue Hills.

Employment  in sawmills is another source of income. Half of the full-time workforce  of  twenty-two  men at the mill in Blue  Hills are  local  farmers;  a handful of their  neighbors  have  jobs  in mills  closer  to La  Crete.  Most  of these  men farm  on weekends  and  at  other  times  when  they  are  home,  but  the  operator of one mill  near La  Crete routinely  gives  the  farmers on his crew  time off  in the  spring  and  fall  to  put in their  crops  and  to harvest  them  (Braun  1999; Peters  1999;  Wieler  1999;  Zacharias 1999;  Friesen  2001).  Sawmill  work  lags  far  behind  logging  as  a  means  of  support  for

Blue  Hills  farmers, but for  those few  who do not work  in the woods in the  winter,  it provides  an alternative way  to make  ends meet.

A number of Blue Hills farmers  have  improved  their finances  by selling  timber from their  own land.  In  the  198os  beginning  farmers  simply  burned  the trees  (principally  aspen  and  poplar)  that  were  cut  during  land  clearing, but with the establishment of small,  local sawmills  in the  199os,  this  practice  came to a halt  (Letkeman 1999;  Thiessen  1999).  Two  of the new mills  rely  primarily  on timber from  private land;  another  obtains  part  of its  supply  from  that source  (Braun  1999; Wieler  1999; NP  2000b,  200ooa; Friesen 2001).  Demand  from these mills has created new  opportunities for Blue Hills farmers,  who have  responded  by cutting  much of the timber remaining  on their  land.  In recent  years  some individuals  have  sold their  timber  for as much  as  $9o,ooo-$100oo,ooo,  far in excess of the  cost  of the land. These  men  understand  that the sale  of timber  is a one-time bonanza  but  readily  agree  that it has been a  major  factor  in debt  reduction,  which in turn has  put development  of their farms on a solid  financial  footing  (Driedger  1999;  Letkeman  1999;  Wieler  1999).

Few  families  in Blue  Hills  are  supported  by  agriculture alone.  Instead,  they  view farming  as  a  desirable way  of life  but  know  that  wood  pays  the  bills.  The  importance of  farming  as a  lifestyle  rather  than  as  a  strictly  financial  venture  was  made  clear  by information  supplied  in  1988  and  1989  by  seventy-four  Mennonite  farmers living  in the La  Crete  area,  including  several  from Blue Hills. These men declared  that the principal  reason  they  were  engaged  in  farming was  the  lifestyle  it  provided,  both for themselves  and their  families,  and added  that  farming  was also  important  because it is  part  of Mennonite  culture. Farming  as  a  way  to make  a  living  was  at  the  bottom of the list  (Haden 1990,  84).  Further  evidence that  farming  is driven  by  cultural rather  than financial  considerations  is found in the words of one Blue Hills resident,  who averred  that  for  him and  his  neighbors,  farming  is  "the  lifestyle  we  prefer ... everything  else  is  secondary  to  maintaining this  way  of  life"  (Siemens  1998). Another  man declared  that  "we...  hope  to teach  our children  the value  of  farming and a life of farm satisfaction  and the love for the land"  (quoted  in Haden  1993, 166).  Nearly  all farmers  I interviewed  in Blue Hills echoed these sentiments. The economic side of this  equation  is confirmed  by  the chairman  of La  Crete's  Timber Advisory  Committee  (and formerly  a  farmer),  who asserts  that  the  development  of farms  in Blue  Hills  has  been made  possible  only by forestry-related work.  Today, he maintains,  "each  and  every  farm  is  supported  by forestry  ...  it is the  community's economic lifeblood"  (Friesen  2001).

## AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE

Dramatic  changes  have taken  place  in  Blue  Hills,  but  the  area faces  an uncertain future.  At  present,  relationships  between  the  province  and  the Mennonite  community  in and around  La  Crete  are  clouded  by  tension and mistrust.  Two  interrelated issues  lie at  the root of this  problem.  The first  is  sharp  disagreement  about modifications  of  government  policy  for  acquiring  land near  the  fringes  of settlement.  The second is debate  about  whether  new  blocks  of land should  be made  available  under

special postings and, if  so,  where  they  should be located. These matters  affect all discussion of the future  of  agricultural  expansion  in Alberta's north.

In Blue Hills the first  issue revolves  around  gradual  replacement of traditional homesteading procedures  with auction sales and around the  province's  ruling  in 1998  that timber must be removed before  parcels  can be advertised  for auction (Haden 1990o;  Ducharme  1999).  Between the  1984  draw and  1998,  it was not uncommon for  prospective  farmers  to homestead  properties  adjacent to land  already allocated  and to finance  development  of their  farms  through  the sale  of timber.  Indeed, by 1994  more than three  dozen  quarter-sections had been  acquired  in this manner (ID 1986, 1994;  Friesen  1998;  Letkeman  1999;  Zacharias  1999).  But the  new  regulations have  placed  serious  obstacles  in the  way  of  young  families  seeking  farms.  Selling  land at auction has often driven  prices beyond  the reach  of  aspiring  farmers, and if an individual  does succeed  in  obtaining  land  through  this  procedure,  funds to  develop  his farm are now limited because the timber has  already  been cut and sold  (Letkeman  1999).  Officials  argue  that the  province  is  simply  fine  tuning  an existing  process  and that  new farmers managed  to  get  started  in the  past  when  they burned all of their  timber,  but the  people  of Blue  Hills are  not so sure  (Ducharme 1999).  "When  the  government  saw how much  money  farmers  were  making  from logging  their  land," said  one,  "they  got  into the  act,  and  what  they  have  done is not good  for the future  of our  young people"  (Driedger  1999).

The second issue is driven  by  continued  high  demand  for  land  among  the area's young  Mennonite families,  who remain  determined to create  farms  and establish homes where  they  can raise their children in a suitable  social environment. One resident  said that if the  government  opened twenty  new  parcels  near  Blue  Hills, it would receive  400  applications  for  the land  (Driedger  1999).  Indeed,  the  only point of  agreement  in the  platforms  of two farmers  from Blue Hills who ran for a local political  office in October  2001  was that  they  both wanted  more land set aside for agriculture. As one candidate  expressed  it,  opening  new land  is essential  "to  give  the next  generation  the  opportunity that we have had" (NP  2001C).

The land that the Mennonite  community  wants the  province  to  open  includes several  sections  west  and  southwest  of  property  made  available in the  1980  and  1984 special  postings,  along  with  two  townships  immediately  south of Blue  Hills.  Alberta Agriculture,  the  provincial department  that oversees  agricultural  concerns, concedes that some land to the west and southwest can be converted  into farms but believes that the southern  townships  are unsuitable for  agriculture  (Freehill  and Ducharme  1998, 2; Ducharme  1999).  Blue Hills  residents  disagree  with  this  assessment and  argue  that  they  are  more familiar  with the land and its  potential  than are the  people  who make the decisions. One farmer  explained  that  "my  friends  and I hunt  moose  down  there every year, so we know  what the land is like and what  can be  done  with  it" (Teichroeb  zool2001). Another  Blue  Hills  man  now  cultivates  more than 90  percent  of  a full  640-acre  section  that the  government  originally  declared had only 3o6  arable acres and contends  that settlers in the southern  townships  will do the same  (AENR  1980b; Letkeman 1999). Other individuals  who  acquired  four or

even  five  quarter-sections of  supposedly marginal land  have  cleared  and drained the wet  places  and  brought most of their  property under  cultivation, proving  in their  minds  that  the  government's "so-called experts," who relied  largely on aerial photographs for  their judgments, were wrong  (Driedger 1999;  Krahn 1999;  Teichroeb 2001). These  people see  little  difference between  their  land  when  they  first  came  to Blue  Hills  and  land  to  the  south  that  has  been  declared off  limits, and  they  have  no doubt  that  their  success can  be  repeated.

The  position of the  provincial authorities is  that  most  of  the  land  south  of Blue Hills  is too wet  for  agriculture and  that  the  cost  of  establishing satisfactory infrastructure is  prohibitive. It  believes that  a few  spots  do  have  potential but  that  they are  separated by  large areas  of  muskeg that  must  be crossed or  bypassed to make them accessible. When  the cost of  building  roads  and  bridges,  cutting  drainage ditches, and  installing power  lines  is  factored in,  Alberta Agriculture is  certain that the  benefits of  opening this  tract would  not  outweigh the  expense  (Ducharme 1999). Complicating the issue  is  recognition that  some  of the land  the Mennonites are seeking overlaps part  of  a  provincial Timber Management Area  whose  wood  is  allocated  to a  large pulp  mill  near  the  town  of Peace River. At  a  time  when  the  provincial  government is  actively encouraging the  expansion of  wood  industries in  northern Alberta, it  is  doubtful that  policy will  be  modified to  accommodate settlers on what the  government  considers  marginal  land  (Haden 1990, 136, 142;  NP  2000ooa; Friesen 2001). Moreover, as  opponents of  agricultural development south  of Blue  Hills  are quick  to  point  out,  land  is  still  available  ast  of La  Crete.

But  government efforts to  place settlers on the  properties east  of La  Crete  have enjoyed only  spotty success. Knowing that  many  deserving applicants had  failed to obtain  land  in Blue  Hills,  the  province opened  more  than  22,000  additional acres, beginning  12  miles  east  of La  Crete  and  extending across  the  Bear  River to  points more  than  3  miles east  of  the  Fort  Vermilion-Red Earth road.  This land,  made  available  to  beginning farmers through  special  postings in  1987 and  1989, was  divided into  thirty-eight parcels ranging in size  from  400  to  640  acres. The  province built roads  and  drainage ditches and  adopted  development requirements almost  identical  to  those  for  Blue  Hills  farmers (ADC 1985a,  1985b; NP  1985b; La  Crete  Chamber of Commerce  1987,  31;  ID  1988, 1991; Haden  199o, 16-26).  Since  1990o Alberta  Agriculture  has  designated more  land  for  development still  farther to the  east  and  southeast  (Ducharme 1999; Friesen 2001).

The  response to this  initiative has  been  disappointing. Although the  area  contained  nearly half  as  many  parcels as  Blue  Hills,  the  number of  participants in the draws  dropped to fewer than  one-fourth, indicating that  many  young  Mennonites were not interested in the eastern lands  (Haden  1990, 26). The pace  of  development has also been slow.  True,  the extreme  western  part  of this tract,  which  adjoins  land farmed for decades,  has  begun  to fill in. But  beyond  the Bear  River  conditions are less  promising.  In the summer  of 2001  only eight occupied dwellings  were located in the area,  all  but three  of them within a mile of the river.  No one lived east  of the Fort  Vermilion-Red  Earth  road.  Some fields  were  no longer  under  cultivation,  and

one  320-acre  tract,  which had  recently  been  logged  and  prepared  for cultivation, was abandoned. Several  access roads were  impassable,  and others could be used only by  four-wheel-drive  vehicles.  A visitor needed to  spend only  a few hours east of the Bear  River  to see that  agricultural  settlement  had not made much  headway there  and  that,  in some instances,  the forest  was  regaining  its hold on the land.3

Several  factors  explain  why young  Mennonite families  have not flocked  to the country  east  of the Bear  River. One  problem  is that  much of the land  is wet and  thus requires  an enormous amount of work  before it can be farmed.  Some of it cannot be reached  by  road. In fact,  in  1998  Alberta  Agriculture  removed  approximately 8,000  acres  east  of the river  from its list of  parcels  with  farming  potential  because they  were too wet and inaccessible  (Freehill  and Ducharme  1998, 5-6;  Ducharme 1999).  Another factor  is that with so few  people living  here,  no incentive exists to establish  churches  and schools  (either  public  or  private)  or to  improve  the roads, further  reducing  the area's appeal  to  prospective  settlers.

But wet  ground,  poor accessibility, and  pioneer  conditions have  not  prevented Mennonites  from  developing  farms  in Blue  Hills  or  making  demands  for  additional land to the south that is even more  poorly drained,  more difficult to  reach,  and without the  slightest  hint of social  infrastructure. The most serious  impediment  to developing  land  east  of the Bear  River  is its location near  two Indian  reservations  a short distance to the south. The  problem  with this, in the  eyes  of the Mennonite community,  is seldom discussed  openly  with  outsiders,  or if it is  brought  up  at  all,  it is  usually  alluded  to in an  oblique  way.  It was  expressed  most  explicitly  to me  by  a respected  community  and  church  leader,  who admitted  that  most Mennonites  from La Crete did not want to live close to First  Nation communities because of their concern about natives'  violent behavior  (often  alcohol  induced),  the need for their children  to attend  school with natives,  and the fear  that,  eventually,  some Mennonite  young people might marry  natives or other outsiders.  "We  Mennonites are deeply  concerned  with  preserving  our culture," he said,  "and  we fear  that  moving out to the east  will be a first  step  in the  wrong  direction"  (Janzen  1989).  This view was  repeated  by  a  supporter  of  agricultural  expansion  south of  Blue Hills, who explained  that  many  members  of the  community prefer  that the  government  open a  block  of land  to be  occupied  exclusively  by  Mennonites,  dozens of miles from  any people except  their  own  (Driedger  1999).  The  Alberta  public  lands  specialist  who is responsible  for  making  lands available  understands  the Mennonite  position  but is unwilling  to  give  in, insisting  that if  young  Mennonites wish to  develop  farms of their  own, they  must do so under  existing government  terms on land that has already  been  set aside  (Ducharme  1999).

For  the foreseeable  future,  the only newly opened  lands that most Mennonites will consider  taking  are individual  quarter-sections  close to Blue Hills, where the acquisition process  continues to involve  logging followed  by auction sales to the highest  bidders (Freehill and Ducharme  1998, 2; Ducharme  1999; NP  200oolb, 6). Land seekers  and  government  officials  hope  that  the  impasse  over  the settlement  of  larger blocks  can  be resolved,  but neither  is convinced  that  this will occur.  Only  one thing

is certain:  Occupation  of  significant  amounts of new land  by  farmers  in this frontier  region  will  require an  extraordinarily delicate  balance  of  provincial  policy,  Mennonite  objectives  and  values,  and economic realities.

## NOTES

1. A section consists of i  square  mile,  or  640  acres.
2.  The Blue  Hills area  is named  for the blue  appearance of the forest-covered  Buffalo  Head  Hills, a few miles to the east.  Blue Hills  comprises  six  townships,  of which five were  opened through processes described in this section. A small  part  of the area's  northeasternmost  township  was homesteaded in the  196os  and  1970s.  Settlement elsewhere  in this  township  took  place during  the  198os, when additional  quarter-sections were  made  available; and from  then  on,  development  there  has  gone hand in hand with  agricultural  expansion  in Blue  Hills'  other five  townships.
3.  Indeed,  the recent  decision  by  a La  Crete  pork  firm  to build a  large  sow barn  approximately 6 miles east  of the  Bear  River  instead  of in the  Blue  Hills  area  was  based  primarily on its  recognition  that the inevitable  stench  produced  by  this business would create  fewer  problems  at the site east of the Bear  River  because  "this  area  ...  has  no residences  and  there  are  a lot of  open  areas" (NP  200ld, 2002).

## REFERENCES

- ADC  [Agricultural Development  Committee,  ID  231].  1976a. Meeting  minutes,  12  October.  Accession Number  91.9o.  Provincial  Archives  of Alberta,  Edmonton.
- .  1976b. Meeting minutes, to  November. Accession Number  91.9o.  Provincial  Archives of Alberta,  Edmonton.
- .  1977. Meeting minutes, 14 July.  Accession Number  91.9o.  Provincial  Archives  of Alberta, Edmonton.
- .  1978.  Meeting  minutes,  Edmonton,  11  January.  Accession  Number  91.9o.  Provincial Archives of Alberta,  Edmonton.
- .  1979. Meeting  minutes,  17 December.  Accession  Number  91.9o.  Provincial Archives  of  Alberta, Edmonton.
- .  1981.  Meeting  minutes,  9 January.  Accession  Number 91.9o.  Provincial  Archives  of  Alberta, Edmonton.
- .  1981.  Meeting minutes, 2  April.  Accession Number  91.9o.  Provincial  Archives  of Alberta, Edmonton.
- .  1982a.  Meeting  minutes,  1  December. Accession  Number  91.9o.  Provincial Archives of Alberta, Edmonton.
- .  1982b.  Meeting minutes,  21  July. Accession Number  91.9o.  Provincial  Archives  of Alberta, Edmonton.
- .  1983a.  Meeting  minutes,  26  January. Accession  Number  91.9o.  Provincial Archives  of  Alberta, Edmonton.
- .  1983b.  Brief  to  the  Environment Council  of  Alberta  Public  Hearing  on  Maintaining and Expanding  the  Agricultural  Land  Base in Alberta,  28  July. Accession Number  91.9o.  Provincial Archives  of Alberta,  Edmonton.
- .  1985a.  Meeting  minutes,  6 December. Accession  Number  91.9o. Provincial Archives  of  Alberta, Edmonton.
- .  1985b.  Meeting  minutes,  11  December. Accession Number  91.9o.  Provincial Archives of Alberta, Edmonton.
- AENR  [Alberta Energy  and  Natural  Resources]. 1980a.  Special  Posting  No.  1, 30 September.  Accession  Number  90.92,  File NW  32-102-17-5-1. Provincial  Archives  of Alberta,  Edmonton.
- .  1980b.  Special  Posting  of Land, 7 November.  Accession  Number  90.92,  File NW  32-102-175-1.  Provincial  Archives  of Alberta,  Edmonton.
- .  1981. Integrated Resource  Plan: Lower Peace River  Regional  Overview. Edmonton:  Alberta Energy  and Natural  Resources.
- .  1984.  Special  Posting  of  Lands, 15  March. Accession  Number  90.92,  File NW  32-102-17-5-1. Provincial  Archives  of Alberta,  Edmonton.

- Barber,  G. L.,  and A. D.  Taylor.  199o.  Land  Development: A Guide  to  Clearing,  Piling,  Breaking,  and Working Down  Land  in  Northwestern Alberta. Edmonton:  Alberta  Environment Information  Centre, Alberta  Forestry, Lands  and  Wildlife.
- Bowen, D. S.  199o.  The Transformation  of a Northern Alberta Frontier  Community.  M.A. thesis, University  of Maine.
- Braun,  J. 1999.  Interview  with the author.  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  15  June.
- Carcajou Research.  1977.  Agriculture in  Northern  Alberta: An  Introductory Study.  Unpublished  manuscript,  Carcajou Research  Ltd.,  Edmonton.
- Corbett,  B.  1988.  Mennonites  Break New  Ground  in Northern  Alberta. Canadian  Geographic  10o8  (2): 34-40.
- Dawson, C. A.  1934.  The  Settlement of  the  Peace  River  Country: A  Study  of  a Pioneer  Area.  Toronto: Macmillan  Company  of Canada.
- Driedger,  J. 1999.  Interview  with the author.  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  15  June.
- Ducharme,  C.  1999.  Interviews  with the author.  Fort  Vermilion,  Alberta,  lo  and 16  June.
- ECA  [Environmental  Council of  Alberta]. 1985. Maintaining  and  Expanding  the  Agricultural  Land Base  in Alberta.  Unpublished  manuscript,  Environmental  Council of Alberta.
- Economist. 1999.  True Grit. Economist  352 (8134): 21-22.
- Fehr  Family  History  Book Committee. 2001. David W &amp; Sarah  (Wall)  Fehr  Family  History,  188o2001.  Altona,  Manitoba:  Friesens  Corporation.
- FFP-Tolko  [Footner  Forest  Products-Tolko  Industries].  2002.  Contractor  Profile.  FFP-Tolko  Newsletter,  February, [6].
- Freehill,  K.,  and C. Ducharme.  1998. Green/White  Land  Exchange  Proposal.  Unpublished  manuscript,  Alberta  Agriculture, Fort  Vermilion.
- Friesen,  J. 1998.  Interview  with the author.  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  3 June.
- Friesen,  T.  1989.  Interview  with the author.  La  Crete,  Alberta,  14  June.

--

- .  2001.  Interview  with  the author. La Crete, Alberta,  8 June.
- Gorelick,  S.  2000. Facing  the  Farm Crisis.  Ecologist 30  (4):  28-31.
- Haden,  A.  J.  1990o.  Farmers' Attitudes  and  Agricultural Land  Expansion  in  Improvement  District  23, Alberta.  M.A.  thesis,  University  of Alberta.
- --. 1993.  Farmers' Attitudes  and  Agricultural  Land  Expansion  in  Improvement District 23,  Alberta.  In The  Uncovered Past:  Roots of  Northern  Alberta  Societies,  edited  by  P.  A. McCormack  and R. G. Ironside,  157-171. Edmonton:  Boreal  Institute  for Northern  Studies.
- Haden,  A.  J.,  and R.  G. Ironside.  1990. Agricultural Land  Expansion  in  Improvement  District  23  by Mennonite and Non-Mennonite Farmers.  In  Proceedings of  the  Fort  Chipewyan and Fort  Vermilion Bicentennial Conference, edited  by  P.  A. McCormack  and R.  G.  Ironside,  193-202.  Edmonton: Canadian  Circumpolar  Institute.
- Hanus, F.  1980.  Farm  Development  and Public Land  Disposition  in the Lower Peace River  Area, Alberta.  Unpublished  manuscript,  Alberta  Agriculture,  Edmonton.
- Homestead Files.  1964-1969. Township  104,  Range  17,  W  of  5th  Meridian.  Provincial  Archives  of Alberta,  Edmonton.
- ID  [Improvement District #231].  1986, 1988, 1991,  1994.  Map  of  Property  Ownership.  High  Level: Improvement  District  #23.
- Janzen,  G.  1989.  Interview  with the author.  La  Crete,  Alberta,  21  June.
- Krahn,  I.  1999.  Interview  with the author.  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  11  June.
- La  Crete  Chamber  of Commerce.  1987.  La  Crete  Economic  Growth  Study.  Unpublished  manuscript, La  Crete  Chamber  of Commerce.
- Letkeman,  J. 1999.  Interview  with the author.  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  to June.
- Lilliston, B., and N.  Ritchie.  2000.  Freedom to  Fail: How  U.S.  Farming  Policies Have  Helped Agribusiness  and Pushed  Family  Farmers  toward  Extinction.  Multinational  Monitor  21  (7  and  8): 9-12.
- NADC [Northern  Alberta  Development  Council].  1983. The  Development  of New  Agricultural  Land in  Northwestern Alberta. Unpublished  manuscript,  Northern  Alberta  Development  Council,  Peace River.
- Northern  Development  Branch. 1982. The Development  of New Agricultural  Land  in Northern  Alberta.  Unpublished  manuscript,  Northern  Development Branch,  Edmonton.
- NP  [Northern  Pioneer]. 1977a.  To Open  Land? Northern  Pioneer,  2  February,  1.
- -. 1977b. Homestead  Land  to Open.  Northern  Pioneer,  30 June,  1.

- -
*  1979. Young  Local  Homesteaders  Favored. Northern  Pioneer,  19 December,  1.
*  1980. More  Than  a Hundred  File  for  30  Homestead  Parcels  at La  Crete.  Northern Pioneer,  to December,  i.
- -1984. Special  Posting  of Land  for  Beginning  Farmers. Northern  Pioneer,  21  March,  1.
-  1985a.  Area  Farmers  Have  Their  Say. Northern  Pioneer,  3  July, 3.
- .  1985b.  ID  23  Agricultural Development  Committee  Meets.  Northern  Pioneer,  11 December,  1.
- .  1999.  Brewster  Mill  Acknowledges  Truckers.
- Northern  Pioneer,  21  April,  10.
- . 2000a.  Associate Forestry Minister  Tours Peace  Region Mills.  Northern Pioneer, 16  February, 1,  4.
- .
- 2000b.  La  Crete  Chamber  Holds  Monthly  Meeting.  Northern  Pioneer,  io  May,  5.
-  2oola.  Chamber  Holds AGM.  Northern  Pioneer,  7 February, 1.
- --. 2001b. Council  Meeting  Highlights.  Northern  Pioneer,  25  July, 6.
- . 2001d. Mackenzie  Pork  Plans  for Barn.  Northern  Pioneer,  24 December,  1.
- 2001C.  Candidate  Profiles.  Northern  Pioneer, 10 October,  i.
- . --.  2002. Mackenzie  Pork  Initiates  Plans  for New Barn.  Northern  Pioneer,  13  February, 7.
- Ojamaa,  P.  M., and R.  L.  McNeil.  1985.  Arable  Lands  Inventory  of Five  Areas  in the Peace  River  Region. Unpublished  manuscript,  Ojamaa  Associates,  Edmonton.
- Peters,  D.  2001. Interview  with the author.  La  Crete,  Alberta,  8  June.
- Peters,  W.  1999.  Interview  with the author.  La  Crete,  Alberta,  14  June.
- Plett,  D.  E,  ed.  2001. Old  Colony Mennonites  in Canada,  1875-2ooo.  Steinbach,  Manitoba:  Crossways Publications.
- Sawatsky, H. L.  1971. They  Sought  a  Country: Mennonite  Colonization in Mexico.  Berkeley: University of California  Press.
- Schmidt,  G.  2001. Interview  with the author.  La  Crete,  Alberta,  7 June.
- Siemens,  B.  1998.  Interview  with the author.  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  3 June.
- Sisson,  J. 1984.  Environmental Limitations  to the  Proposed  Expansion  of Farmland in the Peace  River Area.  Albertan  Geographer 20:  25-35.
- Smith,  D.  1983. Inspector's Reports.  In homestead  file NE 12,  Twp  104,  Range  18,  W  of 5th  Meridian. Provincial  Archives  of  Alberta,  Edmonton.
- Teichroeb,  J.  2001. Interview  with the author.  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  13  June.
- Thiessen,  A.  1999.  Interview  with the author.  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  io June.
- Unrau,  B.  1999.  Interview  with the author.  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  14  June.
- Van  Dyke,  E.  1972.  Blumenort: Study  of Persistence  in a Sect.  Ph.D.  diss.,  University  of Alberta.
- Vanderhill,  B. G.  1971.  The  Ragged  Edge:  A Review  of  Contemporary  Agricultural Settlement  along the Canadian  Northern  Frontier.  Geografisch Tijdschrift 5 (2):  123-133.
- .  1982.  The  Passing  of the Pioneer  Fringe  in Western  Canada.  Geographical Review  72 (2): 200-217.
- West,  D.  2001. Interview  with the author.  High  Level,  Alberta,  5 June.
- Wiebe,  J.  B.  1989.  Interview  with the author.  La  Crete,  Alberta,  20  June.
- Wieler,  J. 1999.  Interview  with the author.  Buffalo  Head  Prairie, Alberta,  14  June.
- Woods  Gordon  Management  Consultants.  1983.  The  Development of  New  Agricultural Land  in  Northwestern Alberta.  Edmonton:  Woods Gordon.
- Zacharias, G.  1999.  Interview  with the author.  Blue  Hills,  Alberta,  12  June.