<!-- image -->

## American Geographical Society

Biodiversity and Land-Use Change in the American Mountain West

Author(s): Jeremy D. Maestas, Richard L. Knight and Wendell C. Gilgert

Source:

Geographical Review, Vol. 91, No. 3 (Jul., 2001), pp. 509-524

Published by:

American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/3594738

Accessed: 18-01-2016 22:46 UTC

## REFERENCES

Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/3594738?seq=1&amp;cid=pdf-reference#references\_tab\_contents

You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

<!-- image -->

Wiley and American Geographical Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## The Geographical Review

VOLUME91

uly 2001

NUMBER 3

## BIODIVERSITY  AND  LAND-USE  CHANGE  IN THE AMERICAN MOUNTAIN  WEST

JEREMY  D. MAESTAS,  RICHARD L. KNIGHT,  and WENDELL  C. GILGERT

ABSTRACT.  Rural  private  lands  in the Mountain  West  of the United  States  are  undergoing  a profound  land-use  conversion,  from  agriculture to  low-density  residential  or exurban  development,  though  little  scientific  study  documents  the  ecological  consequences of this  change. Nongovernmental  conservation  organizations  are  working  with ranchers  to  keep  rangeland out of  development  and in  ranching, ostensibly  because these  organizations  believe that biodiversity  is better  protected  on ranches  than on exurban  developments.  We  compared plant  and wildlife communities  across  the  principal  rural  land uses in the Mountain  West: protection, livestock ranching, and  exurban development.  Native  plant  and  faunal biodiversity was  better  maintained on ranches  and  protected areas  than  on exurban developments. Exurban developments  favored  species  that were nonnative or  adapted  to human-altered  environments. The continued conversion  of ranches  to exurban  development  suggests  a  long-term alteration  of the  region's natural  heritage.  Keywords: biodiversity, exurban  development, land use,  ranching.

Conservationists have an admirable  history  of  documenting the  impacts  of  human  land  uses  on  biodiversity  to  better  inform  resource-management decisions. Considering  all  that, the state of our current  knowledge  about land-use  changes  in the Mountain  West of the United  States is less than  satisfactory.  Across the  region, we work to diminish  extractive and  commodity-based industries,  such as water development,  logging,  mining,  and livestock  grazing,  but have  largely  failed to  recognize the  ecological  consequences  of our own  actions,  especially  where we choose  to live and  play.  While we devote  much  of our attention  to the traditional  consumptive land  uses  that  characterized the "Old West,"  other  threats to  biodiversity  become more  pervasive  each  year  with the  emergence  of a "New West."  Urban  sprawl and outdoor  recreation,  for  example,  are the second  and fourth  leading  causes  of the decline in  federally  listed threatened and  endangered species (Czech, Krausman, and Devers 2000).

The character of the New West is  being shaped by  a flood of  immigrants  seeking to  enjoy  the  natural amenities  and  recreational  opportunities of  a  region  rich  in

*fi MR.  MAESTAS is a  graduate student  in wildlife  biology  at Colorado  State  University, Fort  Collins, Colorado  80523-1474,  where DR.  KNIGHT is a  professor  of conservation  biology  and where MR.  GILGERT is a  faculty  affiliate  from the USDA-NRCS Wildlife  Habitat  Management  Institute.

public  lands  (Power 1996;  Masnick  2001).  Importantly,  however,  only  half  of  the West  is  public  lands;  the most  productive lands  in the  region  are  in  private  ownership (Scott  and others 2001). This is critical,  because  the most  profound  land-use change  in the New  West  is the  conversion  of  private lands  presently in  ranching  and farming  to rural  residential, or  exurban, developments  (Knight  2002). Unfortunately, conservationists  have  given  scant  attention  to  studying  the  ecological  implications of this western  land-use  conversion.

Addressed  here  are  some  of the  ecological issues  associated with  land-use  change in the Mountain West. For readers  who are unfamiliar  with the  region's  current status,  we  provide  a brief review of the  changes  that are  occurring  with human population,  dominant  land  uses,  and  growth  patterns. We  then examine  an  emerging strategy  that is  being implemented  to  protect  biodiversity  from these  growth pressures.  Testing  the unstated  assumptions  of this new conservation  strategy, we present  the results  of a  comparison  of  biodiversity on the three  principal  land  uses beyond incorporated  city  limits in the Mountain  West:  protected  areas  (areas  protected  from  residential development),  livestock  ranches, and  exurban  developments. We conclude  by considering  the  implications  of our  findings  for conservation.

## EXURBANIZATION  OF THE MOUNTAIN  WEST

The  Mountain  West  of the United  States  is  experiencing a  human  population  boom that  rivals  any  in its  history.  Of the  eight  states  that  make  up  this  region-Arizona, Colorado,  Idaho,  Montana,  Nevada,  New  Mexico,  Utah,  and  Wyoming-five  are  the fastest growing  in the  country  (Figure  i). Metropolitan areas  and  their  suburbs  have accommodated  much of this  in-migration,  but rural  areas  are  growing  at a faster rate  (Heimlich  and  Anderson  2001).  Driven  by  a mixture  of economic and  qualityof-life  features,  people  are  increasingly drawn  to the rural  Mountain  West  (Power 1996).  Unlike  previous  booms driven  by  resource  extraction  and  commodity production,  the  present  period  of  growth  is fueled  by  the  expansion  of service,  recreation,  and information  industries  and is marked  by  the conversion  of  private  land use from  agriculture to exurban  development  (Riebsame,  Gosnell,  and Theobald 1996;  Sullins and others  2002).

As a  result,  three  of the  principal land  uses  in the rural  Mountain  West  today  are protection,  livestock  ranching,  and exurban  development.  Exurban  development refers  to  low-density  residential development  that  occurs  beyond  incorporated  city limits  (Nelson  and Dueker  1990;  Knight  1999).  The main  human  use in  protected areas  is  outdoor  recreation and  the  protection of  perceived natural values;  on ranches it is livestock  production;  in exurban  developments  it is human residence.  The amount of land in  protection  is  relatively  static,  with little added  annually.  The amount of land in  ranching  and exurban  development,  however,  is in flux:  Many ranches  are  being  subdivided  into  exurban  developments. In  Colorado,  for  example, 110o,ooo hectares  of  agricultural land  were  converted  to commercial  and  residential development  every  year  between  1992 and  1997  (Obermann,  Carlson, and  Batchelder 2000).

FIG.  1-Percentage change  in resident  population  by  state  in the United States  between 1990 and 2000.  Source:  Adapted  from U.S. Census  Bureau 2001.

<!-- image -->

The extent of land-use  change  due to  population  growth  in rural areas of the Mountain  West is  greater  than that in urban areas because  of the  dispersed  nature of  exurban  development  (Theobald  2000; Sullins and others  2002). Instead of focusing growth  within  incorporated  city limits,  exurban  growth  exists as  pockets  of residential  development  embedded  in a matrix of  agricultural  and  protected  lands. Nearly  80  percent  of the land used for houses  constructed between  1994  and  1997  in the  United  States was  in  nonmetropolitan areas  (Heimlich  and Anderson  2001). Sites  adjacent  to  public  lands are  particularly  attractive for  development  (Riebsame, Gosnell,  and Theobald  1996;  Swanson  2001).  Also,  exurban  developments require  more land than do urban and suburban  developments  because each house is situated on a large  lot  (typically 4-16 hectares). Fifty-seven percent  of the houses built between  1994 and 1997 were on  lots  at least  4  hectares in  size  (Heimlich  and Anderson  2001). In general,  exurban  developments  increase the influences  associated with human  residences  at two  spatial  scales:  site,  with  highly  dispersed  housing;  and  landscape, through  the  placement  of  developments  in rural areas  (Duerksen  and others  2000).

In contrast to the  ecological consequences  of urban and suburban  development, the  effects  of  exurban  development are not  well  studied.  Many  researchers have documented  changes  in wildlife  communities in  and  around  metropolitan areas (Emlen 1974;  Beissinger  and Osborne  1982; Mills,  Dunning,  and Bates 1989;  Engels

and Sexton  1994;  Blair  1996;  Germaine  and others  1998; Bock, Bock,  and Bennett 1999;  Crooks and Soule  1999).  Far fewer studies have examined  biodiversity  associated with exurban  developments,  and no studies have  compared  biodiversity  on exurban  developments  with that on  ranches and  protected  areas  (Vogel 1989; Harrison  1997, 1998;  Odell  and  Knight  2001). Although  little  is known  about  the conversion  of ranchland  to exurban  development,  conservationists  have assumed that  it  results  in a  simplification of  biodiversity, favoring  generalist species  that  thrive in association  with humans over  those that are  more sensitive  (Knight  and Clark 1998;  Knight  2002; Knight  and others  forthcoming).

In  fact,  wildlife  habitat  is affected  both  directly and  indirectly  by  the conversion of western  ecosystems  to exurban  development  (Knight  and Clark  1998).  Soil and vegetation are  directly disturbed  and  lost  in  the  construction of  houses,  roads,  fences, and communication lines. Habitat  quality  is  degraded  by  a  proliferation  of nonnative  plants  and  the  presence  of  humans,  their  automobiles,  and  their  pets (Mills, Dunning,  and Bates  1989;  Knight  and Clark  1998;  Miller,  Knight,  and  Miller 2001). These  changes  result  in elevated mortality  rates,  as  well  as  habitat  loss and  degradation.

## CONSERVATION  RESPONSE

Concern  about  the conversion  of the Mountain  West's natural  heritage from  a  mixture  of  generalist and  specialist  species  to a narrower suite  of  human-adapted  species has  generated  a new  response  to  biodiversity  protection among nongovernmental conservation  organizations (NGOS). The traditional  response  to  protect biodiversity from  anthropogenic  degradation has  been to  purchase land  and  designate  it as  a  protected  area.  The  emerging  response  is to work  with ranchers  to  protect  biodiversity while  keeping  the  land  in  private  ownership  and  as  a  working  ranch (Alexander  and  Propst  2002). Typically, development  rights  on the ranches  are  acquired  through  purchased conservation  easements  while  ranchers  continue  to raise livestock.  This  approach  has become  increasingly  popular,  especially  among  NGOS such  as  The  Nature  Conservancy and the  Rocky  Mountain  Elk  Foundation  (Weeks 2002). In  Colorado, about  35,000  hectares of  private land  have  been  protected  through conservation  easements  by  The Nature  Conservancy  and  24,000 hectares  by  the Rocky  Mountain  Elk Foundation (GCOFR  2000). This  strategy  has  increased  the number  of land  trusts  that  seek  to  protect  private land  in  agriculture from  development.  By  2000,  more than 1,200 land trusts in the United States  had  protected roughly 1,051,000 hectares  through  conservation  easements  (LTA 2001).

This  emerging  response  to  biodiversity  protection  has some untested  assumptions, however.  It assumes  that  biodiversity  on ranches  is no different  from that found on  protected  areas,  or at least that  biodiversity  is better  served  on ranches than on exurban  developments.  NGOs are  taking  this mode of action to  protect biodiversity  with  virtually  no scientific  evidence  to  support  their  approach.  They continue with this  strategy  even  though many  environmentalists argue  that livestock  ranching  is  perhaps  the most detrimental  land use in the West  (Fleischner

1994;  Wuerthner  1994;  Donahue  1999). We tested the  assumptions  of the  emerging strategy  by comparing songbird,  mammalian  carnivore,  and  plant  communities across  the  gradient of  intensifying rural  land  uses  of  protection,  livestock  ranching, and exurban  development.

## STUDY  AREA  AND  SITE  SELECTION

We conducted  our  study  from  May through  August  during  2000  and 2001 in the foothills  along  the  Front Range  of the  Rocky Mountains  in  northern  Larimer County, Colorado  (40050'  N, 105°15' W).  The  study  area  is  approximately 40  kilometers northwest  of Fort  Collins, the  nearest metropolitan area.  The  land-use  matrix  of the  region is a  blend of  private  ranchland, public  protected  areas,  and exurban  developments. The  vegetation is  a  mosaic  of  shrubsteppe and  mixed-grass prairie. Dominant  grasses include needle-and-thread  (Stipa  comata  Trin.  &amp;  Rupr.  var.  comata),  blue  grama (Bouteloua  gracilis  [Kunth]  Lag.  var.  gracilis), western  wheatgrass  (Elymus  smithii [Rydb.]  Gould),  and  cheatgrass  (Bromus  tectorum  L.).  Shrubs  include mountain mahogany (Cercocarpus montanus  Raf.  var.  montanus),  skunkbrush  sumac  (Rhus trilobata Nutt.  var.  trilobata), and  bitterbrush (Purshia tridentata [Pursh]  DC.).  Common forbs include  fringed sage (Artemesia  frigida Willd.)  and  hairy goldaster (Heterotheca villosa  [Pursh]  Shinners  var.  villosa).  Average  annual  precipitation ranges  from  33  to  46 centimeters,  with  75  percent  of it  falling  between  April  and September  (Moreland  1980).

The  study  was  restricted to sites  with similar  physical  characteristics, including the  same  shrubsteppe  plant  community, with  elevations  between  1,740  to  2,200 meters,  and similar  soil  types  to reduce  natural variability  among  sites.  Study  sites had to  comprise  at least  1,ooo  hectares  in order  to minimize the influence  of surrounding  land uses.  We  used  1:24,000  orthophoto-quadrangle maps  and  plat  maps from the Larimer County  Assessor's Office  to determine  potential  sites.

## STUDY  DESIGN  AND  DATA  COLLECTION

We  compared  songbird,  mammalian  carnivore, and  plant  communities  across  three land uses:  public protected  areas  (Colorado  Division of Wildlife's  State  Wildlife Areas)  whose  principal use  was  outdoor  recreation and  wildlife  protection  (no grazing, logging, mining,  or water  development);  private-land  livestock  ranches  with cattle;  and  exurban  developments  with one house  per  14-20 hectares.  We  randomly selected  ninety-three points  across the three land uses to  survey songbirds  and mammalian  carnivores  and  sixty-nine  points  to  sample  the  plant community.1 At each  point  we  sampled  communities  using  75-meter  fixed-radius point  counts for songbirds,2  scent stations for mammalian  carnivores,3  and 20-by-50-centimeter quadrats  for  plants.4

## FINDINGS

Biodiversity  differed across the three land-use  categories.  The occurrence  and density  of wildlife  species  were  more  similar  between  ranches  and  protected  areas  than

in exurban  developments.  Plant communities on ranches,  however,  differed  from those in  protected  areas  and exurban  developments.

We observed  a suite  of  species  in the  songbird  and  mammalian  carnivore  communities  that  benefit  from  factors  that  accompany elevated  human  densities  found

FIG.  2-Densities and  95 percent log-based  confidence  intervals of  human-adapted songbird  species.  These  birds were similar in that  they  reached their  greatest  densities  in  exurban  developments. Letters next  to  density  estimates  indicate  the  results of statistical  comparisons between  land uses. Densities  with  different letters are statistically  different,  whereas  densities  with  the  same letter are  not,  at o'  =  0.03.

<!-- image -->

in exurban  developments.  We also found  species  of  songbirds  and carnivores that occurred  in elevated  densities  on ranches  and in  protected  areas  when  compared with  exurban developments. For  the  plant  community, native species were  more  prevalent and nonnative  species  were  less  prevalent  on ranches  than in either  protected

areas  or exurban  developments.  Many  of the  species  that  thrived  in exurban  developments,  it merits  noting,  also  fare  well  in suburban and  urban  settings  (Blair  1996).

Songbirds  occurred  in three  categories that  can  be  separated according  to  population densities  and  land use.  Generalist  or  human-adapted  species  reached  higher

FIG.  3-Densities and  95  percent  log-based confidence intervals  of  songbird  species that reached  their  greatest  densities  in  land  devoted  to  ranching,  in  protected  areas, or in both  of those  land  uses. Letters next to  density  estimates  indicate  the results of statistical  comparisons between  land  uses.  Densities  with  different  letters  are  statistically  different,  whereas  densities with  the same letter are  not,  at c'  =  0.03.

<!-- image -->

densities  in exurban  developments than  on ranches  or  in  protected  areas  (Figure 2). Species  with narrower ecological  niches attained  considerably  greater densities  on land devoted to  ranching,  protection,  or both of those land uses than in exurban developments  (Figure  3).  Some  songbird  species,  such as the brown-headed  cow-

FIG.  4-Frequency of mammalian  carnivore  detections  at scent  stations  surveyed in exurban  developments,  on  ranches, and  in  protected areas.  Presented are  frequencies plus  one  standard error. Different letters  above  error  bars  indicate  a statistical  difference  between  frequencies, whereas  the same letter represents no statistical  difference  at o  = 0.10.

<!-- image -->

bird  (Molothrus ater)  and rock  wren  (Salpinctes obsoletus), showed no  statistically significant differences  in densities  across  the three  land  uses.

We did not have  large  enough  sample  sizes  to  generate reliable density  estimates for  many  of the  species  detected,  but  compositional  differences  could be observed in some  less  abundant species. We  observed  the  house  finch  (Carpodacus mexicanus), common raven  (Corvus  corax),  Say's phoebe (Sayornis saya),  and  red-winged  blackbird  (Agelaius  phoeniceus)  only  in exurban  developments.  The  dusky flycatcher (Empidonax  oberholseri), savannah  sparrow  (Passerculus sandwichensis), and lark bunting (Calamospiza  melanocorys) were seen  only  on ranches  and in  protected areas.

Few  mammalian  carnivores were  detected  over  the course  of our  study.  Domestic  dogs  (Canis familiaris)  and house cats  (Felis  catus)  were  detected  almost  exclusively  in exurban  developments, whereas  coyotes  (Canis  latrans) were  seldom  found at our scent stations in exurban  developments (Figure  4).  Bobcats  (Lynx  rufus) showed  no statistical  difference  at scent  stations  across  the three  land  uses.

Species  richness  and cover  of  plants  differed  across  the land uses.  We  recorded the  greatest number  of nonnative  species  in exurban developments  (Figure  5).  Nonnative  species  richness  and cover  per point  were  highest  in the exurban  develop-

FIG. 5-Total nonnative plant  species  richness  by  land  use.  The  same  number  of  quadrats  were sampled  in exurban  developments, on  ranches,  and in  protected  areas.

<!-- image -->

TABLE I-PLANT COMMUNITIES ACROSS  LAND USES IN  NORTHERN LARIMER COUNTY, COLORADO*

|                     | SPECIES RICHNESS   | SPECIES RICHNESS   | SPECIES RICHNESS   | SPECIES RICHNESS   | SPECIES COVER   | SPECIES COVER   | SPECIES COVER   | SPECIES COVER   |
|---------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|
|                     | NATIVE             | NATIVE             | NONNATIVE          | NONNATIVE          | NATIVE          | NATIVE          | NONNATIVE       | NONNATIVE       |
| LANDUSE             | No.                | Standard error     | No.                | Standard error     | %               | Standard error  | %               | Standard error  |
| Exurban development | 24.4a              | 1.0                | 4.7a               | 0.4                | 72.0a           | 3.7             | 26.8a           | 3.7             |
| Livestock ranching  | 27.0b              | 1.0                | 3.2b               | 0.3                | 80.4a           | 3.7             | 17.0b           | 4.1             |
| Protected areas     | 23.9a              | 1.2                | 4.5a               | 0.5                | 75.6a           | 2.3             | 28.4a           | 2.4             |

ments and  protected  areas  when  compared  with ranches  (Table  I).  More  species  of native  plants  were  found on ranches  than  in the other  two land  uses,  but the cover of native  plant  species did  not differ statistically across  land  uses  (Table I).  The  dominant nonnative  plant,  cheatgrass, was more  prevalent  in terms  of cover  in the  protected areas  (p  =  0.0002) and exurban  developments  (p  =  0.0050)  than on ranches.

## IMPLICATIONS FOR  CONSERVATION

Our results  support  the  emerging  strategy for  biodiversity  protection  being  implemented  by  environmental  NGOS.  Ranches  in our  study  supported  a more desirable biodiversity than  did  exurban  developments. This  is  evident  for  three  reasons.  First, ranches  were  virtually  the same as  protected  areas  in terms of  populations  of human-adapted  wildlife  species.  Second,  ranches  had  enhanced  populations  of native wildlife  species  of  conservation  concern  compared  with exurban  developments. Third,  plant  communities  on ranches  had  more  native  and  fewer  nonnative  species than did exurban  developments.

A more  ambiguous  relationship exists  between  ranches  and  protected areas.  The assumption  that these two land uses  support  similar  biodiversity  is  only partially borne out  by  our observations.  Ranches  and  protected  areas  supported  similarly low  populations  of  human-adapted wildlife  species  but  produced  variable  populations of other  species.  Also,  protected  areas  had a  higher  prevalence  of nonnative plant  species  and  fewer  native  plant  species  than did ranches.

A  generalization from our  study  is that there  is an increase  in  human-adapted wildlife  and  nonnative  plant  species  with  exurban  development. Interactions  among native,  nonnative,  and  human-adapted  species  could result  in  simplification  of the Mountain  West's  natural  heritage,  favoring  species  whose  evolutionary  life histories  allow  them  to exist  with  humans.  This  change has  negative  implications  for  the maintenance  of  biodiversity  at both the site scale  and the  landscape  scale,  and its consequences  are  increased  with  increasing  development  (Knight  2002).

Elevated  populations  of  human-adapted  songbirds  may  be  occurring  to the detriment  of other  species  (Marzluff, Gehlbach,  and Manuwal  1998).  For  instance, nest  predators  such as the black-billed  magpie (Pica  hudsonia)  may  lower the reproductive  success  of other birds in an area.  The blue  jay (Cyanocitta cristata),  a similar  nest  predator, has  been shown to increase  with urbanization  and  to  play  an important  role in the decline of an  endangered  bird,  the  golden-cheeked  warbler (Dendroica  chrysoparia) (Engels  and Sexton  1994).  The nonnative  European  starling (Sturnus  vulgaris)  competes  aggressively with native  birds  for  nesting  cavities. In one area  in  Nevada,  starlings succeeded  in  excluding  native  birds  from  nest sites for  five  years  (Weitzel  1988). Eric  Odell  and  Richard Knight,  who studied  songbirds in exurban  developments and  undeveloped  areas, found  that  exurban  developments supported  the  greatest densities  of black-billed magpies  and  European  starlings  and the lowest densities of other  songbirds,  which  may  be attributed  to interactions between  these  species  (2001).

House cats  and  domestic  dogs  are  subsidized  predators that  have  been  shown  to extend  the  realm  of human  influence  and  have  substantial impacts  on wildlife  populations  (Churcher  and Lawton  1987;  Miller,  Knight,  and Miller  2001).  These freeranging  pets  can occur at elevated  densities,  as seen in our  study,  because  they  are supplementally  fed and do not  depend  on densities  of native  prey species.  House cats have been  implicated  in the decline and extinction of  scrub-breeding  songbirds  in two studies  in California  (Hawkins  1998;  Crooks  and Soule  1999).  Further-

more,  Kevin  Crooks  and Michael  Soule found that  songbirds  persisted  in  patches with  coyotes because  these  native  predators reduced  the  number  of house  cats  (1999). Coyotes  were detected  less  frequently  in exurban  developments  than in the other land  uses  in our  study, which could  result  in  unusually  high songbird  mortality  owing  to domestic  cats.  Domestic  dogs  are  known  to harass  and  kill  wildlife,  but their impacts  are  less well studied.  Research has shown that  they  can extend  the zone of human influence  and contribute  to the annual  mortality  of some  species (Ballard and others  1999; Miller,  Knight,  and  Miller  2001).  Domestic dogs  and  house  cats have  been documented  to be more  prevalent  in exurban  developments,  especially near  houses,  possibly  at  the  expense  of other  native  predators, which  were  less  abundant  in exurban  developments  than  in  undeveloped  areas  (Odell  and  Knight  2001).

Nonnative  plants  can  change community dynamics  by disrupting  ecosystem processes  and  degrading  the  quality  of wildlife  habitat  (Masters  and  Sheley  2001). For  instance,  the  proliferation of  cheatgrass in the Mountain  West  has altered  historic  fire  regimes,  favoring  nonnative,  annual  grasslands over  native,  perennial  species. This invasive  plant  has  displaced  native  plants  and altered  the occurrence  of shrub-obligate  songbirds  that utilize these  ecosystems  (Rotenberry  1998).  In our study,  eight  of the  twenty-three  nonnative  plant species  documented in exurban developments  were  found  solely  within that  land  use.  Two  of these  species,  spotted knapweed  (Centaurea maculosa Lam.)  and  leafy  spurge  (Euphorbia esula  L. var.  esula), are  noxious  weeds  that  have  been  shown  to lower  the  value  of  rangeland  ecosystems for  ungulates  such as deer  (Odocoileus spp.)  and elk (Cervus  elaphus)  (Trammell and Butler  1995;  Thompson  1996).

The results  of altered  biotic communities in exurban  developments  could be influential  at  two  spatial scales  (Duerksen  and  others  2000). At  the site  scale,  potential  interactions among  wildlife  species  suggest  that  exurban  developments  may  be functioning  as  ecological  traps:  areas  where  species  assess  the land to be suitable habitat  but then suffer reduced survival  and  reproduction  when  they  live there (Pulliam  1996;  Donovan and  Thompson  2001). Also at this  level,  nonnative  plants displace  native  plants,  thereby  altering  interspecific dynamics  and  reducing  habitat quality  for  wildlife  that  do best  in native  plant  communities.  At  the  landscape  scale, exurban  developments  could be  serving  as sources  that  produce  an excess  of human-adapted  wildlife  species  and  nonnative  plants.  Because  exurban  developments are  embedded  in rural  areas,  often  adjacent to  public  lands,  they  may  be  providing individuals  and  propagules  that  spill  over into  surrounding  lands.  Therefore,  the effects  of exurban  development  are  felt  not  just  within its  boundaries  but well  into other areas  (Buechner  and  Sauvajot 1996;  Theobald, Miller,  and Hobbs  1997;  Knight and Clark  1998).

If exurban  developments  are  sources  of undesirable species,  then the  emerging strategy  to  protect  biodiversity  by working  with ranchers  is correct.  Ranchers  and farmers  own much of the land  being  converted  to exurban  development  in the Mountain  West  (Theobald  2000). Our  study  found that  biodiversity was at least  as well served  on ranches  as  it was  on  protected  areas.  More  support  for  the new con-

servation  strategy is  provided  by  a recent  study  which  pointed  out that  most of our protected  areas lie  on the  least  productive  soils  and  at  the  highest  elevations,  whereas most  private lands  occur  in the  most  productive, low-elevation  sites  (Scott  and  others  2001). Our  results,  combined  with this  information,  suggest  that  we will not be able  to sustain  native  biodiversity in the Mountain  West  by relying  merely  on  protected  areas. Future  conservation  efforts  to  protect  this  region's natural  heritage will require  closer  attention  to the role  of  private  lands  (Knight  1999).

## CONSIDERATIONS  FOR LAND-USE DECISION  MAKERS

Inferences  from our  study  should be viewed as  speculative, but if further  studies support  our  findings, land-use  planners  need  to be aware  of the  ecological  effects  of exurban  developments across  the  Mountain  West.  The  Ecological Society  of  America recently  published  a  report  that  provided  ecological  principles  and  guidelines  for land-use  decisions  (Dale  and others  2000). Christopher Duerksen  and others  have written  a  useful  handbook  that  gives  suggestions  for  reducing human  impacts  associated with  housing  developments (2000). Decision  makers concerned  about  the sustainability of land  uses  and  the  maintenance  of  biodiversity should  consult  these documents and others  and  encourage  more  informed  conversations  about  the implications  of land-use decisions.  We  suggest  three  additional  points,  derived  from an  ecological  perspective, to consider  when  making  land-use  decisions  in the rural Mountain  West:

1.  The  location  of development is  ecologically relevant.  Low-elevation  lands  support  a  disproportionate  amount of  biodiversity  and can be the most  ecologically sensitive  (Romme  1997).  Additionally, the effects  of  development  extend  beyond  its boundaries  and can be  expected  to influence  surrounding  lands.  Strategic  placement of exurban  developments within  a  rural landscape  is  critical (Knight  and  Clark 1998).
2.  Low-density residential developments influence biotic  communities. Even  at  densities of one house  per  14-20 hectares,  the effects  of human residences  are  seen. It cannot be assumed  that,  because  most of the land within exurban  developments remains  undeveloped,  it is suitable  for all  species  that  would occur  there  if houses were  not  present. And,  of  course,  it is  not  just  houses  that  come  with  exurban  development-some  homeowners  load  up  their  unbuilt  acreage with  4H  livestock, horses, or other  stock,  which  greatly  extend  the  humanizing  effects  on a site. In  doing  so, exurban  development  patterns  spread  change  associated  with  human  developments farther  across  the  landscape  than  would more  concentrated development  densities, such as  those in urban  and  suburban  areas.  Laws  that  exclude  certain  development densities  from  the  county  review  process  should  be reevaluated. For  example,  Colorado  law  allows  subdivisions  of one house  per  14  hectares  or  greater to avoid  county review,  thereby  encouraging  this  density  of  development  (Riebsame,  Gosnell,  and Theobald  1996;  Romme  1997).  Cluster  developments  are  an alternative  settlement pattern  that involves  concentrating  houses and  leaving  the remainder  of the  purchased land  undeveloped (Theobald,  Miller,  and Hobbs  1997;  Odell and  Knight

- 2001). However, little is known  about the site- and  landscape-scale  effects of cluster development,  so caution  should  be used in  promoting  this  approach.
3.  Ranches are  important  in  biodiversity  protection.  Because  private  lands are often the most  productive,  lowest-elevation  sites,  they play  a  disproportionate  role in maintaining  biodiversity  that is not  found  in  protected  areas,  which  are  mostly  in the  least  productive,  high-elevation sites  (Scott  and  others  2001). Ranches in  our study  area  were as  good  as or better than  comparable protected  areas at  conserving biodiversity.

Conversion  of  ranchland  to  exurban  development should  be  monitored,  because  it will  likely  result in  a  simplification of  our  natural  heritage  and  an  everincreasing  number  of  species  with  declining  populations.

## NOTES

1. For  the  songbird  and mammalian  carnivore  communities,  we  sampled  thirty-three  points  in exurban  developments,  thirty  on ranches,  and  thirty  in  protected  areas.  For  the  plant  community,  we sampled  twenty-three  points  in each  land use. Points  were  restricted  to areas  that met the  following criteria: at least  75  meters  from  riparian  areas; slope  of  35  percent  or  less;  at least  75  meters  from  the edge  of the land  use;  at least  20 meters  from  built structures  and  roads;  and at least  300  meters  from the next-nearest  point.
2. We  recorded  the  species  of  songbirds we detected  visually  or  aurally and  the  distance, in  meters, to those detections  at each  point.  Point  counts  were  eight  minutes  long,  with an initial  thirty-second quiet  period,  and  were  conducted  in a three-hour  period  after  sunrise.  Each  point  was  sampled  twice between  15  May  and  15  June 2000 and twice between  17  May  and  14  June 2001, which  coincides  with the breeding  season  for  most  songbirds in our  study  area.  The  computer  program  DISTANCE  3.5  (Thomas and others  1998)  was  used  to  generate  density  estimates.  To  test  for  statistical  differences between  land uses,  we  did  pairwise  comparisons of densities  using  an  approximate z-test.  An  c  = o.1o  was  set  a  priori to minimize  the  probability of  committing  a  Type  II  error, but differences were  ultimately  considered statistically significant  at  a'  =  0.03,  which  is Bonferroni adjusted  for  multiple  comparisons.
3.  The  presence  of medium-sized  mammalian  carnivores was  recorded  at  scent  stations  surveyed between  17  May  and 12  July  2000  and  23  May  and 16  August  2001.  Each scent station  was established  by clearing  vegetation,  rocks,  and  any  other debris  from a 1-meter-diameter circle  of  ground (Linhart and Knowlton  1975).  Bait  was  placed  in the center  of the station for four consecutive  days  to attract carnivores. Stations  were  examined  daily  for the  presence  of carnivore tracks.  We  tested  for  statistical differences  in  presence  and absence  proportions  of carnivores  at each station across  land uses  using Fisher's Exact  Test (PROC FREQ, SAS Institute  1999).  If the overall  test was  statistically significant,  we did  follow-up paired  comparisons  of  proportions,  again using  Fisher's Exact  Test.  Differences  were considered  statistically significant  at o  = o.1o.
4.  Thirty-meter transects  were  established  in the  four  cardinal directions  at  each  sampling  point. Sampling  occurred  within  20-by-5o-centimeter quadrats  placed  on the left side of each  transect  at  lo, 20,  and  30  meters  from  the  point,  with the 20-centimeter edge  abutting the transect.  Canopy  coverage (cover)  of individual  plant species,  as well as  percentages of rock,  litter,  and bare  ground,  were  estimated to the nearest  percentage  point.  One trained  botanist  made all cover  estimates,  while another observer  recorded  the data.  Sampling took  place  between  26  June  and 18  July  2001, which is  approximately  peak  biomass in our  study  area.  Fewer  than 1  percent  of  species  encountered  could not be identified  and  were  categorized as unknown.  At each  sampling  point  we calculated  a mean  value  for plant  cover  and  for  species  richness  to use  in  analysis. We used  one-way  analysis of variance  to test  for statistical  differences in cover  and  species  richness  across  land uses  (PROC GLM,  SAS Institute  1999).  If the overall  F-test  was  significant,  we used the Least  Significant  Difference  method to  compare  individual means. To meet  assumptions  of  normality  and  homogeneity  of variances,  data  were  squareroot  transformed for  analysis, but  results  are  presented in  the  original scale.  Differences were  considered statistically  significant  at o  =  o.1o.

## REFERENCES

- Alexander, B.,  and  L.  Propst.  2002. Saving  the  Family Ranch:  New Directions.  In  Ranching West  of  the iooth Meridian:  Culture,  Ecology, and Economics,  edited  by  R. L.  Knight,  W. C.  Gilgert,  and E. Marston,  203-217. Washington,  D.C.: Island Press.
- Ballard, W.  B.,  H.  A.  Whitlaw, S.  J. Young,  R.  A.  Jenkins, and  G.  J.  Forbes.  1999.  Predation  and  Survival of White-Tailed  Deer Fawns  in Northcentral  New Brunswick. Journal  of Wildlife Management  63 (2): 574-579.
- Beissinger, S.  R.,  and D. R.  Osborne.  1982.  Effects  of Urbanization  on Avian  Community  Organization.  Condor  84 (1): 75-83.
- Blair, R.  B.  1996.  Land  Use and  Avian  Species  Diversity  along  an Urban  Gradient. Ecological Applications 6  (2): 506-519.
- Bock,  C.  E.,  J.  H.  Bock,  and B. C. Bennett.  1999. Songbird  Abundance  in Grasslands  at a Suburban Interface on the Colorado  High  Plains. Studies in Avian  Biology 19:  131-136.
- Buechner,  M.,  and  R.  Sauvajot.  1996.  Conservation and  Zones  of Human  Activity: The  Spread of Human Disturbance  across  a Protected Landscape. In  Biodiversity in  Managed Landscapes: Theory and Practice, edited  by  R.  C.  Szaro  and  D.  W.  Johnston, 605-629.  New  York: Oxford  University Press.
- Churcher, P.  B.,  and  J.  H. Lawton.  1987.  Predation by  Domestic Cats  in an  English  Village.  Journal of Zoology  [London]  212:  439-455.
- Crooks,  K. R., and M. E. Soule.  1999. Mesopredator  Release  and Avifaunal  Extinctions  in a  Fragmented  System.  Nature  400 (6744):  563-566.
- Czech,  B.,  P.  R.  Krausman, and P.  K.  Devers. 2000.  Economic  Associations  among  Causes  of  Species Endangerment  in the United States.  BioScience 50 (7):  593-601.
- Dale,  V.  H., S.  Brown,  R.  A.  Haeuber,  N. T.  Hobbs,  N.  Huntly,  R. J.  Naiman,  W. E.  Riebsame,  M. G. Turner,  and T.  J.  Valone. 2000.  Ecological  Principles  and Guidelines  for  Managing  the Use of Land.  Ecological Applications o1 (3):  639-670.
- Donahue,  D. L.  1999.  The  Western Range  Revisited: Removing Livestock from  Public  Lands  to  Conserve Native  Biodiversity. Norman:  University  of Oklahoma  Press.
- Donovan,  T.  M.,  and  F.  R.  Thompson  III. 2001.  Modeling  the  Ecological  Trap  Hypothesis: A Habitat and  Demographic  Analysis  for  Migrant  Songbirds.  Ecological Applications 11  (3):  871-882.
- Duerksen,  C.  J.,  N. T.  Hobbs,  D. L.  Elliot,  E.  Johnson,  and  J.  R.  Miller. 2000.  Managing  Development for People  and  Wildlife:  A Handbook  for  Habitat Protection  by  Local Governments.  [http:// ndis.nrel.colostate.edu/escop/handbook/intro.html].
- Emlen,  J.  T.  1974.  An  Urban  Bird  Community  in  Tucson,  Arizona: Derivation,  Structure, Regulation. Condor 76 (2): 184-197.
- Engels,  T.  M.,  and C.  W.  Sexton.  1994. Negative  Correlation  of Blue  Jays  and Golden-Cheeked  Warblers near an  Urbanizing  Area. Conservation  Biology  8  (1): 286-290.
- Fleischner, T.  L.  1994. Ecological Costs  of Livestock Grazing  in  Western  North  America.  Conservation Biology  8  (3):  629-644.
- GCOFR  [Governor's Commission  on  Saving  Open  Spaces,  Farms, and  Ranches].  2000.  Natural  Landscapes: Colorado's Legacy to  Its  Children. December. [http://www.state.co.us/issues/open\_space8.pdf].

Germaine,  S.S.,  S.S.  Rosenstock,

R.  E.  Schweinsburg, and  W.  S.  Richardson.  1998. Relationships

among

Breeding  Birds,  Habitat,  and Residential  Development  in Greater  Tucson,  Arizona.  Ecological

Applications

8  (3):  680-691.

- Harrison,  R.  L.  1997.  A  Comparison of  Gray Fox  Ecology  between  Residential and  Undeveloped  Rural Landscapes.  Journal of Wildlife Management  61  (1):  112-122.
- .  1998. Bobcats  in Residential  Areas:  Distribution  and Homeowner  Attitudes.  Southwestern Naturalist  43 (4):  469-475.
- Hawkins,  C. C.  1998. Impact  of a Subsidized  Exotic  Predator  on Native  Biota:  Effect  of House Cats (Felis  catus)  on California  Birds  and Rodents.  Ph.D.  diss.,  Texas  A&amp;M  University.
- Heimlich,  R.  E.,  and  W.  D.  Anderson. 2001.  Development at the  Urban Fringe  and  Beyond:  Impacts on Agriculture  and Rural Land.  Agricultural  Economic Report  No.  803. Washington,  D.C.: U.S. Department  of  Agriculture, Economic  Research  Service.
- Knight,  R. L.  1999.  Private Lands: The  Neglected  Geography.  Conservation  Biology 13 (2): 223-224.
- .  2002. The  Ecology  of  Ranching.  In  Ranching West  of  the 1ooth  Meridian:  Culture, Ecology, and  Economics, edited  by  R.  L.  Knight, W. C.  Gilgert, and E.  Marston,  123-144. Washington,  D.C.: Island  Press.

- Knight,  R. L.,  and T.  W. Clark.  1998.  Boundaries  between Public and Private  Lands:  Defining  Obstacles, Finding  Solutions.  In  Stewardship across Boundaries, edited  by  R.  L. Knight  and  P.  B.  Landres, 175-191.  Washington,  D.C.: Island Press.
- Knight,  R.  L.,  J.  Mitchell,  E.  Odell,  and  J.  Maestas.  Forthcoming. Subdividing the West.  In  Principles of  Conservation Biology, edited  by  M.  Groom,  G. K.  Meffe,  and C. R. Carroll. 3d  ed.  Sunderland, Mass.:  Sinauer  Associates.
- Linhart,  S.  B.,  and F.  F.  Knowlton.  1975.  Determining  the Relative  Abundance  of  Coyotes  by  Scent Station  Lines.  Wildlife Society  Bulletin  3 (3): 119-124.
- LTA  [Land  Trust  Alliance].  2001.  Summary  Datafrom  the  National  Land  Trust Census.  12  September. [http://www.lta.org/newsroom/census\_summary\_data.htm].
- Masnick,  G.  2001.  America's Shifting Population:  Understanding  Migration  Patterns  in the West. Changing Landscapes  2  (2):  8-15.
- Marzluff,  J.  M.,  F.  R.  Gehlbach,  and D. A. Manuwal.  1998.  Urban  Environments: Influences  on Avifauna  and  Challenges  for the Avian  Conservationist.  In Avian Conservation: Research and Management,  edited  by  J.  M. Marzluff  and R.  Sallabanks, 283-299.  Washington, D.C.:  Island  Press.
- Masters,  R.  A.,  and R. L.  Sheley.  2001. Principles  and Practices  for  Managing  Rangeland  Invasive Plants. Journal of Range Management  54 (5): 502-517.
- Miller,  S.  G.,  R.  L.  Knight,  and C.  K.  Miller. 2001.  Wildlife  Responses  to Pedestrians and  Dogs.  Wildlife Society  Bulletin  29 (1): 124-132.
- Mills,  S.  G.,  J.  B.  Dunning  Jr.,  and  J.  M. Bates.  1989.  Effects  of Urbanization  on  Breeding  Bird  Community  Structure in Southwestern  Desert  Habitats.  Condor 91  (2): 416-428.
- Moreland,  D. C.  1980.  Soil  Survey of  Larimer  County Area, Colorado, GPO  239-812/48.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture, Soil Conservation  Service  and Forest  Service.
- Nelson,  A.  C.,  and  K.  J.  Dueker. 199o. The  Exurbanization of America  and Its  Planning  Policy  Implications.  Journal of Planning  and Education Research  9 (2):  91-100.
- Obermann,  B., D. Carlson,  and J.  Batchelder, eds.  2000. Tracking Agricultural Land Conversion  in Colorado. Colorado  Department  of  Agriculture. September.  [http://www.ag.state.co.us/resource/ AgriculturalLandConversion.html].
- Odell,  E.  A.,  and  R.  L.  Knight.  2001. Songbird  and  Medium-Sized  Mammal  Communities  Associated with  Exurban  Development in Pitkin  County,  Colorado.  Conservation  Biology 15 (4): 1143-1150.
- Power,  T.  M.  1996.  Lost  Landscapes and  Failed  Economies: The  Searchfor a Value of  Place.  Washington, D.C.:  Island  Press.
- Pulliam,  H. R.  1996.  Sources  and  Sinks: Empirical  Evidence  and  Population  Consequences. In  Population  Dynamics  in  Ecological Space  and  Time,  edited  by  0. E.  Rhodes  Jr., R.  K.  Chesser, and  M. H. Smith,  45-69. Chicago:  University of  Chicago  Press.
- Riebsame,  W. E.,  H.  Gosnell,  and D. M. Theobald.  1996.  Land  Use and  Landscape  Change  in the Colorado  Mountains,  I:  Theory,  Scale,  and Pattern.  Mountain  Research and  Development 16  (4): 395-405.
- Romme,  W. H.  1997. Creating  Pseudo-Rural Landscapes  in the Mountain  West.  In  Placing  Nature: Culture  and  Landscape Ecology, edited  by  J.  I.  Nassauer, 139-161. Washington,  D.C.:  Island  Press.
- SAS  Institute.  1999. SAS/STAT® User's Guide,  Version 8.0.  3  vols.  Cary, N.C.:  SAS  Institute.
- Rotenberry, J.  T.  1998.  Avian  Conservation  Research  Needs in Western  Shrublands: Exotic  Invaders and the Alteration  of  Ecosystem  Processes.  In Avian Conservation: Research  and  Management, edited  by  J.  M. Marzluff  and R.  Sallabanks, 261-272. Washington, D.C.:  Island  Press.
- Scott,  J.  M.,  F.  W.  Davis,  R.  G.  McGhie,  R.  G.  Wright, C.  Groves,  and  J.  Estes. 2001. Nature  Reserves: Do  They Capture  the Full  Range  of America's Biological  Diversity? Ecological Applications 11  (4): 999-1007.
- Sullins,  M.  J.,  D. T.  Theobald,  J.  R.  Jones,  and  L.  M.  Burgess.  2002. Lay  of the Land:  Ranch  Land  and Ranching.  In  Ranching West of  the  looth  Meridian: Culture, Ecology, and  Economics, edited  by  R.  L. Knight,  W.  C.  Gilgert,  and E.  Marston,  25-31.  Washington, D.C.:  Island  Press.
- Swanson,  L. 2001.  The West's  Forest  Lands:  Magnets  for New  Migrants  and Part-Time  Residents. Changing Landscape  2  (2):  16-25.
- Theobald,  D.  M.  2000. Fragmentation by Inholdings  and  Exurban Development.  In  Forest Fragmentation  in the  Southern Rocky  Mountains,  edited  by  R.  L.  Knight,  E H.  Smith,  S.  W.  Buskirk, W.  H. Romme,  and  W.  L.  Baker,  155-174. Boulder:  University  Press  of Colorado.
- Theobald,  D.  M., J.  R.  Miller,  and  N. T.  Hobbs.  1997. Estimating the Cumulative  Effects  of  Development on Wildlife  Habitat.  Landscape and Urban  Planning  39 (1):  25-36.

- Thomas, L.,  J.  L.  Laake,  J.  E  Derry,  S. T.  Buckland,  D. L.  Borchers,  D. R.  Anderson,  K. P.  Burnham, S.  Strindberg, S. L.  Hedley,  M. L.  Burt,  F.  Marques, J.  H. Pollard,  and R. M. Fewster.  1998.  DISTANCE  3.5.  St.  Andrews,  Scotland: University  of St.  Andrews,  Research Unit for  Wildlife  Population Assessment.
- Thompson,  M.  J. 1996.  Winter  Foraging  Response  of Elk  to  Spotted  Knapweed  Removal.  Northwest Science  70  (1): 10-19.
- Trammell,  M.  A., and J.  L.  Butler.  1995.  Effects  of Exotic  Plants  on Native  Ungulate  Use of Habitat. Journal  of Wildlife Management  59 (4):  8o8-816.
- U.S.  Census  Bureau. 2001. Resident Population.  15  March.  [http://blue.census.gov/population/www/ cen2ooo/respop.html].
- Vogel,  W. 0. 1989. Response  of Deer to  Density  and Distribution  of  Housing  in Montana.  Wildlife Society  Bulletin  17 (4): 406-413.
- Weeks,  W.  W.  2002. Cloudy  Sky  over  the  Range: Whose Home and  Why  It Matters.  In  Ranching  West of  the  looth Meridian:  Culture, Ecology, and  Economics, edited  by  R.  L.  Knight, W. C.  Gilgert,  and E.  Marston,  219-231. Washington,  D.C.: Island Press.
- Weitzel,  N. H.  1988.  Nest-Site  Competition  between  the  European Starling and  Native  Breeding Birds in Northwestern  Nevada.  Condor  go  (2): 515-517.
- Wuerthner,  G.  1994.  Subdivisions  versus  Agriculture.  Conservation Biology  8  (3):  905-908.