## American Geographical Society

The Fertility Transition in Africa Author(s): Ezekiel Kalipeni

Source: Geographical Review, Vol. 85, No. 3 (Jul., 1995), pp. 286-300

Published by: American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/215274 .

Accessed: 08/05/2014 18:18

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

<!-- image -->

American Geographical Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## THE FERTILITY  TRANSITION IN AFRICA*

## EZEKIEL  KALIPENI

ABSTRACT.  Some African countries  may  be  going through  the initial  stages  of the  fertility  transition.  In  this article  multivariate  analysis  based on  country-level data from 1980  and 1993  assesses  spatial  variations  and  changes  in  fertility  rates. Demographic  and socioeconomic factors  such as  education, rural  or urban  residence,  status of  women,  and  use  of  contraceptives  are  important  factors in determining  the onset of the  fertility  transition.  Over  the  long term,  fertility  will decline to  acceptable  levels  as Africa continues  to  experience  socioeconomic and cultural  changes.  Of  special importance  in the transition is the status of women  in  society.  Key  words:  Africa,  contraceptive prevalence, female autonomy, fertility  transition, infant  mortality rates,  population growth.

D uring  the  past twenty years apparent high growth  rates and their implications  for the environment have been  important emphases in  population  studies. A  growing popular  consensus assumes that  high population growth  rates in Africa are  adversely affecting  the environment  (Mott  and  Mott  1980; Goliber  1989;  Jolly  1994; Kalipeni  1994; Shapiro 1995). According  to this  consensus,  the  increasing pressure  of population  on limited  resources results in destruction of the  carrying capacity  and hence in  declining  standards  of  living.  Other  interpretations contend that in an efficient market a  growing population  can  encourage innovation  and  the  development  of  advanced  technologies  (Boserup 1981;  Simon 1983;  Shipton 1989).

These debates have determined how scholars  study  the  dynamics  of fertility  in Africa and have influenced  policies  about  fertility.  According to the consensus that  high fertility  rates  and  rapid  population growth  are the  major  factors in environmental  degradation  and a  declining quality of life,  investment of  large  financial  resources in  family-planning  activities is  justified.  The  study  of  fertility patterns  has  emphasized why  the rates remain  high despite  a substantial decline in both adult and infant mortality  rates since the 1950s  (Okore 1987;  Omideyi  1987;  Udjo 1987; Mhloyi 1987).

This article  adds the  largely neglected spatial  dimension to the discussion of African  fertility  through  a  geographical  or  spatial-temporal  framework for the  precepts  of the  demographic  transition  theory.  Data from demographic  and health  surveys  (DHS)  indicate that  fertility  levels  in Africa  have  begun  to decline, and research  supports the thesis that some

*  I  thank  Ellen  Kraly  and  Eliya  Zulu  for  insightful comments  on  a  draft  of this  article.  I  am  very  grateful to Zhen  Hou for  her  untiring  research  efforts.  A  grant  from  the  University  of Illinois  Research  Board funded the research.

DR. KALIPENI is an assistant  professor  of  geography at the  University of  Illinois,  Urbana, Illinois  61801.

Copyright ? 1996  by  the  American Geographical Society of  New  York

African  countries-Zimbabwe,  Botswana,  Kenya,  and  Nigeria,  for example-may be in the initial  stages  of an irreversible  fertility  transition  (van de  Walle and Foster 1990; Cross, Obungu,  and Kizito  1991; Caldwell, Orubuloye,  and Caldwell 1992).

The central  objective  of this  article is  to examine the  geographical variation in  fertility  rates  by country throughout  Africa  in order  to identify  some of the  underlying  influences. Quantitative  techniques  are  used to  provide  confidence in  any  inferences drawn from the  analyzed  data. Cultural and socioeconomic  factors are  hypothesized  to be  important spatial  correlates  in the variation of  fertility  and  consequently  the onset of the  fertility  transition  now under  way.

## DATA AND METHODS OF ANALYSIS

Multivariate  analysis explains  the observed  patterns  of African  fertility. Country-level  data from 1980 and 1993 are used in this  analysis  to assess the  spatial  variation and  change  in  fertility  rates. Socioeconomic and  demographic  factors include  education,  rural or urban  residence, income levels, status of women as measured  by  the HDI,  infant  mortality rates,  and  contraceptive  prevalence.  Pairwise t-test for  means,  analysis  of variance,  correlation  analysis,  and  stepwise  multiple-regression  techniques  are  employed  to determine the levels of  regional  variations  and to account for the observed  spatial  variation of  fertility  rates.  The continent is  divided  into  five  regions-north, west,  east, middle,  and south-as suggested  by  the  Population  Reference Bureau. These  regions  exhibit different sociocultural and economic characteristics.

Initially,  the  spatial relationships among  fourteen  independent  variables and six measures of  fertility  were examined  (Table  I).  The choice of variables was  dictated  by  the  availability  of  data; therefore, the independent  variables  may  not  necessarily  be the best.  Also,  the  quality  of data  depends  on their source. However, data from other sources,  especially  the  recently completed  demographic  and health  surveys,  show similar trends and corroborate  the  findings  of this  study.

The choice of variables was also based on the causal model of demographic  transition.  Proponents  of this model  generally agree  that socioeconomic  development  is the  basic  cause of  fertility  decline  (Beaver  1975). The model  highlights  at least four  phenomena  that are interrelated via social, economic,  and  psychological  mechanisms:  urbanization, education,  nonkinship  institutions,  and  consumption  levels  or standards of living.  Social structure  includes the relaxation  of  gender-role  restrictions on  women,  the decreased  predominance  of extended  kinship systems, and the reduced value of children.  Furthermore,  the model accounts for the effect of other  demographic  variables such as infant  mortality  and technological  advances on  contraceptive availability  and use. To  operationalize this model, six multivariate linear models  stressing  the nature

## THE GEOGRAPHICAL  REVIEW

## TABLE  I-DEPENDENT  AND INDEPENDENT  VARIABLES

## Dependent  variables

Crude birthrate  1980

Crude  birthrate 1993

Percent  change  in crude  birthrate  1980-1993

Total  fertility  rate 1980

Total  fertility  rate 1993

Percent  change  in total  fertility  rate 1980-1993

Pairwise  difference  in crude birthrate  1980-1993

Pairwise  difference  in total  fertility  rate 1980-1993

## Independent variables

Socioeconomic

Gross national  product  1980

Gross national  product  1993

Primary-school  enrollment  ratio 1980

Percent urban  population 1980

Percent urban  population 1993

Percent  change  in urban  population 1980-1993

Human  development index  for females

## Demographic

Infant  mortality  rate 1980

Infant  mortality  rate 1993

Percent  change  in infant  mortality  1980-1993

Overall  program  effort score and  family  planning

Policy  concerning  fertility  reduction

Prevalence  of modem contraceptives

Governmental  view  of  fertility  levels and direction of the  relationship  between the chosen  demographic  and socioeconomic variables were formulated. Their form is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Y  is the  dependent  variable,  a measure of  fertility;  a is the Y-intercept  or  constant;  p  is  the  regression  coefficient; X is  the  independent variable associated with  fertility;  and e is the error  term.

## A  FACILE  DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION?

A World  Bank  study  in 1994  noted the dramatic  improvement  of health in sub-Saharan  Africa  during  the  previous  two decades  (Shaw 1994).  The infant  mortality  rate  had declined  by  33  percent,  from  a  high  of 145  infant deaths  per  1,000  live births  in 1970  to 104  per  1,000  live births  in 1992.  The mortality  rate for children under the  age  of five fell 17  percent  between 1975  and 1990.  In low-income Africa,  between the late 1970s  and the late 1980s  mortality  for the  under-five  age  cohort declined  41  percent  in Botswana, 32  percent  in Burundi,  31  percent  in Mali, and 33  percent  in Senegal.  Declines have been more  rapid  in North Africa,  with  mortality of  the under-five  age  cohort  dropping by  50  percent  in  Egypt  and  by

around 40  percent  in Morocco  and Tunisia  over the same  period (Sullivan 1991).  Life  expectancy  at birth is  currently  estimated to be 52  years  for men and 55  years  for women  and has increased  approximately  4  years every  decade since the 1950s  (African  Development  Bank  1992;  Population Reference Bureau  1993).  These  gains  are remarkable,  but the challenges  of  providing  accessible health care  are  immense. The risk of death remains  markedly higher  at all  ages  in Africa than it does in other  major world  regions.

Although mortality  has  declined  rapidly  in sub-Saharan Africa  over  the past fifty years,  the declines have occurred  not because of socioeconomic development  but  mainly  because of the  importation  of medical technologies  from the industrialized world. It therefore  can be  argued  that the declining  infant  mortality  rates and crude death rates on the African continent are due  largely  to  superficial demographic  and  epidemiological social  changes.  Sustainable socioeconomic  development  has  yet  to take root on the continent. In an examination of the available data on the main causes  of  death, infectious,  parasitic, diarrheal,  respiratory,  and nutritional diseases are  prominent,  an indication that  Africa  is still in the age  of  famine  and  pestilence,  as  postulated  by  the  epidemiological transition. In  any population  the main causes of death are  related  to the levels of economic and institutional  development.  The  changes  in health problems  that  come  with economic  and  social  advancement  or  a shift  in the most common  causes of death  in a  society  as  it  accumulates  wealth  are  often called the  mortality  or  epidemiological  transition.  Pessimists  contend that deep-rooted  cultural forces  may prevent  Africa from ever  achieving  the fertility  transition.  Counterarguments  can also be  offered,  especially  when one takes  into consideration  that  the  demographic  transition  does not  give a time framework  and that  European  countries took more than a  century and a half to  go  through  the various  stages  of the transition.  Mortality declines in Africa  began only  about  fifty  years  ago,  so,  given  more  time,  the transition  may  not be out of reach.

It  has been contended that  sub-Saharan  Africa  has not  yet experienced a  genuine  demographic  transition and that it is doubtful whether the continent  will achieve the transition  in a  timely  fashion  (Teitelbaum  1975). The main factor in  achieving  the transition is socioeconomic  development. The  demographic  transition  postulates  a  necessary,  causal link between  modernization and  fertility  reduction. It  explains fertility  and population growth solely  in socioeconomic terms: the  consequences  of widespread preference  for fewer children that is  consequent  to industrialization, urbanization,  increased  literacy,  and  declining  infant  mortality.

## FERTILITY LEVELS AND  REGIONAL  VARIATIONS

By  world standards  fertility  levels  on the African continent are still very high.  If one excludes the islands of  Reunion,  Seychelles,  Sao  Tome,

and  Principe,  total  fertility  rates in 1993  ranged  from 4 to 7 children  per woman  for most  countries. Crude birthrates are also  still  very  high, ranging  from a low of 25 births  per  1,000  persons  in Tunisia  to a  high  of 52 births  per  1,000  persons  in  Niger (Fig. 1).  In 1980  only eight  African countries had  crude birthrates of between  33 and 43 births  per  1,000 persons.  All other countries on the continent had crude birthrates  of 43 or  higher.  Of the  eight  countries  with crude  birthrates  of less than  43,  four were in the well-documented  infertility  belt in central Africa  (Doenges and Newman  1989).  Although  no  single overriding  factor has been isolated  to  explain  this  pattern, gynecological  disorders such  as  pelvic inflammatory  disease and the  presence  of  sexually  transmitted diseases have  been  implicated.  The other countries with  lower  than  expected fertility  rates in  1980 were  Egypt,  Tunisia,  South Africa, and Lesotho. Egypt began  to  experience  a sustained  fertility  transition  as  early  as 1960 (Omran 1973).  Low  fertility  in South Africa  can be  explained by  its  high socioeconomic  development.

By  1993  fertility  had declined  considerably  in most  parts  of  Africa, with  regional patterning  in the  changes.  Northern and southern Africa stand out as  regions  that  have  experienced  the  greatest  declines in  fertility rates. On the other hand, countries in central Africa  experienced slight increases in their  fertility  rates,  which is also true for Sahelian countries of western Africa.  Analysis  of variance for the difference between  regional  means  yields  a  regional  patterning  for  crude  birthrates statistically significant  at  the  5  percent  level in 1993  and  a  regional  difference  in means for total  fertility  rates  significant  at the 10  percent  level for  the same  year (Table  II).  Paired  comparisons  of t-tests for the  change  in  fertility  rates between  1980 and 1993 indicate  statistically significant  declines  at the continental level,  especially  for northern  and southern Africa  (Table  III). The eastern and western  regions experienced  declines that were statistically insignificant.  On the other  hand,  central  Africa  experienced  a  slight but  insignificant  increase in crude birthrates.  A similar  analysis  of total fertility  rates  yields  more or less the same results  (Table  IV).

At the  country  level,  fertility  declines of varied  magnitude  affected most countries (Table  V and  Fig. 2).  Data from  demographic  and health surveys  and other  published  works indicate that  fertility  levels in most African countries have  indeed  begun  to decline.  For  example,  in  Botswana the total  fertility  rate  declined from  7 to 5, or 30  percent,  between 1981 and 1988  (Lesetedi, Mompati,  and Khulumani  1989).  Kenya,  which has  long experienced  the  highest population growth  rate  in Africa-more than 4  percent  annually-appears to be on the  way  to a  fertility  transition (Kelley  and Nobbe 1990).  By  1989  the  fertility  rate  for  Kenya  had declined by  17  percent  to  a  low  of  6.7  (Kenya Ministry  of  Home  Affairs and National  Heritage  1989;  Cross,  Obungu,  and Kizito  1991).  Between 1984 and 1988 total  fertility  rates in Zimbabwe had declined from 6.5 to 5.5

Computation by the author; data from Population Reference Bureau 1980, 1993. FIG. 1—Crude birthrates for 1980 and 1993 and percentage change in crude birthrates. Sources:

<!-- image -->

(Meekers 1991).  In addition, the fertility transition  may also have started in  some  areas of  other countries, including  Nigeria,  Ghana, Senegal, Malawi,  and  Tanzania (Ghana Statistical Service 1989; Ngallaba  and others  1993; Kalipeni  and  Harrington  1995). The  DHS  survey  data  also indicate that  feercentility appeahave increased in  some countries. indicate that fertility appears to have increased in some countries.

In Namibia the total  fertility  rate is 5, and  fertility  in this  country  has been  declining  gradually  over  the  past  fifteen  years  (Katjiuanjo  and

TABLE  II-ANALYSIS  OF VARIANCE  FOR  FERTILITY RATES IN AFRICA,  BY  REGION,  1980  AND 1993

| REGION   |   MEANCRUDE BIRTHRATE 1980 | MEANCRUDE BIRTHRATE 1993   |   MEANTOTAL FERTILITY RATE 1980 | MEANTOTAL FERTILITY RATE 1993   |
|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| North    |                    42      | 34                         |                          6.2    | 4.88                            |
| West     |                    49      | 46                         |                          6.8    | 6.71                            |
| East     |                    48      | 47                         |                          6.6    | 6.77                            |
| Middle   |                    45      | 46                         |                          6      | 6.46                            |
| South    |                    39      | 35                         |                          5.2    | 4.57                            |
| F-ratio  |                     1.13   | 4.61                       |                          0.72   | 2.45                            |
| P-value  |                     0.3529 | 0.0032a                    |                          0.5825 | 0.0590b                         |

Sources:  Computation  by  the  author;  data from  Population  Reference  Bureau  1980,  1993.

b Statistically  significant at the .10 level.

a Statistically  significant at the  .05 level.

TABLE  III-PAIRED  COMPARISONS T-TEST FOR  DIFFERENCES IN CRUDE BIRTHRATE IN  AFRICA,  BY  REGION,  1980  AND 1993

| REGION   |   MEANDIFFERENCE IN CRUDEBIRTHRATE |   STANDARD ERROR | T-STATISTIC   |   P-VALUE |
|----------|------------------------------------|------------------|---------------|-----------|
| North    |                              -9.12 |             1.62 | -5.62a        |    0.0049 |
| West     |                              -0.87 |             0.95 | -0.91         |    0.3767 |
| East     |                              -1.36 |             1.64 | -0.83         |    0.4265 |
| Middle   |                               1.38 |             1.16 | 1.19          |    0.2736 |
| South    |                              -4.07 |             1.38 | -2.96a        |    0.0161 |
| Africa   |                              -2.04 |             0.7  | -2.92a        |    0.0052 |

Sources:  Computation  by  the  author; data from  Population  Reference Bureau  1980,  1993.

a T-statistic  is  significant at the  .05 level.

TABLE IV-PAIRED COMPARISONS T-TEST  FOR  DIFFERENCES IN  TOTAL FERTILITY RATE IN  AFRICA, BY  REGION, 1980 AND  1993

| REGION   |   MEANDIFFERENCE IN TOTAL FERTILITY RATE |   STANDARD ERROR | T-STATISTIC   |   P-VALUE |
|----------|------------------------------------------|------------------|---------------|-----------|
| North    |                                    -1.82 |             0.4  | -4.50a        |    0.0108 |
| West     |                                     0.06 |             0.14 | 0.39          |    0.7013 |
| East     |                                    -1.36 |             0.36 | -0.25         |    0.8056 |
| Middle   |                                     0.25 |             0.17 | 1.50          |    0.1778 |
| South    |                                    -0.59 |             0.2  | -2.89a        |    0.0179 |
| Africa   |                                    -0.25 |             0.13 | -1.89         |    0.0646 |

Sources:  Computation  by  the  author;  data from  Population  Reference  Bureau 1980, 1993.

a T-statistic is  significant at the .05 level.

others 1993).  In Malawi the total  fertility  rates declined from 8 in 1987  to 7 in 1992,  for a decrease of 12  percent  in  just  five  years (Malawi  National Statistical  Office  1992).  In  Zambia  total  fertility  rates  declined from  a  high of 7 in the 1980  census to 6.5 in 1992  (Gaisie,  Cross,  and Nsemukila 1993).

TABLE  V-TOP 15  AFRICAN  COUNTRIES WITH  GREATEST DECUNES IN CRUDE BIRTHRATES FROM  1980  TO 1993

| COUNTRY             |   CRUDE BIRTHRATE 1980 |   CRUDE BIRTHRATE 1993 |   PERCENT CHANGE IN CRUDE BIRTHRATE 1980-1993 |   PERCENT CHANGE IN INFANT MORTALITY RATE 1980-1993 |   PERCENT CHANGEIN GNP 1980-1993 |   PERCENT CHANGE IN URBAN 1980-1993 |   MODERN CONTRACEPTIVE POPULATIONPREVALENCE IN 1993 |
|---------------------|------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| Algeria             |                     48 |                   34   |                                        -29.17 |                                              -57.04 |                            60.31 |                               -9.82 |                                                  31 |
| Botswana            |                     51 |                   36.9 |                                        -27.65 |                                              -54.02 |                           317.74 |                              110.83 |                                                  32 |
| Morocco             |                     43 |                   31.3 |                                        -27.21 |                                              -56.84 |                            53.73 |                               10.71 |                                                  36 |
| Mauritius           |                     27 |                   20.7 |                                        -23.33 |                                              -46.86 |                           191.57 |                               -6.82 |                                                  46 |
| Tunisia             |                     33 |                   25.4 |                                        -23.03 |                                              -65.6  |                            58.95 |                               18.4  |                                                  40 |
| Sao Tome & Principe |                     45 |                   35   |                                        -22.22 |                                              -12.34 |                           -28.57 |                               76.25 |                                                     |
| Rwanda              |                     50 |                   39.5 |                                        -21    |                                              -13.46 |                            44.44 |                               35    |                                                  13 |
| Egypt               |                     38 |                   30.8 |                                        -18.95 |                                              -37.78 |                            55    |                               -0.23 |                                                  44 |
| Kenya               |                     53 |                   45.2 |                                        -14.72 |                                              -12.89 |                             6.25 |                              136    |                                                  18 |
| Malawi              |                     51 |                   44   |                                        -13.73 |                                              -21.42 |                            27.78 |                               74.72 |                                                   7 |
| Zimbabwe            |                     47 |                   40.6 |                                        -13.62 |                                              -54.26 |                            29.16 |                               30.14 |                                                  36 |
| Lesotho             |                     40 |                   35.4 |                                        -11.5  |                                              -24.32 |                           107.14 |                              372.5  |                                                     |
| Libya               |                     47 |                   41.9 |                                        -10.85 |                                              -47.69 |                           -15.3  |                               26.33 |                                                     |
| Ghana               |                     48 |                   43   |                                        -10.42 |                                              -25.65 |                             2.56 |                              -10    |                                                   5 |
| Nigeria             |                     50 |                   44.8 |                                        -10.4  |                                              -46.31 |                           -48.21 |                              -19.5  |                                                   4 |

Sources:  Computation  by  the  author;  data from  Population Reference  Bureau  1980,  1993.

Even  in  the  predominantly  Muslim,  northern  African  countries  of Morocco, Tunisia, and  Egypt, fertility  declined  by  18  percent  or more. Libya,  which has been noted for its  persistent high fertility rate,  experienced a  modest decline of 10  percent.  These  declines  may  not be  dramatic, but  they  indicate that  unusually high fertility  rates  in Africa  are  not static.

## REGRESSION  ANALYSIS

To  account for the observed  geographical  variations in  fertility  levels on the  continent,  six  stepwise regression  models were  generated  with the dependent  and  independent  variables  (Table  VI).  As  indicated  by  the F-ratio and the associated  R-square  values,  all six models were statistically  significant  at the 5  percent  level.  The first model  concerned the variation of total  fertility  rates in 1980.  Only  one  independent  variable met the criterion for  entry  into a  stepwise  regression  method. GNP  per capita  for  1980,  the variable  chosen,  explained  a modest 15  percent  of the variation in total  fertility  rates  for that  year.  The second model used total fertility  rates  in  1993 as  the  dependent  variable. Three  independent variables-total fertility  rates in 1980  included as a control  variable, the HDI for females in 1990,  and modern  contraceptive  prevalence  in 1993were selected for  entry  into the model  by  the  stepwise procedure  in the SAS statistical  software  package.  All standardized  regression  coefficients of the three  independent  variables were  statistically significant  at the 5 percent  level.  The  signs  of the standardized  regression  coefficients are

FIG.  2-Total fertility  rates for selected  DHS countries  1980 and  1990. Sources:  Computation  by  the author;  data  for  1980  from  Population Reference  Bureau  1980,  and  for  1990  from  various  DHS publications.

<!-- image -->

also in the  hypothesized  direction. In other words, the  greater  the HDI, the smaller the total  fertility  rate,  a  negative relationship;  the  greater  the percentage  of  population using  modem  contraceptives,  the smaller the fertility  rate,  a  negative relationship;  and the  greater  the total  fertility  rate in  1980,  the  larger  the  fertility  rate in  1993,  a  positive relationship.  This model  explained  71  percent  of the variation in  fertility  rates for 1993.

The third and fourth  models used crude birthrates  in 1980  and 1993  as independent  variables.  The  results  were similar  to those obtained  for  total fertility  rates.  GNP  per capita  in 1980  and  percentage  of urban  population accounted for 29  percent  of the variation  in crude birthrates  in 1980,  with the  standardized  coefficient  for  GNP  statistically  significant  at  the  5  percent level. Both  variables  chosen for  entry  into the model for crude birthrates in  1993 had  statistically significant regression  coefficients. Once  again the  HDI and the  prevalence  of modern  contraceptives  proved  to be powerful  explanatory  variables for crude birthrates in 1993.

The fifth and sixth  models used the  percentage  change  in  fertility  rates between 1980  and 1993  as the  dependent  variable.  The fifth  model shows that 51  percent  of the  change  in crude birthrates  between 1980  and 1993

TABLE VI-STANDARDIZED PARTIAL REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS*

|                                          | DEPENDENT VARIABLES       | DEPENDENT VARIABLES       | DEPENDENT VARIABLES   | DEPENDENT VARIABLES   | DEPENDENT VARIABLES                     | DEPENDENT VARIABLES                          |
|------------------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| INDEPENDENT VARIABLE                     | Total Fertility Rate 1980 | Total Fertility Rate 1993 | Crude Birthrate 1980  | Crude Birthrate 1993  | Change in Crude Birthrate 1980-1993 (%) | Change in Total Fertility Rate 1980-1993 (%) |
| GNP per Capita 1980                      | -0.3857a                  |                           | -0.3993a              |                       | 0.3129a                                 |                                              |
| Total Fertility Rates 1980               |                           | 0.3957a                   |                       |                       |                                         |                                              |
| Percent Urban Population 1980            |                           |                           | -0.3993               |                       | -0.2080                                 | -0.2267                                      |
| Infant Mortality Rate 1980               |                           |                           |                       |                       | 0.5949a                                 | 0.5188a                                      |
| Human Development Index for Females 1990 |                           |                           |                       |                       |                                         |                                              |
|                                          |                           | -0.2868a                  |                       | -0.3326a              |                                         |                                              |
| Modem Contraceptive                      |                           |                           |                       |                       |                                         |                                              |
| Prevalence 1993                          |                           | -0.5582a                  |                       | -0.5620a              |                                         |                                              |
| Change in Infant                         |                           |                           |                       |                       |                                         |                                              |
| Mortality Rates 1980-1993 (%)            |                           |                           |                       |                       | 0.3434a                                 | 0.2603a                                      |
| r2                                       | 0.15                      | 0.71                      | 0.29                  | 0.64                  | 0.51                                    | 0.41                                         |
| F-ratio                                  | 6.29a                     | 30.9a                     | 7.27a                 | 34.8a                 | 8.40a                                   | 7.87a                                        |
| N                                        | 37                        | 41                        | 41                    | 41                    | 37                                      | 37                                           |

can be  explained by  four  independent  variables-GNP in  1980,  percentage  urban  population  in  1980,  level of infant  mortality  rate in  1980,  and change  in  infant  mortality  rates between  1980 and  1993. In the  sixth model, 41  percent  of the  change  in total  fertility  rates  between  1980  and 1993  was accounted for  by  three  variables:  percentage  urban  population, infant  mortality  rates,  and  change  in infant  mortality  rates. For  all of the models  in which  percentage  urban  population  was  entered, the  standardized coefficient was not  significant  at the 5  percent  level but was so at the 10  percent  level.

## POLICY  IMPLICATIONS

This overview of  regression  results  highlights  the  importance  of both socioeconomic  and  demographic  variables  in  fertility  reduction.  Improvements  in  social, economic,  and  demographic  conditions  are crucial to the realization of an  irreversible,  sustainable  fertility  transition  in Africa.  Clearly, contraceptive prevalence  and the  status of  women  as measured  by  the HDI as well as reductions in infant  mortality  rates are central to  the  ongoing  fertility  declines  in  many  parts  of  Africa.  My discussion  concentrates on these three variables and their implications for a  fertility  transition on the continent.

## THE HUMAN  DEVELOPMENT  INDEX AND  STATUS OF WOMEN

The United Nations  Development Programme  formulated the HDI as a  composite  measure of economic and social welfare. Unlike other measures of  socioeconomic  development,  this index  gives  equal weight  to longevity,  educational  attainment,  and  utility  derived  from  income (UNDP 1990).  A score is derived for each of these, from 0 for the lowest achieved  by any country  to 1 for the  highest. Averaging  the three indicators  gives  a  HDI  value between 0 and 1.  The  Human  Development Report 1990  (UNDP 1990)  gives  the index  by  sex for each  country  in  Africa,  and by  extracting  the  data  I  compiled  a  HDI  for  females  as  a  surrogate measure of the status of women  across the continent. In the  regression analysis  the HDI was a  strong explanatory  variable for the  spatial patterns of  fertility  in  1993 as measured  by  total  fertility  rates and crude birthrates.  Countries that had a  high  HDI exhibited a lower  fertility  rate.

The  importance  of status and  autonomy  of women in the attainment of  fertility  reductions cannot  be  overemphasized.  If a woman is the main controller of her  reproductivity,  she is more  likely  to use  contraceptives and to limit the ultimate number of children born than if the decision is left  to  a  man,  because women  assume  most  of  the  physiological  and child-care  burdens of  frequent childbearing.  One reason for the  persistence of  high fertility  in sub-Saharan  Africa  is the minimal  involvement of women in decision  making  about  childbearing.

The main  policy implication  of this  finding  is to reiterate  the call for upgrading  the status of African women. This variable  decisively  shows that in countries in which the status of women has  improved,  declines in fertility  have been dramatic  during  the  past  decade.  Fertility  decreases as the education of females increases.

## INFANT MORTALITY

A  good  indicator  of health conditions in a  country  is its infant mortality  rate:  the number of deaths of children under the  age  of one  per  1,000 live births  annually.  Studies  during  the  past twenty years  or so indicate that a  very significant relationship  exists between  high  levels  of infant and child  mortality  and low levels of maternal  education  (Caldwell 1979; Cleland and Van  Ginneken 1989;  Bicego  and  Fegan  1991;  Kalipeni 1993). The education of females seems to correlate  highly  with infant  mortality rates. Even if  incomes  are low,  educated women  tend  to make better decisions about their children than do uneducated women.

Lower levels  of  infant  mortality  have  been  shown  to  be  strongly correlated  with lower  fertility  rates.  Because  of  comparatively  high  childhood  mortality  throughout  the  developing  world,  many  families  have felt the  need  to  have  more children to  ensure  that some  will  survive  to adulthood. This  pattern  is further  reinforced  by  the need for  sons as social security  in old  age.

The  importance  of infant  mortality  in  any fertility  transition is  highlighted  by  the situation  in  Kenya, Zimbabwe,  and Botswana, each of which  has  an  infant  mortality  rate  below 70  per  1,000  live  births (Caldwell, Orubuloye,  and Caldwell  1992).  No  other countries in subSaharan  Africa record a level below  80, and most have rates above 100, which  suggests  that the attainment of this level of infant  mortality may prove  to be the  necessary  condition for African  fertility  decline. In this analysis,  infant  mortality  rates and  change  in infant  mortality  rates had a  significant  effect on  total  fertility  rates. Countries with  the  greatest declines in infant  mortality  rates  between 1980  and 1993  also  experienced the  greatest fertility  declines. This  pattern again  can  easily  be related to female  autonomy  and status.

The  policy  option  is clear: the role and status of women  should be changed through  vigorous pursuit  of universal  education of  girls  throughout the continent. Governments are  urged  to increase  women's access to education, employment opportunities,  and extension and credit services and to enact laws that  protect  women's  rights against  male domination in various sectors of economic and social life.

## CONTRACEPTIVE  PREVALENCE AND  FAMILY PLANNING

Perhaps  of  greatest significance  in the onset of the  fertility  transition in the  top  fifteen countries in decline  of crude birthrates is  the use  of modern and effective  contraceptives.  During  the 1960s  and 1970s  African governments  were reluctant to institute effective  family-planning programs,  and  political support  for  them in the  public  sector  was  "uniformly weak"  throughout  the continent  (Africa  Development  Bank  1992).  This attitude  has  changed,  however;  and  since  the  1974 and  1984 world population  conferences,  governments  in several African countries have acknowledged  that  they  consider  fertility  levels to be  high.  Most  governments  with  this  viewpoint  have  initiated  family-planning  programs. Although  success in  popularizing  the use of modern  contraceptive  techniques  has been slow in  coming,  some countries have built an  impressive infrastructure  for  provision  of these services.

In 1973  the  government  of Botswana launched a maternal-  and childhealth  program  into which  family-planning  services were  integrated. This  program  has been  very  successful in  achieving  its  goals  and  objectives.  By  1988,  for  92  percent  of  births,  mothers  had received  prenatal  care; for 66  percent,  mothers had  medically supervised deliveries; and for 54 percent,  mothers had received  postnatal  care  (Lesetedi, Mompati,  and Khulumani  1989).  From 1984 to 1988 current  use of modem methods of contraception  among  married  women  aged  fifteen to  forty-nine  rose from 19 to 29  percent,  and total  fertility  rates declined from 7 to 5. Data from Zimbabwe show  that the decline of  fertility  there has been caused  by changes  in both  marriage  patterns  and  contraceptive  use. The shift to use

of modern  contraception  practices  seemed most  pronounced among  uneducated rural  populations,  which  implies  that neither education nor other  forms  of  socioeconomic  change  were  responsible.  This  pattern indicates that  if a  fertility  transition  is to  be  achieved,  there  will be a  great need for the  provision  of effective methods of  contraception  in both rural and urban  settings.

Investigations  in  Kenya  found  large  variations in  contraceptive  use among  the thirteen districts covered in the DHS data  (Kelley  and Nobbe 1990; Cross,  Obungu,  and  Kizito  1991).  These  findings  indicate  that pockets  of  contraceptive  use in  Kenya,  Zimbabwe, and Botswana reach levels as  high  as those found in  developed  countries and that these areas are  rapidly going through  a  fertility  transition  (Way,  Cross,  and Kumar 1987).  Throughout  the continent there  are  signs  of  progress  in  contraceptive  use.  The celebrated  family-planning programs  in  Botswana, Zimbabwe, South Africa, and  Kenya  have followed  different  paths,  but all have  succeeded.  In  Botswana,  for  example,  family-planning  services operate  in the framework of an  integrated  maternal- and child-health program  of a decentralized health  system.  The  Zimbabwe National Family Planning  Council is a semiautonomous unit in the  Ministry  of Health (Lucas 1992).  The common theme in the southern African  programs  is a commitment to the  provision  of safe and effective means of child  spacing or of  stopping  births  altogether.

In short, successful  programs, coupled  with  strong political support for  family planning,  have undermined the  preference  for  large  families. Rapid  declines in infant  mortality  rates,  improved  maternal and child care,  rapidly  increasing  attainment of formal education  by  females, and increased use of effective  contraceptives  have all contributed  to the onset of a  fertility  transition,  especially  in northern  and southern Africa.

## CONCLUSION

Through  analysis  of variance,  paired  t-tests,  and  exploratory  stepwise regression analysis  this article demonstrates that northern  and southern Africa are in the  process  of a  fertility  transition.  Furthermore,  the results demonstrate that a  significant  number of  countries on  the  continent experienced  substantial  declines in their  fertility  rates  between 1980  and 1993. Female  autonomy  as measured  by  the  HDI, total  fertility  rates, percentage  of urban  population,  infant  mortality  rates,  and moder contraceptive prevalence  are  strongly  associated with the  declining fertility rates. Countries that scored  very high  on the HDI also  experienced  the greatest  declines in  fertility  rates and had  relatively  lower  fertility  rates. Countries that  experienced  the  greatest  declines in infant  mortality  rates also exhibited the  greatest  declines in  fertility  rates.  Although fertility rates  are  still  very high by  world standards  and  population  will continue to  grow  at  high  rates,  the  declining  trends  need to be reinforced  through

the education of  women, the reduction of  high  infant  mortality  rates,  and the  provision  of safe and effective  contraception.

This  analysis  refutes the  argument  that African countries  may  not achieve  a  fertility  transition in  the near  future, because  the  necessary socioeconomic conditions for the transition are  weak or nonexistent. The achievement of the  fertility  transition is  possible  if certain  policy  issues are  addressed with  unyielding governmental  commitment. Over  the  long term,  fertility  will  decline  to  acceptable  levels  as  Africa continues  to experience  socioeconomic and cultural transformation.  Of  great importance in the  timely  achievement of the transition is the status of women in  society.

## CITATIONS

- African  Development Bank. 1992. African  development report  1992.  Development Research  and Policy  Department,  Abidjan,  Ivory  Coast.
- Beaver,  S.  E. 1975. Demographic transition theory reinterpreted. Lexington, Mass.:  Lexington Books.
- Bicego,  G. T.,  and C.  Fegan. 1991. Maternal education  and child survival:  a  comparative  analysis  of DHS  data.  Demographic and  health  surveys world  conference: proceedings, vol.  1,  177-204. Columbia,  Md.: IRD/Macro  International.
- Boserup,  E. 1981. Population  and  technological change.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press.
- Caldwell,  J. C. 1979. Education  as a factor  in  mortality  decline:  an examination of  Nigerian data. Population  Studies 33:395-413.
- Caldwell, J. C.,  I. 0.  Orubuloye, and  P. Caldwell. 1992. Fertility  decline  in  Africa: a new  type  of transition.  Population  and  Development  Review 18:211-242.
- Cleland,  J. G., and  J.  K. Van Ginneken. 1989. Maternal  schooling  and  childhood mortality. Journal of  Biosocial Science  supplement 10:13-34.
- Cross,  A.  R., W.  Obungu, and  P. Kizito. 1991. Evidence  of a transition  to lower  fertility  in  Kenya. International  Family Planning Perspectives  17:4-7.
- Doenges, C.  E.,  and  J.  L. Newman. 1989. Impaired  fertility  in  tropical  Africa.  Geographical  Review 79:99-111.
- Gaisie,  K.,  A.  R.  Cross,  and  G.  Nsemukila. 1993. Zambia  demographic and  health  survey 1992. Lusaka:  University of Zambia and Zambia Central Statistical  Office.
- Ghana Statistical  Service. 1989. Ghana  demographic  and health  survey  1988. Accra.
- Goliber,  T.  J. 1989. Africa's  expanding population: old  problems,  new  policies.  Population Bulletin 44(3):1-51.
- Jolly,  C. L. 1994. Four theories  of  population  change  and the environment.  Population  and Environment 16:61-91.
- Kalipeni,  E. 1993. Determinants  of infant  mortality  in Malawi:  a  spatial  perspective. Social Science and Medicine 37:183-198.
- Kalipeni, E.,  ed. 1994. Population growth and  environmental degradation in  southern Africa. Boulder,  Colo.:  Lynne  Rienner.
- Kalipeni,  E.,  and L.  Harrington. 1995. Regional  variations  of  fertility  in Malawi.  Scandinavian  Journal of Development  Alternatives 14(1/2):222-247.
- Katjiuanjo, P.,  S. Titus, M. Zauna,  and J.  T.  Boerma. 1993. Namibia  demographic  and health  survey 1992. Windhoek:  Namibia  Ministry  of Health  and Social  Services.
- Kelley,  A.,  and  C. Nobbe. 1990. Kenya  at the  demographic turning  point?  World Bank discussion paper  no.  107, World Bank, Washington,  D.C.
- Kenya  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs  and  National Heritage. 1989. Kenya  demographic and  health survey,  summary  report.  Nairobi.
- Lesetedi, L.,  G.  Mompati, and  P. Khulumani. 1989. Botswana  family  health  survey  II, 1988.  Gaborone: Central Statistical  Office,  Ministry  of Finance  and  Development Planning,  and  Ministry of  Health.
- Lucas, D. 1992. Fertility  and  family  planning  in southern  Africa and central Africa. Studies in  Family Planning 23(3):145-158.
- Malawi  National  Statistical  Office. 1992. Malawi  demographic  and health  survey  1992. Zomba.

- Meekers,  D. 1991. Report  on the IUSSP seminar  on the course  of  fertility  transition  in sub-Saharan Africa,  Harare, Zimbabwe,  19-22  November 1991. IUSSP  paper  no.  31,  International  Union  for the Scientific  Study  of  Population,  Liege,  Belgium.
- Mott,  F.  L.,  and  S. H.  Mott. 1980. Kenya's  record  population growth:  a dilemma  of  development. Population  Bulletin  35(3):1-43.
- Mhloyi,  M. 1987. The  proximate  determinants and  their  socio-cultural determinants:  the  case  of two  rural  settings in  Zimbabwe.  The  cultural  roots  of  African  regimes:  proceedings of  the  Ife conference,  February  25-March  1, 1987. Ife, Nigeria:  Obafemi  Awolowo University,  Department of  Demography and Social  Statistics.
- Ngallaba,  S.,  S. H.  Kapiga,  I.  Ruyobya, and  J.  T. Boerma. 1993. Tanzania  demographic and  health survey  1991/1992. Dar-es-Salaam:  Tanzania Bureau of Statistics  Planning  Commission.
- Omideyi, A.  K. 1987. Status,  cultural  beliefs and  fertility  behavior among  Yoruba women. The cultural  roots of African  regimes:  proceedings of the Ife conference,  February  25-March  1, 1987. Ife,  Nigeria:  Obafemi  Awolowo University,  Department  of  Demography and Social Statistics.
- Okore,  A. 0. 1987. Fertility  determinants among  the  Igbo  in eastern  Nigeria.  The cultural  roots  of African  regimes:  proceedings of  the  Ife  conference, February  25-March  1,  1987.  Ife,  Nigeria: Obafemi  Awolowo  University,  Department  of  Demography and Social  Statistics.
- Omran,  A.  R. 1973. Egypt's  fertility  profile.  Egypt:  population problems  and  prospects, ed.  A.  R. Omran,  73-114.  Chapel  Hill:  University of North  Carolina,  Carolina  Population  Center.
- . 1993. World  population data sheet.  Washington,  D.C.
- Population Reference  Bureau. 1980. World  population data sheet.  Washington,  D.C.
- Shapiro,  D. 1995. Population  growth,  changing  agricultural  practices,  and environmental degradation  in Zaire.  Population  and Environment  16(3):221-236.
- Shaw,  P.  1994. Better health  in Africa:  experiences and  lessons  learned.  Washington,  D.C.: World Bank.
- Shipton, P.  1989. How  private  property  emerges in  Africa:  directed  and  undirected land  tenure reforms in  densely  settled  areas south  of the Sahara.  Report  to the Bureau of  Program  and  Policy Coordination,  USAID.  Cambridge,  Mass.: Harvard  University.
- Simon,  J. 1983. Population  pressure  on the land:  analysis  of trends  past  and future.  World  Development 11(9):825-834.
- Sullivan,  J.  M. 1991. The  pace  of decline  in under-five  mortality:  evidence  from the  DHS  surveys. Demographic and health  surveys  world  conference:  proceedings, vol.  1,  25-38.  Columbia,  Md.: IRD/Macro  International.
- Teitelbaum,  M. S. 1975. Relevance  of the  demographic transition  theory  for  developing countries. Science 188:420-425.
- Udjo,  E. 0. 1987. A determinant  of  fertility  and  its cultural  context  among  Nigeria's  Kanuri. The cultural  roots  of African  regimes:  proceedings of the Ife conference,  February  25-March  1, 1987. Ife, Nigeria:  Obafemi  Awolowo University,  Department  of  Demography and Social Statistics.
- van de Walle, E.,  and A. D. Foster. 1990. Fertility  decline  in Africa: assessment  and  prospects,  World Bank technical  paper  no. 125, Africa Technical  Department  Series, World Bank, Washington,  D.C.
- UNDP  (United  Nations  Development Programme). 1990. Human  development report.  New  York: Oxford  University Press.
- Way,  A.  A.,  A. R.  Cross,  and S. Kumar. 1987. Family planning  in Botswana,  Kenya,  and Zimbabwe. International  Family Planning Perspectives  13:7-11.