## Wiley

## American Geographical Society

Settin' the Woods on Fire: Rural Incendiarism as Protest

Author(s): Robert Kuhlken

Source:

Geographical Review, Vol. 89, No. 3 (Jul., 1999), pp. 343-363

Published by:

American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/216155

Accessed: 29-10-2015 09:34 UTC

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Wiley and American Geographical Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

<!-- image -->

## SETTIN'  THE WOODS ON FIRE: RURAL INCENDIARISM AS PROTEST

## ROBERT  KUHLKEN

ABSTRACT. Fire  is a fundamental  tool within a  broad  spectrum  of vegetation-management strategies,  from swidden agriculture  to plantation forestry.  Through  the seemingly pyromanic activity  of incendiarism,  fire  assumes  additional  significance  in the human-environment relationship.  Case  studies  from  England, Algeria,  and  the  southern  United  States  serve to illustrate  the circumstance  of fire  as  an  indication  of agrarian discontent  and  a  weapon  of peasant resistance.  Other documented cases of incendiarism  reveal  that use of fire in the landscape has expanded from a constructive  ecosystem-manipulation  technique to a destructive  form  of protest  undertaken by  the  oppressed  or  disempowered.  Keywords:fire, land tenure,  peasant  revolt, political  ecology.

I'll  gas  up my  hot rod  stoker We'll get hotter  than  a  poker You'll be  broke  but  I'll  be  broker Tonight  we're settin'  the  woods  on  fire

-As  sung  by Hank  Williams,  1952

'ire has  long  been  a  cultural tool  for  modifying the  environment. Humans  and their  antecedent hominids have  used fire as  an  effective and  efficient method  of  converting  resources  for  250,000 years,  if  not  longer.  Carl  Sauer wrote  that  man  "learned early  that fire  aided  in collecting  food, both plant  and animal,  and thus  began  the practice  of setting  fire  to vegetation" (1975, 4). Omer  Stewart  counted  a number  of reasons  for prehistoric  and  what  he described  as  primitive  uses  of fire:  to facilitate hunting or travel  by removing  dense  vegetation;  to drive  or direct  game during  a hunt;  to improve  pasture  for  game;  to  increase the  yield  of  wild  plant  foods;  and  as  an act of war (1956) (Figure 1).

With the development  of agriculture, burning  became  an integral  maneuver  in opening up new lands  for  cultivation  or in clearing  pastures  for  domestic  livestock. Conversion  of wildlands  to agropastoral systems  around  the world has absolutely depended on fire,  and burning continues to play  a major  role in current  agrarian production  strategies. Swidden  is  still  the  dominant  land  use  in many  tropical  areas, and  bush-fallow  agrosystems utilizing  slash-and-burn methods  are  now  recognized as  successful  and  sophisticated  adaptations to the  rain-forest  environment.  Grazing is  another  tropical  land  use  that  relies  on fire  for  the  maintenance  of savannas  or  for enhancing forage  within wooded areas.  In modern forestry,  controlled  burning  is widely  used  as  a  silvicultural prescription, for  hazardous-fuel reduction,  and  for  watershed and wildlife management.  Fire  is also used extensively  in other managed ecosystems,  such  as  midlatitude  rangelands and  heathlands. Indeed,  fire  has  enabled human  occupation  and use of the earth (Pyne 1995, 1997).

m$' DR. KUHLKEN is an associate  professor  of geography  at Central  Washington  University,  Ellensburg,  Washington  98926-7420.

FIG.  i-Fire  was  often  used  by  American  Indian  tribes  to create  favorable conditions for  hunting,  as depicted  in Prairie  Meadows  Burning,  a  pencil  and  watercolor  by  George  Gatlin,  1832.  (Private  collection; reproduced  in Truettner  1979,  248)

<!-- image -->

Fire  has  been an  effective weapon  in  warfare  as  well,  at  least  since  the Greek  and Roman  Empires  (GoudsbloM  1992). But  there  is another  cultural  tradition  of burning,  a  similarly destructive  one that  has  developed  in  addition  to  outright  acts  of  war or deliberate  "scorched-earth" policies.  Through  the act of incendiarism,  humans have infused  fire  in the  landscape  with even more  meaning.

## FORMS OF INCENDIARISM

An incendiary  fire  has  been defined  as  a  "wildfire willfully  set  by  anyone  to  burn,  or to spread  to,  vegetation  or  property  not owned or controlled  by  him, and  without consent of the owner or his agent"  (Forest  Service  1978, 9). Although  the popular Hank  Williams  song  used  "settin' the  woods  on  fire" merely  as  a  metaphor, these  illuminating  lyrics  are  clearly indicative  of  actions  familiar to  many  rural  residents.  Motives for  such actions  include  personal  grievances  against  landowners,  attempts  to devalue  property  for  speculative  economic gain,  incidents  of arson  by  unemployed firefighters who seek  work,  and  the  pyromanic  activities  of demented  individuals. The focus of this article  is on incendiarism  as  a tool of protest  or resistance.

Arson is  listed  by  James  C.  Scott  as  one of the  "weapons of the  weak"  that  "relatively  powerless  groups" utilize  against  ",those who seek  to extract  labor,  food, taxes, rents,  and interest  from  them"  (1985,  29).  Rural  incendiarism,  according  to George

Rude,  belongs  "to  that  shadowy  realm  between  crime  and  protest  where  it  is  often  no easy  matter  to tell  the two apart" (1978,  4). In  cultural-ecological terms,  destructive burning of the landscape  represents  seemingly  maladaptive behavior,  as  a result  of which the perpetrators themselves  become  victims.  But  a review  of the  literature of peasant resistance  stamps  this type of incendiarism  an act of desperation,  which must be seen as  part  of a  "rebellion  of hopelessness" (Scott  1976, 195). In  many  cases it is  a  refractory phenomenon that  occurs  wherever  an  established  agrarian order  is forced  to undergo change  that threatens  to disrupt  its particular  subsistence  ethic and its  traditional  resource-use  patterns.  These  inflammatory reactions  range  from isolated  incidents  of arson  to jacquerie,  or full-blown  peasant  revolt,  during  which incendiarism  may be widespread.  Frederick Gamst  found that "such  uprisings  of peasants  often  stem  from  increased rates  of  extraction of  the  fund  of  rent,  or  from  attempts to alter  the nature  of their  ties to the land"  (1974,  48).

In the wake of commercial agriculture,  the rise of export-driven  plantation space-economies,  and  postcolonial  modernization  of the  peasantry, rural  incendiarism persists  as a political-ecological  trait  operating  in defiance  of unpopular  government  policies  or  as  a  symbolic  and  immolatory  act  of  protest.  The  representative case studies reviewed  below, followed  by a brief assessment  of incendiary  activity elsewhere  around  the world,  serve  to illustrate  this idea.

## ARSON  IN THE ENGLISH COUNTRYSIDE

The  first  documented  widespread use  of incendiarism as  a  means  of  protest  began  in England  in the eighteenth  century  and  culminated  in the "Captain Swing"  revolt  of 1830. During  the  1700s,  rural  discontent  was  provoked by  enclosure  laws  and  ensuing competition for forest  resources: game,  timber,  firewood,  and  forage  for  cattle  and sheep.  Privatization of  traditional  commons  land  subsequently placed  unreasonable production  pressure  on remaining  "open" resources  and  created deep-seated  resentment. The government  reacted  to the  protest,  and  a  vicious  cycle  ensued.  Increased poaching  and  malicious  destruction  of deer  parks  and  hedges,  often  by  gangs  of men disguised  with blackened  faces,  led to the passage  of the Black  Act in 1723, making trespass  and poaching of Crown  game capital  offenses.  This forced  a conflict  between gamekeepers  and traditional  users  of the forest  and  contributed  to the radicalization of the peasantry.  Arson within emparkments  increased  as a gesture  of indignation  (Charlesworth 1983, 60). As  Edward Palmer  Thompson  explained,  "the resort  of deer  poachers  to more  highly  organized  force  may  be seen  as  retributive in character and  concerned  less  with  venison  as  such  than  with  the  deer  as  symbols  (and as  agents)  of  an  authoritywhich threatened  their  economy,  their  crops,  and  their  customary  agrarian rights" (1975,  64).

Continuing enclosure  of commons and wastelands  was part of the rise of an agrarian  capitalism  that endangered  the subsistence-based  economy of the peasantry.  Moreover,  as Scott points out, the "right  to subsistence" was perceived  in moral and social context,  so its inevitable  demise  was at the core  of peasant  revolt (1976, 33).  Between 1750 and  1850  the  English peasant became  a  proletarian farm  la-

borer,  cut  off  from  customary rights  to  land  and  confronted  with  ever-increasing agricultural  mechanization.  Agrarian unrest  resulted  in a  "tendency for  incendiarism to flare  up  occasionally and  to maintain  itself  at  a  very  high  level  during  certain  periods of disturbance" (Hobsbawm  and Rude  1968, 80). Such  cultural-ecological disturbances included extremely harsh winters, failed harvests,  and the return of 250,000 men looking for farmwork  after  the Napoleanic  Wars.  Particularly rebellious  years were  the  1790s,  1816,  1822-1823,  1830,  1834-1835,  and  1843-1844,  and  incendiarism  was an increasingly  frequent  tool of protest (p. 16).  Poor  wages for farm labor  became  the  leading  grievance, especially  in  the  eastern  counties,  where  setting fire  to haystacks was a common practice  (Peacock  1974, 31) (Figure  2).

The Captain  Swing  revolt,  named  after  a  mythical  sender  of threatening letters, manifested  two components:  attacks  on threshing  machines  as  the  perceived  cause of unemployment,  and  an  unprecedented wave  of incendiarism. This  was  "no  longer a  case  of isolated  attacks  on ricks" but  an  organized protest  for  higher  wages;  during November  1830 "all  of southern  England  seemed  in flames"  (Hobsbawm  and Rude 1968,  102, 84).  With  the  invention  of the  strike-anywhere "Lucifer match"  that  same year  (1830),  "technology it  would  seem  had  come  to  the  aid  of  the  protester at  just  the right  historical  moment"  (Archer  1990,  24).

These  fires  signaled  a  profound  change  in the  economic  geography  of a rapidly industrializing  nation. Peasants  found themselves  obsolete in the emerging  landscape  of mechanized  Britain. As  J.  P.  D.  Dunbabin  remarked, "agricultural labor  was in widespread  surplus,  a factor  underlying  many  of the riots,  fires,  and  threatening letters"  (1974,  297).  Differential  agricultural ecologies  within the country  created  a spatial  component for the protests.  In addressing the geography  of rural  incendiarism in England  at  this  time,  Eric  Hobsbawm  and  George  Rude  note that  the revolt "occurred  essentially  in the  regions  in  which  cereal  farming  was  combined  with  low wages"  and  list the counties  of North and  East  Kent,  Surrey, East  Sussex,  West  Norfolk,  Cambridgeshire, and  Lincolnshire as  particularly prone  to incendiarism  (1968, 173).

After 1830,  incendiarism  became the predominant  weapon in the arsenal  of agrarian revolt.  John  Archer  reported that  "from  October  1843 to  December  1844 incendiarism  throughout  England  reached  an unprecedented  scale"  and actually  attained  an  incidence  rate  of  twice  that  which  occurred during  the  Swing  period  (1990, 107).  According  to David Jones,  "arson  was the dominant  form of rural  protest  in East  Anglia  during  the  years  1842-51," reflecting  heightened  farm-labor  oppression and  increasing class  struggle  (1976, 6).  High  unemployment  in  Suffolk caused  a  peak year  for  arson  there  in  1844 (Charlesworth 1983,162);  and  in  Cambridgeshire, during the  early  1850s, Sir  James Caird  noted  that  "these incendiary  fires  are  said  to  be of almost nightly  occurrence," causing  farmers to make  certain  adaptations in their  harvesting methods: "The  corn ricks  are  built in different  parts  of the fields,  seldom contiguous,  so that  if one should  be fired  the  rest  may  have  some chance  to escape" (1967,467).  Townscapes  in  Cambridgeshire likewise  were  transformed: "The  scale  of incendiarism  in these  villages  during  the 1840s  altered  their  architecture since re-

placement  buildings  were  constructed  of brick  and  tile,  a  less risky  proposition  for insurance  companies"  (Archer  1990, 149).

Arson  was  also  charring the  landscape  of  Wales, often  due  to  "long-standing battles  over  common rights,  encroachments  and  sheep-walks" (Jones  1985,97).  Despite contrary  claims that "the  Welsh  did not resort  to incendiarism," Jones  recounted

FIG.  2-A rick burner. Source:  Armstrong  1988, 83;  originally  published  in Punch 7, No.  155 [1844].

<!-- image -->

"many  fires  in  the  Welsh  countryside which  historians  have  so far  ignored.... Shooting moors and plantations  were  set on fire,  as  were  enclosure  fences,  hayricks  and farm outbuildings"  (p. 97). Other  areas  in the British  Isles,  including  Ireland,  witnessed deliberate  burning of rural  lands. Distinct spatial  and temporal patterns emerge  from  the data:  Rude,  for  example,  pointed  to "roughly ten  year  intervals" in England-"1822,  1831-2, 1843-5,  1854-5,  and  1863-6" (1978,145). By  the  mid-1870s the

FIG. 3-Forest-fire  occurrences, by  county,  in  Louisiana and  Mississippi, 1966-1973.  Source: Adapted  from Bertrand  and Baird  1975. (Cartography by  Julie  Morgan,  Central  Washington  University  Resource  Management  Program)

<!-- image -->

rise  of agricultural trade  unions  utilized  "weapons better  fitted  for  the  struggle," and incendiarism  in Great  Britain  began  to die out (Charlesworth 1983,  163).

## ALGERIA IN FLAMES

Just  as British  fires  were  fading,  the mountains  of northern  Africa  experienced  the beginnings  of arson  as  a  weapon  of peasant  resistance. Arab  and  Berber  peoples  inhabiting  the forested  highlands  of what  was  to become  Algeria were  cultivators  and pastoralists  who worked  within the fire  ecology  of their  Mediterranean landscape. Late-summer  controlled  burning  was  a  traditional  method  of enhancing  forage  the following  season,  one that  opened  up  farmlands for  cereal  and  vegetable  crops.  This clearing  by fire  was  part  of a crop-livestock complex  with a three-year  fallow  (Prochaska  1986,  230). Although  rights  to use  cleared lands  were  hereditary, the forest  at large  was considered  a common resource.  After  the 1830 French  invasion,  colonial authorities  expropriated these  lands  and  began  to issue  concessions  during  the  1850S and  186os  that  stimulated  a  thriving  commercial  cork  industry. Forestry  officials  attempted  to administer  a  forest  code  imported  from  Europe that  strictly  curtailed traditional subsistence  activities,  including  the pasturing  of sheep and goats.  When petitions submitted  by peasant  groups  failed  to stop this onslaught  on indigenous rights,  incendiarism  flared.

Between  186o  and  19oo a  series  of conflagrations erupted  as  peasants  torched  the woods; particularly bad  years  were  1871,  1877,  and  1881. Pushed  aside  by settlement schemes and the demarcation  of state-controlled  forestlands,  herders  resorted  to burning  as  a  tool of resistance: "In  protest  they  fired  the  reserved forests" (Pyne  1997, 121).  Forest  arson  was the lead  weapon in "the  clash  between  two opposed  ways  of life,  between  two  political  economies"  (Prochaska 1986, 239). As  control  of  the  forest shifted  from  the subsistence-based peasantry  to the capitalists holding  concessions, peasants  were  forced  to enter  the cash  economy  and  become  forest  laborers.  Incendiarism  abated  somewhat,  though  it  never  ended  entirely, as  resistance to French  colonial domination  persisted  and  finally  climaxed  in the  Algerian  Revolution  of 1954, which Nico Kielstra  characterized as  a  "peasant war"  (1978) and during  which,  Eric Wolf noted, incidents  of arson  were  common in the Aures  Mountains  (1969, 236). Even  several  years  later,  in August  1956,  a  fire  in the  Bainem  State  Forest  outside  Algiers  "was believed  to  have  been  started by  nationalist  rebels" (New  York Times  1956).

## SOUTHERN WOODS  BURNING

In  the United  States,  incendiarism  occurs  most frequently in the South  (Forest  Service  1978;  Clark 1984),  with  Alabama and,  especially, Mississippi  and  Louisiana noted as  hot spots (Hansbrough  1961;  Dunkelberger and  Altobellis  1975) (Figure  3).  These and neighboring  states  contain  expansive  tracts  of planted  pines  that  are  only  now reaching  maturity  and that have  been fuel laden  for several  decades.  But,  as  Alvin Bertrand  and  Andrew  Baird  correctly pointed  out,  "there is  no  way  to  understand the incendiary  problem  in the  Southern  region  without  a  knowledge  of the  cultural  history of this part  of the nation"  (1975,  5).

In  the  South,  colonial  and  postcolonial  settlement  patterns  responded  to the already  established  presence  of large  clearings  "maintained as  such  by  recurrent fires" (Prunty  1965, 165). At  the  beginning  of the  nineteenth  century, settlers  in the  region quickly  adopted  the  aboriginal technique  of firing  the  landscape.  European  agricultural  traditions  also included  the use of fire  (Otto and  Anderson  1982).  Although Amerindian burning was common in all areas of the continent, Stephen Pyne pointed to the southern  frontier  as home to "a  blend of European  and Indian  fire practices" and stated  that  "more  than  any  other  region  of the U.S.,  this amalgamation persisted  in the South, giving it an incendiary  tradition  without parallel  in America"  (1982,  124).

Fred  Kniffen  believed  that  the initial  impetus  behind  southern  woods burning was  the free-range  cattle  complex,  which  developed  when  the  traditional  European right to pasture  stock on common lands met the abundant  forage  opportunities provided  within the  large  expanses  of open,  parklike pine forests  created  and  maintained by fire (1990). This subsistence  adaptation  was aided  by a haphazard,  often noncontiguous  land-granting  process  whereby  many  undeveloped  or  uncultivated blocks of land remained  interspersed  with newly cleared  farms  (Hilliard  1972, 9). Eventually, as southern  timber  resources  became  recognized  and  valued,  many  of these  parcels  came  under  corporate  or  absentee  ownership. The  cattle  owners,  however,  still  considered  it  within  their  rights  to use  these  lands  to graze  their  stock  and to enhance  forage  by the tradition  of annual  firing  (Bertrand and Baird  1975, 16).

The superimposition  of commercial  forestry  added  fuel  to the fires  of southern incendiarism.  Fire  protection  became  the  leading  management tenet  of  large  corporate  landowners,  as it had earlier  been adopted  by the federal  government  when it consolidated  the remaining  public  domain  into national  forests.  Traditional subsistence  strategies  of the  backwoods  farmer-stockman were  threatened. As  Pyne  put  it: "The  Indian  whose hunting  grounds  had  vanished  into farms  had  a  counterpart in the  agrarian southerner  whose  hunting  and  herding  lands  were  swallowed  by  industrial forests"  (1982,  154).  Retaliatory  fires  became a common practice  known as "burning  the  big  man"  (Kerr 1958,29),  although  Albert  Smith  suggested that  arson  in Reconstruction-era  Georgia  may  have  been "violent,  interracial protest,  a form of revenge  for the racism  and poverty  that defined  the region's race  relations" (1985, 528).  More  frequently, many  areas  of the  South  experienced "fires of a  vindictive  nature"  that  may  be  linked  to forfeiture  of tax-delinquent lands  and  the  eventual  creation of large  holdings,  both public  and  private  (Folweiler  and  Brown  1946,  40).

By  the  1930s incendiarism  was  so rampant  in the South  that  the U.S.  Forest  Service hired  teams  of sociologists  to "conduct  research  into the underlying  reasons" for the fires, focusing on "the sociocultural environment within which acts of woods-burning  take  place"  (Dunkelberger and  Altobellis 1975, 5). These  sociological investigations  were  revived  during  the 1970S and  revealed that  many  of the reasons for the high rate  of fire  setting  in the South  persisted.  Although,  in the outsider's view,  "the  benefits  are  mostly  imaginary," the apparent  cause  of most incendiarism remained  "traditional woodsburning  practices" (Randall  1963, 54).  In  their  report,

FIG. 4-Sign  offering  a  reward placed  in a  recently  burned  area  along  a road  in  western  North  Carolina.  (Photograph  by  the author,  April  1995)

<!-- image -->

Bertrand  and Baird  found four major  factors  behind southern incendiarism:  the open-range tradition; the aesthetics of  "cleaning  out" underbrush  to make the woods c"look good";  the eradication  of ticks,  chiggers,  snakes,  and other  pests;  and revenge  or "~spite burnings"  set by rural  residents  out of resentment  against  "encroachments  on their  traditional  way  of life"  (1975,16-17). Of course,  those  ostensibly  more  constructive  reasons  stated  for  setting  fires  may  simply  be a  ritualized  part of the southern  credo  and  may  serve  as  standard  excuses  for  the  underlying  covert sabotage.  Overall, Max  Doolittle  and  M.  L.  Lightsey reported,  reasons  for  setting  the woods on fire  had  changed  little  over  the  past  fifty  years-"cgrazing, grudge,  hunting, jobs, meanness,  pests,  retaliation" (1979,  5).  They  concluded:  "cThe  traditional  tendency  to  regard the forest  as  free  and  open  still  exists  in  most  areas  we examined,  so regulations  and  practices  that  impede  free  entry  and use are  met with resentment and, at times, retaliation  by  the offended  residents.  In  general,  the more restrictive the practices  of a landowner,  the more  likely  that  his land  will be burned"  (P.  3).

As if to  provide  further  evidence  for  the  persistence of  vindictive  fire,  during  the first  few  weeks  of November  1980,  particularly destructive  forest  fires  roared  out of control  across  the southern  Appalachians. Incendiarism was identified  as  the cause of most of these  blazes,  and  in eastern  Kentucky "lan investigator for  the  Forest  Service said  that  arsonists  seeking  revenge  against  the  government  had  started  many  of the fires" (New  York  T'imes 1980).  The  problem  of southern  incendiar'ism, may  actually intensify  in the future,  as rural  economies implode  and land tenure  becomes

even more corporate or absentee. Authorities throughout this region have attempted  to curtail  fire  setting  by criminalizing the activity  and  by offering  rewards for information  leading  to the arrest  of culprits  (Figure  4).

Although  the South  has  epitomized  the problem  of protest  incendiarism,  other regions of the country are not immune from it. The Pacific  Northwest,  with its abundant  resource  lands  and  late-settlement-frontier economy,  has  witnessed  numerous  outbreaks. Donald  Meinig  cited  a  case  in  which  sheepherders, angry  at  being evicted from pastures  controlled  by local cattle ranchers  in central  Washington, "were  blamed for setting fire  to much of the local timberland  out of spite"  (1968, 291).  California,  characterized by  its  Mediterranean landscape  and  a  nearly  identical fire  regime  favoring  explosive  early-autumn fires, has  seen  its  share  of incendiarism, too.  Among any  number  of reasons  for  wildland  arson,  anger  and  spite  still  emerge, as  recounted  in a  recent  article  about  Southern  California's Angeles  National  Forest. Of the deliberately set  fires  there,  "the  second  most  common  variety  is  what  the  Forest Service  calls  'grudge fires,' blazes  set  by  people angry  at  the government" (Sullivan 1997,67). And  in northern  New  Mexico,  in  the  early  summer  of 1967, cutbacks  in federal  grazing  allotments  triggered  a retaliatory response  of arson  in the Carson National Forest,  in which one blaze  burned  more  than  500  acres  (New  York  Times 1967).

## A GLOBAL ASSESSMENT

Incendiarism  as a  tool of protest  or resistance has  been a  recurring, albeit  sporadic, phenomenon across  the globe,  although  certain  areas  are  more  prone  to experience this activity  than  are  others  (Figure  5).  A sampling  of documented  cases  reveals  the following situations,  beginning  with several  locations once subsumed  within the British  Empire.

During  the 1920S, in Kenya, the encroachment  of European  colonists  into areas of traditional  pasture  for  tribal  livestock  led to a government-sponsored  program known as kifagio,  a  Swahili  word  for  "broom," referring to the  sweeping  away  of native stock. Resistance  to kifagio included acts of incendiarism,  involving  settlers' crops  and  the  forest  reserves in  which  indigenous  people  were  forced  to  relocate.  The ensuing poverty  led to militancy,  and "acts  of terrorism  against  settlers  and their property  increased," part  of a  peasant  movement  that  found  ultimate  expression  in the  Mau  Mau  rebellion  (Kanogo  1987,140).  To  the  south,  in  neighboring  Tanganyika during the 195os,  a mandatory government soil-conservation  program  that included a ban on burning  elicited  an incendiary  response:  "Ribbons  of smoke  rose defiantly  all  over  the  Uluguru  Mountains....  Rules  against  burning  were  no longer enforceable,  and the peasants  now openly flaunted  authority  by firing the hills" (Young and Fosbrooke 1960,  157).

In India,  forestry  programs  under  the British  Raj  included  suppression  of fires, often to the detriment  of both economic and  ecological  functioning.  Protest  over these  policies  took  the  form  of "spectacular outbreaks" of incendiarism,  along  with a "relentless insurgency  of small  firings" (Pyne  1995,  166).  And  in the Indian  Hima-

laya,  peasant resistance  to commercial  forestry  ignited "outbreaks of planned incendiarism"  as the attempted  government  repression  of traditional  annual  forest burning had the opposite effect  (Guha  1990,  52).  Incendiarism  in the state  of Uttar Pradesh  was  especially  common in 1916,1921,  and  1930-1931.  The  situation  in India, particularly, suggests  that a distinction should be drawn  between  incendiarism  as strictly  a destructive  form of protest  against  any  manner  of injustice  and  the insistence on utilizing  fire  as  a constructive  tool of resource  management  in the face  of criminalization  or restrictions  on its further  use.

The  island  continent  of  Australia has  been  occupied  by  its  aboriginal  inhabitants for tens of thousands  of years.  Burning  was an essential  component of the human ecosystems  for  these  antipodean  hunter-gatherers, whose culture  so carefully  managed  the environment  for  broad-spectrum  food production  that  it earned  the epithet "firestick  farming," a descriptive  term  first  ascribed  to Rhys  Jones  (Pyne  1991, xii). In the Aborigine  worldview,  frequent  burning  was absolutely  necessary,  not only for subsistence  but also in order  to take  care  of the land (Lewis  1989;  Kohen 1995).  With the inevitable  and  unavoidable  clash  of cultures  associated  with incursions onto native  lands  following  the 1788 British  convict  settlement  at  Botany  Bay and the subsequent  colonization of the frontier  beyond,  the Aborigines  naturally used fire  as  a  tool of resistance: "They  fired  wheat  shocks  as  they  did  tussocks.  They hurled  fire  sticks  as  though they  were  warding  off night demons escaped  from  the Dreamtime.  Fields  and paddocks  they  burned  like  favored  hunting  grounds.  They set decoy fires  to distract  settlers,  then plundered  their  homesteads  and barns  for food" (Pyne 1991,  192).

In the compartmentalized  geography  of modern Australia,  where "ecosystem management"  is at  once  the  tenet  and  the  responsibility of government  scientists,  an attempt  has been made to incorporate  Aboriginal  burning  practices  and environmental  knowledge  as part  of the management  plan for Kakadu National  Park.  But different  perceptions  and  ideas  about  proper  fire  intensity  and  seasonal  restrictions have  contributed  to misunderstandings between  park  personnel  and  resident  Aborigines.  In one case,  a ranger  reported  an antagonistic  attitude  on the part of one landowner  who vehemently  insisted on his right to burn;  the ranger  commented that the resultant  fire  "was  almost a form of protest  against  us"  (Lewis  1989,  952). Less  ambiguous  is  the  situation  documented  by  Jeff Collmann  for  an  outback  settlement of Aborigines  near  Alice  Springs,  where  land rights  were  perceived  as being threatened  (1988).  Collmann,  using the pseudonym  "Mt.  Kelly" for this particular community of "fringe-dwellers," wrote of one individual  who, on 21-22  May  1975, burned a large  area  of surrounding  land:  "George burnt  the bush  around  Mt.  Kelly when the basic  assumptions  of power,  responsibility, and  independence,  which  underlie  bush-burning  and  the identities  of the  Mt.  Kelly domestic  groups  as  a  whole, were under assault  and subject  to grave  compromise  from  outside  forces"  (p. 208). The boundaries  of this burned area  corresponded  to what the people felt  were  the true  claims  for  their  settlement.  The  fire  was  an  attempt  to assert  control  over  space that the people believed  rightfully  belonged  within their  domain.

? "~~~4-~~~~~~~ -4..

S5-3

<!-- image -->

Several  traditions  of rural  incendiarism  have  been documented  in continental Europe.  Andre Abbiateci  linked fire with the changing economic geography  of eighteenth-century  France  and  noted  that,  "for  the  most  part,  rural  crimes  of arson were committed by landowners  and tenant farmers  whose land was threatened" (1978,  170).  In  operation  was  the  peasant  tradition  of perpetual  leasehold:  A tenant could  not  be forced  to  leave  the  land  held  under  lease  and  had  the  right  to  a  moderate rent  and  the right  to purchase  the  land  if the  owner  offered  it for  sale  (first  refusal). Violations  of these  rights  would often  result  in retaliation by arson,  and  "rural society during  the  Ancien  Regime  ...  was  an  anxious,  threatened  and  fragile  one,  living in dread of fire and the firesetter" (p. 176).  This incendiary  tradition  among the French  peasantry  was roughly  contemporaneous  with the English  use of fire as a weapon of agrarian  protest,  but it does not appear  to have  been as  widespread  or as politically  charged.  Following  the institution  of French  forestry  codes,  authorities who attempted  afforestation during  the  late  1800s  blamed  the  "malevolence of shepherds"  for frequent  outbreaks  of incendiarism  (Clout  1983, 134).

The lack  of organized  resistance  to agrarian change  also  characterized the  use  of incendiarism  by  German  peasants  in the  latter  half  of the  nineteenth  century,  which Regina  Schulte  found to have  been predominantly  a situation  of individuals  acting from a sense of personal  injustice  (1994).  Writing  about  both "accidental" and incendiary  blazes,  Cathy  Frierson  elucidated  what  seemed  to be an  "epidemic  of fire" that captivated  local narratives  and discourse  during the same period in Russia (1996, 1997). And in the forests  of Poland,  incidents  of incendiary  fires  in 1947 accompanied Ukrainian  resistance  to government  relocation  efforts:  "The  fires  were said  to represent  a  new strategy  by  the  stubborn  Ukrainian  bands,  which at  present are Poland's  biggest internal  security  headache"  (New York  Times 1947).  Farther east,  in  China,  during  a  period  of forest  fires  in  1953, it  was  reported that  "some  trees were  deliberately burned  because  of 'dissatisfaction' with the  Government  takeover of privately  owned forest  land"  (New  York  Times  1953b).

As might be expected  given  the  unique  pyrophytic  ecological  conditions,  Mediterranean  lands  in addition  to Algeria  have  witnessed  the destructive  use of fire.  In Cyprus,  for example, British  forest laws imposed in the late nineteenth century clashed  with the traditional  use of a "common"  resource.  Restrictions  on grazing and fuelwood gathering  led to incendiary  reactions  by shepherds  and others  who to 'dis(1997, 135). A  vicious cycle  of of  the Cyprus  Republic,  and  "the  tradition  of firing  the forest  in times  of stress  and  as  po- felt  they  were  being  deprived  of their  rights.  As  Pyne  expressed  it,  "attempts cipline'  Cypriot  pastoralism  only  led to incendiarism" arson  followed  by  further  restrictions prevailed beyond  the  1955 establishment litical  protest  continues"  (Thirgood  1981,  147).

The Spanish  countryside  during  the 1930S was in the grip  of "rural  anarchism" that induded burning crops and woodlands, a phenomenon that seems to have diffused  from a heartha:  "In  the fall  of 1933 a series  of farm  burnings,  which originated  in the Jerez  de  la Frontera-Medina Sidonia  region  of Cadiz,  spread  rapidly  to other  parts  of Spain.  From  August  to November, several  hundred  farms  and  forests,

though apparently  relatively  few  farm  buildings,  were  set on fire"  (Malefakis 1970, 301).  Post-Civil  War  government  reforestation programs  became  the  target  of  political  agitation,  largely because  of the  requisite linkage  of state  control  with  plantation establishment: "A  protest  against  one is a  protest  against  the other;  both often  come in the form  of fire" (Pyne  1995, 122). Other  resource  issues  have  incited  similar  strife. Paul  Starrs  and Lynn  Huntsinger  noted  variations  among  the autonomous  regions of Spain  regarding the regulation  of hunting  practices; in some areas  the continued application  of a 1970 law  allowing  landowners  to post their  lands  and  close  them  to hunting  has  resulted  in  numerous  fires  set  by  villagers in retaliation against  such  restricted  access  (1991). The problem  of incendiarism  in Spain  lingers,  as reported  in the New York Times:  "The  settling  of accounts  by  setting  fire  to a neighbor's land is common practice  in Galicia" (New York  Times  1989).  Where  once fire  was a useful tool of ecosystem  management,  destruction  for  its  own sake  is now  the order  of the day.  "Increasingly, the demise  of traditional  burning  is replaced  by incendiarism  as protest,  vandalism,  revenge,  and  terrorism. Each  site  of change  becomes  a  potential flashpoint.  The sharper  the change  the more  likely  the spark" (Pyne  1995, 124).

Throughout  the greater  Mediterranean region,  the  practice  of "politically motivated  arson"  remains  rampant  (Pyne,  Andrews,  and  Laven  1996,  636).  Portugal  was the  scene  of incendiary fires  in  1975, reportedly part  of a  "right-wing offensive  to create  political  chaos"  (Howe  1975). More  than  1oo,ooo  acres  were  burned  by  midsummer,  and some fires  were  reported  to have  been  set  by  aircraft dropping  incendiary bombs. Israel  also has been plagued  by arson  attacks  on its forests.  In 1988  nearly 50,Ooo  acres  of woodland  and  pasture  were  destroyed by  proponents  of the Intifada (New York  Times 1988).  This region  had  previously  suffered  incendiary  activity  as well:  During the late  1930S forests  near  Nazareth were  a frequent  target  of Arab  arsonists (New York  Times 1937, 1939).

Greek  incendiarism  was  so rife  in  1981 that  it  was  the  subject of an  editorial  in  the New York Times  that  began,  "Democracy  is a Greek  word.  So is  anarchy. So is pyromania"  (Ebon  1981). The  following  summer  seemed  no different, as  the  government "blamed  organized  arsonists  or  political  extremists  for  a  series  of devastating forest fires" (New York  Times  1982). But  neither  is  incendiarism new to Greece,  which  encountered  such  acute  problems  in  1900  that  the  Orthodox  Church  threatened  arsonists  with  excommunication  (Pyne  1982, 165). Characterizing the  country  as  one  with "a  history  of hostile  fire,  of fire  used  violently,  of a  malevolent  and  vindictive  burning'" Pyne  graphed  the  total  burned  area  from  1922 through  1990.  He  noted  a  "strong correlation  between  fires  and  periods  of social  unrest" and  found  that  the  amount  of burned area  was especially  high during  election  years  (1995,  97-105).

Beyond the Mediterranean  region,  the world's  islands,  as microcosmic  metaphors  for  a  closed  system,  seem  particularly prone  to outbreaks of incendiarism.  On Madagascar, for  example,  grass  and  brush  fires  were  commonly  set  as  a  "subtle  form of political  protest"  (Mohr  1971). But  such  actions  have  increased  to the point  that they are  not so subtle anymore,  for Daniel Gade  writes  that "incendiarism of the land  rages  over  Madagascar as  a  way  of  expressing political  or  social  discontent" and

further  comments  that  these  fires  maybe  "away for  a  repressed culture  to  externalize their  emotions and  hostilities"  (Gade  1985, 1ggo).  The  Edenic  paradise  of Mauritius was transformed  by colonial  invasion  and  indiscriminate burning  (Pyne  1997, 406410).  Lorded  over  in its  time  by  a  succession  of European masters,  the  tiny  island  ultimately witnessed large-scale sugarcane operations, and in 1937  labor strikes against  plantations  escalated into  protest  incendiarism. After  several dissidents  were gunned down on one estate,  "the  crowd  retreated, setting  fire  to the cane  fields  as they fled"  (Storey  1995, 172). On the  densely  populated  island  of Java, in addition  to woodland clearance  and  pasture  maintenance,  fire  has  been used "for  hunting,  for pleasure,  for pestering  neighbors  or neighboring  villages"  (van Steenis  1965,  33). Here  too, Nancy Peluso  found that  "historically, the state,  the  peasantry,  and other external  interests  have  acted  out their  tensions  in the natural  theatre  of the forest" (1992,  4).  Questions  of access  and  control  over  resources  hearkening  back  to Dutch colonial regulations  remained  contentious  issues  during  the 1946  revolution,  when peasants  resisted  state  control  over  forest  use  and  nearly 250,000 acres  were  torched. When  the  revolution  ended  in  1949, control  of state  forestlands passed  to  Indonesian hands, although "to forest-dependent  villagers  there was little change[;] ... restricted  forest  access,  whether  imposed  by the Dutch,  Japanese, or fellow  Indonesians,  constrained  their  lives  and  livelihood"  (p.  102).  During  the  1970s,  protest  over the  establishment  of pine  plantations  and  government  prohibitions  against  clearing swiddens for agriculture  resulted  in further  incendiary  activity:  "As  fires  flared  on the forest  lands,  'no one knew'  who started  them"  (p. 194).  Wolf Donner recounts frequent  fires  on the outer  islands  of Indonesia,  citing  "arson and  negligence  on the part of peasants  as  well as foresters" (1987, 246).

In  the  1930S the  Philippines  was  the  scene  of  peasant  uprisings,  as  tenant  farmers sought greater  tenure security  from landlords  and protested  eviction from their lands (Kerkvliet 1971, 176).  Destructive burning  of cane  fields  was  a  common occurrence,  a  tool of protest  that  continued  to be used  during  the  Huk  Rebellion  of 19461954  (Kerkvliet  1977,  37). Although unsuccessful  in their attempt  to bring about change,  the Huks'  use of incendiarism  was  aimed  at "the  redress  of agrarian grievances"  (Lachica  1971, 11).  Problems  persist,  and the government's  Social Forestry Program,  established  in  1982, has  attempted to  alleviate the  threat  of incendiary fires. Research  in the Ifugao  region found that swidden  cultivators  regularly  use fire  to clear  new plots for planting  and resent  what  they  perceive  as unnecessary  government intervention  in their  farming  traditions:  "They  believe  that  common law  dictates  that  kaingins  [plots]  are  made  in 'open  areas' regarded  as  'public  land'...  [and] do not understand  why  they  should  be  prohibited  from  burning  or  utilizing  fire  as  a tool in their kaingin  practice" (Codamon-Quitzon  1991,  416).  As a way  around  the rules,  these  farmers have  even  instituted  a  taboo  against  anyone  observing  nighttime burning,  lest the fire  be reported  to authorities.

On the nearby  islands  of Palau,  Kenneth  Brower noted  that  "there was  once  forest  here,  but  it  burned  away in  fires  set  by  Palauan arsonists" (1974,124).  Calling  these fires  the "worst  conservation  problem  in the Palau  islands," he wrote:

Pyromania is a  strange aberration anywhere, but  in Palau it is  especially strange. Here, as  in  the  other small  islands of  Micronesia, the  traditional view  is  that  land, in its scarcity, is precious. Within  such  a tradition, then,  arson  seems  a peculiarly mindless and  self-flagellatory behavior, like  that  observed sometimes in  caged animals.  If  it  does  not  hint  at  something dark and  unhinged in  the  new  Palauan psyche, the  widespread occurrence of the  fires does  at  least  suggest that,  after a  century of foreign  rule,  the old systems  are  breaking  down. (Brower  1974,  124)

It  should be remembered,  however,  that  the fires  of Palau  are  not pyromania  at all but,  in  fact,  represent a  redirection of  traditional burning  practices toward  a  political ecology of protest.

In another  part  of Oceania,  a  number  of sugarcane fields  in Fiji  were  destroyed by  fire  following  the  1987  military  coups  d'etat  that  left  the  Indo-Fijian  leaseholders without secure  access  to farmland. Controlled  burning  of cane  is  a  common  harvest technique  for  removing  leaves  from  the  stalk,  but these  fires,  sparked by anger  over the  tortured  political  affairs of the  country,  were  deliberately set  to destroy  the  crop. Later  that same year,  as reported  by Michael  Howard,  "arson,  a common form of political  protest[,]  ...  [was]  becoming  another  serious  concern  in Fiji's pine  plantations";  by  November  more  than  25,000  acres  of trees  had  been  damaged  by  incendiary fires (1991,  305).

Halfway  around  the  globe,  and  a  century  earlier, another  island  dominated  by  the sugar  economy  witnessed  fires  of protest.  Commenting  on the agrarian unrest  during  the  188os and  189os  in  Cuba, Louis  Perez  Jr. characterized the  disturbances as  "not quite  an  organized peasant  rebellion [;]  ... rather, it  was  an  improvised assault  against the  dominant  social  class,  and  no  planter or  plantation was  safe" (1989,  29). Throughout the island,  agricultural interests-often financed  by foreign  capital- were  consolidating  lands into large  estates,  forcing  a transition  in the mode of production from  smallholder to  wage  earner. The  reaction  of displaced peasants  was  decisive  and deliberate: "They  torched  the  canefields-again,  again,  and  again" (p.  30). During  the 1910S the inexorable  expansion  of sugar  latifundios  rekindled  the flames  of protest across  Cuba:  "Incidents of  arson  increased, and  cane  field  fires  in  particular" (p.  179).

Continental Latin  America  has also experienced  outbreaks  of incendiarism, though  not nearly  as  often  as  the  Mediterranean area  or  insular lands.  In  1943  a  series of mysterious  blazes  burned  in  the  rubber-growing region  of the  Brazilian  Amazon, and officials  there  suspected  saboteurs  (New  York Times 1943). In 1953  vast  prairie fires  in Buenos  Aires  Province, Argentina,  were  thought  to have  been "the  work  of opposition  elements seeking to discredit the government of President Juan  D. Peron"  (New  York Times  1953a).  And  the  occurrence  of ecoterrorism in  Colombia  in 1990  included incendiarism  as a tactic:  "In a series of arson attacks  in July  and August,  one guerrilla  unit set fire  to 262 acres  of pine plantations" (Brooke  1990).

## CONCLUSION

Recognition  that  "wildland fire  is  as  much  a  cultural as  a  natural phenomenon"  is  increasing  (Pyne,  Andrews,  and  Laven 1996, 215).  As  Gilbert White  once  wrote,  fires  are

"an  interaction  of human,  physical,  and  biological  systems  and  are  never  wholly  the work of man or wholly the product  of undisturbed  processes  in the environment" (1972,3).  This  interaction, however,  is  more  likely  to  evolve  into  an  incendiary  tradition in those areas  in which fire  is a major  ecological  component  of the  landscape, such as  the  Mediterranean region,  or  where  fire  has  played  a  prominent  part  in cultural  adaptation  strategies.  Being  forced  to change  from  established  economic  lifeways that are tied to the land is often the catalyst  that ignites  a tendency  toward setting  protest  fires.  Moreover, it  is  often  the  case  that  a  restriction or  prohibition  on the use of fire  is  precisely  what  prompts  an  incendiary  reaction.  Where  burning  traditionally  has  been  used  to  maintain  lands  in  productive use,  illegally set  fires  maybe both practical  and highly  symbolic.

As we have seen, peasant  groups  who have  come to depend on such forest  resources  as  fuelwood,  timber,  and  forage  for  livestock  typically  utilize  fire  as  a  management tool. Often these forested areas  traditionally  have been managed as a commons, using standards  of sharing  and equality  necessary  for social  reproduction and successful  adaptation  to environment.  Historical  changes  in land  tenure, social  stratification, and  political  economy  in various  places  have  caused  a  realignment of people and  resources,  especially  concerning  the  management  tactics  available  to common folk.  With  the  rise  of capitalism,  coupled  with colonialism  and  the imposition of proletarian  economic  relations,  the  consequent  restrictions  on forest use, enclosure  of common lands,  and outright  expropriation  of areas  essential  for peasant subsistence  spawned  deep resentment.  In most cases  incendiarism  flared out of a  sense  of injustice  rather than  from  any  hope  of  maintaining  the  old  agrarian system or reestablishing  severed relations  with the land. This was precisely  the situation that developed  in the British  Isles,  across  continental  Europe,  and in the colonies  of equatorial Africa. Elsewhere,  because fire was already  a customary resource-management  tool, its use as a  weapon  seemed  only natural.  We  have  witnessed  examples  of this  from  such  diverse  areas as  the  Indian  Himalaya, the  forested highlands  of Algeria,  the  Australian frontier, and  the  United  States,  where  southern woods burning  has  been  viewed  by  its  practitioners as  their  traditional right,  part  of the subsistence  ethic in the moral  economy of the rural  South.

Another regularity  in incendiary  activity  is presented  by the limited environmental context of islands.  Examples  from Cuba,  Cyprus,  Madagascar, Mauritius, Java, the Philippines,  Fiji,  and  Palau  serve  to indicate  that  the  destructive use of fire may be a warning  of cultural-ecological  strain.  In the absence  of suppressed  or no longer  feasible  methods of adaptation  to island  ecosystems  (warfare, migration,  infanticide),  incendiarism  may  be a reaction  to production  pressure  on resources  in these places, characterized  as they are by a constrained  land base and an everincreasing  population (Blaikie  and Brookfield  1987).  Moreover, islands  are  vulnerable  to outside invasion,  and  Pyne  has  articulated the view that  anthropogenic  fire on islands,  the increased  practice  of which  often  accompanied  European  colonization, may  be compared  to an  exotic  pest  that  breeds  uncontrollably without  natural checks  or balances  (1997).

In conclusion,  these forms  of incendiarism  may  be viewed  in several  ways:  as  a final act of defiance  by rural  peoples  who have  lost control  over  the resources  on which their  subsistence  has  traditionally depended;  as  a  clear  signal  of imbalance  in the cultural-ecological equation;  and  as  a  symbolic  gesture  of political  protest.  The latter  component of this  tripartite rationale  has  the  potential  to become  even  more apparent  as the twenty-first  century opens on a world of fractured  politics and ecologies.  We,  in  turn,  should  become  more  aware of the  likelihood  that  fire  may  be used as  a  tool of protest  for  any  number  of reasons,  from  continued  agrarian-based anger  to politically  charged  incidents  of environmental  injustice.  Ironically,  perceived  threats  to nature  may  result  in acts  of destruction. Sabotage  has  been  used  by such  groups  as  the  Earth  Liberation Front, whose  members  recently  daimed responsibility  for  the destruction  of ski-resort  equipment  in the name of preserving  lynx habitat. Another organization's  ecoterrorism  newsletter  "recommends  burning trees  down to save  them  from  loggers" (Eagan  1996,  9). Moreover, these  rural  incendiary traditions can transfer  to urban areas,  as was documented by C. Onyeka Nwanunobi for  nineteenth-century Nigeria  (1990). Roger  Geary  commented  on the torching  of mostly  English  owned  holiday  homes  in  Wales and  noted  that  "the  use  of fire to destroy  property  as a form of protest  against  cultural  oppression  is, then, firmly  established  in twentieth-century  Welsh  political  history"  (1994, 85-86). Indeed,  structural  arson  as  a form  of protest  may  well  warrant  its  own survey, for  the burning  that  accompanied  urban  riots  during  the  1960s could  certainly be  viewed  in this  light,  and  a  connection  between  burning  and  social  protest  has  tentatively  been established  for  European  cities  of the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  (Roberts 1997).

In the final  analysis,  incendiary  fire  must  be understood  as  a  potent  and  potentially  devastating  symbol of power,  "used  by desperate  people when they have  no other  weapon"  (Scott  1974, 62).  As  a  covert  act,  incendiarism is  nearly  flawless: It is anonymous, and its effects  are immediate.  This, of course,  has contributed  to its adoption  by  the  politically  marginalized: "Fire becomes  a  dangerous  weapon  in the hands  of weak,  passionate,  or rebellious  people"  (Kuntzburger and Laxenaire 1996, 632;  my  translation). To  rural  folk  especially, those  who  have  lived  with  terrestrial cycles  of death  and  rebirth,  the rich  iconographic  appeal  of fire  involves  not only  destruction  but also  catharsis  and  renewal.  Therein  may  rest  incendiarism's most enticing  attribute: its  perceived ability  to  purge  impurities and  forge  a  new  civilization.

## REFERENCES

- Abbiateci,  A.  1978. Arsonists  in Eighteenth-Century France: An Essay  in the Typology  of Crime.  In Deviants  and the  Abandoned  in French Society, edited  by  R.  Forster  and  0.  Ranum,  translated  by E. Forster  and P.  M. Ranum,  157-179. Baltimore,  Md.:  Johns  Hopkins  University  Press.
- Archer,  J. E.  1990.  By  a Flash  and  a Scare:  Incendiarism, Animal  Maiming}  and Poaching  in EastAnglia,  1815-1870. Oxford:  Clarendon  Press.
- Armstrong,  A.  1988. Farmworkers in England  and Wales: A Social  and  Economic History,  1770-1980. Ames:  Iowa  State  University  Press.
- Bertrand,  A.,  and  A.  Baird. 1975.  Incendiarism in  Southern Forests: A Decade  of  Sociological Research. Mississippi  Agriculture  and  Forestry  Experiment  Station  Bulletin  838.  State  College:  Mississippi State  University.

- Blaikie,  P.,  and H. Brookfield. 1987. Land  Degradation  and Society.  London:  Methuen.
- Brooke,  J. i19o.  Colombian  Rebels  Turn  to Ecological  Terrorism. New York Times  (Late  city  edition), 29 October,  ?A, 4.
- Brower,  K.  1974. With  Their  Islands  Around  Them.  New York: Holt, Rinehart  and  Winston.
- Caird, J.  1967 [1852].  English Agriculture in 1850-51. 2d ed. New  York:  A. M. Kelley.
- Charlesworth,  A.,  ed.  1983.  AnAtlas  ofRuralProtestin Britain,  1548-1900. Philadelphia: University  of Pennsylvania  Press.
- Clark,  T.  D.  1984. The  Greening of the  South:  The  Recovery of  Land  and  Forest. Lexington:  University Press  of Kentucky.
- Clout,  H.  D.  1983.  The Land of France, 1815-1914.  London:  Allen  and Unwin.
- Codamon-Quitzon, S.  1991. Fires,  Forests,  and Tribes  in the Northern Philippines:  Cultural  and Ecological  Perspectives. In  Fire  in  the  Environment: Ecological and  CulturalPerspectives, edited  by S.  C.  Nodvin and  T.  A.  Waldrop, 414-417.  Asheville,  N.C.:  U.S.  Forest  Service,  Southeastern  Forest Experiment  Station.
- Collmann,  J. 1988. Fringe-Dwellers and Welfare: TheAboriginalResponse to  Bureaucracy. Saint  Lucia, Australia:  University  of Queensland  Press.
- Donner,  W.  1987. Land  Use  and  Environment in  Indonesia. Honolulu:  University  of Hawaii  Press,  in association with the Institute  of Asian  Affairs,  Hamburg.
- Doolittle, M. L.,  and  M.  L.  Lightsey. 1979. Southern  Woods-Burners:A DescriptiveAnalysis. U.S.  Forest Service  Research  Paper  so-151.  New Orleans:  U.S.  Department  of Agriculture, Forest  Service, Southern Forest  Experiment  Station.
- Dunbabin, J. P. D.  1974. Rural  Discontent  in Nineteenth  Century  Britain.  New York:  Holmes and Meier.
- Dunkelberger, J.,  and  A.  Altobellis. 1975. Profiling  the  Woods-Burner:An Analysis  of  Fire  Trespass Violations in the South's National Forests.  Alabama  Agricultural  Experiment  Station Bulletin  469. Auburn:  Alabama  Agricultural  and Mechanical  College.
- Eagan,  S.  1996. From  Spikes  to Bombs:  The  Rise  of Eco-Terrorism. Studies  in  Conflict  and Terrorism 19 (1): 1-18.
- Ebon,  M.  1981.  Arson and  Anarchy. New York  Times  (Late  city edition), 18  August,  ?A,  21.
- Folweiler,  A. D., and A. A. Brown. 1946. Fire  in the  Forests of the United  States.  Saint  Louis:  John  S. Swift.
- Forest  Service. 1978. Wildfire Statistics.  Washington,  D.C.:  U.S.  Department  of Agriculture.
- Frierson,  C. A.  1996. Apocalyptic  Visions and Rational  Responses:  Fire  Narratives  in Fin-de-Siecle Russia.  Canadian  Slavonic  Papers  38 (3-4): 357-384.
1997. Of Red  Roosters,  Revenge,  and  the  Search  for  Justice: Rural  Arson  in European  Russia in the Late  Imperial  Era.  In  ReformingJustice in  Russia, 1864-1996: Power,  Culture, and the  Limits of Legal  Order,  edited by P.  H. Solomon Jr.,  107-130. Armonk,  N.Y.:  M. E.  Sharpe.
- Gade,  D.  1985. Savanna  Woodland,  Fire,  Protein,  and  Silk  in Highland  Madagascar.JournalofEthnobiology 5 (2): 109-122.
- .  1990. Letter to the  author.  13  November.
- Gamst,  F.  C.  1974. Peasants  in Complex Society.  New York: Holt, Rinehart,  and  Winston.
- Geary,  R.  1994. The Dragon  and the Flame:  An Analysis  of the Welsh  Arson  Campaign.  Contemporary Review 264 (1537): 80-87.
- Goudsblom, J. 1992. Fire  and Civilization.  London:  Allen  Lane,  Penguin  Press.
- Guha,  R.  1990. The Unquiet  Woods: Ecological Change  and  Peasant  Resistance in the  Himalaya.  Berkeley:  University  of California  Press.
- Hansbrough,  T.  1961. A Sociological  Analysis  of Man-Caused  Forest  Fires  in Louisiana.  Ph.D.  diss., Louisiana  State  University.
- Hilliard,  S. B.  1972. Hog  Meat and Hoecake: Food  Supply  in the  Old South,  1840-1860.  Carbondale: Southern Illinois University  Press.
- Hobsbawm, E. J.,  and G. Rude. 1968. Captain  Swing.  New York:  Pantheon.
- Howard,  M. C.  1991. Fiji:  Race  and  Politics  in an Island  State.  Vancouver: University  of British  Columbia Press.
- Howe, M.  1975. Lisbon Sees Arson in Rash of Forest Fires.  New York  Times  (Late city edition), 3o August,  ?A, 4.
- Jones,  D.  1976. Thomas  Campbell  Foster  and  the  Rural  Labourer: Incendiarism  in East  Anglia  in the 1840s. Social History  1 (1): 5-43.

- .  1985. The Welsh  and Crime,  1801-1891. In Artisans,  Peasants,  and Proletarians, 176o-186o: Essays  Presented to  Gwyn  A. Williams, edited  by  C.  Emsley  and  J.  Walvin,  81-103.  London:  Croom Helm. Kanogo,  T.  1987. Squatters and the  Roots of  Mau  Mau,  1905-63. London:  J.  Currey; Athens:  Ohio University  Press. Kerkvliet,  B. J. 1971. Peasant  Society and Unrest Prior to the Huk Revolution in the Philippines. Asian  Studies 9 (2): 164-213. 1977. The  Huk  Rebellion:A Study  of  PeasantRevolt in the  Philippines. Berkeley: University  of California  Press. Kerr,  E.  1958. Southerners  Who Set  the Woods  on Fire.  Harpers, July,  28-33. Kielstra, N. 1978.  Was the Algerian  Revolution  a Peasant War? Peasant Studies 7 (3): 172-186. Kniffen,  F. 1990.  Interview  with the author.  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  7 November. Kohen,  J.  L.  1995. AboriginalEnvironmentalImpacts. Sydney:  University  of New  South  Wales  Press. Kuntzburger, F.  and  M.  Laxenaire.  1996. L'Incendie: Une Forme  spectaculaire de  revolte  contre  la  societe. Annales  Medico Psychologiques 154 (io):  632-634. Lachica,  E.  1971. The  Huks:  Philippine Agrarian  Society  in Revolt.  New York:  Praeger. Lewis,  H.  1989. Ecological  and  Technological  Knowledge  of Fire: Aborigines  versus  Park  Rangers  in Northern  Australia. American Anthropologist 91 (4): 940-961. Malefakis,  E.  E.  1970. Agrarian Reform  andPeasantRevolution in  Spain:  Origins ofthe Civil  War.  New Haven, Conn.:  Yale  University  Press. Meinig,  D.W.  1968. The  Great  Columbia Plain:A  Historical  Geography, 1805-1910. Seattle:  University of Washington  Press. Mohr,  C.  1971. "Fires of Anger"  Scar  Madagascar. New York Times  (Late  city  edition),  3  January, ?7,  1. New York  Times.  1937. Jews  Fight Big Fire  in Balfour  Forest.  New York Times  (Late  city edition), 28 October,  7. 1939. 25,000 Trees  Burn  in Palestine.  New York Times  (Late  city edition), 29 June,  9. 1943. Rubber  Fires  a Problem.  New York Times  (Late  city edition), 5  January, lo. 1947. Forest  Fires  Are Used as Terror  by Ukrainians.  New York Times  (Late  city edition), 19 May, 3. 1953a.  12  Die in Argentine  Fire.  New York Times  (Late  city edition), 12  January, 4. 1953b.  Bad Forest Fires in China. New  York  Times (Late city edition),  21 June, 30. 1956. 2 Algerians  Die in Reprisal  Riot.  New York Times  (Late  city  edition), 7 August,  3. 1967.  Land Ownership  Dispute  Revived in New Mexico. New York  Times (Late city edition), 4 June,  81. .  1980.  Rain Eases  Forest  Fires  in Appalachian  States.  New York Times  (Late  city edition), 16 November,  28. 1982. Greeks  Blame  Arsonists  for  Forest  Fires.New  York Times  (Late  city  edition),3August,5. 1988. Blazes Ravage  Israel's  Forests;  Arabs  Blamed.  New York  Times  (Late city edition), 13 June, ?A, 1, 5. .  1989. Forest  Fires  Blackening  Acres  of "Green  Spain." New York  Times  (Late  city edition), 10  September,  ?I, 10. Nwanunobi, C. 0. 1990.  Incendiarism  and  Other  Fires  in Nineteenth-Century  Lagos  (1863-88).  Africa 6o  (1): 111-120. Otto,  J.,  and  N. Anderson.  1982. Slash-and-Burn Cultivation  in the  Highlands  South:  A Problem  in Comparative  Agricultural  History.  Comparative Studies in Society and History 24 (1): 131-147. Peacock,  A.  1974. Village  Radicalism  in East  Anglia,  1800-50.  In  Rural Discontent  in  Nineteenth  Century  Britain,  by J.  Dunbabin,  27-61.  New York:  Holmes and Meier. Peluso,  N. L.  1992. Rich  Forests, Poor  People:  Resource Control  and  Resistance in  Java.  Berkeley: University  of California  Press. Perez,  L.  A., Jr. 1989. Lords of the  Mountain:  Social  Banditry  and  Peasant  Protest  in Cuba,  1878-1918. Pittsburgh,  Pa.:  University  of Pittsburgh  Press. Prochaska,  D.  1986. Fire  on the Mountain:  Resisting  Colonialism  in  Algeria.  In  Banditry, Rebellion, and Social  Protest  in Africa,  edited by D. Crommey,  229-252.  London:  J.  Currey;  Portsmouth, N.H.: Heinemann.
- Prunty,  M.  1965. Some  Geographic  Views  of the  Role  of Fire  in Settlement  Processes  in  the  South.  In Proceedings, Fourth  Annual Tall  Timbers  Fire  Ecology  Conference, edited by E. V. Komarek  Sr., 161-168.  Tallahassee, Fla.:  Tall  Timbers  Research Station.

- Pyne, S. J. 1982. Fire in America:  A Cultural  History  of Wildiand  and Rural  Fire.  Princeton,  N.J.: Princeton University  Press.
1991. Burning  Bush:  A Fire  History  of  Australia.  New York:  Henry Holt.
1995. World  Fire:  The  Culture  of  Fire  on  Earth.  New York:  Henry Holt.
1997. Vestal  Fire:  An Environmental History,  Told  through  Fire,  of Europe  and Europe's Encounter  with the World. Seattle:  University  of Washington  Press.
- Pyne, S. J.,  P.  L.  Andrews,  and R. D. Laven. 1996. Introduction  to Wildland  Fire.  2d ed. New York: Wiley.
- Randall,  C.  1963. Crazy  Blazes.  American  Forests 69 (7):  9, 53-54.
- Roberts,  P. 1997. Arson,  Conspiracy  and Rumour  in Early  Modern  Europe.  Continuity  and Change 12 (1): 9-29.
- Rude,  G.  1978. Protest  and  Punishment: The  Story  of  the  Social  and  Political  Protesters Transported to Australia,  1788-1868.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press;  New York: Oxford  University  Press.
- Sauer,  C. 0. 1975. Man's  Dominance by Use of Fire.  Geoscience and Man lo: 1-13.
- Schulte,  R.  1994. The  Village  in Court: Arson,  Infanticide, and  Poaching  in the  CourtRecords of Upper Bavaria,  1848-1910. Translated  by B. Selman.  Cambridge,  England,  and New York:  Cambridge University  Press.
- Scott, D. F. 1974. Fire  and Fire-Raisers. London:  Duckworth.
- Scott,  J.  C.  1976. The  Moral  Economy of  the  Peasant: Rebellion and  Subsistence in  SoutheastAsia.  New Haven, Conn.:  Yale  University  Press.
- .  1985. Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms  of  Peasant  Resistance. New Haven,  Conn.:  Yale University  Press.
- Smith, A.  1985. "Southern  Violence"  Reconsidered: Arson as Protest  in Black-Belt  Georgia,  18651910.  Journal  of Southern  History  51  (4):  527-564.
- Starrs,  P.,  and L.  Huntsinger. 1991. Hunting, Land  Management,  and the Dehesas  of Spain.  Paper presented  at  the  87th  Annual  Meeting  of the  Association  of  American  Geographers, Miami,  Fla.
- Stewart,  0. 1956. Fire  as  the First  Great  Force  Employed  by  Man.  In  Man's Role  in Changing  the  Face of the  Earth,  edited  by W.  L.  Thomas  Jr.,  115-133. Chicago:  University  of Chicago  Press.
- Storey,  W.  1995. Small-Scale  Sugar  Cane  Farmers and  Biotechnology  in Mauritius: The "Uba"  Riots of 1937. Agricultural History  69 (2):  163-176.
- Sullivan,  R.  1997. Dark  behind It Rose  the Forest.  Outside  22 (7):  62-73, 141-143.
- Thirgood,  J.  V.  1981.  Man  and  the  Mediterranean Forest: A History  of  Resource Depletion.  London  and New York:  Academic  Press.
- Thompson, E.  P. 1975. Whigs  and  Hunters: The  Origin  oftheBlackAct. NewYork:  Pantheon  Books.

Truettner,  W. H.  1979. The  Natural  Man Observed:

D.C.:  Smithsonian Institution Press.

- Van  Steenis,  C.  1965. Concise Plant  Geography  of Java.  In Flora  of  Java  (Spermatophytes Only),  edited by C. A. Backer  and R. C. Bakhuizen  van den Brink  Jr.,  2: 1-72. Groningen,  Netherlands: P.  Noordhoff.
- White, G.  1972. History of Fire  in North America.  In Fire  in the  Environment Symposium  Proceedings,  3-11.  Denver,  Colo.:  U.S.  Department  of Agriculture, Forest  Service.
- Williams, H.  1952. Settin'  the Woods on Fire.  Recorded  13  June,  Castle Studios, Nashville, Tenn. (MGM 11318). Lyrics  by Ed  Nelson and Fred  Rose.
- Wolf, E.  R.  1969. Peasant  Wars of the  Twentieth Century. New York:  Harper  and Row.
- Young,  R., and H. Fosbrooke. 1960.  Smoke  in the  Hills:  Political  Tension  in the  Morogoro District  of Tanganyika. Evanston,  Ill.:  Northwestern  University  Press.

A Study  of Catlin's

Indian Gallery.  Washington,