<!-- image -->

## American Geographical Society

Land-Use Dynamics beyond the American Urban Fringe

Author(s): David M. Theobald

Source:

Geographical Review, Vol. 91, No. 3 (Jul., 2001), pp. 544-564

Published by:

American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/3594740

Accessed: 01-01-2016 11:22 UTC

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Wiley and American Geographical Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

<!-- image -->

## LAND-USE  DYNAMICS  BEYOND THE AMERICAN URBAN  FRINGE*

## DAVID  M. THEOBALD

ABSTRACT.  A  deficiency  common to both the historical  debates  over  loss of  agricultural land and the current  discussions  of urbanization  and  sprawl  is a limited  understanding of landuse  dynamics  beyond  the urban  fringe.  Data  aggregated at the  county  level  poorly capture the  fine-grained  pattern  of land-use  change  beyond  the  dynamic  urban-rural interface.  Furthermore,  current  urban-based  definitions are  poorly  suited to delineate  these areas,  and low-density,  exurban  land use is difficult  to measure  using existing  land-cover  databases. Urbanization  and  the  conversion  of  once-agricultural or  other  natural resource  lands  to other uses has  traditionally been tracked  using  urban  areas,  as delimited  in the U.S.  census.  Urban densities  are  typically  defined  as areas  with more than 1,ooo  people per square  mile, or 1.6 people per  acre  (U.S.  Census  Bureau  2000).  Assuming  an  average of  2.5  people per housing unit, this translates  to  roughly  0.7  units  per  acre,  or  approximately i  unit  per  1.6  acres.  The analytical  units used in the census,  however,  both overbound  and underbound  areas  with urban  densities.  About  one-third  of urban  areas  in 1990  comprised  lower-than-urban housing density,  thanks  to  overbounding.  But,  then,  one-third  of locations  that had urban-level housing  densities  failed  to be included  in urban  areas  as  a result  of  underbounding, which,  if counted, would have constituted  another  18 million acres  of urban area.  An increase  over time of the  average number of acres  required  per housing  unit in exurban  and  higher-density  locations  occurred  in  roughly  one-third  of U.S.  counties  from  1960  to 199o  and  persisted from 1990 to 2. 2000. In n2 roughly  38  million acres  were settled at urban  densities,  and nearly  ten times  that  much  land  was  settled  at  rates  from  low,  exurban density  (as  low as  one house  per 40 acres)  to  higher  rates  (up  to one  per  o1  acres).  This  represents  a  continuing encroachment  on land  previously  given  over  to other  uses-habitat or  agriculture. Practitioners of natural  resource  management  need to  recognize  the  ubiquity  of exurban  development and better  incorporate  the fine-scale  patterns  of land use  beyond  the urban  fringe. Keywords: agriculture, exurbia,  land  use,  sprawl, urbanization.

jtn 1950  the condition  of  agriculture in the United  States quietly  reached  a  turning point.  From  the late  1800oos until  1950,  farmland  expanded  rapidly  to  eventually include  1,161 million acres.  Since  that  peak,  farmland acreage  declined  steadily  to  931 million  acres in  1997,  at a rate of  5.39  million  acres  per year (USDA 1999) (Figure 1).1 Although  some have  argued  that  agriculture  was overextended  and needed to be reduced  (Platt 1985),  a  great  deal of  concern  was  expressed  in the  1970s  and  198os about  the  decline  of  agricultural land,  and  many  feared  that  the  United  States  would soon be unable  to feed itself  (Hart  1976).  A rancorous  debate  ensued after  the re-

*  Portions of this  research were  supported by  the  William and  Flora Hewlett Foundation, through the  Center of the  American West, University of  Colorado, Boulder; the  U.S.  Environmental Protection Agency's Science to  Achieve Results program (#R827449-o0-o);  and  The  Nature Conservancy's David  H.  Smith postdoctoral fellowship program.  I wish  to thank  the  reviewers for  helpful  suggestions and  Mark  Easter for  assistance with  the  National Resources Inventory data  set.

f'f DR. THEOBALD is a research scientist  at the Natural Resource  Ecology  Laboratory  and an assistant professor  in the  Department  of Natural  Resource  Recreation and  Tourism,  Colorado  State  University, Fort  Collins,  Colorado  80523-1499.

lease of the  1981  National  Agricultural  Lands  Study  (NALS),  mostly  focused  on the methodological difficulties  of  the  study  (NALS  1981;  Fischel  1982;  Raup 1982;  Platt 1985).  The consensus  was that NALS'S estimate of conversion  of  agricultural  land to urban  uses  at a rate  of  3  million acres per  year  was  too  high  and  that  1  million acres was  a  more  reasonable estimate  (Simon  and  Sudman  1982). However,  data  from  the U.S.  Census  of  Agriculture suggest  that  farmland acreage  declined  steadily at a rate of more than 6 million  acres  per year  from  1950  to  1974.

In the last  quarter-century a reduction  in farmland  acreage has  continued,  and with that  has  come concern  about  a decline  in the United  States' production  capacity.  However,  most observers  believe  that  farmland  conversion poses  little  threat  to food  production.  Instead,  the foremost  worry  is about loss of  productive  agricultural land,  open  space,  and wildlife habitat  (Platt 1985;  Diamond  and Noonan  1996; Beatley  and  Manning  1997; Sorensen,  Greene,  and  Russ  1997;  Rome  1998;  Waldie 2000;  Heimlich  and Anderson  2001).

The loss of  agricultural land is  thought  to be caused  by  conversion  to urban land  uses,  especially low-density  residential and commercial  use at the urban  fringe. Rapid  population  growth and  associated urban  development have  emerged within  the past  decade  as  an  important, if  not  the  foremost, concern  locally and  nationally  (Bank of America  1996;  Benfield, Raimi, and Chen  1999;  Katz and Liu 2000; Waldie 2000).

However,  the historic  debates  of  agricultural land loss and the current  discussions  of  urbanization-often called  by  the  less-than-rigorously  defined name "sprawl"-share  a  deficiency  (Hart  1976;  Platt  1985).  Both  have been  impeded  by incomplete  understanding of the  extent,  rate,  and  pattern  of  changes  that  occur  at the urban  fringe-also  known as the  metropolitan  fringe  (Daniels  1999),  the ruralurban  fringe  (Myers and  Beegle  1947), or  the  urban-rural interface. The  urban  fringe is  commonly  defined  as  the transition  zone  between  the  city  or urban  areas  and  the surrounding  countryside  (Lamb  1983),  though  in  practice  this zone is  challenging to  map (Fesenmaier, Goodchild,  and Morrison  1979).  Thomas  L.  Daniels  describes the urban  fringe  as  the area  within  5-50  miles  of a  city  that  has  scattered,  low-density development-fewer  than  500 people per square  mile-typically  on 1-10 acre lots  (1999).  Ralph  E.  Heimlich  and  William  D.  Anderson  define  the urban  fringe  as low-density  settlement-o.5  acre  lots or  larger-in metropolitan  counties  (2001).

The  importance  of the  land-use  dynamics  at  this  interface  is  underestimated, or at  least  undervalued, because  measurement of land-use  change is  difficult  (Riebsame, Gosnell,  and Theobald  1996; Theobald,  Gosnell,  and Riebsame  1996).  The  primary reason  for the  difficulty  is that coarse  analytical units,  such as  counties,  simply  do not  capture  the  fine-grained  pattern  of land  use.  Farming still  occurs,  for  example, within  metropolitan  counties,  which are  responsible  for 25  percent  of U.S. food production  (Daniels  1998).  In  addition,  a  paucity  of  data,  a  lack  of clear  definitions, and a  blurring  of land-use  and  land-cover  categories contribute  to the  challenges of quantifying  land-use  changes  beyond  the urban  fringe.  A  long-standing  problem has been clear identification  of  "hobby"  or "nonfarm" farms (Hart 1992).  What production  value is  required  of a ranch  or farm  before  it is no  longer  considered

FIG.  1-The amount  of farmland  in the United  States  peaked  in  1950.  Since  then,  farmland  acreage has declined  steadily  at a rate of  5.39  million  acres  per year.  Source: USDA  1999.

<!-- image -->

"true  agriculture"? And at  what  point  should  it be considered low-density  residential  land  use?

Because  of the  difficulties in  precisely measuring  conversion  of  agricultural land, it is a  challenge to  definitively describe  the condition of  agricultural land resources and  the  potential  conversion  to urban  and  developed  uses.  Compounding  the difficulties of  measuring  dynamics  at the urban  fringe  is the revival  of exurban  and rural  population  growth  that  has  been fueled  by  substantial in-migration  and service-based  economies,  especially  toward  high-amenity  areas  (Riebsame 1997; McGranahan  1999).  The  ensuing  development  preferentially locates  away  from  urban  areas,  adjacent to  open space  and  federal  land,  typically  as  low-density  exurban development.  Philip  M.  Raup's admonition  remains  true  today: "We  are  blind  where we need most  to see"  (1982, 272).

In this article  I examine traditional  databases  and methods used to measure land-use  dynamics,  and I  identify  limitations  in their  utility  for  detailing  land-use dynamics  at the urban  fringe.  A method is described  to  map development  patterns that  captures  change  along  the full  urban-to-rural gradient  and  that  can  be used  to better  estimate  the extent  and  rate  of  changes at  this critical  interface. Finally, I describe  the  historical  and  current  extent  and  rate  of  change  beyond  the urban  fringe.

## LAND  DATABASES

Several  commonly  available  databases  are used to track  the nation's  agricultural and urban land base. The U.S. Census of  Agriculture  was established  in  1840  to provide  data  on the nation's agricultural resources; data  were  collected  on a  decadal

basis before 1920  and on a  quinquennial  basis thereafter. "Land  in Farms"  is the primary  statistic  tallying  the conversion  of  agricultural land,  and  a  rapid  decline  in farmland  acreage is  commonly  considered  an indicator  of urbanization.  However, because  the census  only  tracks existing  farms  in  any  given  census  and  does not survey  nonfarm  property, details  about  what  a  farm  was  converted  to are  not collected and  must  be inferred. That  is,  only  a  ceiling  can  be  placed  on estimates  of the  amount of  development  using  census  of  agriculture data.

The National Resources  Inventory  (NRI),  conducted  by  the Natural  Resources Conservation  Service  (NRCS) of the U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  surveys  the nation's nonfederal land resources. Data were collected for  1982,1987,1992,  and  1997 from  a  combination  of aerial photographic  interpretation and  field  surveys  of more than  800,000  points  in the United  States  (Nusser  and  Goebel  1997).  Because  sample points  are  consistent  through  time,  and  because  each  point  is  categorized as one of eleven  major  land  types,  trends  in conversion  of  agriculture to urban  and  built-up areas can be  computed  (USDA 2000).  However, because  both  census  and NRI data are  reported  in an  aggregate fashion,  typically at  the state  or  county  level,  they  are  of limited use for  identifying  the  dynamics  of  changes  at  the urban  fringe.

The Land  Use and Land  Cover  data set was  produced  by  the U.S.  Geological Survey  (seGs) from  1970S  and  198os  aerial  photography  and then  manually  interpreted  into nine  major  land-use  categories  (Anderson  and others  1976;  USGS  1990). These  data  are  available at  1:250,000  and  are  helpful  in  understanding the  pattern  of land  cover, but trends  cannot  be deduced  from  them  because  they  are  not multidate data.  They  can be used in  conjunction  with other land-cover  data  classified  from imagery  (for example,  Greene  1997);  however,  a similar  method, scale,  and classification  must be used to ensure  comparability  among  data  sets.

More  recently, the USGs  Land  Cover  Characteristics (LCC) data  set was created from  Advanced Very  High  Resolution  Radiometer (AVHRR)  satellite imagery  for  the conterminous  United States  at a  3,281-foot  (i-kilometer)  resolution  (Loveland  and others  1991). A recent  addition  to the  LCC effort  is  the  National  Land  Cover  Database (NLCD), which was created  by classifying  98.4-foot (30-meter)  resolution  Landsat Thematic  Mapper  imagery into  twenty-one  land-cover categories  (Vogelmann, Sohl, and  Howard  1998; Vogelmann  and  others  1998).  The  availability of these  recent  data sets obviates  the need to choose between  providing  broad  (national)  geographical coverage  and fine  (subcounty)  spatial  detail.

A number  of  techniques  have  been  developed  that  use  imagery  to  map  conversion to urban land-cover  types  such as  commercial,  industrial,  and  high-density residential  (Jensen  and Toll  1982; Ridd  1995; Ridd and Liu  1998;  Ward,  Phinn,  and Murray  2000). But,  at  lower  land-use  intensities, the  relationship between  land  cover and  land  use  degrades rapidly. At  a  relatively high  residential building  density-more than  one unit  per  2  acres-development  is  fairly  pronounced, and  a  large  percentage of a  parcel-up  to 60  percent-is  covered by  impervious features such  as  houses,  driveways,  and  lawns  (Jensen  and  Toll  1982). At  lower  densities,  the  proportion  of a  parcel occupied  by  impervious  surfaces declines  rapidly, and  outlying  areas  of a  parcel  may

be  nearly  indistinguishable from  nearby  remaining  agricultural areas  (Ridd  1995). Douglas  Ward,  Stuart  R.  Phinn,  and Alan T.  Murray  have summarized  this challenge:  "This  is a fundamental  problem  in urban  classification  and is  intrinsically linked  to the definition  of urban  land-cover  types,  not land-use  types  in urban  areas.  At  the urban  fringe  the  change  between  urban  residential  and  rural  residential is often not discrete,  but rather  a continuous decrease  in  housing density"  (2000, 380).  Increasing spatial  and  spectral resolution  can  assist  in better  identifying builtup areas,  but it does little to assist  interpretation of  outlying  areas,  although  combining parcel  boundaries with  imagery  holds  promise (Sutton  and others  1997; Brown,  Pijanowski, and Duh  2000).  Even  so,  many  assessments  of conversion  that use  remote-sensing  data  continue to be focused on urbanization.  For  example,  to assess  the  impacts  of urbanization  on U.S.  soil  productivity,  Egide  L.  Nizeyimana and others  (2001)  used a  map  derived  from  "nighttime" satellite  imagery  that located  areas  of  housing density  of  1.7  units  per  acre  and  higher,  resulting in  just  2.6 percent  of the United  States being  identified  as  urban.  Moreover, the  lack  of historical data  poses  a substantial  impediment  to  deeper understanding  of land-cover dynamics  beyond  the urban  fringe.

Relying  solely  on urban-based  land-cover  classifications  will  likely  underestimate  large  areas  of  low-density  human settlement  beyond  the urban  fringe.  Landcover  databases derived  from  classified satellite imagery  substantially underestimate lower-density  settlement  (Radeloff  and others  2000).  For  example,  the  spatial  extent of  developed  areas  ranged  from one-third  to one-seventh  of the extent occupied by  exurban  and  greater densities  in Colorado  (Table  I). Moreover, John  Fraser Hart  (1991)  demonstrated  that  impacts  are  felt  beyond  urban  areas,  in a  process  he likened  to a  "perimetropolitan bow wave," where  agricultural conversion  occurs  at some distance  beyond  an urban  area.  Bruce  Pond and Maurice  Yeates  showed  that methods that examine  only  urban/nonurban  changes  in Canada  were unsatisfactory  because  they only  accounted  for direct  conversion  to urban uses  (1993).  Because there is  growing recognition  that human-dominated  ecosystems  occur throughout  the urban-to-rural  gradient (McDonnell  and Pickett  1990;  Medley, McDonnell,  and Pickett  1995;  Theobald, Miller,  and Hobbs  1997),  our need to better characterize land use  beyond  the urban  fringe  increases  as  well.

The census  of  population  and  the census  of  housing  are  two additional  sources typically  used to measure  urbanization.  Because  development  is associated  with rapid  population  growth,  urbanization  and  sprawl  are  often measured  in terms  of population  density  growth,  occasionally at  the state  or  county  level  but more  commonly  by metropolitan  areas or urban areas  (Hart 1976;  Sierra Club  1998;  Pendall 1999;  Fonseca and  Wong 2000; Doyle  2001;  El Nasser and  Overberg 2001). Although many  of the census data are  organized  and  presented  in urban  categories,  these urban-based  definitions are  limited for  understanding  development  patterns  because  they  only approximate developed  areas  (Alonso  1993). For  example,  a metropolitan  statistical  area (MSA) consists  of one or more counties  that  contain  a  city  of at  least  50,000  people.  Typically, an MSA contains  an urbanized  area  (uA),  and  adja-

TABLE I-COMPARISON OF  ACRES OF  "URBAN" LAND USE AND  LAND COVER FOUND IN  COLORADO USING COMMONLY AVAILABLE DATA  SETS

| DATABASE                                 |   URBAN ACRES (iOOOs) | DATE        | COMMENTS                                                                                                        |
|------------------------------------------|-----------------------|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Colorado Gap Analysis Project land cover |                   536 | Early 1990s | Interpreted from Landsat Thematic Mapper imagery                                                                |
| National Land Cover Database             |                   393 | Early 1990s | Used residential and commercial catego- ries but not transportation category, which had many highways and roads |
| Land Use and Land Cover data set         |                   527 | 1970/1980s  | Aerial photographic interpretation, MMU = 40 acres                                                              |
| National Resources Inventory             |                 1,539 | 1992        | Urban and built-up                                                                                              |
| Census block groups                      |                   485 | 1990        | >1 per 2 acres                                                                                                  |
| Census block groups                      |                 1,175 | 1990        | >1 per 10 acres                                                                                                 |
| Census block groups                      |                 3,445 | 1990        | >1 per 40 acres                                                                                                 |

Sources: USGS  1990,  2000;  Schrupp  and others  2000;  U.S. Census  Bureau 2; DA 2000; USDA  2.

cent counties are  included  if a substantial degree  of  commuting  between  counties occurs.  A UA is defined  as an area  with one or more census  places  and  the  adjacent settled  areas-the urban  fringe-that  have  at  least  50,000  people.  The  urban  fringe  is defined  by  the Census  Bureau  as those areas  that have densities of at least  1,00ooo people per square  mile and that are  within  1.5  road  miles,  or  5  road  miles if  separated  by  some  undevelopable land or water  body.  In 1990 there  were  362  MSAS  and 405  UAS  (U.S.  Census Bureau  2000).

MSAs include  large  areas  of  rural  density  in them and  routinely  overbound metropolitan  development.  The  majority  of smaller  cities  and  towns  (nearly  25,000 places  were identified  in the 1990 Census)  are not included  in MSAS or UAS, and are thus underbounded.  Also,  the  spatial  averaging that occurs  when  using  MSAs and counties  misses  much  of the  important  spatial  complexity  of  development  patterns (Cromartie  and Swanson  1996;  Morrill, Cromartie, and Hart  1999).  William Alonso has  aptly  described  the need for  rethinking the urban-rural  framework: "The  existing  censal  categories  are  misleading  because  they present  a vision of the United States  as a  territory  tiled with convex,  continuous,  mutually  exclusive  types  of regions,  while the  reality is one of a  great  deal  of  interpenetration, much of it rather fine-grained"  (1993, 25). Changes  to  urban/rural  definitions  for the  2000 Census addressed  these  challenges, in  part,  through  the addition  of urban  clusters-slightly lower-density  (500 people per square  mile) blocks  adjacent  to UAS (U.S. Department of Commerce  2001). Also,  a new form of  development,  so-called  rural  largelot  development,  is  beginning  to be  recognized  (Heimlich  and  Anderson 2001).

Although  a number of researchers have  mapped development  patterns  using fine-scale  parcel-based  data  (Batty  and Xie  1994;  Theobald and Hobbs  1998;  Aspinall 2000) or  interpreted  from aerial  photographs  (Vesterby  and Heimlich  1991;  LaGro

1994),  these data  are  typically  available only  for  limited  regions.  These  efforts  offer glimpses  of  ways  to better  measure  change  at the urban  fringe,  but  compiling  data for  a  broader geographical  extent-larger  than  a  county-is  a formidable  effort,  and comparative  analysis is often  precluded because  different  data  sets  and  methodologies  are  used.

Much of the local and national  debate  over  growth  and  development  has  been based  on  analyses conducted  using  one or  more  of these  databases, especially changes in  population  and  land  area  of UAs  (Sierra Club  1998;  El Nasser  and  Overberg 2001; Kolankiewicz and Beck 2001)  and MSAS (El  Nasser and  Overberg  2001;  Fulton and others  2001).  Although  these  analyses have  quantified  "sprawl" in various  ways,  they rely  on coarse  spatial  analytical  units,  so that  overbounding  and  underbounding occur,  and  they  are  focused  solely  on urbanization-that  is,  on  changes at  the  urban fringe.  Because  the databases  poorly capture  nonurban land-use  changes,  these analyses  are  limited  in  informing  discussions  about  land-use  dynamics  beyond  the urban  fringe.  For  example,  William  Fulton,  Rolf  Pendall,  Mai  Nguyen,  and Alicia Harrison  examined  changes  in  population densities  for 281 MSAS  by measuring  a metropolitan  area's density,  calculated  as the area's population  divided  by  the area of  developed  land as determined  from NRCS  NRI  data  (2001).  This measurement  of sprawl  is confounded  by population growth  in locations within a  county  where development  densities  are  too low or  too  scattered-beyond  the urban  fringe-to  be accounted  for  by  the NRI  definition.  With mismatched  analytical  units,  this measure  poorly  differentiates  bona fide increases  in urban  population density  from changes  in  density  caused  by  a  disproportionate increase  in  population  in exurban and rural  parts  of a  county-or  rural  sprawl.  Aggregated by county,  the NRI  data have  a  bias  that  is difficult  to determine  precisely but is  likely  to be  greater in counties with low  proportions-private  land  only-of urban area  (Figure  2)  and with higher  ratios  of rural-to-urban population growth  rate.

## MAPPING HOUSING  DENSITY

The  maps  included  in this article  suggest  a method for  depicting  development  using fine-grained  data,  available  nationwide,  and with rich historical  data as well. Although  population  density  is  commonly  used  to  map  development patterns, housing density  is a better  indicator  of  landscape  change.  Because  population  data  are tied to the  primary  place  of residence,  they  underestimate landscape  change  due to second homes and vacation  homes. For  example,  high  rates  of  unoccupied  housing-up  to  70  or 80  percent-occur  in  many  counties,  particularly in  amenity  counties  (McGranahan  1999;  Theobald  2000). Therefore,  population densities  will  be low in these  areas  relative to  housing  densities,  and  the amount  of land  for  nonrural uses  will  be  underestimated. Housing  density  is  simply  the  number  of  housing  units in a  specified  area  (a square  mile,  for  example).  A  housing  unit  may  be a  singlefamily  home, a townhome, a condominium, or an  apartment  that  provides  separate  living quarters  with its own access  that  is, or is intended to be, occupied.  A

Proportion  of Urban Land  in the

FIG.  2-The  proportion of urban area  in each county in the United States,  computed using

National  Resources  Inventory  of the Natural  Resources  Conservation  Service,  divided  by the ac

(excluding  Alaska  and sented in the inventory. Source: UsDA 2000.

<!-- image -->

residence  with a  separate  "mother-in-law" apartment  would count as two  housing units,  but a shed  or an  outbuilding  would not count as a  housing  unit.

Fine-grained, spatially detailed housing  data  are  available in census  block  groups and  blocks,  which  are  subdivisions of the familiar  census  tract.  The  1990  Census  includes more than  250,000  block  groups,  each of which  typically  contains  250-550  housing  units  (U.S.  Census  Bureau 2000). A number  of researchers have  used  these  data  to map  land-use  patterns, but these  efforts  were  not  fully  constructed (Theobald  2000), mapped only  current-that is,  1990-not historical,  patterns (Holloway,  Schumaker, and  Redmond  1997),  or  mapped  only  local  areas  (Radeloff and  others 2001).

Question  H17  from the 1990 Census Bureau  long-form  questionnaire  codes the number of  housing  units built in each decade between  1940  and 1990. Because  they are  estimates  of units  present  in  April  1990,  there  are  a  number  of  potential  reasons why  these data  will underestimate the number  of actual  historical  units.  These  reasons include:  housing  units that had been demolished or  destroyed  before  1990; misreporting  the  age  of a  house,  perhaps due to substantial  renovation  of an  earlier structure;  and  changes  in the definition of  "housing  unit,"  particularly  the handling  of vacant  units  (Radeloff  and  others 2001). Nationwide,  the number  of housing  units was underestimated  by  8.2  percent  in  1980,  by 14.3  percent  in  1970,  and  by 26.9 percent  in  1960.

To  correct  for  these  potential  errors, I  adjusted historical  housing-unit  estimates for block  groups  using county-level  estimates  from historical  decennial  censuses, per  Volker  C. Radeloff  and others  (2001). To  compute  a correction  factor  for each county,  I took the ratio  of the number  of units  in the historical  census  and divided it  by  the  total  housing  units summed  from  the  H17  block-group  estimates.  Then  the adjusted  number  of  housing  units in each  block  group  was  computed  by multiplying  the number  of  housing  units  by  the correction  factor  for the  county  in which the block  group  is located.  However,  the  adjusted  housing  units for some block groups  can  exceed  the number  of units  in the next  decade.  To  preclude  overestimation of units,  I used  an iterative technique  that  calculates  the number  of underestimated  housing  units  in each  county, then  spreads them  equally over  the  block  groups in a  county,  weighted  by  the number  of units in each  block  group.  The  spreading function was constrained,  so that the number  of units in a decade  did not exceed the number of units in the next decade.  Although  some areas  may actually  lose housing  units over  a  decade,  particularly urban  core  areas  that  are  "hollowing" out, the number  of units  for  the  vast  majority of block  groups  do not decline  over  time.

To ease  the  description  and  portrayal of  development  patterns,  I  classify  housing density  into four  general  classes:  urban,  suburban,  exurban,  and rural.  I define urban  housing  density  as  more  than  1  unit  per  acre, which  is  slightly  higher  than  the census  definition  of urban.  Suburban density, which identifies  areas  that  are  lowerdensity  subdivisions,  is defined as 0.1-1.0  units  per acre,  or 1 unit  per  1-10 acres. Exurban  density ranges  from  0.025  to 0.1  units  per  acre,  or 1  unit  per 10-40  acres.  This class  identifies very  low-density  development,  including  "ranchette" development  in the  western  United  States, which  occurs  typically at  1  unit  per  35-45  acres.  Rural  den-

sity,  then,  is  defined  as  fewer  than  0.025  units  per  acre, or  1  unit  per  41  acres  or  more. Typically this includes  working  farmsteads and  ranches,  but it also  includes  remote vacation  and second  homes on the  public  lands  interface.

These  density  classes  are  slightly more  relaxed-that  is,  have  lower  densities-than what one  traditionally  thinks of as "urban" or "suburban." This is due in  part  because  measuring  development  for  large  areas-state,  region,  or  nation-requires computation  of  gross  density,  rather  than net  density. Net  density  is based  on discounting  areas  of land  that  are  "not  developed  or  are  undevelopable," such  as  roads, greenbelts,  open space,  recreation  areas,  floodways,  and so forth  from  the denominator  when  calculating  density,  whereas  gross  density  is based  on  coarser-grained data  such as block  groups (Clawson  1971). Typically, when  envisioning  "urban" or "suburban" areas,  we tend to think about the  landscape  in terms of net densities, rather  than  gross  densities.

## BEYOND  THE URBAN FRINGE

Fine-scale  patterns  of  development  can be  distinguished  on the  maps produced from  these  block-group  data  (Figures 3  and  4).  Locations  with urban-level  housing densities  can be seen in black,  signifying  locations  typically  identified  as  UAS; numerous  small  cities  and  towns  can  be seen  as  well.  Lower-density, exurban  development, in  gray,  rings  much of the urban  development  (Dallas-Fort  Worth,  Denver, Minneapolis,  and  so  forth).  The  expansion  of urban  areas,  readily viewable  by  comparing 1960  with  to  2000,  is-not surprisingly-quite remarkable in  places  like Atlanta,  Boise,  Salt  Lake  City,  and Tucson.  What  can also  be seen is the  emergence  of many  microurban  areas  in rural  counties:  for  example,  Jackson,  in northwestern Wyoming;  Redmond,  Oregon,  just  north of Bend;  and  Kalispell  and Whitefish  in western  Montana.  Exurban  development  has occurred  around  many  of the urban areas  and is  striking  around  places  like  Farmington,  New Mexico,  and in central Florida; and  between  Bozeman  and  Belgrade, Montana,  Montrose  and  Delta,  Colorado,  and  Austin  and San  Antonio,  Texas.

Overall,  the area  under  urban  densities  nationwide  doubled  from  1960  to 1990 (Figure  5),  from  nearly 16  million  in  1960  to more  than  33  million  in  1990.  By  including  suburban  housing density  or  greater, the  acreage increased  from  nearly  47  million to 101  million in the same  period.  For  exurban  density  and  greater, the  acreage increased  from  159 million  to  333 million acres.  The  pace  of  development  continued from  1990  to 2000.  The  acres  of urban  density  increased from  33  million  to  38  million in 2000;  suburban, from  o10 million  to 121 million;  and  exurban,  from  333 million  to 378  million.  It  is  important to note that  while  the  population  in exurban  and  greater density  areas  grew by 13.3  percent  from 1990 to 2000  (U.S.  Census Bureau  2001),  the amount of  developed  land increased  at a faster  rate,  14.3  percent.

Although  these data are not  directly  commensurate  with other estimates  because of  methodological  and definitional  differences,  it is  interesting  to see how they compare  in  rough  terms.  In  1960,  census  urban  areas  occupied  nearly  25  million  acres  (from  Hart  1976),  which  grew  to more than  41  million  acres in 1990. De-

eo\ Ct cO ,. C o -Ct Ct) C) &gt; c\_ 0v O 0 u 0 0 C) &lt;4 C)^ -0 00

<!-- image -->

o o s 0 c~ Fq V) U CQ O CO 0 o I u o .. t0 Oc z, '5 u0, (S \_g

<!-- image -->

FIG.  5-Extent  of  development  at  varying  densities  for  the conterminous  United  States using  blockgroup  data. Source:  U.S. Census  Bureau  1993,  2001.

<!-- image -->

velopment  as defined  by  the NRI, which  is a more  inclusive  definition  of urban  and built-up  and is  roughly  comparable to densities  of i unit  per  o1  or more  acres,  was 89  million  acres in  1992.

Block-group  data  are  useful for  examining  the extent to which urban  features are  overbounded  or underbounded.  More  than  92 percent  of the area  inside MSAS comprises development  at lower-than-urban  housing  densities  (Figure 6).  UAs overbound  urban  development  to a much  lower  degree, but about  one-third  of the total area  of UAS  comprises  lower-than-urban housing  densities  (Figure  7).  Moreover,  UAS  underbound  urban  densities  to a  large  degree.  An additional  18  million acres  of areas  in urban  housing  densities  are  missed  by  UAS (roughly  50 percent).

Aggregating  block-group  data to the  county  level allows one to examine the spatial  variability of land  consumption,  computed  here as the  average  number of acres  required  per  housing  unit,  for block  groups  with exurban  and  higher  densities  (Figure  8). Large, dense urban  locations such as Los  Angeles,  Denver,  and  Atlanta  have  low  average numbers  of acres  per  unit. Low  average  consumption  rates are also found in some counties that contain microurban  areas,  such as Jackson County,  Colorado.  If  the  average number  of acres  per  unit increases  over  time,  land is  being  consumed  disproportionately, or  "sprawling" (Figure  9).  From  1960  to  2000, development  in one-third of the counties in the United States  became less dense. Although many  of the  fastest-growing  counties can also be seen to be  sprawling (Douglas County,  Colorado-the  fastest-growing  county  in the United  States),

FIG.  6-Overbounding of  Metropolitan  Statistical Areas in the United  States. In  1990,  more  than 90 percent  of MSAS contained  lower  than  urban  (more  than  one unit  per  2  acres)  housing  density.  Source: U.S. Census  Bureau  1993.

<!-- image -->

FIG.  7-Overbounding of Urban  Areas  in the United States.  In 199o, more than  33  percent  of  UAS contained lower than urban  (more  than one unit  per  2  acres) housing density.  Urban areas  also underbound  urban  areas:  More  than 18  million acres  of  development  at urban  housing density  were excluded  from  urban  areas.  Source: U.S.  Census  Bureau  1993.

<!-- image -->

Urban, Suburban, and Exurban by county,  in  2000,  based  on the

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

FIG.  9-Expansion  of  urban, suburban,  and exurban  areas  in each  county  in the United States, 196o-1990  (top)  and  1990-2000 (bottom), computed  using  the  average  number  of  acres  per housing unit for  block  groups  with exurban  and  higher  density  (199g averages divided  by  1960  averages; 2000 averages  divided  by 1990 averages).  Sources:  U.S. Census  Bureau  1993,  2001.

exurban  sprawl  is scattered throughout  the  country,  particularly in  high-amenity areas  such as the mountain counties of the  Rocky  Mountain  states  and in  upstate Wisconsin,  Michigan,  and New  York.

## CONCLUSIONS

We have  an  unparalleled opportunity  to  expand  our  understanding of the  dynamics  of the  nation's land  base,  in  part  due  to advances in  technology  such  as  enhanced land-cover  data  sets  from  remote  sensing  and  GIs-based analyses of  very  large  databases.  Even  from  this  initial  effort  to  map  housing  density, fine-scale  landscape heterogeneity  and  fragmentation of land uses can  be seen,  and  these  patterns  need to be considered  when  discussing  the status  and  trends  of the  nation's land  base.  However,  to  capitalize  fully  on this  opportunity,  we need to shift the  way  in which we think  about  land  use and  land  cover,  to  simultaneously  recognize  the need for  finegrained  spatial  data  and  broaden  land-use  and  land-cover  classification systems  to include  land  uses  beyond  the  urban  fringe.  Even  though fine-grained  mapping  provides detailed  land-use  patterns  to assist our  understanding  of the  dynamics  of landscape  changes  through  the whole urban-to-rural continuum,  a number  of additional  refinements  are  needed.

First,  refinements  can  be made  to  improve  the distribution  of units  within each block  group  using  a  dasymetric  mapping  process  (Wright  1936; Robinson  and others  1995;  Holloway,  Schumaker, and Redmond  1997;  Eicher and Brewer  2001).  Undevelopable  portions  of block  groups,  such  as  "zero  blocks," public  lands,  lakes  and reservoirs, and  steep slopes,  can  be removed  using  additional  data  layers.  Housing units  will  then  be constrained in the  remaining  portion  of the  block  group.  Changes between  the  1990  and  2000 block-group  boundaries  need  to be better  resolved.  Second,  fine-grained data  for  nonresidential urban  land,  such  as  commercial, industrial, and  transportation-related land  uses,  are  limited,  which  leads  to an  underestimation in census  data  of urban  land uses.  Third,  as  Raup  noted in his  critique  of the  1982 NALS study,  "The  primary  incentive  and the financial  justification  for the maintenance of land  ownership  records  rests  with  taxing  authorities,  and since  land  taxes are  locally  administered in the United  States,  the federal  government  has no direct channel to land  ownership  data"  (1982, 272).  That  is,  although  national  efforts remain critical  to our  understanding of  development,  it seems reasonable  that local governments-county  assessors-are  perhaps  best  positioned  to collect and  provide data  on land-use  patterns  and  trends,  especially in exurban  areas.

Municipalities  and  nongovernmental  organizations  nationwide  have  recently engaged  in "smart  growth"  by conserving  lands  through purchase  of  open space and conservation  easements  to counter urbanization  and  sprawl,  and  nearly  6.5 million  acres of land have been  protected by  land trusts alone  (LTA 2000). This is no doubt a  positive  trend;  however,  because  traditional  land-use databases  and current  methods  of  assessing  sprawl do not  capture these  significant conservation  efforts and other  changes,  finer-detailed  data are  needed to understand  patterns  of land use  beyond  the urban  fringe.

## NOTE

1.  Linear  regression  of"Land  in Farms" from  1950  to  1997  with  an R2  =  0.98.

## REFERENCES

- Alonso,  W.  1993.  The  Interpenetration of Rural  and Urban  America.  In  Population  Change  and the Future  of  Rural  America: A  Conference Proceedings, edited  by  L.  L.  Swanson  and  D. L.  Brown,  2328.  Report  No. AGES  9324. Washington,  D.C.: U.S.  Department of  Agriculture,  Economic  Research Service,  Agriculture and Rural  Economy  Division.
- Aspinall,  R.  J.  2000. A Framework  for  Use of  Spatial Information  in  Analysis  and Prediction  of Land Use  Change. In  Spatial  Information for  Land  Use  Management, edited  by  M.  J. Hill  and  R.  J. Aspinall, 205-215. Amsterdam:  Gordon  and Breach Science  Publishers.
- Anderson,  J.  R.,  E.  E.  Hardy, J.  T.  Roach,  and  R.  E.  Witmer.  1976.  A Land  Use  and  Land  Cover Classification  System for  Use  with  Remote  Sensor Data.  Geological  Survey  Professional Paper  964.  Washington,  D.C.:  U.S.  Government Printing  Office.
- Bank of America. 1996. Beyond  Sprawl: New Patterns  of  Growth  to Fit the New  California.  [http:// www.bankofamerica.com/environment/index.cfm?Menu\_Sel=public&amp;oth=urban] .
- Batty, M. B.,  and  Y.  Xie.  1994.  Urban  Analysis  in a GIS  Environment: Population  Density  Modelling Using  ARC/INFO.  In  Spatial  Analysis and GIS,  edited  by  S.  Fotheringham and P.  Rogerson,  189219.  London,  England,  and  Bristol,  Penn.:  Taylor  &amp; Francis.
- Beatley, T.,  and  K.  Manning. 1997. The  Ecology of  Place: PlanningforEnvironment, Economy, and Community.  Washington, D.C.:  Island  Press.
- Benfield,  F.  K.,  M.  D.  Raimi,  and  D.  D.  Chen.  1999.  Once  There  Were Greenfields: How Urban  Sprawl Is Undermining America's Environment, Economy, and Social  Fabric.  New York:  National  Resources Defense Council.
- Brown,  D.  G.,  B.  C.  Pijanowski, and  J.  D. Duh.  2000.  Modeling  the  Relationships between Land  Use and Land  Cover  on Private  Lands  in the  Upper  Midwest,  U.S.A.  Journal  of  Environmental Management  59 (4): 247-263.
- Clawson,  M.  1971.  Suburban  Land  Conversion in the United  States:  An Economic  and Governmental Process. Baltimore,  Md.:  Johns  Hopkins  Press.
- Cromartie,  J.  B.,  and L. L. Swanson.  1996.  Census  Tracts  More  Precisely  Define Rural  Populations and  Areas.  Rural  Development Perspectives 11  (3):  31-39.
- Daniels,  T.  L.  1998.  The  Struggle to  Manage  Growth  in the  Metropolitan  Fringe.  In  Proceedings of  the 1998  National  Planning  Conference "Revolutionary Ideas  in  Planning," 4-7 April,  1998,  edited  by B. McClendon  and B. Pable.  Chicago: American  Planning  Association.
- .  1999. When  City  and  Country Collide: Managing  Growth  in the  Metropolitan Fringe.  Washington,  D.C.:  Island  Press.
- Diamond,  H. L.,  and P.  F.  Noonan,  eds.  1996.  Land  Use  in  America. Washington,  D.C.:  Island  Press.
- Doyle,  R.  2001. Sprawling  into  the Third Millennium. Scientific  American  284 (3): 25.
- Eicher, C.  L.,  and  C.  A.  Brewer.  2001.  Dasymetric  Mapping  and  Areal  Interpolation:  Implementation and Evaluation.  Cartography  and  Geographic Information  Science 28  (2):  125-138.
- El  Nasser, H.,  and  P.  Overberg.  2001. What  You  Don't  Know  about  Sprawl: Controlling  Development a  Big  Concern,  but  Analysis  Has  Unexpected  Findings.  USA  Today, 22  February, §A,  1.
- Fischel,  W.  A. 1982. The Urbanization  of  Agricultural Land:  A Review  of the National  Agricultural Lands  Study.  Land Economics  58 (2):  236-259.
- Fesenmaier, D.  R.,  M.  F.  Goodchild,  and  S.  Morrison.  1979.  The  Spatial Structure  of the Rural-Urban Fringe: A Multivariate Approach.  Canadian  Geographer 23 (3):  255-265.
- Fonseca,  J.  W.,  and  D.  W.  Wong.  2000. Changing  Patterns  of  Population  Density  in the United  States. Professional  Geographer 52  (3): 504-517.
- Fulton,  W.,  R.  Pendall,  M.  Nguyen,  and  A. Harrison. 2001.  Who  Sprawls Most?  How Growth  Patterns Differ across  the  U.S.  Washington, D.C.:  Brookings  Institution,  Center  on Urban  and  Metropolitan Policy.
- Greene,  R.  P.  1997.  The  Farmland  Conversion  Process  in a  Polynucleated Metropolis.  Landscape and Urban  Planning  36 (4): 291-300.
- Hart, J.  F.  1976.  Urban  Encroachment  on  Rural Areas.  Geographical  Review 66  (1): 1-17.
1991.  The  Perimetropolitan Bow Wave.  Geographical  Review 81  (1): 35-51.

- .  1992.  Nonfarm  Farms.  Geographical  Review 82  (2): 166-179.
- Heimlich,  R.  E.,  and  W.  D.  Anderson. 2001. Development at the Urban Fringe  and  Beyond:  Impacts on Agriculture and Rural  Land.  Agricultural Economic  Report  No.  803.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture, Economic  Research  Service.
- Holloway,  S.  R.,  J.  Schumaker, and  R.  L.  Redmond.  1997. People and  Place: Dasymetric Mapping  Using ARC/INFO.  Missoula:  University  of Montana.
- Jensen,  J.  R.,  and  D.  L.  Toll.  1982.  Detecting  Residential  Land-Use  Development  at the Urban  Fringe. Photogrammetric Engineering and  Remote  Sensing  48 (4):  629-643.
- Katz,  B.,  and  A.  Liu. 2000.  Moving  beyond  Sprawl: Toward  a  Broader Metropolitan  Agenda.  Brookings Review 18  (2): 31-34.
- Kolankiewicz,  L., and R. Beck. 2001.  Weighing Sprawl  Factors  in  Large  U.S. Cities: Analysis  of  U.S. Bureau  of  the Census  Data on the 1oo  Largest  Urbanized  Areas  of  the United States.  [http:// www.sprawlcity.org/studyUSA/index.html].
- LaGro,  J.  A.  1994. Population  Growth  beyond  the Urban  Fringe:  Implications  for Rural  Land  Use Policy. Landscape  and  Urban  Planning  28  (2-3):  143-158.
- Lamb, R. F.  1983.  The Extent  and Form of Exurban  Sprawl.  Growth and  Change 14 (1): 40-47.
- Loveland,  T.  R.,  J.  W.  Merchant,  D.  O. Ohlen,  and  J.  F.  Brown. 1991.  Development  of a Land-Cover Characteristics Database  for the Conterminous  United States.  Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote  Sensing 57 (11):  1453-1463.
- LTA  [Land  Trust  Alliance]. 1998.  1998  National  Directory of  Conservation Land  Trusts. Washington, D.C.:  Land  Trust  Alliance.
- McDonnell,  M. J.,  and S. T.  A. Pickett.  1990. Ecosystem  Structure  and Function  along  Urban-Rural Gradients: An  Unexploited  Opportunity for  Ecology.  Ecology 71 (4): 1232-1237.
- Medley,  K.  E.,  M.  J.  McDonnell,  and S.  T.  A. Pickett.  1995. Forest-Landscape Structure  along  an Urban-to-Rural  Gradient.  Professional Geographer 47 (2):  159-168.
- McGranahan, D. A.  1999.  Natural  Amenities  Drive  Rural  Population  Change.  Agricultural  Economic Report  No.  781.  Washington,  D.C.:  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture, Economic  Research  Service.
- Morrill,  R.,  J.  Cromartie, and G.  Hart.  1999. Metropolitan, Urban,  and  Rural  Commuting  Areas:  Toward a Better  Depiction  of the United States  Settlement  System.  Urban  Geography 20 (8): 727748.
- Myers,  R.  R.,  and J.  A.  Beegle. 1947.  Delineation and  Analysis  of the Rural-Urban Fringe.  Applied Anthropology  6: 14-22.
- Nizeyimana,  E.  L.,  G.  W.  Petersen, M. L.  Imhoff,  H.  R.  Sinclair Jr., S.  W.  Wattman,  D.  S.  Reed-Margetan, E.  R.  Levine,  and  J.  M. Russo. 2001. Assessing  the  Impact  of Land  Conversion  to Urban  Use on Soils  with Different  Productivity Levels  in the  USA.  Soil  Science Society  ofAmerica Journal  65:  391402.
- NALS [National  Agricultural  Lands  Study]. 1981.  National  Agricultural Lands  Study:  Final  Report. Washington,  D.C.:  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture, Soil Conservation  Service.
- Nusser,  S.  M.,  and  J.  J.  Goebel.  1997.  The  National  Resources Inventory: A  Long-Term Multi-Resource Monitoring  Programme. Environmental and  Ecological Statistics 4 (3):  181-204.
- Pendall,  R.  1999.  Do  Land-Use  Controls Cause  Sprawl? Environment  and  Planning  B:  Planning  &amp; Design  26  (4): 555-571.
- Platt,  R. H.  1985.  The Farmland  Conversion  Debate:  NALs  and  Beyond.  Professional Geographer 37 (4): 433-442.
- Pond,  B.,  and M.  Yeates.  1993.  Rural-Urban Land  Conversion,  1:  Estimating  the Direct and Indirect Impacts.  Urban  Geography  14 (4): 323-347.
- Radeloff, V.  C.,  A. E.  Hagen,  P.  R.  Voss,  D. R.  Field,  and D.  J.  Mladenoff. 2000. Exploring  the  Spatial Relationship  between Census and Land-Cover  Data.  Society  and Natural  Resources 13  (6): 599609.
- Radeloff, V.  C.,  R.  B.  Hammer,  P.  R.  Voss,  A. E.  Hagen,  D. R.  Field,  and  D.  J.  Mladenoff. 2001. Human Demographic  Trends  and  Landscape Level  Forest  Management  in the Northwest  Wisconsin  Pine Barrens. Forest Science  47 (2):  229-241.
- Raup,  P.  M.  1982.  An  Agricultural Critique  of the  National  Agricultural Lands  Study. Land  Economics 58 (2): 260-274.
- Ridd,  M. K.  1995. Exploring a  V-I-S  (Vegetation-Impervious Surface-Soil) Model for  Urban  Ecosystem  Analysis  through  Remote  Sensing:  Comparative Anatomy  for Cities.  International Journal  of Remote  Sensing  16  (12): 2165-2185.

- Ridd,  M.  K.,  and  J.  J.  Liu.  1998.  A  Comparison  of Four  Algorithms for  Change  Detection  in an  Urban Environment.  Remote  Sensing of  Environment  63 (2):  95-1oo.
- Riebsame,  W. E., ed.  1997.  Atlas  of  the  New West: Portrait  of  a  Changing  Region.  New York:  W. W. Norton.
- Riebsame,  W. E.,  H. Gosnell,  and D. M. Theobald.  1996.  Land  Use and  Landscape  Change  in the Colorado  Mountains,  I:  Theory,  Scale,  and Pattern.  Mountain  Research and  Development 16  (4): 395-405.
- Robinson,  A. H., J.  L.  Morrison,  P.  C.  Muehrcke,  and S. C.  Guptill. 1995.  Elements  of Cartography. 6th ed. New York: John  Wiley  &amp;  Sons.
- Rome,  A. W.  1998.  William  Whyte,  Open Space,  and Environmental Activism.  Geographical Review 88  (2):  259-274.
- Schrupp,  D.  L.,  W.  A.  Reiners, T.  G.  Thompson,  L.  E.  O'Brien, J.  A.  Kindler, M. B.  Wunder,  J.  F.  Lowsky, J.  C.  Buoy,  L.  Satcowitz,  A. L.  Cade, J.  D.  Stark,  K. L. Driese, T. W. Owens, S. J. Russo, and F D'Erchia.  2000. Colorado Gap  Analysis  Program: A  Geographic Approach  to  Planningfor  Biological Diversity-Final  Report. Denver:  U.S.  Geological  Survey, Biological Resources  Division,  Gap Analysis  Program; Colorado  Division of Wildlife.
- Sierra  Club.  1998. Sprawl: The  Dark  Side  of  the  American Dream.  [http://www.sierraclub.org/sprawl/ report98/].
- Simon,  J.  L.,  and S.  Sudman.  1982.  How Much  Farmland Is  Being  Converted  to Urban  Use?  International  Regional  Science Review  7 (3):  257-272.
- Sorensen,  A.  A., R. P.  Greene,  and K.  Russ.  1997.  Farming on the  Edge.  Washington, D.C.:  American Farmland  Trust;  DeKalb:  Northern Illinois  University,  Center  for  Agriculture  in the Environment.
- Sutton,  P.,  C.  Roberts,  C.  Elvidge,  and H.  Meij. 1997.  A  Comparison  of  Nighttime  Satellite  Imagery and  Population  Density  for  the Continental  United States.  Photogrammetric Engineering and  Remote  Sensing 63 (11):  1303-1313.
- Theobald,  D. M.  2000. Fragmentation by Inholdings  and  Exurban Development.  In  Forest Fragmentation  in the  Southern Rocky  Mountains,  edited  by  R.  L.  Knight, F W.  Smith,  S.  W.  Buskirk, W.  H. Romme,  and  W.  L.  Baker,  155-174. Boulder:  University  Press  of Colorado.
- Theobald,  D.  M.,  and  N. T.  Hobbs.  1998. Forecasting Rural  Land-Use  Change: A  Comparison  of Regression-  and  Spatial  Transition-Based Models.  Geographical and  Environmental Modelling 2  (1): 57-74.
- Theobald,  D. M., H. Gosnell,  and W. E. Riebsame.  1996.  Land  Use and  Landscape  Change  in the Colorado  Mountains,  II:  A Case  Study  of the East  River Valley. Mountain  Research and  Development 16 (4): 407-418.
- Theobald,  D.  M.,  J.  M.  Miller,  and  N. T.  Hobbs.  1997.  Estimating the Cumulative  Effects  of  Development on Wildlife  Habitat.  Landscape and Urban  Planning  39 (1): 25-36.
- U.S. Census  Bureau.  1993.  1990 Census  of  Population and  Housing.  Washington,  D.C.:  U.S.  Department of Commerce.
- .  2000. Geographic Areas  Reference Manual.  [http://www.census.gov/geo/www/garm.html]. . 2001. Census 2000, Summary  File 1: United  States.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S.  Department of Commerce.
- U.S.  Department  of Commerce. 2001. Urban  Area  Criteria  for Census  2000:  Proposed  Criteria.... Federal  Register  66  (60):  17018-17033.
- USDA [U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture]. 1999.  1997 Census  of  Agriculture. Vols.  1,  1A,  iB, 1C,  Geographic Area  Series. Washington,  D.C.:  National  Agricultural Statistics  Service.
- USGS [U.S. Geological  Survey]. 199o.  Land Use and Land  Cover  Digital  Data  from 1:250,000-  and 1:1oo,ooo-Scale Maps.  Data  Users  Guide  4. Reston,  Va.:  U.S.  Department  of the  Interior, U.S.  Geological Survey.
- .  2000. National  Resources Inventory: 1997 State  of  the Land  Update.  Fort  Worth,  Tex.:  U.S. Department  of  Agriculture, Natural  Resources  Conservation  Service.
2000. National  Land  Cover  Dataset:  Fact  Sheet  o18-oo.  Reston,  Va.:  U.S.  Department  of the Interior,  U.S.  Geological  Survey.  [http://mac.usgs.gov/mac/isb/pubs/factsheets/fslo8oo.html].
- Vesterby, M.,  and  R.  E.  Heimlich.  1991.  Land-Use  and  Demographic  Change: Results  from  Fast-Growth Counties.  Land Economics  67 (3): 279-291.
- Vogelmann,  J.  E.,  T.  Sohl,  and S. M. Howard.  1998. Regional  Characterization of Land  Cover  Using Multiple  Sources  of Data.  Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote  Sensing  64 (1):  45-57.

- Vogelmann,  J.  E.,  T.  Sohl,  P.  V.  Campbell,  and D. M. Shaw.  1998. Regional  Land  Cover  Characterization  Using  Landsat  Thematic  Mapper  Data  and  Ancillary  Data  Sources.  Environmental Monitoring  and Assessment  51 (1-2):  415-428.
- Waldie,  D.  J.  2000. Do the Voters  Really  Hate  Sprawl? New York  Times  (Late  edition,  final),  3 March, §A, 21.
- Ward,  D., S. R. Phinn, and A. T.  Murray.  2000.  Monitoring  Growth  in  Rapidly  Urbanizing  Areas Using Remotely  Sensed  Data.  Professional Geographer 52 (3):  371-386.
- Wright,  J.  K.  1936.  A Method of  Mapping  Densities  of  Population.  Geographical Review  26  (2):  103110.