Rural Soundscape: Acoustic Rurality? Evidence from Chinese Countryside

Maichi (Match) Chen, Jie Zhang, Yingying Zhang, Ke Wu & Yixin Yang

To cite this article: Maichi (Match) Chen, Jie Zhang, Yingying Zhang, Ke Wu & Yixin Yang (2021): Rural Soundscape: Acoustic Rurality? Evidence from Chinese Countryside, The Professional Geographer, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2021.1880943

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2021.1880943
Rural Soundscape: Acoustic Rurality? Evidence from Chinese Countryside

Maichi (Match) Chen
Nanjing University and Anhui University of Technology

Jie Zhang, Yingying Zhang, Ke Wu, and Yixin Yang
Nanjing University

Although rurality is regarded as core terminology in rural geography and an essential characteristic of rural and rural tourism, researchers have not attached enough academic importance to the hybridity and multisensory characteristics of the rural, including its soundscapes. From the perspective of history and culture, the ancient Chinese were obsessed with the geomantic conception of the harmonious coexistence of man and nature in their rural construction, and Chinese pastoral poetry covered the harmonious soundscape symphony of natural ecology and rural community. Acoustic rurality can be defined as sustainable rural soundscapes in the changed and changing human–environment contexts comprising quiet and tranquility; wild, domestic, and social soundscapes; and the rural soundscapes as important indicators of good rural ecological environment and traditional rural heritages that can be preserved and developed through acoustic rurality-based planning. Using the practical roadmaps of China’s Beautiful Rural Construction and Rural Vitalization Strategy for reference, this study sums up the four proposed guidelines for conserving and developing acoustic rurality: noise control and protecting the quiet and tranquil countryside, conserving wildlife habitat of the rural wild soundscapes, safeguarding cultural soundscape heritages, and developing recreational soundscapes for rural tourism. Key Words: acoustic rurality, acoustic rurality-based planning, Chinese countryside, rural geography, rural soundscape.

The village lit by slanting rays, The cattle trail on homeward ways. See an old man for the herd wait, Leaning on staff by wicker gate. Pheasants call in wheat field with ease; Silk worms sleep on sparse mulberries. Shouldering hoe, two ploughmen meet; They talk long, standing on their feet. For this unhurried life I long, Lost in singing “Home-going song.”

—“Rural Scene by River Wei,” Chinese pastoral poet Wang Wei [701–761] (trans. X. Yuanchong)

In the context of rural environmental hazards and rapid reconstruction of the rural, the connotation and denotation of rurality, as a core terminology of rural geography (Munkejord 2006; Bosworth and Somerville 2013), should be extended and restructured as soon as possible. There is voluminous academic literature on rurality, but the hybridity and multisensory characteristics of the rural have been generally neglected (Cloke and Little 1997; Woods 2007; Daugstad 2008; Agapito, Valle, and Mendes 2012; Agapito, Mendes, and Valle 2013; Agapito, Pinto, and Mendes 2017). Further, there appears to be remarkably little discussion about the metatheory and basic concepts of rurality (Hu et al. 2020) and multisensory rurality, let alone acoustic rurality.

As described in the preceding pastoral poem, pheasants calling, cattle mooing, and ploughmen chatting got the Chinese poet “lost in singing Home-going song” as the peaceful and tuneful rural idyll. Considered the father of contemporary soundscape research (J. Zhang 2015), Schafer (1994) published The Soundscape: Our Sonic Theme Environment and the Tuning of the World, in which he introduced the concept of “hi-fi” (high fidelity) to evaluate the essential attributes of rural soundscapes (“a soundscape in which every component is distinctly heard without significant effects of masking”; Farina 2014, 13). Currently, quiet and tranquility have been valued by Kaaristo (2014) as two of the most important sound environments and natural resources, and he added, “notions of rurality and rural environment are constantly (re)created and (re)negotiated” (267). In this way, holistic rural soundscapes can be defined as acoustic rurality.

For “earthbound China” (Fei and Chang 1948) with a long history of poetry on the rural soundscape, the unprecedented urbanization of imbalanced urban–rural development has seriously damaged and reconstructed the intrinsic rurality of the Chinese countryside in the last forty years, and China’s current rural vitalization strategy and its policies have been providing great opportunities for acoustic rurality. This study aims to conduct a theoretical review and application of progress of rurality and rural soundscape succinctly; introduce systematically the new concept of acoustic rurality in China’s rural human–environment context; and focus on the evaluation, conservation, and rehabilitation of
Figure 1  A basic conceptual path of the evolution of ruralities.

acoustical rurality in rural soundscape planning and management. Based on “rurality as a choice” and rural soundscape development, we hope to further outline and develop a scientific conceptual framework and systematical practice guidelines of acoustical rurality for its theoretical potential.

Rurality and Rural Soundscape

Turns of Rurality
Owing to rurality’s seeming reduction to “a messy and slippery idea” (Woods 2010, 835), many scholars across different academic disciplines have tried in vain to provide an unambiguous and common definition of rurality through varied approaches (e.g., Mormont 1990; Halfacree 1993; Grimes 2000; Cloke 2006; Figueiredo 2009; Figueiredo, Kastenholz, and Lima 2013; Shucksmith 2018). In the wake of social, economic, and technological developments (Long, Zou, and Liu 2009), however, along with rural gentrification (Phillips 2009; Mamounova and Sutherland 2015), rural place marketing (Stockdale 2006), and ruralities selling (Kordel 2016), considerable changes in rural areas have been constructing the conceptualizations of rurality.

To summarize, with the performative turns of rural studies and performativity in human geography (Little and Leyshon 2003; Paquette and Domon 2003; Paniagua 2016; Kumar 2018), “recent work in rural geography has started to engage with the performance of rurality” (Woods 2010, 835). Multifaceted rurality is performed in the everyday activities of people living, working, and playing in rural spaces (Woods 2010) and in the rural consumptions of visitors, tourists, and vacationers (Edensor 2000), namely, the authentic rurality of the tourist idyll (Frisvoll 2013). Until now, the particular process of construction and evolution of rurality in individual dimensions remained unclear (Huang and Bai 2020). Furthermore, even if we are physically exposed to rurality (Lichter and Brown 2011), imagined rurality (Cloke 2006; Woods 2011; Harrington 2018) manifests itself in multiple ways and encompasses emotional embodiment and experiences (Everett 2008). In the 1990s, postmodernism and urban disease gave birth to the rural idyll of the urban (see Figure 1); just as the rural was depicted as idyllic, pure, tranquil, and inevitably boring (Yarwood 2005), ruralities were also influenced by perceptions of feelings, customs, and future expectations (Sibley 1995; Woods 2011). Some recent works suggest conducting a reorientation of rurality, based on performance (Woods 2010), with the purpose of rematerializing studies on rurality and their influence on authentic rural experiences and practices (Shubin 2006; see Figure 1).

With the swift and violent development of rural gentrification (Nelson, Trautman, and Nelson 2015; Phillips and Smith 2018) and amenity migration (Gosnell and Abrams 2011; Sánchez 2017), the development of rural agricultural has gradually been replaced by nonagricultural land use dominated by the service industry (Darling 2005; McCarthy 2008; Romstad 2010; Willemen et al. 2010). On the one hand, the rural has been consumed (Eusebio et al. 2017), community livelihood has improved, and rural society has been rejuvenated. On the other hand, the ecological environment has suffered from degradation, with traditional villages reduced to placeless spaces (Zhao 2019). For this hybrid and networked space (Woods 2009), the threefold ruralities (Halfacree 2006; Mahon 2007) have undergone a transition to multifunctional rural areas comprising agricultural production, ecological conservation, social community, cultural heritage, recreation, and tourism (Holmes 2008; De Rosa, McElwee, and
Smith 2019; see Figure 1). Furthermore, influenced by rural gentrification and tourism commercialization, rural heritage communities began suffering serious creative destruction (Mitchell and Vanderwerf 2010; Mitchell 2013), such as noise pollution, cultural alienation, and the extinction of the former harmonious and peaceful neighborhood atmosphere.

From the perspective of humanistic geography, rurality is subordinate to place attachment in the countryside (J. Zhang, Zhong, and Lu 2014), and the rural has become a “place” that interacts directly with the body senses and then generates emotional attachment (S. Y. Zhou 2017), rather than just a “space” of material environment and social systems, which had been distinguished and interpreted by Tuan (1977, 2006, 2012) and discussed by Turner (2002) on “geography as a spatial-chorological approach” or “the human–environment subject” (53). Accordingly, for sounds, the media between human and environment (Ji 2019), sound experience creates, influences, and shapes our habitual relationship with the specific environment (Truax 1984). Furthermore, soundscape is considered by sensuous geographies as a process involved in the sound environment (Rodaway 1994), a dynamic, place-making, and even culturally informed audiovisual process (Curtin 2014), which brought about the “sonic turn” of geographic research (Gallagher and Prior 2014; Gallagher, Kanngieser, and Prior 2017).

Rurality and Soundscape
Exactly as The Language of Landscape, rural sounds must be the language of landscape as well: “We see, smell, hear, touch, and taste landscapes through materials” (Spirn 1998, 97). Carolan (2008) observed that the embodiment of rurality goes beyond social constructions; a walker, for example, also experiences the contours, sounds, and smells of rurality in a physical, sensory manner (Wylie 2003). Rather than city noise that urban inhabitants sought to escape, rural sounds “played a vital role in daily life in the countryside” (Garrioch 2003, 6), making them part of the rural auditory community (Truax 1984, 2001). As “birds are emblematic natural elements of landscapes” (Queiroz and Soares 2016, 228), and soundscapes can be considered the “auditory properties of landscapes” (Truax 1999, 1), can rurality, which is strongly related to wild nature and farming life, be possessed by any of the auditory properties of the countryside, namely the rural soundscapes?

The soundscape was officially defined as the “acoustic environment as perceived or experienced and/or understood by a person or people, in context” (International Organization for Standardization 2014, 12913-1, 1). Schafer and the World Soundscape Project researchers recorded the rural sounds of birdsong in village woods, church bells, and whistles; they found that changing rural soundscapes could strengthen the experience and memory of the specific space in the villages (Schafer 1977). Compared with the booming research on urban soundscapes (e.g., Garrioch 2003; Sahera and Cetin 2016; Kang and Schulte-Fortkamp 2018), the rural soundscape has been relatively inadequately researched (e.g., Gibson and Davidson 2004; Matless 2005; Daugstad 2008; Matsinos et al. 2008; M. M. Chen 2017; Ren et al. 2018), and little theoretical research has focused on the dual correlations between the rural soundscape and rurality. The rural soundscapes in agricultural societies were kept in a “hi-fi” state of distinctly tonal discrimination, but, since the industrial revolution, the roaring machines have caused the rural soundscape to descend from “hi-fi” to “lo-fi” (Schafer 1994). In a monograph on soundscape ecology, Farina (2014) found that rural soundscapes were rather different from urban environments; along a gradient of increased human intrusion, geophonics (geographical sounds) seemed unaffected. For rural soundscapes, as an intermediate spectrum between wild and urban soundscapes, biophonies (biological sounds) showed a clear decrease, and anthrophonies (anthropic, or human-made, sounds) increased (Figure 2).

Beyond the acoustic characteristics of sound environment, soundscape is a crucial term for conceptualizing how sounds make a particular place more meaningful (Saldanha 2009); it mainly refers to the acoustical values of natural ecological, aesthetic, and cultural functions (Farina 2014). Ecological acoustic surveying is a useful way of monitoring habitats, where acoustic indexes are used to measure biodiversity by summarizing the activity or diversity of biotic sounds (Fairbrass et al. 2017). In this sense, rural natural soundscapes can be considered acoustic indexes of rurality to be measured and monitored.

Sounds tend to occur in specific spaces at specific times, so soundscapes, being made of sounds, are endowed with those same typical meanings and cultural values (D. Hall and Gathercole 2011). Therefore, a certain soundscape might trigger place attachment to a specific space (Carles, Barrio, and de Lucio 1999), such as a rural soundscape conjuring up place attachment to the countryside. In the absence of urban noise, quiet and tranquility in the rural soundscape as an important “inside quality,” as an asset and as authentic, might increase the attractiveness of rural areas, and different stakeholders such as farmers, operators, and tourists might seek authentic rural life in a living countryside through experiencing the rural idyll in a multisensory way (Daugstad 2008). This statement was supported by the “hi-fi” rural soundscape, which can be clearly perceived due to low ambient noise in quiet rural areas (Schafer 1977; Farina 2014) and can often be
recognized as signal sounds of farming activities in different seasons (Schafer 2019). Rural soundscapes can thus be listed among the qualities of the rural and defined as the acoustic characteristics of rurality, namely, acoustic rurality.

Rurality and Rural Soundscapes in China’s Past and Present Countryside

Chinese Countryside of “Harmonizing Man and Nature”
In Design with Nature, McHarg (1991) analyzed the relationship between man and nature by comparison and proposed that all environmental planning and landscape design should follow the laws of nature with the ecological view that an indivisible dependence exists between human and natural environments, “harmonizing man and nature.” The ancient Chinese pursued a harmonious coexistence between man and nature. In particular, Taoists advocated human life as being in harmony with nature; thus, Fengshui (geomantic omen) in Chinese rural and urban construction regarded the settlements and their surrounding natural environment as a whole.

Fengshui, a knowledge domain of Chinese environmental selection (P. Liu 1996) and of geography unique to China (X. Li et al. 2019), places great emphasis on the livable human settlement and land use of “Harmonizing Man and Nature” involving geography, meteorology, ecology, environmental planning, landscape, and architecture (Sun et al. 2014; Kory 2016). The village settlements hidden in fields, gardens, forests, and mountains highlighted the ultimate beauty of nature (B. Chen et al. 2018)—for instance, an ancient village in southwestern Fujian Province with Back Dragon Mountain and Fengshui forests behind it, a stream and lake to the sides, and a sacred temple of the god of earth and an ancestral lineage hall in the lair (see A3 in Figure 3).

From the perspective of landscape, rural landscapes are rural dreamscapes (dreamlike landscapes; Stilgor 2005), and Chinese historic villages gave prominence to rural poetic dwelling idylls of Shangri-la, which had been affected by Chinese classical gardens, pastoral poetry, and landscape painting (P. Liu 2016; see A1 in Figure 3). Whether in the eight views or twelve volumes of Records of Xinghua Village, the village in Anhui Province was a land of idyllic beauty (see A2 in Figure 3), where mountains and rivers, birds and beasts, and fields were deeply treasured; ecologically sound mountains and forests abounded; and with the crops growing well in croplands and farms and the husbandmen living tranquil and leisurely lives in a harmonious neighborhood. Currently, after hundreds of years of place branding, the historic village has become the prototype for and demonstration of the practical construction of China’s beautiful countryside and its rural tourism landscape development.

Rural Soundscapes in the Chinese Countryside
McLuhan (2000) noted the highly developed aural sensitivity of the Chinese people and that “China is almost certainly the world-renowned country which made full use of various sounds to generate an aesthetic setting” (S. Wang 2001, 239). Until the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Tao Yuanming, the founder of the pastoral poetry school, created the ideal pastoral mode of the Chinese literati with the nostalgic image of “cocks crowing and dogs barking” (M. M. Chen 2018; R. Li and Wei 2020).

In the rural descriptions of pastoral poets, such as Wang Wei, Meng Haoran, and other famous poets of the Tang Dynasty, soundscapes became essential elements of the countryside and the rural symphony. Specifically, wild birds were singing in the Fengshui forest in an ancient village, frogs croaking in the pond, water trucks rattling by the stream, insects and frogs singing in the field, cows mooing in the cowpen, dragon boats competing in the lake, and local operas performing in the ancestral hall (see B1–B5 in Figure 3). Practically speaking, the epitome of Chinese rurality and “collective imaginaries might constitute appropriate visions for rural futures” (Shucksmith 2018, 164).

Rural Sound Environment Contaminated Today
Similar to urban syndromes, the Chinese countryside has been infected with rural syndromes (He 2018), including environmental pollution such as soil pollution, water pollution, noise pollution, and garbage pollution (see C1–C3 in Figure 3). With quite a few dirty heavy industries transferring from the cities to rural areas, the rapidly developing towns and villages in Chinese rural areas are increasingly suffering from waste, sewage, and the like, which
1. Chinese countryside of “Harmonizing Man and Nature”
2. Rural soundscapes in Chinese countryside
3. Rural sound environment contaminated

A1
Painting of a different land in Taoyuan by Wen Zhengming (1470-1559)

A2
Master plan of Xinghua Village in Records of Xinghua Village (1685)

A3
An ancient village with a Hakka tuolou in southwest Fujian (Photo: Jesse Minor)

b1
Wild birdsong

b2
Tranquil countryside with the sounds of running water

b3
Farmland with croaking of frogs

b4
Farm livestock in the village

b5
Traditional dragon boat race

c1
No frogs croaking in the pond caused by garbage and pollution.

c2
No insects in the field caused by overuse of chemical fertilizer

c3
Rumbling noises from large trucks outside the village

c4
Gambling noise from the farmer's home

Figure 3 Rurality and rural soundscapes in Chinese ancient and present countryside. Source: Photos B1–5 are of ancient Chinese villages and were taken by the first author. Photos C1–4 are from online news reports: C1, Guo (2016); C2, Jiang (2017); C3, Cheng (2014); C4, Xiang (2018.)

has driven the frogs and fish into polluted rivers and lakes and further into extinction (Z. Wang, Chen, and Zhang 2019; see C1 and C2 in Figure 3). The countryside is now at risk of being reduced to “silent fields.” In the absence of natural sounds in the wilderness and countryside, the lifeless scenes that could quite possibly befall our soundscapes were described in Silent Spring (Carson 1962) as “a spring without voices” (2). The contaminated sound environment in the countryside remains to be regulated and improved, with the view of environmental justice and ecosystem services (Mullin et al. 2018).

Undoubtedly, even if the countryside is silent with no wild sounds, man-made and mechanical noise do not fill the silence in a positive way and are not designed to be popular or create pleasant soundscapes (see C3 and C4 in Figure 3). It has been reported that the warm tones of the local operas, folk and fishing songs, gongs and drums, lion dancing, and country movies heard in the countryside’s past have been increasingly replaced by the disharmonious sounds of playing mahjong and gambling; as noted in Xiang (2018), “the sounds of playing mahjong can be heard in every home during the Spring Festival” (see C4 in Figure 3).

Acoustic Rurality as a Choice in Rural Development

The countryside in China has been exposed to increasingly serious city-level noise pollution from
Figure 4 Rural planning based on the choice of acoustic rurality.

the noise of rural and small-town enterprises and dense traffic. Efforts toward maintaining and preserving the unique personalities of specific countryside areas remain insufficient in rural development planning in most countries (Ndoro, Mumma, and Abungu 2009). Ruralization, “the changing lifestyle towards functional rurality” (Chigbu 2015, 1069), can be constructed as a possible choice for rural communities to pursue revival development (Krause 2013), so that rural settlements are reformed into places for living, working, tourism, and leisure (Bryceson 1996; Krause 2013; Mercer 2017). To sustain the indispensable characteristic of being rural in the countryside, “rurality as a choice” should be considered in physical planning for rural sustainable development rather than urbanizing the rural (Chigbu 2013a).

In this article, practical lessons were drawn from four main contexts of achieving rural development focused on rurality through planning: environment and ecology, living conditions and infrastructure, agriculture and working conditions, and society and culture (Liu 2002; Chigbu 2013b). Similar to the idea of natural soundscapes as natural resources, natural sounds—singing sands, water, birds, insects, and frogs—should be treated as valuable natural resources such as water, land, and minerals (Krause 2002). Accordingly, wild soundscapes, especially the sound of wildlife, animals, and other living things, are essential elements of environmentally friendly countryside living. It can be seen that rurality as a choice can be applied to preserving and developing rural soundscapes through planning based on the choice of acoustic rurality (Figure 4).

Figure 4 is designed to show how rural soundscape planning can serve the purpose of creating a livable and sustainable rural environment based on acoustic rurality. On the left side of Figure 4 are different stages of rural soundscape planning activities, which govern the choices and processes of acoustic rurality–focused development. In accordance with the four categories of tranquil, biophonic, anthrophonic, and social soundscapes, we recommend four main contexts of planning based on the choice of acoustic rurality.

Quiet and Tranquility Soundscapes

In terms of assessing and managing environmental noise, the European Environmental Noise Directive recommended preserving and establishing quiet areas (European Parliament and Council 2002). Quiet and tranquility were regarded as the core features of the countryside within the UK government’s rural white paper (“Rural England” 1995), and a survey showed that tranquility was considered the most positive feature of the countryside (Hewlett et al. 2017). All in all, in the quiet and tranquil countryside of “hi-fi” soundscapes (Votsi et al. 2012; Watts and Pheasant 2013), most sounds can be heard so clearly because there are fewer man-made noises that the wild rural soundscapes dominated by singing birds and insects can perform the
vigorous and enjoyable rhythm of the authentic countryside and acoustic rurality.

Wild Soundscapes
Acoustic ecology in animal soundscape studies emphasizes the consequences of human-induced noise disturbance on an avian community and the ecological characteristics of biotic songs in the natural habitats (Pieretti, Farina, and Morri 2011; Sueur and Farina 2015). Furthermore, there is a close correspondence between wild soundscapes and geographic features (“lo-fi” or “hi-fi”) because “every natural soundscape has its own unique tones and often these are so original as to constitute soundmarks” (Schafer 1994, 26).

Domestic Soundscapes
In developing countries, associated with poultry farming, domestic dogs in rural communities play many important roles in rural households (Wittmeyer et al. 2008; Sepúlveda et al. 2014). Other domesticated animals are important as primary sources of meat, milk, fat, hides, labor, and companionship (De Haan et al. 2001; Romanach, Lindsey, and Woodroffe 2007). In southern Mexico, livestock breeds often appear to contribute to local identity (Amador-Alcalá, Naranjo, and Jiménez-Ferrer 2013), so grazing livestock is sufficient to define rurality (S. J. G. Hall 2004). In this way, the sounds of the raised livestock and poultry in rural communities can constitute the acoustic community (Truax 1984), where dogs barking, cocks crowing, and cows mooing can become the integral soundmarks of specific rural communities.

Social and Communal Soundscapes
In the context of intangible cultural heritage, “sounds constitute an inevitable part of daily life and are therefore very important as ICH [intangible cultural heritage]” (Yelmi 2016, 302). Church bells and calls to prayer dominated the rhythm of rural life (O’Connor 2008) and determined the identity of the collective and individual, as was concluded by Corbin (2003) regarding the sounds and sensory culture of the French countryside. The characteristics of rural landscapes and country music reinforce each other (Gibson and Davidson 2004). In this sense, rural cultural and historical soundscapes are crucial for creating a sense of place and maintaining cultural identity, namely, culturally acoustic rurality in the countryside. All in all, acoustic rurality is laden with ecological and cultural significance.

Proposed Guidelines for Sustainable Rural Soundscape Development

Noise Control and Protection of Quiet and Tranquil Countryside
Noise was progressively recognized as a serious environmental pollution and health hazard in almost every big city in developed countries, so European policy on measuring and mapping noise pollution has been forcefully put into effect over the past decades (Adams et al. 2006). Since the 1970s, more than ten important policies on natural soundscapes in protected areas have been issued (Newman, Manning, and Treviño 2010), all with the intent to enact the protection, maintenance, or restoration of the natural soundscape resource. In particular, the Campaign to Protect Rural England (CPRE) appraised quiet areas in 1995 and reported that tranquil rural areas were threatened by traffic noise and construction activities. CPRE used noise maps to create opportunities to enjoy the peaceful and tranquil countryside while conserving bird populations and without depressing human disturbance (Drewitt 2007).

According to the Environmental Quality Standard for Noise (GB3096-2008; Ministry of Environmental Protection of the People’s Republic of China 2008), the urban and rural sound environment is divided into five classes, and the first class for psychological restoration and recuperation was ranked by quietest areas (40 dBA_{night}–50 dBA_{day}), the second class for the next quietest village community (45–55), the third class for the residential and country fair village (50–60), the fourth class for the village on manufacturing industry (55–65), and the fifth class for the village next to a main traffic line (60–70). With regard to planning based on the choice of acoustic rurality, all kinds of mechanical noise sources should be controlled and a quiet and tranquil countryside and “hi-fi” rural soundscapes should be reconstructed by masking traffic noise with water sounds (Nilsson et al. 2010).

Conserving Wildlife Habitats of Rural Wild Soundscapes
As mentioned previously, the acoustic signals, particularly biophony soundscapes, have been used as a proxy for biodiversity estimates (Reide 1993; Sueur et al. 2008; Pijanowski et al. 2011). For the encouragement of a biophony soundscape in rural areas, habitats and food sources must be provided for wildlife by making full use of the natural landscape and rural landscapes, other fields and gardens, and orchards and meadows—which could be considered habitats and biotopes for biodiversity conservation (Verberk et al. 2006). Since the enactment of the Hedgerow Regulations (CPRE 1997), hedgerows
have been recognized as ecological corridors that protect the habitat and survival of wildlife, increase the quiet of the countryside by providing noise barriers, and provide an important cultural service through their heritage value as part of the British landscape (Gosling et al. 2016).

In Lucid Waters and Lush Mountains Are Invaluable Assets: Strategies and Actions for China’s Ecological Civilization, the United Nations Environment Programme (2016) issued an environmental report indicating that China advocated harmonious coexistence between humans and nature (B. Liu 2019) and stuck to the path of green and sustainable development (F. Zhang, Lu, and Yi 2020). The National Rural Greening Planning (2018–2025) (Office of China’s National Greening Committee 2019) and the Implementation Plan of the Rural Greening and Beautification Project had been formulated to improve the livable level of rural ecology and consolidate the ecological basis of agricultural and rural modernization. The Technical Guidelines for Agricultural Green Development (2018–2030) (Ministry of Agriculture and Countryside of China 2018) focused on improving the human settlements environment and put forward soundscape planning and land use transformation strategies from the various aspects of infrastructure, rural public space construction, human settlements environment construction, and ecological protection through dredging silted river channels and ponds, reducing the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, and clearing garbage.

Safeguarding Cultural Soundscape Heritages

“Soundscape as part of the cultural heritage” (Maffei, Brambilla, and Gabriele 2016, 215) can represent social, spiritual, historical, and cultural memories related to a specific place and society (O’Connor 2008; Kato 2009); rural soundscape (music) festivals might create new sonic identities and foster community well-being through contested traditions (Connell and Gibson 2011; Duffy and Waitt 2011); therefore, it is necessary to safeguard cultural and historical soundscapes in the countryside. Meanwhile, the country music might produce rural nostalgic myths and idyllic rural landscapes by staging music festivals, promoting rural places, and encouraging cultural industries from music, festivals, and tourism (Gibson 2002). Consequently, ruralities were performed by rural idyll marketing campaigns (Gibson and Davidson 2004) and triggered by country music through sounds (Connell and Gibson 2003).

The Chinese central government formulated and implemented the National Strategic Plan for Rural Vitalization (Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and State Council 2018), which put emphasis on rural cultural vitalization by taking full advantage of various resources and functions of the countryside and planning the rural cultural construction as a whole. Pilot projects of cultural soundscape heritages have been constantly conducted in multiple regions and departments of China, such as The Voice of Countryside established by Zhejiang Province, the Technology & Evaluation of Soundscape Heritages between China and Croatia, the Tianjin Dialect Sound Archives Project, and the Sound Recording Action.

Developing Recreational Soundscapes for Rural Tourism

In Europe, the birthplace of rural tourism, rurality was always deemed to be an important concept for interpreting the rural and rural tourism (Willits, Bealer, and Timbers 2010). According to L. Zhou (2014), “rural tourism and rurality are intertwined” (227). In rural tourism destinations, the rural space and its rurality are negotiated, commercialized, and consumed (Lacy and Douglass 2002; Frisvoll 2012, 2013), and the complex representations of rurality are deeply embedded in farmland use, everyday life, cultural traditions, and social actions (Halfacree 2007; Frisvoll 2012). Moreover, the multisensory rurality is authentic in a rural tourism destination where the “benefits of sensory experiences were indivisible” (Stålhammar and Pedersen 2017, 5). The countryside capital would attract rural tourists to experience authentic rurality in multisensory ways in the relaxing and comfortable atmosphere of the tranquilly thriving countryside (Bunce 1994; Holloway and Hubbard 2001).

As a major means for rural growth, rural tourism can offer more opportunities to market and brand rural landscapes and heritage (Butler and Hall 1998) and generate and diversify the farmers’ revenues (Park and Yoon 2008). First, tranquility and natural sounds should be subsumed into the management and identification of rural green tourism (Votsi et al. 2014). Second, more biophilic outdoor recreation projects of rural soundscapes should be reasonably developed and meticulously planned; for instance, “Listening to Nature” for children and the visually impaired. Third, programs for experiencing the agrestic daily experiences in village communities, such as livestock farming and poultry breeding, should be implemented (Walmsley 2003; Lu and Zhang 2015). In China’s rural tourism development of ethnic villages, quite a few ritual soundscapes such as folk songs, indigenous performance, and aboriginal dances have been reinvented and developed into sustainable cultural soundscape heritages (D. W. Li, Li, and Ma 2018; see B5 in Figure 3), which could demonstrate a new rurality for China’s rural tourism destinations (Véron 2019).

Conclusions

To conclude, acoustic rurality is rural soundscapes of human–environmental sustainability, and it is able
to convey diverse perspectives and emotions associated with authentic rural lives that have been interpreted and enrolled into the multifunctional countryside. Toward the sensuous geography of rural soundscape as a sonic record in humanistic views of acoustic landscape, this study recognizes acoustic rurality, the rural soundscapes, and rural development by examining the major changes of rural sound environments. First, regarding rural soundscapes as the rural identity, broadening this study to include perspectives of the fundamental theory, planning ideas, and technical methods of acoustic rurality is recommended. In addition to advancing the exploratory understanding of acoustic rurality, this study suggests future research on both rural soundscapes and development. Second, this study has demonstrated the importance of and the need for rural soundscape planning of acoustic rurality. Directly related to the habitability and attraction of rural settlements, rural soundscapes could provide rural residents and urban visitors with various functions such as livelihood, recreation, vacation, and tourism in promoting and preserving their rural features.

On the basis of reviewing the research literature on rurality and rural soundscape, this normative research of acoustic rurality was carried out in a problem-oriented setting, in particular the specific sonic problems identified in the Chinese countryside. In view of further research, an interdisciplinary conceptual model of acoustic rurality from macro- and microscales remains to be constructed, particularly combined with rural and sonic geographies. For one thing, it is of great importance to create a bridge between rural geography and sonic geography on the everyday environmental experience level comprising the quantitative measurements, assessment system, spatiotemporal process, characteristics, and mechanisms of acoustic rurality in more types of typical cases. For another, it is necessary for multidisciplinary researchers worldwide to investigate more diverse geographical scopes of acoustic rurality, improve more feasible proposed guidelines for sustainable rural soundscape development, and select more scientific, reasonable, and comprehensive measurements of acoustic rurality for future research.

Acknowledgments

We thank the six anonymous reviewers for their insightful and meticulous comments on an earlier draft of the article in three rounds of revision.

Funding

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 41571136 and 41971173).

Literature Cited

Adams, M., T. Cox, G. Moore, B. Croxford, M. Refaei, and S. Sharples. 2006. Sustainable soundscapes: Noise policy and the urban experience. Urban Studies 43 (13): 2385–98. doi: 10.1080/00420980600972504.

Agapito, D. 2018. A contribution to marketing sustainable and innovative sensory-themed tourist experiences in rural destinations. Paper presented at the International Conference on Sustainable Tourism, Hong Kong, May 17.

Agapito, D., J. Mendes, and P. Valle. 2013. Exploring the conceptualization of the sensory dimension of tourist experiences. Journal of Destination Marketing & Management 2 (2):62–73. doi: 10.1016/j.jdmm.2013.03.001.

Agapito, D., P. Pinto, and J. Mendes. 2017. Tourists’ memories, sensory impressions and loyalty: In loco and post-visit study in Southwest Portugal. Tourism Management 58: 108–18. doi: 10.1016/j.tourman.2016.10.015.

Agapito, D., P. Valle, and J. Mendes. 2012. Sensory marketing and tourist experiences. Spatial and Organizational Dynamics Discussion Papers 2012-5. Research Centre for Spatial and Organizational Dynamics, University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal.

Amador-Alcalá, S., E. J. Naranjo, and G. Jiménez-Ferrer. 2013. Wildlife predation on livestock and poultry: Implications for predator conservation in the rainforest of south-east Mexico. Oryx 47 (2):243–50. doi: 10.1017/S0030605311001359.

Bosworth, G., and P. Somerville. 2013. Interpreting rurality: Multidisciplinary approaches. London and New York: Routledge.

Bryceson, D. F. 1996. De-agrarianization and rural employment in sub-Saharan Africa: A sectoral perspective. World Development 24 (1):97–111. doi: 10.1016/0305-750X(95)00119-W.

Bunce, M. 1994. The countryside ideal. London and New York: Routledge.

Butler, R. W., and M. C. Hall. 1998. Imaging and re-imaging of rural areas. In Tourism and recreation in rural areas, ed. R. W. Butler, M. C. Hall, and J. Jenkins, 115–22. Chichester, UK: Wiley.

Campaign to Protect Rural England. 2003. CPRE’s guide to quiet lanes. Accessed August 13, 2003. http://www.cpre.org.uk/resources/transport/roads/item/1867-cpre-guide-to-quiet-lanes.

Carles, J. L., I. L. Barrio, and J. V. de Lucio. 1999. Sound influence on landscape values. Landscape and Urban Planning 43 (4):191–200. doi: 10.1016/S0169-2046(98)00112-1.

Carolán, M. S. 2008. More-than-representational knowledge/s of the countryside: How we think as bodies. Sociologia Ruralis 48 (4):408–22. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9523.2008.00458.x.

Carson, R. L. 1962. Silent spring. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and State Council. 2018. National strategic plan for rural revitalization (2018–2022). Accessed August 30, 2018. http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2018-09/26/content_5325534.htm.

Chen, B., C. Coggins, J. Minor, and Y. Zhang. 2018. Fengshui forests and village landscapes in China: Geographic extent, socioecological significance, and
conservation prospects. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening 31:79–92. doi: 10.1016/j.ufug.2017.12.011.
Chen, M. M. 2017. Conservation-oriented development of vernacular soundscapes in rural areas. China Ancient City 2:57–61. doi: 10.3969/j.issn.1674-4144.2017.02.010.
Chen, M. M. 2018. Soundscape image of human settlements from the perspective of human and environment. China Ancient City 4:40–44. doi: CNKI:SUN:ZGMI.0.2018-04-007.
Cheng, L. 2014. A village in Huangshi, Hubei Province is besieged by 14 steel mills with constant noise and dust. Accessed April 30, 2020. http://news.163.com/14/0818/10/A3U56DH0001124J.html.
Chigbu, U. E. 2013a. Fostering rural sense of place: The missing piece in Uturu, Nigeria. Development in Practice 23 (2):264–77. doi: 10.1080/09614524.2013.772120.
Chigbu, U. E. 2013b. Rurality as a choice: Towards ruralizing rural areas in sub-Saharan African countries. Development Southern Africa 30 (6):812–25. doi: 10.1080/0376835X.2013.859067.
Chigbu, U. E. 2015. Ruralisation: A tool for rural transformation. Development in Practice 25 (7):1067–73. doi: 10.1080/09614524.2015.1071783.
Cloke, P. 2006. Conceptualizing rurality. In Handbook of rural studies, ed. P. Cloke, T. Marsden, and P. Mooney, 18–27. London: Sage.
Cloke, P., and J. Little. 1997. Contested countryside cultures: Otherness, marginality and rurality. London and New York: Routledge.
Connell, J., and C. Gibson. 2003. Sound tracks: Popular music, identity and place. London and New York: Routledge.
Connell, J., and C. Gibson. 2011. Elvis in the country: Transforming place in rural Australia. In Festival places: Revitalising rural Australia, ed. C. Gibson and J. Connell, 175–207. Bristol, UK: Channel View.
Corbin, A. 2003. Village bells: Sound and meaning in the 19th-century French countryside. Guilin, China: Guangxi Normal University Press.
Curtin, A. 2014. Avant-garde theatre sound: Staging sonic modernity. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Darling, E. 2005. The city in the country: Wilderness gentrification and the rent gap. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 37 (6):1015–32. doi: 10.1068/a37158.
Daugstad, K. 2008. Negotiating landscape in rural tourism. Annals of Tourism Research 35 (2):402–26. doi: 10.1016/j.annals.2007.10.001.
De Haan, C., T. S. Van Veen, B. Brandenburg, J. Gauthier, L. G. Francois, R. Mearns, and M. Simeon. 2001. Livestock development: Implications on rural poverty, the environment, and global food security. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
De Rosa, M., G. McElwee, and R. Smith. 2019. Farm diversification strategies in response to rural policy: A case from rural Italy. Land Use Policy 81:291–301. doi: 10.1016/j.landusepol.2018.11.006.
Drewitt, A. L. 2007. Birds and recreational disturbance. Ibis 149(1–2). doi: 10.1111/j.1474-919X.2007.00663.x.
Duffy, M. K., and G. R. Waitt. 2011. Rural festivals and processes of belonging. In Festival places: Revitalising rural Australia, ed. C. Gibson and J. Connell, 109–22. Bristol, UK: Channel View.
Edensor, T. 2000. Walking in the British countryside: Reflexivity, embodied practices and ways to escape. Body & Society 6 (3–4):81–106. doi: 10.1177/1357034X00006003005.
European Parliament and Council. 2002. Directive 2002/49/EC relating to the assessment and management of environmental noise. Official Journal of the European Communities 18 (7):12–26.
Eusebio, C., M. J. Carneiro, E. Kastenholz, E. Figueiredo, and D. S. da Silva. 2017. Who is consuming the countryside? An activity-based segmentation analysis of the domestic rural tourism market in Portugal. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Management 31:197–210. doi: 10.1016/j.jhtm.2016.12.006.
Everett, S. 2008. Beyond the visual gaze? The pursuit of an embodied experience through food tourism. Tourist Studies 8 (3):337–58. doi: 10.1177/1468797608100594.
Fairbrass, A. J., P. Rennert, C. Williams, H. Titheridge, and K. E. Jones. 2017. Biases of acoustic indices measuring biodiversity in urban areas. Ecological Indicators 83 (12):169–77. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.07.064.
Farina, A. 2014. Soundscape ecology: Principles, patterns, methods and applications. Berlin: Springer.
Fei, X., and T. Chang. 1948. Earthbound China: A study of rural economy in Yunnan. London and New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Figueiredo, E. 2009. One rural, two visions—Environmental issues and images on rural areas in Portugal. European Countryside 1 (1):9–21. doi: 10.2478/v10091-009-0002-8.
Figueiredo, E., E. Kastenholz, and J. Lima. 2013. Recreating rurality—Visions of hosts and guests in two Portuguese villages. In Fertile links? Connections between tourism activities, socioeconomic contexts and local development in European rural areas, ed. E. Figueiredo and A. Raschi, 43–70. Florence, Italy: Florence University Press.
Frissvoll, S. 2012. Power in the production of spaces transformed by rural tourism. Journal of Rural Studies 28 (4):447–57. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2012.06.001.
Frissvoll, S. 2013. Conceptualising authentication of ruralness. Annals of Tourism Research 43:272–96. doi: 10.1016/j.annals.2013.07.006.
Gallagher, M., A. Kanngieser, and J. Prior. 2017. Listening geographies: Landscape, affect and geotechnologies. Progress in Human Geography 41 (5):618–37. doi: 10.1177/0309132316652952.
Gallagher, M., and J. Prior. 2014. Sonic geographies: Exploring phonographic methods. Progress in Human Geography 38 (2):267–84. doi: 10.1177/0309132314538104.
Garrioch, D. 2003. Sounds of the city: The soundscape of early modern European towns. Urban History 30 (1):5–25. doi: 10.1017/S0963926803001019.
Gibson, C. 2002. Rural transformation and cultural industries: Popular music on the New South Wales far North Coast. Australian Geographical Studies 40 (3):337–56. doi: 10.1111/1467-8470.00184.
Gibson, C., and D. Davidson. 2004. Tamworth, Australia’s “country music capital”? Place marketing, rurality, and resident reactions. Journal of Rural Studies 20 (4):387–404. doi: 10.4324/9781315596778-8.
Gosling, L., T. H. Sparks, Y. Araya, M. Harvey, and J. Ansine. 2016. Differences between urban and rural hedges
in England revealed by a citizen science project. BMC Ecology 16 (S1):45–55. doi: 10.1186/s12898-016-0064-1.
Gosnell, H., and J. Abrams. 2011. Amenity migration: Diverse conceptualizations of drivers, socioeconomic dimensions, and emerging challenges. GeoJournal 76 (4): 303–22. doi: 10.1007/s10708-009-9295-4.
Grimes, S. 2000. Rural areas in the information society: Diminishing distance or increasing learning capacity? Journal of Rural Studies 16 (1):13–21. doi: 10.1016/S0743-0167(99)00027-3.
Guo, Z. 2016. Too dirty! Who is responsible for serious rural environmental pollution? Accessed April 30, 2020. https://m.sohu.com/a/104857166_131990.
Halfacree, K. 1993. Locality and representation: Space, discourse and alternative definitions of the rural. Journal of Rural Studies 9 (1):23–37. doi: 10.1016/0743-0167(93)90003-3.
Halfacree, K. 2006. Rural space: Constructing a three-fold architecture. In Handbook of rural studies, ed P. Cloke, T. Marsden, and P. H. Mooney, 44–62. London: Sage.
Halfacree, K. 2007. Trial by space for a “radical rural”: Introducing alternative localities, representations and lives. Journal of Rural Studies 23 (2):125–41. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2006.10.002.
Hall, D., and S. E. Gathercole. 2011. Serial recall of rhythms and verbal sequences: Impacts of concurrent tasks and irrelevant sound. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 64 (8):1580–92. doi: 10.1080/17470218.2011.564636.
Hall, S. J. G. 2004. Livestock biodiversity genetic resources for the farming of the future. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science.
Harrington, L. M. B. 2018. Alternative and virtual rurality: Agriculture and the countryside as embodied in American imagination. Geographical Review 108 (2): 250–73. doi: 10.1111/gere.12245.
He, S. 2018. Rural disease and its response in the perspective of rural vitalization from multiple field surveys. Huixiang Forum 5:62–69. doi: 10.16479/j.cnki.cn43-1160/d.2018.05.008.
Hewlett, D., T. Munro, L. Harding, A. Terradillos, and K. Wilkinson. 2017. Broadly engaging with tranquility in protected landscapes: A matter of perspective identified in GIS. Landscape and Urban Planning 158:185–201. doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2016.11.002.
Holloway, L., and P. Hubbard. 2001. People and place: The extraordinary geographies of everyday life. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing.
Holmes, J. 2008. Impulses towards a multifunctional transition in rural Australia: Interpreting regional dynamics in landscapes, lifestyles and livelihoods. Landscape Research 33 (2):211–23. doi: 10.1080/01426390801912089.
Hu, X., H. Li, X. Zhang, and Y. Yuan. 2020. On the recognition of rural definitions. Acta Geographica Sinica 75 (2):398–409. doi: 10.11821/dlxh202002013.
Huang, Q., and K. Bai. 2020. Translocal rurality production and presentation of Yuanjia village of Shaanxi province. Geographical Research 39 (4):922–38. doi: 10.11821/dlyj20190360.
International Organization for Standardization. 2014. ISO 12913-1:2014 Acoustics—Soundscape part 1: Definition and conceptual framework. Geneva: International Organization for Standardization.
Ji, L. 2019. Thinking communication from soundscape theory: Sound, space and auditory culture. Journal of International Communication 41 (3):24–41. doi: 10.13495/j.cncj.cjcj.2019.03.002.
Jiang, H. 2017. Why does China need a lot of imported grain even with a good agricultural harvest every year? Accessed April 30, 2020. https://www.sohu.com/a/207499358_747995.
Kaaristo, M. 2014. Value of silence: Mediating aural environments in Estonian rural tourism. Journal of Tourism and Cultural Change 12 (3):267–79. doi: 10.1080/14766825.2014.939366.
Kang, J., and B. Schulte-Fortkamp. 2018. Soundscape and the built environment. Boca Raton, FL: Routledge/CRC.
Kato, K. 2009. Soundscape, cultural landscape and connectivity. Sites: A Journal of Social Anthropology and Cultural Studies 6 (2):80–91. doi: 10.11157/sites-vol6iss2id123.
Kordel, S. 2016. Selling ruralities: How tourist entrepreneurs commodify traditional and alternative ways of conceiving the countryside. Rural Society 25 (3):204–21. doi: 10.1080/10371656.2016.1255475.
Kory, S. N. 2016. Five classics of Fengshui: Chinese spiritual geography in historical and environmental perspective. Monumenta Serica 64 (1):201–3. doi: 10.1080/02549948.2016.1170346.
Krause, B. 2002. Wild soundscapes in the national parks: An educational program guide to listening and recording. California: US Department of the Interior, National Park Service.
Krause, M. 2013. The ruralisation of the world. Public Culture 25 (270):233–48. doi: 10.1215/08992363-2020575.
Kumar, S. 2018. Rural and rurality with truly performativity in human geography. International Journal of Academic Research and Development 3 (1):749–55.
Lacy, J. A., and W. A. Douglass. 2002. Beyond authenticity: The meanings and uses of cultural tourism. Tourist Studies 2 (1):5–21. doi: 10.1177/1468797602002001094.
Li, D. W., C. G. Li, and Z. P. Ma. 2018. Influence of tourism on local music and its construction to the place: A case study on the Lijiang ancient town. Progress in Geography 37 (6):833–43. doi: 10.18306/dlxj2018.06.010.
Li, R., and W. Wei. 2020. Ancient pastoral scenery from the cultural perspective: Taking peach blossom spring as an example. Architecture & Culture 1:120–22.
Li, X., W. Li, K. Smith, and A. C. Smith. 2019. Hidden from the wind and enjoying the water (藏风得水): The traditional cosmology of fengshui and the shaping of Dong villages in southwestern China. Landscape Research 44 (5):614–27. doi: 10.1080/01426397.2018.1481935.
Lichter, D. T., and D. L. Brown. 2011. Rural America in an urban society: Changing spatial and social boundaries. Annual Review of Sociology 37 (1):565–92. doi: 10.1146/annurev-soc-081309-150208.
Little, J., and M. Leyshon. 2003. Embodied rural geographies: Developing research agendas. Progress in Human Geography 27 (3):257–72. doi: 10.1191/0309132303ph427oa.
Liu, B. 2019. Extremization and collectivization: Philosophical thoughts on the development of human settlement environment. Chinese Landscape Architecture 35 (9):5–14. doi: 10.19775/j.cla.2019.09.0005.
Liu, C. 2002. The village renewal in Germany and its implication for Taiwan. Journal of Agricultural Economics 69: 129–63.

Liu, P. 1996. Geographical evaluation of Fengshui model. Human Geography 11 (3):36–40. doi: 10.13959/j.issn.1003-2398.1996.01.008.

Liu, P. 2016. Poetic dwelling: Chinese traditional human settlement and its modern enlightenment. Social Science Front 39 (10):25–33.

Long, H. L., J. Zou, and Y. S. Liu. 2009. Differentiation of rural development driven by industrialization and urbanization in Eastern coastal China. Habitat International 33 (4):454–62. doi: 10.1016/j.habitatint.2009.03.003.

Lu, F., and J. Zhang. 2015. Research on acoustic landscaping in rural tourism based on tourist perception. Journal of Sichuan Tourism Institute 17 (5):48–52. doi: 10.3969/j.issn.1008-5432.2015.05.015.

Maffei, L., G. Brambilla, and M. D. Gabriele. 2016. Soundscape as part of the cultural and natural heritage. In Soundscape and the built environment, ed. J. Kang and B. Schulte-Fortkamp, 215–42. Boca Raton, FL: CRC.

Mahon, M. 2007. New populations; shifting expectations: The changing experience of Irish rural space and place. Journal of Rural Studies 23 (3):345–56. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2007.01.006.

Mamonova, N., and L. A. Sutherland. 2015. Rural gentrification in Russia: Renegotiating identity, alternative food production and social tensions in the countryside. Journal of Rural Studies 42 (2):154–65. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2015.10.008.

Matless, D. 2005. Sonic geography in a nature region. Social & Cultural Geography 6 (5):745–66. doi: 10.1080/14649360500258245.

Matsinos, Y. G., A. D. Mazaris, K. D. Papadimitriou, A. Mnistris, G. Hatzigianidis, D. Maioglou, and J. D. Pantis. 2008. Spatio-temporal variability in human and natural sounds in a rural landscape. Landscape Ecology 23: 945–59. doi: 10.1007/s10980-008-9250-7.

McCarthy, J. 2008. Rural geography: Globalizing the countryside. Progress in Human Geography 32 (1):129–37. doi: 10.1177/0309132507082559.

McHarg, I. L. 1991. Design with nature. Beijing: China Architecture & Building Press.

McLuhan, M. 2000. Understanding media: The extensions of man. Beijing: The Commercial Press.

Mercer, C. 2017. Landscapes of extended ruralisation: Postcolonial suburbs in Dar es Salaam. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 42 (1):72–83. doi: 10.1111/tran.12150.

Ministry of Agriculture and Countryside of China. 2018. Technical guidelines for agricultural green development (2018–2030). July 6. http://www.moa.gov.cn/gk/ghjh_1/201807/t20180706_6153629.htm.

Ministry of Environmental Protection of the People’s Republic of China. 2008. Environmental Quality Standard for Noise (GB3096-2008). 2008-09-17. http://www.mee.gov.cn/gknl/hbl/bgg/200910/t20091022_174506.htm.

Mitchell, C. J. A. 2013. Creative destruction or creative enhancement? Understanding the transformation of rural spaces. Journal of Rural Studies 32:375–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2013.09.005.

Mitchell, C. J. A., and J. Vanderwerf. 2010. Creative destruction and trial by space in an historic Canadian village. Geographical Review 100 (3):356–74. doi: 10.1111/j.1931-0846.2010.00041.x.

Mormont, M. 1990. Who is rural? Or, how to be rural: Towards a sociology of the rural. In Critical perspectives on rural change series, ed T. Marsden, S. Whatmore, and P. Lowe, 21–44. London: David Fulton.

Mullin, K., G. Mitchell, N. R. Nawaz, and R. D. Waters. 2018. Natural capital and the poor in England: Towards an environmental justice analysis of ecosystem services in a high income country. Landscape and Urban Planning 176:10–21. doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2018.03.022.

Munkejord, M. C. 2006. Challenging discourses on rurality: Women and men immigrants’ constructions of the good life in a rural town in northern Norway. Sociologia Ruralis 46 (3):241–57. 2006.00415.x. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9523.

Natural England. 2015. National nature reserves in England. https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/national-nature-reserves-in-england/.

Ndoro, W., A. Mumma, and G. Abungu. 2009. Cultural heritage and the law: Protecting immovable heritage in English speaking countries of sub-Saharan Africa. Rome: UNESCO.

Nelson, L., L. Trautman, and P. Nelson. 2015. Latino immigrants and rural gentrification. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 105 (4):841–58. doi: 10.1080/00045608.2015.1052338.

Newman, P., R. Manning, and K. Treviño. 2010. From landscapes to soundscapes: Introduction to the special issue. Park Science 26 (3):2–5. doi: 10.1891/194589502787383182.

Nilsson, M. E., J. Alvarsson, M. Dsten-Ekman, and K. Bolin. 2010. Auditory masking of wanted and unwanted sounds in a city park. Noise Control Engineering Journal 58 (5):524–31. doi: 10.3397/1.3484182.

O’Connor, P. 2008. The sound of silence: Valuing acoustics in heritage conservation. Geographical Research 46 (3):361–73. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-5871.2008.00529.x.

Office of China’s National Greening Committee. 2019. Bulletin 2018 on China’s Land Greening. March 11. http://www.mnr.gov.cn/dt/ywbl/201903/t20190312_2398299.html.

Paniagua, A. 2016. An individual rural geography. The Professional Geographer 68 (3):511–18. 2015.1129909. doi: 10.1080/00330124.

Paquette, S., and G. Domon. 2003. Changing ruralities, changing landscapes: Exploring social recomposition using a multi-scale approach. Journal of Rural Studies 19 (4):425–44. doi: 10.1016/S0743-0167(03)00006-8.

Park, D. B., and Y. S. Yoon. 2008. Segmentation by motivation in rural tourism: A Korean case study. Tourism Management 30 (1):99–108. doi: 10.1016/j.tourman.2008.03.011.

Phillips, M. 2009. Counter urbanisation and rural gentrification: An exploration of the terms. Population, Space and Place 16 (6):539–58. doi: 10.1002/psp.570.

Phillips, M., and D. P. Smith. 2018. Comparative approaches to gentrification: Lessons from the rural.
Dialogues in Human Geography 8 (1):3–25. doi: 10.1177/2043820617752009.

Pieretti, N., A. Farina, and D. Morri. 2011. A new methodology to infer the singing activity of an avian community: The Acoustic Complexity Index (ACI). Ecological Indicators 11 (3):868–73. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2010.11.005.

Pijanowski, B. C., L. J. Villanueva-Rivera, S. Dumyahn, A. Farina, B. Krause, B. M. Napoletano, S. H. Gage, and N. Pieretti. 2011. Soundscape ecology: The science of sound in the landscape. BioScience 61 (3):203–16. doi: 10.1525/bio.2011.61.3.6.

Queiroz, A. I., and F. Soares. 2016. Birds in Portuguese literature. Environment and History 22 (2):228–54. doi: 10.3197/096734016X14574329314362.

Reide, K. 1993. Monitoring biodiversity: Analysis of Amazonian rainforest sounds. Ambio 22 (8):546–48.

Ren, X., J. Kang, P. Zhu, and S. Wang. 2018. Soundscape expectations of rural tourism: A comparison between Chinese and English potential tourists. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 143 (1):373–77. doi: 10.1121/1.5019466.

Rodaway, P. 1994. Sensuous geographies: Body, sense and place. London and New York: Routledge.

Romanach, S. S., P. A. Lindsey, and R. Woodroffe. 2007. Determinants of attitudes towards predators in central Kenya and suggestions for increasing tolerance in livestock dominated landscapes. Oryx 41 (2):185–95. doi: 10.1017/S0030605307001779.

Romstad, E. 2010. Multifunctional rural land management: Economics and policies. Journal of Agricultural Economics 61 (1):202–4. doi: 10.1111/j.1477-9552.2009.00239.x.

Rural England: A nation committed to a living countryside. 1995. White Paper (No. 3016). London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.

Sahera, K., and M. Cetin. 2016. Music and performance as sonic acts of political struggle; counter political soundscapes in urban. Sociology Study 6 (6):378–91. doi: 10.17265/2159-5526/2016.06.004.

Saldanha, A. 2009. Soundscape. In International encyclopedia of human geography, ed. R. Kitchin and N. Thrift, 236–40. Oxford, UK: Elsevier.

Sánchez, R. 2017. Leisure-tourism and amenity migration: Transformations observed in the semiarid mountain region of northern Chile. Journal of Tourism and Cultural Change 17 (2):1–16. doi: 10.1080/14766825.2017.1417992.

Schafer, R. M. 1977. Five village soundscapes. Vancouver, BC, Canada: A.R.C. Publications.

Schafer, R. M. 1994. The soundscape: Our sonic environment and the tuning of the world. Rochester, VT: Destiny Books.

Schafer, R. M. 2019. I’ve never seen a sound. Literature and Culture 10 (3):75–82. doi: 10.13896/j.cnki.wxwywh.2019.03.008.

Sepúlveda, M. A., R. S. Singer, E. Silva-Rodríguez, P. Stowhas, and K. Pelican. 2014. Domestic dogs in rural communities around protected areas: Conservation problem or conflict solution? PLoS ONE 9 (1):e86152. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086152.

Shubin, S. 2006. The changing nature of rurality and rural studies in Russia. Journal of Rural Studies 22 (4):422–40. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2006.02.004.

Shucksmith, M. 2018. Re-imagining the rural: From rural idyll to good countryside. Journal of Rural Studies 59: 163–72. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2016.07.019.

Sibley, D. 1995. Geographies of exclusion: Society and difference in the west. London and New York: Routledge.

Spurr, A. W. 1998. The language of landscape. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Stålahammer, S., and E. Pedersen. 2017. Recreational cultural ecosystem services: How do people describe the value? Ecosystem Services 26:1–9. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoser.2017.05.010.

Stilgor, J. R. 2005. Landscape and image. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.

Stockdale, A. 2010. The diverse geographies of rural gentrification in Scotland. Journal of Rural Studies 26 (1): 31–40. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2009.04.001.

Sueur, J., and F. Farina. 2015. Ecoacoustics: The ecological investigation and interpretation of environmental sound. Biosemiotics 8 (3):493–502. doi: 10.1007/s12304-015-9248-x.

Sueur, J., S. Pavoinne, O. Hamerlyncs, and S. Duvail. 2008. Rapid acoustic survey for biodiversity appraisal. PLoS ONE 3 (12):e4065. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004065.

Sun, F., C. Fang, Z. Wang, and T. Yan. 2014. The relationship between human and land and the basis of geomancy philosophy in China. Tropical Geography 34 (5): 581–90. doi: 10.13284/j.cnki.rddl.002596.

Truax, B. 1984. Acoustic communication. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Truax, B. 1999. Handbook of acoustic ecology. 2nd ed. Burnaby, BC, Canada: Cambridge Street.

Truax, B. 2001. Acoustic communication. 2nd ed. Westport, CT: Ablex.

Tuan, Y. F. 1977. Space and place: The perspectives of experience. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Tuan, Y. F. 2006. Humanistic geography: A personal view. Progress in Geography 25 (2):1–7. doi: 10.3969/j.issn.1007-6301.

Tuan, Y. F. 2012. Humanist geography: An individual’s search for meaning. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

Turner, B. L. 2002. Contested identities: Human–environment geography and disciplinary implications in a restructuring academy. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 92 (1):52–74. doi: 10.1111/1467-8306.00279.

United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 2016. Yearbook of International Environmental Law 27:481–88. doi: 10.1093/yiel/yvx069.

Verberk, W. C. E. P., G. A. Van Duinen, A. M. T. Brock, R. S. E. W. Leuven, H. Siepel, P. F. M. Verdoncschot, G. van der Velde, and H. Esselink. 2006. Importance of landscape heterogeneity for the conservation of aquatic macro-invertebrate diversity in bog landscapes. Journal for Nature Conservation 14 (2):78–90. doi: 10.1016/j.jnc.2005.11.002.

Véron, E. 2019. Will new rurality emerge in China as evidenced by the rural tourism in Yangtze River Delta. Journal of Ningbo University (Liberal Arts Edition) 32 (5): 17–22.

Votsi, N.-E. P., E. G. Drakou, A. D. Mazaris, A. S. Kallimanis, and J. D. Pantis. 2012. Distance-based assessment of open country quiet areas in Greece. Landscape and Urban Planning 104 (2):279–88. doi: 2011.11.004. doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.
Votsi, N. P., A. D. Mazaris, A. S. Kallimanis, and J. D. Pantis. 2014. Natural quiet: An additional feature reflecting green tourism development in conservation areas of Greece. Tourism Management Perspectives 11: 10–17. doi:10.1016/j.tmp.2014.02.001.

Walmsley, D. J. 2003. Rural tourism: A case of lifestyle-led opportunities. Australian Geographer 34 (1):61–72. doi: 10.1080/00049180320000066155.

Wang, S. 2001. Wang Shiren’s collection on theories of architectural history. Beijing: China Building Industry Press.

Wang, Z., M. M. Chen, and J. Zhang. 2019. Soundscape change and conservation in beautiful rural construction: Case study of Qiangguofu village in Shandong province. Environmental Science and Management 44 (12): 156–60.

Watts, G. R., and R. J. Pheasant. 2013. Factors affecting tranquility in the countryside. Applied Acoustics 74 (9): 1094–1103. doi: 10.1016/j.apacoust.2013.03.007.

Willemsen, L., L. Hein, M. E. F. van Mensvoort, and P. H. Verburg. 2010. Space for people, plants, and livestock? Quantifying interactions among multiple landscape functions in a Dutch rural region. Ecological Indicators 10 (1):62–73. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2009.02.015.

Willits, F. K., R. C. Bealer, and V. L. Timbers. 2010. Popular images of “rurality”: Data from a Pennsylvania survey. Rural Sociology 75 (4):559–78. doi: 10.1111/j.1549-0831.1990.tb00697.x.

Wittemyer, G., P. Elsen, W. T. Bean, A. C. O. Burton, and J. S. Brashares. 2008. Accelerated human population growth at protected area edges. Science 321 (5885): 123–26. doi: 10.1126/science.1158900.

Woods, M. 2007. Engaging the global countryside: Globalization, hybridity and the reconstitution of rural place. Progress in Human Geography 31 (4):485–507. doi: 10.1177/0309132507079503.

Woods, M. 2009. Rural geography: Blurring boundaries and making connections. Progress in Human Geography 33 (6):849–58. doi: 10.1177/0309132508105001.

Woods, M. 2010. Performing rurality and practising rural geography. Progress in Human Geography 34 (6):835–46. doi: 10.1177/0309132509357356.

Woods, M. 2011. Rural. London and New York: Routledge.

Wylie, J. 2003. Landscape, performance and dwelling: A Glastonbury case study. In Country visions, ed. P. Cloke, 137–57. Harlow, UK: Prentice Hall.

Xiang, X. 2018. Bad habit of gambling is harmful to rural households. Accessed April 30, 2020. k.sina.com.cn/article_2323283903_8a7a7fb0f01005nw3.html.

Yarwood, R. 2005. Beyond the rural idyll: Images, countryside change and geography. Geography 90 (1):19–31. doi: 10.2307/40574026.

Yelmi, P. 2016. Protecting contemporary cultural soundscapes as intangible cultural heritage: Sounds of Istanbul. International Journal of Heritage Studies 22 (4): 302–11. doi: 10.1080/13527258.2016.1138237.

Zhang, F., L. Lu, and S. Yi. 2020. Big data demonstration of “Lucid waters and lush mountains are invaluable assets.” Paper presented at the 2020 International Symposium on Frontiers of Economics and Management Science (FEMS 2020), Dalian, Liaoning, China, March 20. doi: 10.26914/c.cnkihy.2020.004438.

Zhang, J. 2015. An analytic review of the Schafer’s classic work of soundscape research. Tourism Tribune 30 (12): 121–24. doi: 10.3969/j.issn.1002-5006.

Zhang, J., S. Zhong, and S. Lu. 2014. The game between generality and diversity in tourism planning—Some thoughts on the standardization and demonstration of rural tourism planning. Tourism Tribune 29 (6):10–11. doi: 10.3969/j.issn.1002-5006.2014.06.001.

Zhao, Y. 2019. When guesthouse meets home: The timespace of rural gentrification in southwest China. Geoforum 100:60–67. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2019.01.020.

Zhou, L. 2014. Online rural destination images: Tourism and rurality. Journal of Destination Marketing & Management 3 (4):227–40. doi: 10.1016/j.jdmm.2014.03.002.

Zhou, S. Y. 2017. Four layers in one: The way to excavate the traditional rural. Tourism Tribune 32 (1):6–7. doi: 10.3969/j.issn.1002-5006.2017.01.004.

MAICHI (MATCH) CHEN is an Associate Professor at Anhui University of Technology and a PhD Candidate in the Department of Land Resources and Tourism Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210023, PR China. E-mail: chmatch2000@yeah.net. His research interests include soundscape attachment and rurality in rural tourism and destination fascination.

JIE ZHANG is a Professor in the Department of Land Resources and Tourism Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210023, PR China. E-mail: jiezhang@nju.edu.cn. His research interests include tourism geography and tourism landscape, natural soundscape, and calligraphy geography.

YINGYING ZHANG is a PhD Candidate in the Department of Land Resources and Tourism Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210023, PR China. E-mail: Zhangyy0429@163.com. Her research interests include geographical imagination and literary tourism.

KE WU is a Master’s Candidate in the Department of Land Resources and Tourism Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210023, PR China. E-mail: alston0820@foxmail.com. His research interests include soundscape assessment.

YIXIN YANG is a Master’s Candidate in the Department of Land Resources and Tourism Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210023, PR China. E-mail: alston0820@foxmail.com. Her research interests include rural soundscape and painting landscapes.