Rural Ruins in America’s Climate Change Story: Photojournalism, Perception, and Agency in Shishmaref, Alaska

Victoria Stephanie Herrmann

To cite this article: Victoria Stephanie Herrmann (2019) Rural Ruins in America’s Climate Change Story: Photojournalism, Perception, and Agency in Shishmaref, Alaska, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 109:3, 857-874, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2018.1525272

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2018.1525272
Rural Ruins in America’s Climate Change Story: Photojournalism, Perception, and Agency in Shishmaref, Alaska

Victoria Stephanie Herrmann
The Arctic Institute

This article provides a visual analysis of a set of peopleless photographs taken in 2006 of a falling home erosion in the village of Shishmaref, Alaska, that have been widely circulated in reporting about the relocation of the village due to climate change. It asks whether the visual contract between spectator and absent climate change victim extends beyond an empathetic response to action toward restoring the lost home. The article explores the relationship of contemporary scholarship on postmodern ruination in U.S. Rust Belt cities and the Shishmaref fallen home photograph as a means to analyze the work done by rural ruination. Key Words: Alaska, climate change, media, narratives, visuals.

本文对于一系列2006年在阿拉斯加一个名为希什马廖夫（Shishmaref）的部落所捕捉的衰败家园侵蚀之无人照片提供视觉分析，这些照片已在报导部落因气候变迁而进行的迁村中广泛流传。本文质问，旁观者与缺席的气候变迁受害者之间的视觉缔结，是否能让移情回应延伸至朝向恢复失去的家园之行动。本文探讨美国锈带城市的后现代衰落研究和希什马廖夫遗址的家园照片之间的关系，作为分析乡村衰落的后果之工具。 关键词: 阿拉斯加, 气候变迁, 媒体, 叙事, 视觉。

Este artículo suministra un análisis visual de un conjunto de fotografías sin personas de la erosión de una casa en colapso en la aldea de Shishmaref, Alaska, tomadas en 2006, que han sido ampliamente circuladas en el reporte de la relocalización de la aldea como consecuencia del cambio climático. Se pregunta si el contrato visual entre el espectador y la víctima ausente del cambio climático va más allá de una reacción empática por acción conducente a restaurar el hogar perdido. El artículo explora la relación de la erudición contemporánea sobre la ruina posmoderna de las ciudades del Cinturón del Orín de los EE.UU. con la fotografía de la casa derrumbada en Shishmaref, como un medio para analizar el trabajo hecho por la ruina rural. Palabras clave: Alaska, cambio climático, medios, narrativas, visuales.

On Friday, 11 November 2016, the U.S. Center at the 22nd Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Marrakesh, Morocco, commonly known as COP22, hosted an event titled, “The Melting Arctic: A Glimpse into the Future of Global Climate Change.” The event aimed to “explain the most recent scientific understanding of climate change impacts in the Arctic, and extrapolate from the Arctic example the scientific and policy challenges that are on the horizon for the rest of the world” (Arctic Council 2016). At the event, each presenter, all PhD scientists and U.S. Department of State officials, offered their own visual narratives of how the Arctic is warming at twice the rate as the global average with profound consequences. None of the presenters at “The Melting Arctic” specialized in community impacts of a warmer Arctic or worked professionally with Alaskan rural communities on adaptation and resiliency efforts. Yet, despite the considerable effort to enlist speakers with natural science credentials, the take-away message of the event was a human-centric one: Arctic communities are vulnerable to sea-level rise and are already feeling its dramatic effects more than anywhere else on the planet. All three presentations included photographs of Alaskan villages identified by the Army Corps of Engineers as in imminent danger of becoming uninhabitable, namely, Shishmaref, Kivalina, and Newtok, Alaska. By introducing photographs of imperiled villages, the presentations were able to move beyond carbon curves and ice retreat maps to something perceived as more relatable and emotionally moving. Climate change, in short, becomes a human story.
Figure 1. Photograph taken in 2006 of Nathan Weyiouanna’s fallen house at the west end of the Native Village of Shishmaref, Alaska. Credit: Diana Haecker, Associated Press, 8 December 2006.

There is one striking characteristic of the photographs shared on how climate change is impacting Arctic communities, though: There are no humans present. The photographs shown at COP22 were of peopleless places, aerial views of vulnerable villages and abandoned, decaying built environments. If these images are meant to provide the human connection to the effects of climate change without humans in them, their use begs a follow-up investigation into what hidden narratives are at work and the performative politics they come to embody in Arctic, climate change, and indigenous discourses. This article begins this follow-up investigation through the visual discourse analysis of a salient image shown twice at the COP22 “The Melting Arctic” event—a set of photographs from 2006 of a falling home in the village of Shishmaref, Alaska (Figure 1). As this image circulates across geographic boundaries, the fallen house has become, to use Shields’s (1991) term, a “place-image” (60), a widely disseminated and commonly held image or set of images of a place or space that come to represent the essential character of some wider geography or idea despite the specifications of and changes in local geopolitical environments.

Understanding Shishmaref: Physical Positioning the Falling House Photograph

The village of Shishmaref is located on a barrier island, Sarichef Island, in the Chukchi Sea roughly five miles from mainland Alaska. It is separated by a lagoon and lies within the Bering Land Bridge National Preserve and has been inhabited for at least 500 years (Marino 2015). The population of Shishmaref is roughly 600 people and is mainly Inupiat Native Alaskan. Erosion is nothing new for Shishmaref. The land on which the village thrives is part of a dynamic barrier island chain. Residents have noted land lost to the sea from natural trends for hundreds of years—it is an impermanent and ever-changing landscape. For most of its history, though, the community’s mobility throughout the
Figure 2. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers constructed a rip rap sea wall to protect much of Shishmaref from 2005 to 2009. The project is the latest in a number of sea walls constructed to try to slow the rate of erosion on Sarichef Island. Credit: Eli Keene, 2016.

year was also dynamic and seasonally patterned. Their movement and building of camps was flexible, and was made dependent on an analysis of weather and ice conditions. This high amount of mobility proves a successful adaptation strategy to protect the community against flooding and erosion, as movement off of Sarichef Island could be done quickly and efficiently (Marino 2015). In the mid-twentieth century, however, as a federally funded school was built on Sarichef Island, the community of Shishmaref consolidated more permanently to adhere to the mandated attendance policy. This eroded the flexibility of the community, replacing it with immobile infrastructure, often prefabricated further south and shipped north.

As climate change and warmer air and sea temperatures are accelerating the speed and extent of shoreline erosion, this fixed infrastructure of Shishmaref and the community have become more vulnerable to environmental and climatic hazards. The consequences of recent warming have resulted in a loss of three to five feet of shoreline per year, with a single severe storm washing away fifty feet of land (Natural Resources Conservation Service and Shishmaref Erosion and Relocation Coalition 2003). Storms caused such severe erosion in 1997 and 2002 that some homes fell into the ocean and several more needed to be moved. Shishmaref has voted to relocate twice in the past twenty years. The first, more informal vote took place in 2002 after a particularly bad fall storm. Although a new site to relocate the village further inland was scoped, it was eventually dismissed due to hazards of permafrost thaw. On 16 August 2016, residents again decided in a ninety-four to seventy-eight vote to relocate (Hovey 2016).

The vote to relocate was the latest media event that brought the fallen house photograph to the forefront of climate change reporting. Although “The Melting Arctic” event at COP22 provided the personal impetus for this article, it is the constellation of news reports on the August 2016 vote that
Figure 3. Shishmaref, seen from just south of the seawall, in August 2016. Credit: Eli Keene, 2016.

provide the basis for this visual analysis. The 2016 vote was widely covered by major news outlets, with many choosing to use the fallen house photograph. In print media, The New York Times (Mele and Victor 2016), Huffington Post (Sheppard and D’Angelo 2016), and the Guardian (Holpuch 2016) used the photograph; on television CNN (Sutter 2017), ABC (Thorbecke 2016), and Fox News (via Associated Press 2016) used the image; and even in radio reporting, National Public Radio (NPR; 2016) and PRX (2016) both recycled the falling house. All of these news reports use one of two photographs of the fallen house in Shishmaref. One is sourced by the stock photo site AP Images. Titled “Alaska Eroding Village,” it was taken 8 December 2006 by Diana Haecker, a reporter for the Nome Nugget, for the Associated Press and intended for editorial use only, meaning that it cannot be used for commercial advertising purposes but instead only for a newspaper or magazine article or for descriptive purposes on Web sites and blogs.

The second set of photos comes from Getty Images and was taken by Gabriel Bouys, an Agence France-Presse photographer based in Los Angeles, on 28 September 2006. This photograph is also tagged as editorial rights with possible use for commercial or promotional uses. As noted, both photographs were taken in 2006 at a particular moment in Shishmaref’s history. Over ten years later, the fallen house has been cleared, a rock revetment wall now extends the length of the shoreline pictured (Figure 2), and the beach beyond the wall has been eroded by increasingly intense fall storms (Figure 3). Its visual immobility, the canonical prewall image of Shishmaref, and construction as a near still life allow the photograph to easily function as document and archive of the village despite material changes over the past decade. The image, and village, are anchored to the meaning of climate change impacts, textually layered on in each of its uses with additional signs of the most recent climate-induced relocation event or story.

The sections to follow deconstruct this composition in three readings of the image through its visual signifiers. In parallel to this more Barthesian semiotic analysis, the photograph’s performativity is
also considered. The reception of the photograph by its audiences and how those audiences initiate its performing force and meaning are probed within a frame of social justice. In particular, the article asks whether the visual contract between spectator and absent climate victim outside the frame of the photograph extends beyond an empathetic response to action toward restoring the lost home. In short, does the image exceed the status of testimony by calling for action on part of the viewer? To do this, first a framework for analysis at the nexus of ruination and material decay, representation and landscape, and postcolonial analysis in photography is laid out. Most notable, the following sections explore the relationship of contemporary scholarship on postmodern ruination in U.S. Rust Belt cities and the Shishmaref fallen home photograph as a means to analyze the work done by rural ruination in on the Arctic, Native agency, and Western philosophical sentiments toward a warmer world. Using this scholarship as a foundation, it then delves into an visual analysis of the Shishmaref fallen house photograph and offers three readings of the image: (1) a narrative tension between the romantic aestheticization of decay and an active engagement with the socioenvironmental issues of climate change; (2) the return to nature in postmodern ruination as commentary on nature–human relationships in an era of manmade climate change; and (3) the disordering of normative conceptions of time and materiality in connection to indigenous or peripheral agency.

The Visualization of Climate Change

Shishmaref’s visual narrative of the consequences of climate change does not exist in a vacuum. As noted in an early seminal work in the field by O’Neill and Smith (2014), “Visual images are everywhere in the portrayal of climate change” (73). In surveying scholarship on the visualization of climate change in newspapers, television, and film, O’Neill and Smith (2014) surmised that studies conducted in Canada, the United States, Australia, and the United Kingdom “find that climate change depicts identifiable people (often politicians, but also scientists, citizens, business leaders, and celebrities), the causes of climate change (such as throughout iconic images of ‘smockstakes’), climate impacts at home and abroad, and graphical or scientific representations of climate change” (O’Neill and Smith 2014, 73; O’Neill 2013). These same studies have found that images of people dominate coverage of climate change of those media outlets surveyed. In DiFrancesco and Young’s (2011) study of Canadian print media, 66 percent of all images included people. Much of this photojournalism focuses on identifiable people, including politicians, celebrities, and business leaders. Rebich-Hespanha and Rice (2016) found that such images were “unexpectedly common” in a U.S. sampling of newspapers; in a thirty-year longitudinal study of U.S.-based print media, 34 percent of all images coded were of politicians and people involved in political processes. The impacts of climate change offer a second common visual theme in mass media. In surveying UK, U.S., and Australian print media outlets, O’Neill (2013) found that impact-oriented images accounted for 23 percent, 16 percent, and 7 percent of all visuals, respectively. In particular, images of “real people” facing climate change impacts, in contrast to staged photo-ops, are found to resonate with media audiences (Corner et al. 2016). For example, a series of UK-based facilitated discussion groups on climate change photographs found that “imagery containing people or animals tends to be more powerful, and that people respond more strongly to photos of one or two individuals” (Croner et al. 2015, 14).

Nonetheless, despite the importance of people-oriented imagery in creating an affectual relationship between viewer and subject, most visuals of climate impacts focus on nonhuman subjects, such as flood aerial views, melting ice sheet, and drought-cracked ground. A significant subset of climate impact imagery focuses on the portrayal of pristine landscapes and iconic species and impacts on those landscapes, such as deforestation, coral reef bleaching, and polar bear starvation (O’Neill et al. 2013). As the “poster boys” of climate change, polar bears have garnered a significant amount of visual coverage in the media and subsequent analysis of visual scholars (O’Neill and Hulme 2009). The image of the fallen house is situated within this wider, or perhaps at the nexus of, body of literature on the visualization of climate change and the construction of iconic images of its impacts. It explores an image that has become an iconic representation of climate-induced relocation in Alaska—an image about climate change impacts on a specific population of people
that shows no humans. In many ways, the fallen house image is a departure from the aforementioned scholarship, in that it visualizes the impacts of climate change on a singular object and through invisible narrative threads connects that object with the landscape and people that lie just beyond its frame.

The Rural Ruins of America’s Eroding Edges

The abandonment of the fallen house photograph, its expressive fixation for viewers, and the aesthetic of decay is reminiscent of the ruin porn, the viewer’s voyeurisms and constructed fantasies that have come forth from the economic decline of U.S. Rust Belt cities like Detroit. Thus, the recent literature that surrounds such urban ruination and industrial decay acts as a promising theoretical departure point for the analysis to follow. Huyssen (2006) asked in his “Nostalgia for Ruins”:

At a time when the promises of the modern age lie shattered like so many ruins, when we speak with increasing frequency both literally and metaphorically of the ruins of modernity, a key question arises for cultural history: What shapes our imaginary of ruins in the early twenty-first century, and how has it developed historically? (7)

For Huyssen, the answer lies entirely within the city. In his analysis of the “cult of ruins” that has gripped northern transatlantic societies over the past decade and a half, today’s ruin craze is one borne from nostalgia of early modernity, a time when cities were alive with smoke stacks and production lines. The photographs of decay are equal parts a yearning for the vanished promise of an alternative future and a fear or denial of the ruination by time that urban preservation, remakes, and retro fashions failed to prevent. Over the last two decades, amateur and professional photographers have flocked to capture the urban ruins of rusting cities. Photographer and sociologist Vergara’s novels Silent Cities: The Evolution of the American Cemetery, The New American Ghetto (Jackson and Vergara 1989) with Jackson, and most notably his American Ruins (Vergara 1999) created a foundation on which the contemporary fascination with postindustrial decay was formed. More recently, Detroit, a Midwestern city that “rose and fell with the automobile industry” (Sugrue 2004), has taken on a particular importance for artists in this genre. Since the 1950s, the city has lost over a million residents, leaving behind an urban landscape of abandoned buildings that that have made for an inviting artistic playground (MacDonald 2016). Marchand and Meffre, at least in part, kick-started the visual fixation on Detroit with publications like the Time photo essay “Detroit’s Beautiful, Horrible Decline” (Marchand and Meffre 2009) and their coffee table book The Ruins of Detroit a year later (Marchand and Meffre 2010). In turn, a considerable academic literature built up around the practice of capturing U.S. industrial city ruins. Publications like Skrdla’s (2006) Ghostly Ruins: America’s Forgotten Architecture, Steinmetz’s (2008) “Harrowed Landscapes: White Ruingazers in Namibia and Detroit and the Cultivation of Memory” in Visual Studies, and Edensor’s Journal of Material Culture article “Waste Matter—The Debris of Industrial Ruins and Disorderling of the Material World” (Edensor 2005a) and his subsequent book Industrial Ruins: Space, Aesthetics, and Materiality (Edensor 2005b) are but a few of many seminal pieces that have come to construct academia’s response to the cultural phenomenon of today’s ruin porn.

There are contemporary ruins outside the cityscape, however, a decay caused not by economic decline but the consequences of twentieth-century economic transformations that serve as the starting point of grave climatic changes. The fallen house in Shishmaref is a far cry from the abandoned buildings of Detroit. The village is one of the most rural settlements in the United States. It never shared the promises of the industrialization of the U.S. manufacturing cities, save for the effects of persistent organic pollutants and greenhouse gas emissions that came with developments further south. According to Shishmaref’s 2013 Economic Development Plan, the two economic mainstays of the village are (1) subsistence and barter, with food hunted and harvested locally, and (2) carved and sewn crafts that are made and traded for other necessities, including selling to visitors and middle men (Ellanna Strickling 2013). The most industrial aspect of Shishmaref is the now-closed tannery at the end of the island, although funding possibilities for heating and electricity are now being explored for it to reopen. Still, despite the seeming material disparity between rural and urban postmodern decay, the literature on Detroit and other city ruins provides a useful
framework for understanding the fallen house photograph when combined with scholarship on pastoral landscape representation and power.

Huyssen’s work on nature’s role in the ruin aesthetic is one such frame that is suitably transposed from the urban back the rural, where the ruin aesthetic originates, for analyzing rural ruination in the framing of climate change. In “Nostalgia for Ruins,” the modern imaginary of ruins is, in essence, one that elicits the dark side of modernity—“a nightmare of the Enlightenment that all history might ultimately be overwhelmed by nature” (Huyssen 2006, 13). There is, through the abandoned factories and crumbling homes, a societal anxiety that humanity’s successes will be—and have always been—dwarfed by those of nature. It is a romantic appeal to a particular version of the natural sublime and the omnipotent power of natural manifestations like erosion and organic decay, one that finds its roots in the early twentieth-century scholarship of Simmel. Simmel’s essay “The Ruin” describes a binary between nature and culture, a battle that resides within all people and is captured in the representation of the ruin’s “return of architecture to nature” (Simmel 1911, as cited in Wolff 1959, 260). The process of industrial landscapes returning to the nature they once were in both Simmel and Huyssen’s works is unidirectional. There is a natural and expected continuum of progression from a pure form of nature to a built environment and then an inevitable retreat again into nature. This seemingly unavoidable regression into nature, and the overarching relationship between the viewer, the subject, and the natural world, is one that is also at work in the fallen house photograph of Shishmaref and an important frame for understanding its position in the wider discourse of climate change and human civilization.

There is a second binary at work, though, in the analysis of the contemporary ruinenlust that lends itself to a visual discourse analysis of the fallen house. The representation of ruins is not just the capturing of decay; rather, it is a means of disordering normative conceptions of materiality and time. The dual gesture toward the present and past as simultaneously active temporal frames in photographs of Detroit and other derelict cities is also one constructed in the fallen house. For cultural geographer Edensor, ruins become “stranded from the recent, but seemingly far-distant past” (Edensor 2005a, 315).

Within this conceptual frame, to sojourn into the decaying industrial landscape to document places like Detroit then becomes a trip into the past itself. Much like how Gregory looked at nineteenth-century European tourism to colonial Egypt, finding appreciation in photographing Detroit’s abandoned buildings requires an assumption of distance from the parallel landscape of residents and lived-in buildings (Gregory 1995, 2004). It is to willingly ignore the complex fabric of reality to instead focus solely on capturing decay and the emptiness of a city. Photographing industrial ruins then becomes a practice, a politicized practice, of depopulating the contemporary landscape. As Herron (2012) noted, “ruins are not found, but made.”

To label a photograph as a ruin is inherently a political act. It is to use material decay as the dominant trope in constructing an imaginative geography that comes to represent the wider built environment—city and rural village alike—and in turn obscures the current residents. Using frames to cut the image in a particular way holds the ability to place Detroit and Shishmaref alike in a mythical historical context, suggesting the inevitability of their decline and romanticized awe. As a photographer and sociologist, Vergara struggled with this tension between aestheticization and active engagement with the social justice and poverty in his subjects (Vergara 1999). For Vergara and other photojournalists engaged in photographing the decaying-built environments of America, their practice exists somewhere in between socially charged documentary work and socially ambivalent ruin gazers. And yet, through the act of capturing and labeling those images, photojournalists and photographers at all points along this socially charged-ambivalent spectrum accept the political agency to decide what is and what is not a ruin. The politicization embedded within a ruin’s visual narrative is one that extends beyond the temporalities of representation to the material landscape itself. Landscapes can also be a material entity capable of structuring and naturalizing social relations and cultural processes, a concept that has been explored by Vergara and others in the recent scholarship on Detroit ruination.

Schein (1997) described landscapes as discourse materialized that serves to simultaneously capture the intent and ideology of the discourse and to develop it further. Discourse, in all of its forms, is not an objective reflection of reality, and discourse
materialized through landscape is no different. “The landscape,” as Schein (1997) noted, “is not innocent” (1). It holds the power of naturalizing, or to make normal, social relations by choosing to express what should be, rather than what is. In Detroit, this means transforming a still lived-in city into a scape of abandoned, decaying ruins. The foundational scholarship of landscape as a force of naturalizing power comes not from urban ruins but rather from the pastoral. Mitchell (1994) defined landscape as a cultural medium, one that “has a double role with respect to something like ideology: it naturalizes a cultural and social construction, representing an artificial world as if it were simply given and inevitable, and it also makes that representation operational by interrelating its beholder in some more or less determinate relation to its givenness as sight and site” (13). The main point of Mitchell’s discussion of pastoral paintings is that the practice of depicting landscapes in particular ways is intimately tied to assertions of power. In visual representations of Britain’s colonial holdings, landscape painting was equal to imperialism itself, the practice of exerting political and economic influence over foreign territories. At home, it was a means of naturalizing Britain’s evolving industrial capitalism, changing labor relations, and landholding patterns that resulted in poverty and sharp societal fractures based on class. Like temporal distancing, the use of painting as a means of truthful representation became a tool of social and power construction—one that would eventually translate into the Kodak era where photography’s ability to appear truthful allowed it to stand in as accurate records of history.

This notion—that painting and photography are a means of producing, not capturing, particular landscapes—is at the core of all literature on industrial urban ruins and rural pastoral landscapes and thus an ideal departure point for the analysis on the fallen house visual. It is geography’s very own critical approach to visual discourse analysis by seminal scholars like Cosgrove (1998; Cosgrove and Daniels 1988), Daniels (Daniels and Cosgrove 1993), and later Rose (1993, 2000, 2016) that have come to write the theoretical underpinnings of how the interplay between power and narrative are understood in the context of cultural geography. This geographical coding and detailed reading follow in their footsteps to find the meaning of the fallen house photograph. It is here that this visual investigation begins, at the foundational theory that narratives are not neutral but instead are products of particular authors and open to particular interpretations and reinterpretations.

Romanticized Representations of Living on the Front Lines of Climate Change

The fallen house in Shishmaref is wooden, with a green and red metal roof. It is small and simple compared to the modern image of the U.S. home. In its representation, the natural materials, single-paned window, and diminutive chimney construct the lives once lived inside it to be humble. They embody the existence of a time gone by, a lifestyle passed over by the industrialization and capitalization of the United States where human and nature still coexist in harmony. Although expressively distressing in subject matter—a house fallen into the sea—the formal elements and principles of the photograph’s composition are aesthetically pleasing. The visual ordering of the house as the central subject (the victim) parallel to the sea (the victor) is arranged in such a way that the photograph acts as a work of art. The sharp diagonal line of the house’s foundation enables the viewer’s eye to move across the composition in a strong but easy-to-follow visual path, sweeping from one corner to the other. The space is perfectly balanced between the positive geometric house and the negative background landscape, providing a foreground with an ideal depth from viewer to viewed. Even the hues are in harmony, creating an almost homochromatic color scheme of muted, natural tones. The fallen house is fit to be a picture. It is, in a word, picturesque.

Picturesque as a term was born from the very practice of observing of landscapes. In the late eighteenth century, Englishman William Gilpin argued in Three Essays: On Picturesque Beauty; On Picturesque Travel; and on Sketching Landscape: to Which Is Added a Poem, On Landscape Painting (Gilpin 1794) that modern, pastoral ruins of the English countryside could compete against the classical sites of the Grand Tour of continental Europe in Italy and Greece. The argument went that such ruins were rustic sights, ones that combined the harmonic and classical beauty of a cultured past with the grandiose and terrifying sublime of the natural world to inspire a “picture-imagination” in the spectator. The concept of the picturesque transcended tourism
advertisements into the zeitgeist of Romanticism sweeping cultural debates and practices of the time. Burke’s ([1759] 2008) Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of the Sublime and the Beautiful and other publications of the time set forth a set of rules for picture making with the materials of nature to render it picturesque—practices that are still in use today.

One requirement for rendering an eighteenth-century English landscape picturesque was a cropping out of the harsher realities beyond the subject matter. Gilpin’s description of the Medieval ruins of Tintern Abbey included the “poverty and wretchedness” of the homeless taking shelter there, the human collateral damage of Britain’s industrial revolution that would never make it into his tour descriptions (Gilpin 1794). Even in Wordsworth’s ([1798] 1994) poetic representations of the English landscape, including his “Lines Written a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey,” had to cleanse themselves of the distressing “gross transgressions” and “disfigurement” resulting from the increased settlement and development of England’s Lake District. For Wordsworth and other Romantics, the romantic aestheticization of pastoral ruins required an active disengagement and erasing of the socioeconomic issues that accompanied the industrial revolution in landscape representations. The same requirement is true for fine art photographers of Detroit’s ruins today, as described earlier in Vergara’s struggle between aestheticization and social justice, and for the fallen house in Shishmaref. Although the composition of the Shishmaref photograph is visually aesthetically appealing, the choices of its visual construction, its inclusions and exclusions, distance the reader from the realities and complexities of Shishmaref as a lived-in village in need of relocation. This estrangement from societal and justice realities is performed by rendering Shishmaref a peopleless, temporally distant landscape defined solely by climate change. Like Wordsworth’s Tintern Abbey and Vergara’s Detroit, however, the harsher realities of Shishmaref still exist beyond the photographic frame. The village faces what its leaders have labeled “critical health issues” of substance abuse and suicide and “major recurring health problems” of diabetes, heart disease, cancer, and alcoholism (Ellanna Strickling 2013, 81). The only clinic on the island is busy and crowded, and for serious medical treatment, mental and physical, residents must fly to Nome or further on to Anchorage. This is particularly acute for younger residents, who are only visited by the Bering Straits School District counselor once or twice a year.

In each of these, from eighteenth-century English painting to Detroit’s ruin porn to the fallen house of Shishmaref, the curating of the landscape is more than a practice of the picturesque. Rather, within the contours of the composition lies a hidden ideological agenda that informs the arrangement of the built and natural environments portrayed, which then in turn promotes the ideology. In Barrell’s (1980) work The Dark Side of Landscape: The Rural Poor in English Painting 1730–1840, he explored the ideology and power dynamics at play in rustic landscape paintings of the enclosure period. The enclosure period marked a disquieting time in the life of English peasants, where society was becoming more stratified and subdivided. Yet, despite the harsh political and economic strife they faced, the landscape paintings produced during this period offered a version of rural life that concealed the harshness of the new social order (Barrell 1980). The construction of an idealized, picturesque, and pastoral landscape served the ideology of the elite by lending support to the new division of land. These paintings act as a cultural medium to “naturalize a cultural and social construction, representing an artificial world as if it were simply given and inevitable” (Mitchell 1994, 1). The dark side of landscape can also be seen in the Shishmaref photograph. The fallen house is not merely an image to be read but a process by which the social and subjective identities of individuals, families, and communities experiencing the most extreme impacts of climate change are formed. One aesthetic choice that lends itself to the construction of particular identities of climate victimization, rendering the landscape of Shishmaref as peopleless, is significant, if not counterintuitive.

A Peopleless Image of “America’s First Climate Change Refugees”

There is an immediately noticeable deficiency in the fallen house photograph: There are no people in the frame. Shishmaref is home to a growing community of more than 600 mainly Inupiat Alaska Natives, yet there are no people present in the visual. Although the focal point is the abandoned home and left articles on the surrounding beach,
peoplelessness does not equate to an empty landscape. The material objects imbue the photograph with an imagined history of what once was. The coastal landscape of Shishmaref and the fallen home might appear as an empty space to viewers but, to borrow from Pratt (2007), it is actually one that has been “lived as intensely humanized, saturated with local history and meaning where plants, creatures, and geographical formations have names, uses, symbolic functions, histories, places in indigenous knowledge formations” (61).

The photograph is a visual narrative of material decay and physical damage—the human story is left as an intangible to be imagined. Having no people in the frame is an important quality for its ability to spark an imaginative storytelling of what has come to pass and what will come to pass in the moments after the photograph is shot. It provides the canvas of an unfinished story for audience and author alike, unencumbered by the accuracies or specificity that come with looking at the human face of a living relic. Consumers of the fallen house visual, whether readers of the New York Times or audience members at COP22, are free to interact with the ruin by constructing their story of the life of the family in the house when it was at its prime: Who used the now abandoned fuel barrels strewn behind the ruin? What child once rode the bike whose wheel now juts up in the background of the image? Who boarded up the seaward-facing window in a final effort to stem the surge? The composition leaves room for an affective spectatorship and active participation in Shishmaref’s past, present, and future realities.

The peoplelessness of the fallen house image is important in the discursive formation of Shishmaref as an imaginative scape of ruin and crisis at the edge of the United States. As Rose (2000) argued, however, absences in photographs are often as important to note as what is included in them. Similar to the absence of peasants in landscape paintings struggling through the social reordering of England during the enclosure period, the absence of inhabitants here does more than allow for the construction of an imagined geography. It also facilitates a flattening of Shishmaref into a singular still photograph with one salient existential challenge: climate-induced erosion. To offer humans in the frame of the fallen house would come to complicate the otherwise straightforward narrative of a house falling victim to natural forces with nonenvironmental and individual complexities. Each face provides an added level of distinctiveness and presents a tapestry of interwoven economic, personal, environmental, and health challenges. The peoplelessness of the photograph allows for the sameness of the representation’s repetition. The fallen house was captured by a number of photojournalists and spectators: the 2016 New York Times article and NPR piece use Diana Haecker’s Associated Press image and the 2014 Huffington Post article uses Gabriel Bouys’s AFP/Getty Images photograph, among many others. Although all of these provide slightly varied frames and angles of the house, there is a deep déjà vu when looking at the images used in presentations, articles, and documentaries of Shishmaref. Photographs and writers who focus on Shishmaref’s relocation plight follow a prescribed visual narrative and borrow from the standard aesthetic convention of what Shishmaref should look like.

The fact that the house fell in 2005 and has since been removed and replaced by a seawall is lost in the repetition and circulation of this singular iconic image. To populate the frame with people, or a sea wall, would disrupt its ability to reinforce one particular story of the village. Without the differing faces of people that would inevitably change with each individual snapshot of the ruin, the scope and scale of Shishmaref ultimately becomes limited to the repetitive decaying house. Photographers, in essence, convert a complicated village into an easily reproducible image. A peopleless landscape allows for everyday occurrences and sites that define most residents’ lives to be cropped out when documenting the ruin—it is easy to neglect the still lived-in homes and village grocery store just beyond the camera’s frame. Like all visuals, the photographs of the fallen house are about constructing particular visions and moods. There is an attempt in the accompanying text and presentations to move beyond a photograph of desolation and correct for the implications of peoplelessness. Journalists and presenters work, at least in part, to avoid the image of Shishmaref as a symbolic relic of the costs of climate change.

They nod to the proud and resilient U.S. citizens who still call the village home, a place where they work, hunt, play basketball, go to school, and attend church services. The New York Times 19 August 2016 article, “Reeling from the Effects of Climate Change, Alaskan Village Votes to Relocate” (Mele
and Victor 2016), colors in the photograph with quotes taken from community members—the grocery store owner Percy Nayokpuk and a college student, Esau Sinnok, serving as a U.S. Arctic Ambassador as part of the U.S. Arctic Council Chairmanship. Although short, the article focuses on the vote to relocate and on community members’ reactions to it—the challenges and necessities of moving the village. An NPR article on the relocation vote posted a day earlier also quoted Esau Sinnok in a recent blog post where he notes the loss of 2,500 to 3,000 feet of land to coastal erosion over the past thirty-five years and in an interview with NPR where he advocates for relocation (NPR 2016). These accompanying texts are indicative of a near-always used structure of talking about Shishmaref in articles that use the fallen house photograph.

They are personal story-driven narratives of individuals and a village, living on the front lines of climate change facing an immediate threat to their very existence. It is here that the image and the text work constructively and asymmetrically in their storytelling of Shishmaref. On one plane, the text tells the story of the people missing from the visual narrative. They work to populate a landscape with human narratives that is otherwise dominated by vulnerable objects—the house, the beach debris. Despite this asymmetry in visual and textual narratives, however, the emphasis on the community’s decision to move in the text of the articles works to construct the same imagined geography that is created by the image—they flatten Shishmaref’s narrative into a single, coherent issue: shoreline erosion from rising tides. In major U.S. newspapers, Shishmaref and the circulation of the fallen house photograph are contextualized within a crisis story of intense erosion, without engaging visually or textually with Shishmaref’s societal fractures and its other climate, health, economic, or political challenges.

In some ways, the architecture in the image stands in for the community at large. The fallen house coalesces the entire settlement and can be read not merely as tangible infrastructure but also as the idea of home and the displacement of indigenous occupancy. The natural disasters of Shishmaref—quick or slow onset—carry heavy consequences far beyond the decay of physical structures. They bring complex challenges like how to secure funds to rebuild homes in a remote village facing a housing shortage and mental health concerns of personal and family safety. Then there is an intangible consequence that comes with the loss of a village’s historic placement. Leaving the island that the community has been using for more than 500 years comes with a loss of rootedness, the detachment from a placed-based identity of subsistence living and family and community traditions. It is a land where generation after generation passed down their knowledge and tribal narratives that bind people together. It is where residents’ ancestors, ancient and recent, are buried in the graveyard, a cemetery that might or might not be able to migrate with the community further inland. It is also a rootedness, however, that hangs heavy with strife, marginalization, and empowerment. It is the place where families were forced to relocate when the Bureau of Indian Affairs built the school in the 1950s, creating a more permanent village for what was once a nomadic tribe. The land, and its surrounding waters, are also inextricably connected to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971 that transferred stolen land in Alaska regional and local village corporations for economic development and a year later the Marine Mammal Protection Act that curtailed traditional marine economic activity and trade on the island. This rootedness—the importance—of the particular land on which Shishmaref currently stands has a deep history both traditional and modern that is part of the untold, or invisible, complex narrative of displacement and relocation in a rapidly changing climate that the fallen house fails to capture.1

The Flattening and Normalizing of America’s Eroding Edge

Even in the world of materiality, the fallen house flattens, or makes invisible, the complexity of climate change’s effects on the community. Less sea ice means difficulty hunting marine mammals and ice fishing, causing cultural loss, food insecurity, and unsafe travel practices that have already caused one death in the community. Warmer temperatures are speeding up the growing season around the island for berries and greens, an important part of the Inupiat diet. With a warmer spring, the berry season arrives earlier than historically expected, catching many families unprepared to gather enough to freeze for the long winter months. In 2016, a lack of snow cover made traveling to fall regional basketball tournaments difficult. This is not only a strain on
community culture and cohesion but also an economic one. Village travel provides one of the only opportunities to sell Native crafts like carvings and moccasins, a mainstay of the local economy. Beyond the costs of a changing climate, just over 40 percent of people in Shishmaref live below the poverty line, including 49 percent of children under the age of eighteen (U.S. Census Bureau 2015). While I was visiting there in August 2016, the community was down to one working washing machine for the entire village, a public health concern, particularly for youth.2 The village could only afford to purchase one machine. A later city council vote would request state of emergency money from the State of Alaska to purchase five additional machines. Beyond poverty, Shishmaref, like many Native villages in Alaska, suffers from a high cost of living, high rates of public and mental health issues, and alcoholism. The materiality of the house in the photograph, at least in part, embodies these ailments. The ability of the house to be uprooted notes the lack of a water or sewage system (Alaska accounts for the highest number of U.S. homes per capita without indoor plumbing), and the simple building materials that make it picturesque and rustic are also indicative of the difficulty of transporting sturdier material to remote, rural villages (U.S. Census Bureau 2014).

Yet these challenges of politics and poverty are made invisible in the visual narrative of the fallen house and the accompanying text. The focus instead is on the physicality of the loss and damage climate change has caused. The central subject here is the ruin, in perfect composition, as a symbol of a lost simpler lifestyle and the picturesque decay of a romantic existence on the frontlines of climate change in Alaska. The framing excludes any acknowledgment of the complex constellation of challenges that Shishmaref faces every day that are exacerbated by a warmer world. As Fyfe and Law (1988) theorized in Picturing Power, visual framing is a principle “of inclusion and exclusion, to detect the roles that it makes available, to understand the way in which they are distributed, and to decode the hierarchies and differences that it naturalizes” (1). The construction of a hierarchy also highlights the power dynamics between photographer and photographed. Discourse and representations are intimately tied to the workings of power. As Gregory (1995) elaborated, “Imaginative geographies are discursive formations, tense constellations of power, knowledge, and spatiality, that are centered on ‘here’ and projected towards ‘there’” (29). Photojournalism is, in part, about who has the power to order and represent particular narratives. The capturing and framing of an image signifies not objective reality but is a representation constructed by the photographer’s view of the world, his or her imagined relationship with the subject, and his or her own social role and that of his or her audience.

“Extreme Temporal Attenuation”:
Tensions of Immediate and Ancient in the Fallen House

There is a complex interplay between temporal representation and lived reality that is created by the disordering of normative conceptions of time and materiality. There is an amorphous quality to when Shishmaref exists in this photograph. Shishmaref as a place is both in the immediate time, where its fall has just happened, and in a more historic past, one where the ruin has taken on an antique quality. In a material sense, the image evokes a vicariously sensual familiarity from the viewer, to invite audiences to experience Shishmaref’s cold, windswept beach. The emotive materiality of ruination grounds viewers through sensory experience (Frykman and Frykman 2016). The synaesthetics of transcending the mere viewing of an image of Shishmaref but sensually traveling to the spot on the shoreline whereupon the house has just fallen summon an exploration of its physical features and the affective potentials of its material sand materiality (Istasse 2016).

Beyond the themes of the composition that position the fallen house, the material’s tactile visual descriptors—the roughness of the wood, the redolent smell of salt spray, the redolent sounds of the Bering Strait’s relentless tidal kinetics—all conjure an immediate and corporeal experience of the fallen house as an object that can be touched and handled. To apply the writings of twentieth-century German film theorist Kracauer, the textures within the fallen house photograph “directly stimulate the material layers of the human being: his nerves, his senses, his entire physiological substance” (quoted in Sobchack 2000, 55). In this way, the carnality and sensuality of experiencing the ruin unite the lived bodies of the audience with the invisible lived bodies of
Shishmaref. The reflective, physical reaction to the image is temporally close, something that can be connected to the viewers’ own lived experiences in the here and now, wherever that might be.

Nonetheless, like many other representations of ruins, the process of the material building’s ruination is insinuated by what is not present. We as viewers feel the movement of its decay but do not see the events that led to where it stands in the photograph perched on the edge of the island. We do not see the life go out of the house—we arrive in the moments, days, and years after it has fallen. By picturing it in the aftermath of its downfall, the representation frees viewers from the emotional experience of ruin and decay. By the time we as viewers arrive at the scene it is lifeless—or, perhaps, as argued in the next section, it is overcome with a new type of natural life. Viewers of the photograph have seemingly just arrived at the landscape and are able to imagine that the people who once inhabited the house had time to retreat. Similar to Schwartz’s (1996) analysis of nineteenth-century European tourists’ photography in Egypt, representing a ruin is to at once deny and demonstrate change. In the fallen house, there is an undeniable change to the landscape of Shishmaref, one that has intimately and forever changed the contours of the community. Not only have the very borders of the village changed but a home, the most cherished of places, has been lost to the sea. Notwithstanding this undeniable element of change, however, there is also this fixed and timeless quality to the photograph.

Despite the imagined movement of the composition, the house seems static, a quality often attributed to classic, idyllic ruins in painting and literature. The fixedness and timeless quality of the photograph’s composition—a still life of ruination—stand in contrast to the dynamic realities of village life and the eroding island. It has fallen, a swift ruination process brought about by raging seas. Now, though, as it stands on its side on the newly eroded shoreline, it is serene and calm. Its position almost appears predestined to be here, toppled onto the beach at the edges of the United States. In this state of stationary decay, however, there is a disordering of temporal scales. The material objects of the frame, the house and scattered debris, quickly become victims of what Buck-Morss (1991, 55) termed “extreme temporal attenuation,” wherein the material ruin attains venerable status, moving the decay from just happened to ancient history. The house becomes cast in the tones of history rather than in the present day—a relic of a simpler village life when humans lived in harmony with nature.

This temporal distancing does more than age Shishmaref; it also casts its Inupiat residents in the shadows of the past. The idea that the photograph of the ruin is a representation of a lifestyle lost to time portrays the invisible residents as living in the “there and then” rather than the “here and now” in which the viewers reside. Depicting the fallen house, and in turn Shishmaref in its entirety, as existing in a time not contemporary with our own makes their intellectual and development inferior, much like early muskets are perceived as inferior to today’s automated firearms (Fabian 2014). Although the viewer and residents share the same historic time—and challenge of climate change—in actuality, the textual rhetoric and visual vocabularies of the fallen house’s narrative systemically distance Shishmaref from its observers and place them in a distant, different temporal frame. This denying of contemporaneity also denies the residents political agency. The residents of Shishmaref are seen not as partners or equals in confronting climate change but as distant victims removed from the decision-making process of climate change policy, with the assumption that any climate policy would better such a peripheral space. The distancing, displacing, and disenfranchisement of indigeneity that comes with historicizing the representation again highlight the power dynamics of visual narratives addressed earlier in Gregory’s work.

A Return to Nature in a Changing Climate

In many ways, the fallen house photographic frame of Shishmaref, its use and reuse, is connected to a wider visual publishing story of a handful of images acquiring extraordinary poignancy in depicting the plight of the Arctic and its people in a time of rapid environmental change. To examine the fallen house photograph, as this article has done, is thus not merely an exercise of studying its symbols and themes, its use and circulation, but rather how this one image relates as a reflection of the narrative of climate-induced rural decay and the role that a single image has in reproducing particular themes of
ruination. Rather than wrench the image out of its temporal and spatial context, the piece instead wrestles to understand the imaginative ability to see the fallen house image as part of broader narratives of romantic aestheticization of decay, of a peopleless frontline of climate change, and of core–peripheral relations in relation to time and materiality. Inquiry into the power of visual representation in climate-induced ruination need not—and indeed should not—stop here, however. Rather, the writing herein should act as a point of departure for future scholarship on the visuals of the ruination of coastal villages as seas rise and give way to a wider discourse on the relationship between viewers and subjects of a warming world; on the universal philosophy on how humans respond to the sometimes terrifying reality of a rapidly changing climate system; and on the agency of the alternative, subaltern narrative of the residents of these derelict places and spaces.

The first conclusory consideration that the relationship between U.S. media news and those living on fragile coastlines in need of relocation is reminiscent of the core–peripheral relationship in visual storytelling of exotic landscapes and peoples in colonial empires. To take as an example, in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, British and U.S. corporations with an economic interest in the expansion of the tourism trade had a significant role in the visual manufacturing of the Caribbean. By choosing to photograph island landscapes and peoples in a particularly picturesque way, photographers were able to not only construct an imagined visual paradise but also shape the physical contours of the very social spaces that they imaged (Thompson 2006). In this way, visual narratives and colonial representations became interwoven within the texture of colonial societies themselves. A point of departure for future scholarship on images of climate ruination is then to consider what impact these representations have had on both the physical landscape and social spaces of eroding coastlines. This article in part acts as a groundwork to determine which representational lenses and images climate ruinations filter through and whether they can be understood as appropriate vehicles for analytical discourse rather than mere illustrative devices. Further scholarship, in turn, could and should provide a fuller examination of the social power that is reproduced through landscape, photography, and visual narratives.

The second consideration for further scholarship is rethinking humans’ and humanity’s place in nature in an age of man-made climate change through the visual lexicon of citing, reiterating, and reusing tropes of ruination to visually communicate the impacts of climate change. Images like the fallen house—a peopleless landscape of ruin awash in naturalized hues—represent a return to nature from our postmodern, postindustrial existence. Photographs of buildings and objects abandoned to nature combine the Romantic sublime of an overpowering mother earth with ideas of reclamation, transformation, and ultimately rebirth. The visual narrative becomes a commentary on the human–nature relationship not just in contemporary times but on the history of civilization’s relationship with nature. For centuries, humankind has tried to tame, cultivate, and harness the powers of nature and in the process polluted, disrespected, and destroyed the ecosystems within it. Now, after factories have tainted its waters and suburban developments have populated its landscapes, nature has begun to reclaim what it lost. After years of waging a war on our planet, it is now fighting back through rising tides and more intense storms. The trajectory of history, from nature to industry back to nature, is a naturalized process in these ruin representations. It is Simmel’s return to nature (as cited in Wolff 1959) and Huyssen’s (2010) “nightmare of the Enlightenment that all history might ultimately be overwhelmed by nature” (18–19)—the seemingly unavoidable regression into nature. If set within this frame—a frame of the inevitable—the loss of buildings, cultures, and even life itself becomes less shocking because it becomes expected. The departure point here then becomes the return to nature and how a place can return to nature when nature itself is read as neither natural or unchangeable but rather socially constructed. It is in part a question of what the process means for the human condition in the twenty-first century beyond the built environment’s ruination and whether this filter of inevitable loss is comparable to other historic periods where buildings and lived-in spaces are overcome by natural elements.

The third and final consideration moves the discussion of climate ruination beyond the emerging dominant visual narratives to excluded narratives, those that are actively or passively excluded by these dominant discourse strands. Akin to Cosgrove’s alternative landscapes, there exist visual narratives of at-risk coastal communities that are less visible
than the dominant narrative of the fallen house. For Shishmaref, these alternative narratives of a changing climate are the struggle of getting to regional basketball tournaments with no snow to travel over safely; they are the lost life of a community member while hunting for seals on unreliable and fragmented ice; they are the economic struggle for finding $180 million to relocate further inland to escape the impacts exhibited in the fallen house photograph. These alternative narratives—alternative landscapes—are peopled and require a rethinking of the techniques of interpretation established by the dominant narrative of the fallen house.

The control of visual narrative as image flows from Alaska through media outlets to the U.S. public is in part the cause of uneven power dynamics in knowledge communication. The one-way communication of mass media creates “opacity from above” rather than a “horizontal legibility” founded on cooperative visual production and knowledge exchange (Carson 2011, 11). It is in this way that producers of visuals are able to curate particular themes of imperialist persuasion that make localized, alternative landscapes invisible, perhaps best articulated by Mitchell (1994) in Landscape and Power. Through their selection, arrangement, and aesthetic elements of inclusion and exclusion, legible landscapes act as the “dreamwork of imperialism, unfolding its own movement in time and space from a central point of origin and folding back on itself to disclose both utopian fantasies of the perfected imperial prospect and fractured images of unresolved ambivalence and unsuppressed resistance” (Mitchell 2002, 10). In the fallen house photograph, the power–knowledge imbalances not only derive from the categorization and measurement of the natural and built landscapes; they also extend to the ordering and calculation of peoplelessness in those visual frames.

Images of the fallen house might be supplemented by other images through this type of visual democratization, enabling residents with the communication tools and platform to internally define the visualization of their village. The photographing of alternative subjects for photojournalism in mass media outlets is another, perhaps more far-reaching process that might decenter the hegemonic photograph featured herein. A 2 June 2017 feature in USA Today, the most widely circulated print newspaper in the United States, titled “Residents on Remote Alaska Island Fear Climate Change Will Doom Way of Life” is one example of this (Hughes 2017).

Photographs here are not limited to landscape; they include two images of children on bicycles and an Inuit sculptor, Edwin Weyiouanna, holding a carving made from mastodon ivory, whale baleen, and rabbit fur. In repeopling the visual narrative of Shishmaref, this particular USA Today article offers another path toward complicating and expanding images available to media audiences of the Alaska village.

Nonetheless, there is a possibility that in supplanting the fallen house image with altered compositions, other themes of imperialism, of distancing, and of othering might emerge through the elevation of specific subjects captured by the cameras of media photojournalists. In elevating certain elements of the local population as representatives of the whole, U.S. mass media outlets were able to create what Thompson (2006) termed a “visual economy of people as images” (3), wherein people became objects of the U.S. visual narrative of Alaska. Although the ways in which Alaskans were visually recorded has changed over time, certain binary themes have persisted—themes of primitiveness and timelessness; of technological and natural sublime; of foreign and domestic; and of U.S. and other. For example, children in relocating villages are one such visual icon seen in the USA Today feature and elsewhere. Children are seized on as a particular element of the local population to represent the whole, but children do not escape the power of images to construct, make visible, and obscure complex power dynamics in the story of U.S. climate relocation. Children are the most vulnerable sector of the population and are heavy with symbolism dating back to their first representations in Western art. Youth is a symbol of innocence in the aesthetic, of a childish inexperience that allows them to move through art without higher purpose other than to lighten the composition with a gentle laugh or an unsullied smile. Here, though, in twenty-first century representations of relocation, is a choice to depict the most vulnerable and least experienced members of the Native communities.

Although the inclusion of other subjects, like children, does decenter the hegemonic photographs featured herein, the fetishization of selected, specific themes by southern photojournalists continues to problematize the visualization of Shishmaref. Perhaps, then, democratizing the ways in which Shishmaref is imaged, represented, and communicated offers a new way of seeing defined not by southern media outlets,
but by residents themselves. Outside of the purview of this article, it is important to understand not only the alternative narrative of a peopled Shishmaref but also how the dominant and alternative narratives interact and intersect one another to illuminate how decisions of who and what will be included and excluded are made. One could, for example, consider the Chasing Alaska photojournalism project held in Shishmaref on 11 and 12 August 2016. The workshop, led by photojournalists, taught community members how to photograph and document their environments, with specific focus on how climate change is affecting them. In part, the event began a process redefining the roles of photographer and subject in the visual narrative. Rather than allow the village to be represented and constructed by an external photojournalist and decade-old photograph, the workshop enabled community members to represent themselves visually, with or without the need to depict ruins. These might well be the first steps toward the diversification of the visual narrative construction of Shishmaref’s future—a future that might, or might not, be defined by the physical erosion and ruination of the village.

ORCID

Victoria Stephanie Herrmann http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1117-7499

Notes

1. For a fuller understanding of Shishmaref, please see Marino’s (2015) Fierce Climate, Sacred Ground: An Ethnography of Climate Change in Shishmaref; Chapter 10 of Anthropology and Climate Chang: From Actions to Transformations, edited by Crate and Nuttall 2016; Living with the Coast of Alaska by Mason, Neal, Pilkey, and Bullock (1997); Geological and Anthropological Considerations in Relocating Shishmaref, Alaska by Mason et al. (1997) from the State of Alaska; and Tetra Tech (2004), “Shishmaref Partnership Shishmaref Relocation and Collocation Study, Preliminary Costs of Alternatives” (see https://www.commerce.alaska.gov/web/Portals/4/pub/USACE_relocation%20plan_shishmaref.pdf).
2. Based on interviews conducted in September 2016.

References

Arctic Council. 2016. COP22 event: The Melting Arctic—A glimpse into the future of global climate change. Accessed May 12, 2017. https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/our-work2/8-news-and-events/428-cop22-arctic-event
Associated Press. 2016. Most residents of eroding Alaska village vote to relocate. Foxnews.com, August 18. Accessed April 3, 2018. http://www.foxnews.com/us/2016/08/18/most-residents-eroding-alaska-village-vote-to-relocate.html.
Barrell, J. 1980. The dark side of the landscape: The rural poor in English painting 1730–1840. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Buck-Morss, S. 1991. The dialectics of seeing: Walter Benjamin and the Arcades Project. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Burke, E. [1759] 2008. A philosophical enquiry into the origin of our ideas of the sublime and beautiful. Oxford, UK: Oxford Paperbacks.
Carson, K. 2011. Legibility & control: Themes in the work of James C. Scott. Center for a Stateless Society Paper, 12. Accessed December 2, 2017. https://c4ss.org/wpcontent/uploads/2011/05/james-scott.pdf.
Corner, A., R. Webster, and C. Teniete. 2016. Climate Visuals: Seven Principles for Visual Climate Change Communication (based on international social research). Climate Outreach. Accessed June 12, 2017. https://www.climatevisuals.org/sites/default/files/2018-03/Climate-Visuals-Report-Seven-principles-for-visual-climate-change-communication.pdf
Cosgrove, D. E. 1998. Social formation and symbolic landscape. 2nd ed. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Cosgrove, D. E., and S. Daniels, eds. 1988. The iconography of landscape: Essays on the symbolic representation, design and use of past environments. Vol. 9. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Crate, S. A., and M. Nuttall. 2016. Anthropology and climate change: From actions to transformations. New York and London: Routledge.
Daniels, S., and D. Cosgrove. 1993. Landscape metaphors in cultural geography. In Place/culture/representation, ed. S. James and D. Ley, 57–77. London and New York: Routledge.
DiFrancesco, A. D., and N. Young. 2011. Seeing climate change: The visual construction of global warming in Canadian national print media. Cultural Geographies 18 (4):517–36.
Edensor, T. 2005a. Waste matter—The debris of industrial ruins and the disordering of the material world. Journal of Material Culture 10 (3):311–32.
———. 2005b. Industrial ruins: Space, aesthetics and materiality. Oxford, UK: Berg.
Ellanna Strickling, S. 2013. Shishmaref Local Economic Development Plan 2013–2018. Nome, AK. Accessed May 12, 2017. http://www.kawerak.org/ledps/shishmaref.pdf.
Fabian, J. 2014. Time and the work of anthropology: Critical essays 1971–1981. London and New York: Routledge.
Frykman, J., and M. P. Frykman. 2016. Affect and material culture. Vol. 2. Oxford, UK: Nordic Academic Press.
Fyfe, G., and J. Law, eds. 1988. Picturing power: Visual depiction and social relations. Vol. 35. London and New York: Routledge.
Gilpin, W. 1794. Three essays: On picturesque beauty: On picturesque travel: and On sketching landscape: to which is added a poem on landscape painting. London: Gregg Division McGraw-Hill.

Gregory, D. 1995. Between the book and the lamp: Imaginative geographies of Egypt, 1849–50. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 20 (1):29–57.

———. 1995. Imaginative geographies. Progress in Human Geography 19 (4):447–85.

———. 2004. The colonial present. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.

Herron, J. 2012. The forgetting machine: Notes toward a history of Detroit. Places Journal, January. Accessed May 14, 2017. https://placesjournal.org/article/the-forgetting-machine-notes-toward-a-history-of-detroit/

Holpuch, A. 2016. Alaskan village threatened by rising sea levels votes for costly relocation. The Guardian, August 18. Accessed April 3, 2018. https://www.the guardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/18/alaska-shishmaref-vote-move-coastal-erosionrising-sea-levels.

Hovey, D. 2016. Shishmaref community votes to relocate. Alaska Public Media, August 18. Accessed May 14, 2017. http://www.alaska public.org/2016/08/18/shishmaref-community-votes-to-relocate/.

Hughes, T. 2017. Residents on remote Alaska island fear climate change will doom way of life. USA Today, June 2. Accessed March 1, 2018. https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2017/06/02/alaska-island-fear-climate-change-dooms-town/102398636/.

Huysseu, A. 2006. Nostalgia for ruins. Grey Room 23:6–21.

———. 2010. Authentic ruins. In Ruins of modernity, ed. J. Hell and A. Schonle, 18–19. Durham, NC, and London: Duke University Press.

Istasse, M. 2016. Affects and senses in a world heritage site. In World heritage on the ground: Ethnographic perspectives, ed. C. Brumann and D. Berliner, 28–37. New York: Berghahn.

Jackson, K. T., and C. J. Vergara. 1989. Silent cities: The evolution of the American cemetery. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Architectural Press.

MacDonald, C. 2016. Detroit population rank is lowest since 1850. The Detroit News, May 19. Accessed July 14, 2017. http://www.detroitnews.com/story/news/local/detroit-city/2016/05/19/detroit-population-rank-lowest-since/84574198/.

Marchand, Y., and R. Meffre. 2009. Detroit’s beautiful, horrible decline. Time Magazine, March 11. Accessed July 14, 2017. http://content.time.com/time/photo gallery/0,29307,1882089_1850973,00.html.

———. 2010. The ruins of Detroit. Göttingen, Germany: Steidl.

Marino, E. 2015. Fierce climate, sacred ground: An ethnography of climate change in Shishmaref, Alaska. Fairbanks: University of Alaska Press.

Mason, O. K., W. J. Neal, O. H. Pilkey, and J. Bullock. 1997. Living with the coast of Alaska. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Mele, C., and D. Victor. 2016. Reeling from effects of climate change, Alaskan village votes to relocate. The New York Times, August 19. Accessed May 20, 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/20/us/shishmaref-alaska-elocate-vote-climate-change.html?_r=1.

Mitchell, W. J. T. 1994. Landscape and power. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

———. 2002. Landscape and power. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

National Public Radio. 2016. Alaskan village votes to relocate amid climate change fears. All Things Considered, August 18. Accessed May 17, 2017. http://www.npr.org/2016/08/18/490523957/alaskan-village-votes-to-relocate-amid-climate-change-fears.

Natural Resources Conservation Service and Shishmaref Erosion and Relocation Coalition. 2003. Shishmaref Site Analysis for Potential Emergency Evacuation and Permanent Relocation Sites. Accessed June 12, 2017. https://www.commerce.alaska.gov/web/portals/4/pub/shishmaref_relocation_site_reconnaissance_nrcs.pdf

O’Neill, S. 2013. Image matters: Climate change imagery in U.S., UK and Australian newspapers. Geoforum 49:10–19.

O’Neill, S., M. Boykoff, S. Day, and S. Niemeyer. 2013. On the use of imagery for climate change engagement. Global Environmental Change 23 (2):413–21.

O’Neill, S., and M. Hulme. 2009. An iconic approach for representing climate change. Global Environmental Change 19 (4):402–10.

O’Neill, S. J., and N. Smith. 2014. Climate change and visual imagery. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 5 (1):73–87.

Pratt, M. L. 2007. Imperial eyes: Travel writing and transculturation. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.

Rebich-Hespanha, S., and R. E. Rice. 2016. Dominant visual frames in climate change news stories: Implications for formative evaluation in climate change campaigns. International Journal of Communication 10 (216):4830–62.

Rose, G. 1993. Looking at landscape: The uneasy pleasures of power. In Feminism and geography: The limits of geographical knowledge, 87–112. Cambridge, UK: Polity.

———. 2000. Practising photography: An archive, a study, some photographs and a researcher. Journal of Historical Geography 26 (4):555–71.

———. 2016. Visual methodologies: An introduction to researching with visual materials. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Schein, R. H. 1997. The place of landscape: A conceptual framework for interpreting an American scene. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 87 (4):660–80.

Schwartz, J. M. 1996. The geography lesson: Photographs and the construction of imaginative geographies. Journal of Historical Geography 22 (1):16–45.

Sheppard, K., and C. D’Angelo. 2016. Facing rising seas, remote Alaskan village votes to move (again). Huffington Post, August 17. Accessed April 3, 2018. https://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/shishmaref-alaska-relocation-vote-2016_us_57b4faa7e4b095b2f5427b1b.

Shields, R. 1991. Places on the margin: Alternative geographies of modernity. London and New York: Routledge.

Skrla, H. 2006. Ghostly ruins: America’s forgotten architecture. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Architectural Press.

Sobchack, V. 2000. What my fingers knew, the cinematic subject, or vision in the flesh. Accessed May
12, 2017. http://sensesofcinema.com/2000/conference-special-effects-special-affects/fingers/
Steinmetz, G. 2008. Harrowed landscapes: White ruingazers in Namibia and Detroit and the cultivation of memory. Visual Studies 23 (3):211–37.
Sugrue, T. J. 2004. From motor city to motor metropolis: How the automobile industry reshaped urban America. Automobile in American Life and Society. Accessed March 10, 2018. http://www.autolife.umich.edu/Race/R_Overview/R_Overview1.htm.
Sutter, J. D. 2017. Tragedy of a village built on ice. CNN. March 29. Accessed April 3, 2018. http://edition.cnn.com/2017/03/29/us/sutter-shishmaref-esau-tragedy/index.html.
Tetra Tech, Inc., Shishmaref Partnership: Shishmaref Relocation and Collocation Study, Preliminary Costs of Alternatives, US Army Corps of Engineers, Alaska District, December 2004, https://www.commerce.alaska.gov/web/Portals/4/pub/USACE_relocation%20plan_shishmaref.pdf
Thompson, K. A. 2006. An eye for the tropics: Tourism, photography, and framing the Caribbean picturesque. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Thorbecke, C. 2016. Leaving their ancestral home: Alaska village votes to move due to climate change. ABC News, August 18. Accessed April 3, 2018. http://abcnews.go.com/US/leaving-ancestral-home-alaska-village-votes-move-due/story?id=41482755.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2014. American Community Survey 1-year estimates. Accessed May 12, 2017. https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?src=bkmk.
———. 2015. American Community Survey 5-year estimates. Accessed May 12, 2017. https://censusreporter.org/profiles/16000US0269770-shishmaref-ak/.
Vergara, C. J. 1999. American ruins. New York: Monacelli Press.
Wolff, K. H., ed. 1959. Georg Simmel, 1858–1918: A collection of essays, with translations and a bibliography. Columbus: Ohio State University Press.
Wordsworth, W. [1798] 1994. Lines written a few miles above Tintern Abbey, on revisiting the banks of the Wye during a tour, 13 July 1798. In Romanticism: An anthology, ed. D. Wu, 265–69. 2nd ed. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.

VICTORIA STEPHANIE HERRMANN, PhD, is the Managing Director of The Arctic Institute and a Gates Cambridge Scholar at the Scott Polar Research Institute at the University of Cambridge, Cambridgeshire CB2 1ER, UK. E-mail: Victoria.herrmann@thearticinstitute.org. Her research interests include visual and media discourses of the Arctic and issues of coastal climate change adaptation policy.