The Professional Geographer
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

Of Stakes, Stems, and Cuttings: The Importance of Local Seed Systems in Traditional Amazonian Societies
Oliver T. Coomes a
a McGill University
Published online: 01 Jun 2010.

To cite this article: Oliver T. Coomes (2010): Of Stakes, Stems, and Cuttings: The Importance of Local Seed Systems in Traditional Amazonian Societies , The Professional Geographer, 62:3, 323-334

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2010.483628

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand, or costs or damages
whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.
Of Stakes, Stems, and Cuttings: The Importance of Local Seed Systems in Traditional Amazonian Societies*

Oliver T. Coomes
McGill University

Studies of indigenous agricultural systems in Amazonia often devote only limited attention to the accessibility and exchange of crop plant germplasm among Amerindian and folk peoples. I argue that scarcity of crop planting material—geographically, seasonally, and socially—in rural Amazonia has given rise to socioeconomic relations that profoundly influence indigenous agriculture and rural life. Access to seeds, cuttings, and other plant propagules is shown to be critical in the building and maintenance of crop and varietal diversity, in subsistence security for lowland farmers, and in market product specialization among traditional farmers. Further study of seed supply systems in Amazonia is needed to inform discussions of in situ crop conservation as well as intellectual property rights over plants and seed. Moreover, a focus on seed systems provides a new lens through which to study Amazonian peoples, their relations with one another, the market, and society. Key Words: agrobiodiversity, Amazonia, crop conservation, indigenous peoples, informal seed systems.

对亚马逊土著农业系统的研究往往只对下述问题投入有限的关注，即美洲印第安人和其他人民之间的作物种子的获取和交流。我认为，作物种植材料的地理性、季节性和社会性稀缺，在亚马逊农村已经形成一定的社会经济关系，这一关系对土著农业和农村生活产生了深刻影响。种子的获取，扦插，和其它的植物繁殖方法被证明是建立和维护作物和品种多样性的关键，对于低地农民的最低生活保障，以及定位于传统农民的产品市场，上述因素都至关重要。本文认为，有必要对亚马逊地区种子供应系统进行进一步的研究，以帮助当地的作物保护，并有助于保护植物和种子的知识产权。此外，对种子系统的侧重分析提供了一种新的视角，通过它有助于研究亚马逊人民，他们之间的相互关系，市场和社会。关键词：农业生物多样性，亚马逊，作物保护，土著人民，非正规种子系统。

Los estudios sobre sistemas agrícolas indígenas de la Amazonia a menudo dedican poca atención a la accesibilidad e intercambio de germoplasma de plantas cultivadas entre amerindios y gente común. Arguyo que la escasez de material de plantío—en términos geográficos, estacionales y sociales—en la Amazonia rural ha dado lugar a relaciones socioeconómicas que influyen profundamente la agricultura indígena y la vida local. El acceso a semillas, plantones y otros propágulos vegetales aparece como crítico en la construcción y mantenimiento de la diversidad de cosechas y variedades, en la seguridad de la subsistencia para los cultivadores de las tierras bajas y en la especialización de productos comercializables entre los agricultores tradicionales. Se necesitan más estudios de los sistemas de suministro de semillas en la Amazonia que informen las discusiones in situ sobre conservación de cosechas, lo mismo que sobre derechos de propiedad intelectual de plantas y semillas. Más todavía, el enfocarnos sobre sistemas de semillas provee un nuevo lente a través del cual estudiar los pueblos amazónicos, sus mutuas relaciones, el mercado y la sociedad. Palabras clave: agrobiodiversidad, Amazonia, conservación de cosechas, pueblos indígenas, sistemas informales de semillas.

*This article draws on many a long conversation with traditional farmers in Peru and with my former students—Natalie Ban (nee Lerch), Sophie Caillon, Mathilde Perrault-Archaubault, and Michael Watson—who undertook their theses as part of an ongoing project at McGill on the role and importance of agricultural planting material in indigenous and folk agricultural systems of the Peruvian Amazon. I gratefully acknowledge their contributions here and in the text. Grants in support of this research were received from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, the Quebec Fonds pour la Formation de Chercheurs et l’Aide à la Recherche, and McGill University. Finally, I wish to express my thanks to two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions on the article and to the Guest Editors, Kimberlee Chambers and Laura R. Lewis, for their initiative and steady guidance in the editorial process.
[The] Shipibo curiously ask about plants unfamiliar to them, and inquire about seeds or cuttings, and whether a plant will grow in their area.

—Bergman (1980, 87)

Amazonian cultural ecology has witnessed an impressive burst of research activity since the early 1980s on the material life ways of folk and Amerindian peoples of the basin. Geographers, anthropologists, ethnobotanists, and other scientists catalogued and described how rainforest peoples make use of local natural resources, actively manage them, and ultimately transform the soils, forests, fauna, and landscapes of the Amazon (Posey and Balée 1989; Redford and Padoch 1992; Denevan 2001; Glaser and Woods 2004; Heckenberger et al. 2007; Coomes, Abizaid, and Lapointe 2009). A focal point of such research has been the indigenous agricultural systems of distinct Amerindian groups as well as folk peoples, known as ribereños or ribeirinhos (caboclos). Indeed, studies of indigenous agriculture have lain at the heart of the key debates in Amazonian cultural ecology since the early 1960s, from the origins of prehistoric relic fields and the historical demography of native populations to environmental limitations on cultural development and the role of humans in transforming “pristine” Amazonia (Denevan 2001). More recently—in the face of threats to the rainforest and its peoples—research on indigenous agriculture has sought to inform wider debates on agricultural development, land rights for native peoples, and conservation of cultural and biological diversity. Such work has documented the significant ecological and economic benefits of indigenous agriculture and points to remarkable variation and diversity in traditional cropping systems, field management practices, and crops and crop varieties cultivated by Amerindian and folk peoples (Denevan and Padoch 1988; Eden 1990; Salick and Lundberg 1990; Hiraoka 1992; Padoch and de Jong 1992; Smith 1996; Denevan 2001; Miller, Penn, and van Leeuwen 2006). Interest in agrobiodiversity has led to growing attention to the origins and distribution of cultivar diversity in Amazonia by cultural ecologists as well as a broader community of research scientists working in the basin and beyond (McKey et al. 2001; Cole et al. 2007; Pujol et al. 2007; Heckler and Zent 2008).

In this article, I suggest that closer study is needed of an important but neglected feature of agricultural life among Amazonian traditional societies—access by farmers to seeds, cuttings, and other plant propagules that are vital to agricultural production and a key component of agrobiodiversity in indigenous farming systems. In other regions of the world, studies of crop-varietal diversity and the movement of seed through informal or local supply systems are more common and understanding is considerably more advanced than for Amazonia (see Almekinders, Louwaars, and de Bruijn 1994; David and Sperling 1999; Seboka and Deressa 2000; Nagarajan, Smale and Glewwe 2007; Oakley and Momsen 2007; Jarvis et al. 2008; McGuire 2008). I argue that planting stock is far from being readily available to traditional Amazonian farmers and that local, seasonal, and conjunctural scarcity beget social and economic relations that shape agriculture and rural life more broadly in important ways. To illustrate my case, I focus on the material significance of planting stock access—over the social, cultural, and symbolic—and demonstrate its influential role in three areas: (1) the building and maintenance of cultivar diversity, (2) in subsistence security among lowland farmers, and (3) in market product specialization among traditional farmers. Supporting evidence is drawn from the ethnographic and ethnobotanical literature from across the basin, although rather more examples are taken from research conducted in northwestern Amazonia. This region is of particular interest because it is considered to be an important center of domestication of several Amazonian crops (Clement 1989) and many of the initial studies of cultivar diversity and exchange come from the northwestern Amazon (e.g., Boster 1984, 1986; Padoch and de Jong 1991; Salick, Cellinese, and Knapp 1997; Lamont, Eshbaugh, and Greenberg 1999; Coomes and Ban 2004).

Planting Stock Scarcity?

The suggestion that traditional farmers in the rainforests of Amazonia—or elsewhere in the humid tropics—are constrained by a lack of access to planting material for agriculture would
seem counterintuitive. Farmers in arid and semiarid regions—such as the Sahel or in south Asia—clearly face serious challenges in securing and preserving seeds, and their lives can depend on timely access to planting material. In mountainous regions—such as in Mexico, the Andes, or the Himalayas—elevational differences and dispersed populations face varied and often harsh conditions for agriculture. Indeed, much of the leading recent work on in situ crop-varietal diversity, seed conservation, and local seed systems has come from studies conducted in these (semi)arid and mountainous regions (see Brush 1992; Louette, Charrier, and Berthaud 1997; Zimmerer 2003; Badstue et al. 2006; Nagarajan and Smale 2007; Rana et al. 2007; van Etten and de Bruin 2007; Bazile and Abrami 2008; McGuire 2008). In the tropical rainforest, however—renowned for abundant diversity of plant life, for conditions of relative environmental constancy, and as an important source of some of the world’s major crops, such as bananas and wild rubber—one might assume that planting stock is readily available to local people. Yet, on closer examination, this does not appear to be the case.

In rural Amazonia, folk and Amerindian people live along the rivers and interfluves in small, dispersed settlements, distant from urban centers and with few means of communication and trade other than river ways. Subsistence agriculture forms the core of the household’s livelihood portfolio, even among hunters and fishers, and those living within a day’s travel to an urban center also practice market-oriented indigenous agriculture. Households typically have a home garden nearby, with a rich array of cultivars, and farmers practice long-cycle swidden-fallow agroforestry on multiple small plots (each typically less than one hectare) on the interfluves and riverside upland bluffs. On the floodplain of the Amazon and its Andean tributaries, farmers practice annual cultivation of the levees, mudflats, and sandbars. Traditional farmers cultivate at least 300 different species of useful plants (see McGrath 2002; Perrault-Archambault and Coomes 2008), drawing on many more wild and semidomesticated species from the forest (Schultz and Raffauf 1990; Duke and Vásquez 1994), and the number of varieties, especially among clonal species such as manioc, is likely to be high (see Boster 1984; Heckler and Zent 2008). Varietal diversity reflects farmer selection tailored to microenvironmental heterogeneity in edaphic conditions; nutrient status and topography; and their varied material, aesthetic, and cultural needs and preferences. Farmers are in constant need of replenishing their holdings of cultivars to maintain production against losses due to pests, diseases, and theft, and, in the lowlands, flooding.

Amazonian farmers—like those elsewhere in the Neotropical lowlands—rely heavily on manioc and plantain for their primary starch, rather than maize, beans, or rice. High reliance on these and other vegetatively propagated plants for subsistence, unlike with cereals, places a heavy burden on farmers. Manioc and plantain are grown from cuttings (stakes) and pseudostems, respectively, which are bulky and heavy, perishable, essentially inedible, and have low stock–yield ratios. In contrast, seed crops such as rice and maize can be stored for long periods, are comestible as grains, and small quantities serve to plant large land areas. Differences in the availability, portability, and productivity of seed- versus vegetatively propagated plants have important implications for farmers.

To secure their subsistence, traditional farmers in Amazonia must marshal large quantities of planting material for their fields. Although field sizes are small, planting densities are high, with fields receiving the equivalent per hectare of several thousands of manioc cuttings and hundreds of plantain pseudostems (see Beckerman 1987, Table 3–4). Similarly, large quantities of planting material are needed for vegetatively propagated cash crops such as pineapple or yams (Coomes 1998). As each mature plant yields only a modest number of propagules, a farmer must have substantial extant holdings nearby to ensure that sufficient planting material for new fields is available from old fields and forest fallows. This need stands in sharp contrast to cereals with their high seed–yield ratios where, for example, only five kilograms of rice taken from a lowland field (that yielded one to two metric tonnes per hectare) is required to replant an equivalent area on the floodplain. Moreover, vegetative propagules typically remain viable for a few months, not a year or several as for some seed. On the upland, where a farmer typically manages multiple polycultural fields at the same time, impressive quantities of this perishable material must be assembled
in a timely manner. Among the Aguaruna, Boster (1984, 40) reported that informants attribute significant losses of manioc cultivars with precipitous moves, over long distance, because of the high bulk and low portability of manioc stakes. A similar constraint is noted among the Yanomami in field and settlement location and the importance of allies for remote access to manioc cuttings (Chagnon 1968, 34–36; Ferguson 1995, 27). In the lowland, as floodwaters recede and expose the fertile floodplain soils for cultivation, demand for fresh planting stock is high as farmers en masse seek out cuttings, suckers, and especially seeds for maize, rice, and bean cultivation. When a farmer moves to a new community, or when his or her sons and daughters form their respective households, access to land but also to planting stock becomes a critical issue in establishing themselves as a viable agricultural household.

Seed Sources and Exchange Networks

To secure agricultural planting material, traditional farmers in Amazonia seek out seeds, cuttings, and pseudostems from a variety of sources and they actively participate in intra- as well as intercommunity exchange networks to acquire material, often over considerable distances. The sources of planting material as well as both the nature and terms of exchange relations, depend on the crop, distance to markets, and local circumstances. Generally, seed for cereals is purchased or “loaned,” whereas crops that are vegetatively propagated—such as manioc or plantain—are gifted; planting material tends to be purchased closer to urban centers and along busy river routes. In Peru, seeds for cash crops such as maize, rice, cow pea, and peanuts are readily available for purchase through markets; however, when cash is limited or distances too great, farmers obtain seed as loans from family, kin, or neighbors, typically with the understanding that twice the quantity would be repaid at harvest. Farmers, often women, select seeds based on size, appearance, and expected viability and productivity from the harvested grain (or fruit, such as watermelon) and store them in plastic containers and bottles for the next season. Near Iquitos, a hybrid seed system (el pedido) has developed—in the face of short-lived and ineffectual formal seed delivery programs offered by local government agencies and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)—whereby floodplain farmers work with informal seed dealers in the city to locally test and “certify” new seed crop varieties and hybrids, retaining a portion for their own use (Pinedo-Vasquez et al. 2004). Penn (2006) reported on the critical role also played by ribereño farmers in government-sponsored dissemination of camu camu (Myrciaria dubia), a promising riparian tree crop in northeastern Peru.

In rural communities, traditional farmers most commonly acquire planting material primarily from their own fields; from family and kin through extensive social networks; and from intermediaries such as river traders, missionaries, oil company workers, or government agents. Extant fields and forest fallows are important sources of planting material, as sometimes is the nearby forest. For vital subsistence crops such as manioc and plantain, much of the planting material is transferred by gifting along family and kin lines; markets for seeds and cuttings for crops other than cereals tend to be thin, periodic, and most often nonexistent. Gifting is not explicitly reciprocal and farmers consistently recall more clearly from whom they acquired stock than to whom they have given seeds or cuttings, pointing to the importance of seeds as social currency (see Heckler and Zent 2008). Most exchanges occur within communities, but intercommunity trade in planting material is common and networks can extend over hundreds of kilometers (Boster 1984; Kainer and Duryea 1992; Ban and Coomes 2004; Collado-Panduro et al. 2004). Evidence from recent studies of genetic differentiation in peach palm suggests that seed exchange networks and migration among Amerindians might be historically more extensive than among folk peoples (see Adin et al. 2004; Cole, White, and Nair 2007). At times, though, when material is especially scarce and demand is synchronous, as after a high flood, plantain pseudostems and manioc stakes are sold by upland farmers or by itinerant river traders. Farmers will also do day work in exchange for planting material, a common solution in areas where cash is scarce and opportunities for wage work are few. Along the Marañón River, novelty crops such as oranges, mangoes, and coconuts are sold as planting stock from balsa rafts floating down river from the eastern slopes of the Andes (Ban and
Coomes 2004). Farmers sometimes also purchase or barter planting material from traders on the large boats that ply the major rivers or the long-distance traders (regatones) that work the more remote tributaries. Nonetheless, much planting material is acquired through social networks, bridging lowland and upland environments, upriver sources with downriver farmers, and rural farmers with urban sources. The most developed and extensive seed exchange networks appear to be those that provision home gardens—the sites of the greatest crop diversity in indigenous and folk agricultural systems in Amazonia—and swiddens.

The existence of trade networks in agricultural planting stock, although poorly understood as yet, supports our conjecture that planting material can be locally scarce and access is an important issue for Amazonian traditional farmers. We explore this issue further by considering the role of planting stock exchange in the building and maintenance of crop diversity; in subsistence security, and in market product specialization.

Crop Diversity

One of the most celebrated features—indeed a hallmark—of indigenous agriculture in Amazonia is the high diversity encountered in agricultural practices and in cultivated plants. Much research on indigenous agriculture has emphasized agrodiversity (e.g., Brookfield 2001), such as variations in cropping systems, output, and management practices within and across agroecosystems. Recently, however, more attention has been devoted to agrobiodiversity, as researchers document cultivar diversity and seek to assess the factors that build and shape crop and varietal diversity, particularly in polyvarietal manioc (Boster 1984; Salick, Cellinese, and Knapp 1997; Emperaire, Pinton, and Second 1998; Wilson and Dufour 2006; Pujol et al. 2007; Heckler and Zent 2008). As yet, however, relatively little is known of the geographical and social distribution of useful plant diversity across the basin, or the factors that influence cultivar diversity at the regional, community, and household levels.

In northeastern Peru, regional crop diversity is highly variable and depends on field type and location, community size, group ethnicity, and access to market (Coomes and Ban 2004; Perrault-Archambault and Coomes 2008). Generally, swiddens and home gardens situated on the upland have significantly higher crop diversity than in the lowland, where the annual flood cuts away at the potential for long-term accumulation of crop species, especially perennials. Varietal diversity in manioc has also been found to be lower in the floodplain than on the upland (Willemen et al. 2007). Larger communities tend to hold greater total diversity and intracommunity differences in crop diversity are often greater than differences across communities. Certain Amerindian groups are known for higher crop diversity than others, particularly the Aguarauna, Huambisa, Yanesha, Ashaninka, and Achuar (Boster 1984; Salick and Lundberg 1990; Descola 1994; Collado-Panduro et al. 2004; Perrault-Archambault and Coomes 2008). Garden diversity is often higher in communities nearer to markets than in more remote areas (Padoch and de Jong 1991; Lamont, Eshbaugh, and Greenberg 1999; Perretault 2005; Wezel and Ohl 2005). Urban gardens are frequently populated with plants from nearby rural communities (WinklerPrins 2002). At a given rural location, crop diversity tends to be higher among older, wealthier households, and those affiliated with a larger kin group (Coomes and Ban 2004). Importantly, crop diversity is also strongly related to the frequency with which households exchange planting stock: Those households reporting more exchanges have more diverse gardens, as greater diversity both requires and facilitates greater trade in seeds and cuttings. Farmers frequently remark that they did not plant a particular cultivar or cultivate the full area of a field specifically because they lacked sufficient planting material, and as such their production suffered. Others point out specific cultivars in their gardens and fields, planted as experimental varieties or crops and acquired by way of gifting or bartering. This observation is consistent with a remark commonly found among ethnographic and historical accounts from Amazonia of traditional peoples’ great interest in the acquisition of seeds or cuttings for planting. Indeed, many an early missionary and traveler and, more recently, field scientist, FUNAI (National Indian Foundation) employee, or NGO worker, has responded to requests by bringing seeds of new cultivars to share among local people (see Holmberg 1969, 272; Jackson 1983, 54; Johnson 2003,
47). And, reported “crop raiding” among indigenous groups might be as much to acquire the seeds and cuttings of new crops or varieties as to secure foodstuffs. Clearly, access to planting material is important not only for sustained and timely crop production but also for crop diversification and on-farm experimentation (Johnson 1972; Penn 2006).

Amazonian farmers are differentiated, however, despite their common need, in their access to planting material—seeds, cuttings, and pseudostems move through exchange networks shaped by social, economic, cultural, and gender relations. Farmers most actively involved with trading of planting material (giving and receiving) for home gardens tend to be among the better-off households. Better-off households also purchase a larger portion of their planting material compared to poorer households, who rely more on family and kinship ties for receiving of planting stock (Ban and Coomes 2004). Among the Achuar, planting material flows especially along the matriline (i.e., mother–daughter, maternal aunt–niece) and older, wealthier households lie at the center of networks, exchanging with similar households, transferring material to younger households, and bringing in new material from other communities and regions (Perrault-Archambault and Coomes 2009). Descola (1994, 166) wrote, “[an Achuar] woman who successfully grows a rich pallet of plants thereby demonstrates her competence as a gardener and fully assumes the main social role ascribed to women by proving her agronomic virtuosity.” Women, elders, and traditional healers (shaman) in other Amerindian groups play an active role in holding and transmitting seeds and cuttings (Brown 1985; Boster 1986; Salick, Cellinese, and Knapp 1997). A new cultivar of manioc, among the Aguaruna, is often named after the woman who introduced it to the community; later, once the cultivar has gained broader acceptance, the place of origin becomes the name (Boster 1984). Exchange among ethnic (and quasi-ethnic) groups appears to be uneven and partial. Although the Achuar of the Corrientes River exchange actively with neighboring mestizos (riberenos), they rarely exchange planting material with nearby Urarinas (Perrault-Archambault and Coomes 2009). In Ecuador, the Achuar acquired in the mid-1970s a useful taro (papachina, Colocasia sp.) from the Shuar (Descola 1994, 166). The Desano (Tukano, Colombia) reportedly received the sweet potato and arum (Xanthosoma sp.) from the Uanano; papaya, chilli, and custard apple came from rubber tappers (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1971). Indeed, trade in plants and planting material has been common historically among indigenous groups, with seed exchanges likely tied into larger scale regional trade networks for commodities such as salt, metal tools, magical substances, pets, and ceremonial objects (see Goldman 1963; Hugh-Jones 1992; Reeve 1994; Miller and Nair 2006).

Often within a region or river system, a small number of farmers—usually less than one per community—hold a significantly more diverse portfolio of crops and varieties than others, particularly in their home gardens. These high-diversity farmers actively seek to increase their repertoire of crops and cultivars and can be important local sources of seeds and cuttings. Referred to in the literature as master or expert farmers (Boster 1983; Padoch and de Jong 1991; Salick, Cellinese, and Knapp 1997), they serve also as knowledge brokers about planting material and are recognized locally by other local farmers as being particularly interested in plants (le gusta mucho las plantas). Brown (1985) described how new varieties of manioc move through long-distance intraethnic networks of Aguarian women with acknowledged expertise in magic, and make their way to less knowledgeable women. Yet farmers also hide certain cultivars from others in their community and use the presence of researchers to visit others’ fields and formally request planting material (Brown 1985; Coomes and Ban 2004). Access to planting material is thus differentiated and an important factor in the building and maintenance of crop diversity among traditional farmers of the Amazon.

Lowland Subsistence Security

The lowland environment along the Amazon River is a singularly challenging place to live. Annual floods bring sediments that replenish soil fertility on the floodplain but also threaten crops, homes, and possessions. Should a flood arrive early when crops are not yet mature, losses can be substantial; an unusually high flood can carry away some or all of the planting
stock. A long flood can leave households with little food or savings during the recessional period. Although flood waters might recede quickly, households must still wait at least three months before their first crops mature, and during this period they rely on stored cereals and manioc flour, on manioc buried in pits or submerged underwater, on fresh manioc and plantain acquired by trading fish with upland communities, and on “hunger foods” (e.g., breadfruit, taro, yams). It is during the recessional period, which varies by month down the Amazon River, that access to planting stock, as well as food, becomes a critical issue. Subsistence security is threatened when farmers cannot marshal sufficient planting stock to meet food needs for the coming year. An added risk in the Upper Amazon is the threat of repiquetes, small but devastating water-level rises during flood recession that drown freshly planted floodplain crops, particularly rice and cow pea, and drive farmers to seek out seeds anew for replanting their fields.

Lowland farmers use several strategies to ensure access to sufficient planting stock following the annual flood. For cereals, such as maize and rice, the greatest threats arise from pests and household consumption of the seed cum grain before the floodplain is ready for planting. Although farmers typically sun-dry their seed to reduce moisture content and then apply pesticide, used engine oil, ash, or smoke, losses to pests—particularly moths and weevils—can be 75 percent or higher (Collado-Panduro et al. 2004; Pinedo-Vasquez et al. 2004). Despite efforts to self-supply, many farmers must rely on family and kinfolk for access to seed; few can afford to purchase seed because of depleted savings during the flood and recession period. For specialty door yard crops such as medicinal plants, farmers construct elevated barbacoas and even balsa rafts for storing small quantities of important planting stock above the floodwaters. For crops such as manioc and plantain, which require large volumes of bulky planting stock, lowland farmers typically seek out areas of the highest levees and especially the upland, where they plant gardens to ensure a secure supply of both food and planting stock during the lean period. During the highest floods only the uplands are absolutely secure. Upland “insurance gardens” as well as old forest fallows and Dark Earth (terra preta) sites serve as soil seed banks that provide not only planting material after catastrophic crop loss, but also serve a vital function in fostering diversity in genotypes and phenotypes of manioc as well as perhaps other mixed clonal–sexual reproducing species (see Boster 1984; Brown 1985; Clement, McCann, and Smith 2003; Pujolet al. 2007). In the absence of high ground, floodplain farmers must travel to upland communities to acquire cuttings and suckers, and this search is particularly extensive following an unusually high flood. Upland areas, as such, are important sources, whereas the lowlands are sinks for planting material, and trade networks link these areas together.

Certain areas of the upland appear to be especially important sources of planting material, including riverine bluffs, upland tributaries, and possibly terra preta sites. An example from Peru is the Nahuapa River, a third-order left bank tributary of the Marañón, upstream of Iquitos (Ban and Coomes 2004). On the eastern margins of the fertile Pastaza fan, farmers along the Nahuapa orient their production systems—particularly manioc and plantain—for the provisioning of stakes and pseudostems to lowland communities following the annual flood along the Marañón. During 1999, some 11,000 pseudostems of plantain or banana and 705 rolls of manioc stakes were transferred to lowland farmers from households in two Nahuapa communities (Watson 2000). Typically, planting stock is gifted to family and kinsfolk, along with small quantities of foodstuffs; some lowland farmers barter fish, others exchange their labor, and some purchase the planting material. The frequency and volume of transferred stock varies markedly, from little or no transfer to households that gift, barter, or sell more than 5,000 pseudostems and 100 rolls of manioc stakes in up to sixty exchanges per year. Generally, planting stock is provided more frequently and in higher volumes by wealthier households, particularly those with younger and more crop-diverse fields, situated in communities nearest to the lowland. In 1999, a “normal” flood year according to local residents, planting stock from the two study communities reached fifteen communities over distances of up to 200 km away. As perhaps might be expected, the network of planting stock exchange becomes more extensive and thicker following a major flood event. In the months after the devastating
flood of 1993–1994 on the Marañón River, the number of transfers per household rose, as did the proportion of households making transfers, and almost twice the number of lowland communities (i.e., twenty-five) received manioc stakes and plantain pseudostems from along the Nahuapa (Watson 2000). In addition, several lowland communities appealed to a conservation-development NGO, based in Iquitos, for logistic support in facilitating access to much needed planting stock following the flood.

The source–sink dynamic described for planting material suggests a corollary: The uplands in Amazonia effectively serve as a source of agrobiodiversity and the floodplains act as a sink, with crop and varietal diversity cut down by the annual flood and the upland serving to replenish lowland diversity. The vulnerability of floodplain peoples today and perhaps in prehistory is offset by trade relations that bring planting material vital to subsistence in this dynamic and unpredictable environment. One might speculate as to whether the devastating collapse of Amerindian populations with contact and postcontact intertribal conflict was due, in part, to widespread disruption of seed supply systems. As Old World diseases repeatedly ravaged the population, native people evacuated riverine areas and abandoned floodplain cereals, seeking refuge in the forest interfluves where they relied on root crop systems—crops that require large quantities of bulky, inedible planting material; indeed, it is perhaps here that the soil seed banks of other tribes they replaced or displaced would have been crucial to the survival of Amerindian populations in Amazonia.

Market Product Specialization

Although often depicted as subsistence societies, folk and Amerindian peoples of Amazonia with few exceptions live economically as peasants—integrated either directly or indirectly through intermediaries to markets. Kerosene, salt, clothing, and shotgun shells are today among the basic necessities of rural life, purchased with earnings from the sale of agricultural and forest products. Smole (1976) reported how the highland Yanomami at the time cultivated maize, beans, tomatoes, and squash—essentially nonfood plants for them—expressly for barter with mission stations. Today, the urban markets of Belém, Manaus, and Iquitos bear witness to a remarkable diversity of products extracted or cultivated in the hinterland. Much more than backwoods generalists who send surplus production of subsistence goods to market, Amazonian rural households are often highly specialized in the products marketed, and the choice of speciality product varies markedly within and across communities (Coomes, Barham, and Takasaki 2004). Households might draw on many different products from the forest and land, but often a single product serves as their primary source of cash—from aquarium fish species, palm fruit, honey, game, or wild rubber to vegetables, medicinal plants, root crops, or tropical fruit. Within one day’s travel of an urban center, specialization in market-oriented indigenous agriculture is particularly pronounced. Nearest to Iquitos, farmers produce medicinal plants and condiments in their gardens and ornamental cut flowers in swidden fields on the levee backslopes for the city’s cemeteries; beyond a few hours’ travel, pineapple, cashew, caimito (Pouteria caimito), and umarí (Poraqueiba sericea) come from swidden-fallow agroforests, and sweet peppers, watermelon, and papaya come from the levees. In this process of product specialization for market, access to planting stock plays an instrumental role—access to seeds or cuttings can permit certain households to specialize in a marketable crop or variety that is unavailable to others.

The role and importance of planting stock in niche market specialization can be illustrated with a case from along the Tahuayo River, a small tributary of the Amazon within one day’s boat travel of Iquitos. Communities along the Tahuayo specialize in particular agricultural products—from manioc and purple yams to pineapple, watermelon, and avocado (Coomes 1998). Of their specialities, planting stock access was a key factor in the cultivation of purple yams (Discorea sp., upland crop) and watermelon (floodplain crop). In both cases a single resident acquired the seed—the yam from the forest and the watermelon variety from a foreign visitor—and began cultivating the plant as an experiment. Various cultivation techniques were tried, modified, and retried until the crop flourished. As pests for the new crop
were few, market demand was strong, and local competition was limited, the early adopters captured high returns from this novelty crop. In a few seasons, both the seeds and knowledge of how to cultivate the new crop spread quickly in the community via cooperative labor work groups and by intrakin group gifting. With more households participating in production of the crop, the community name became associated with the crop—Punga for purple yam and Chino for watermelon—and its reputation afforded producers a measure of market power in the markets of Iquitos. Soon, however, residents in nearby communities on the Tahuayo—where soils were similar—sought the seeds and the knowledge of how to cultivate the crop. In an attempt to maintain market advantage, the community discouraged or explicitly forbade the sharing of seeds beyond the village. Despite the tight kin-based nature of the community, the seeds inevitably spread to other communities by intermarriage, illicit sale, theft, or in exchange for field labor. As the geographic scale of production expanded and farmers cultivated the crop, year after year on the same land, pests became ever more problematic. Whereas most farmers sought out strategies to control pests, a few individuals began looking for a new crop or variety to introduce that would fill a potential niche market. In that search, the innovators sought out new planting material, from the markets of Iquitos, from travelers, and in their peregrinations along the other rivers of the region.

Conclusion

In this article, I have argued that access to agricultural planting material among traditional peoples in the Amazon basin, as perhaps elsewhere in tropical forests, is an important issue that merits closer study. Planting material cannot be assumed to be readily available to traditional farmers, nor that it moves freely or liberally, without significance among Amazonian Amerindian and folk communities. Seeds, cuttings, and stems can be locally, seasonally, and socially scarce, and access to planting stock plays a crucial role in shaping agrobiodiversity in indigenous agriculture, in subsistence security along the floodplains, and in niche market product specialization among farmers living in the urban hinterland. The common need for planting material under conditions of relative, periodic, or conjunctural scarcity has given rise to a variety of important social and economic relations—including seed exchange networks—among farmers along the rivers and interfluves of the basin. Such relations are as yet poorly documented and understood, even though they are highly relevant for initiatives aimed at in situ conservation of plant germplasm and in debates over plants and seeds as intellectual property. Local seed systems in Amazonia link lowland to upland farmer, rural producers to river traders and urban seed merchants, newcomers and new households to old timers, men to women, indigenous to nonindigenous groups, and traditional healers and master farmers to the rest. At the same time, such relations act to differentiate rural peoples and households by the uneven flow of planting material. As such, further study of the role and importance of agricultural planting stock is promising not only to advance our understanding of Amazonian indigenous agriculture but also as a new lens through which to study Amazonian peoples and their links with each other, the market, and society.

Literature Cited

Adin, A., J. C. Weber, C. Sotelo Montes, H. Vidaurre, B. Vosman, and M. J. M. Smulders. 2004. Genetic differentiation and trade among populations of peach palm (Bactris gasipaes Kunth) in the Peruvian Amazon—Implications for genetic resource management. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 108:1564–73.

Almekinders, C. J. M., N. P. Louwaars, and G. H. de Bruijn. 1994. Local seed systems and their importance for an improved seed supply in developing countries. Euphytica 78:207–16.

Badstue, L. B., M. R. Bellon, J. Berthaud, X. Juarez, I. M. Rosas, A. M. Solano, and A. Ramirez. 2006. Examining the role of collective action in an informal seed system: A case study from the central valleys of Oaxaca, Mexico. Human Ecology 34 (2): 249–73.

Ban, N., and O. T. Coomes. 2004. Home gardens in Amazonian Peru: Diversity and exchange of planting material. The Geographical Review 94 (3): 348–67.

Bazile, D., and G. Abrami. 2008. Des modèles pour analyser ensemble les dynamiques variétales du
sorgho dans un village malien. (Models for analysis of sorghum varietal dynamics sorghum in a Malian village). Cahiers Agricultures 17 (2): 203–09.

Beckerman, S. 1987. Swidden in Amazonia and the Amazon rim. In Comparative farming systems, ed. B. L. Turner II and S. B. Brush, 55–93. New York: Guilford.

Bergman, R. W. 1980. Amazon economics: The simplicity of Shipibo Indian wealth. Dellplain Latin American Series 6. Ann Arbor, MI: University Microfilm International.

Boster, J. S. 1983. A comparison of the diversity of Jivaroan gardens with that of the tropical forest. Human Ecology 11 (1): 47–68.

———. 1984. Classification, cultivation, and selection of Aguarruna manioc cultivars of Manihot esculenta (Euphorbiaceae). Advances in Economic Botany 1:34–47.

———. 1986. Exchange of varieties and information between Aguarruna manioc cultivators. American Anthropologist 88:428–36.

Brookfield, H. 2001. Exploring agrodiversity. New York: Columbia University Press.

Brown, M. F. 1985. Tsewa’s gift: Magic and meaning in an Amazonian society. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.

Brush, S. B. 1992. Ethnoecology, biodiversity and modernization in Andean potato agriculture. Journal of Ethnobiology 12:70–88.

Chagnon, N. A. 1968. Yanomamo: The fierce people. Montreal, Canada: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Clement, C. R. 1989. A center of crop genetic diversity in western Amazonia: A new hypothesis of indigenous fruit-crop distribution. BioScience 39 (9): 624–31.

Clement, C. R., J. M. McCann, and N. J. H. Smith. 2003. Agrobiodiversity in Amazonia and its relationship with dark earth. In Amazonian dark earths: Origins, properties, management, ed. J. Lehmann, D. C. Kern, B. Glaser, and W. I. Woods, 159–78. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.

Cole, D. M., T. L. White, and P. K. R. Nair. 2007. Maintaining genetic resources of peach palm (Bactris gasipaes Kunth): The role of seed migration and swidden-fallow management in northeastern Peru. Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution 54: 189–204.

Collado-Panduro, L. A., M. Arroyo, A. Fiesco, and J. L. Chávez Servia. 2004. Experiencias sobre la diversidad de los cultivos y aspectos económicos de la conservación in situ en la Amazonía Central Peruana (Crop diversity and economics of in situ conservation in the Central Peruvian Amazon). In Manejo de la Diversidad de los Cultivos en los Agroecosistemas Tradicionales, ed. J. L. Chávez-Servia, J. Tuxill, and D. I. Jarvis, 188–98. Cali, Colombia: Instituto Internacional de Recursos Fitogenéticos.

Coomes, O. T. 1998. Traditional peasant agriculture along a blackwater river of the Peruvian Amazon. Revista Geográfica 124:33–55.

Coomes, O. T., C. Abizaid, and M. Lapointe. 2009. Human modification of a large meandering Amazonian river: Genesis, ecological and economic consequences of the Masisea cutoff on the central Ucayali, Peru. Ambio 38 (3): 130–34.

Coomes, O. T., and N. Ban. 2004. Cultivated plant species diversity in home gardens of an Amazonian peasant village in northeastern Peru. Economic Botany 58 (3): 420–34.

Coomes, O. T., B. L. Barham, and Y. Takasaki. 2004. Targeting conservation-development initiatives in tropical forests: Insights from analyses of rain forest use and economic reliance among Amazonian peasants. Ecological Economics 51 (1–2): 47–64.

David, S., and L. Sperling. 1999. Improving technology delivery mechanisms: Lessons from bean seed systems research in eastern and central Africa. Agriculture and Human Values 16:381–88.

Denevan, W. M. 2001. Cultivated landscapes of native Amazonia and the Andes. New York: Oxford University Press.

Denevan, W. M., and C. Padoch, eds. 1988. Swidden-fallow agroforestry in the Peruvian Amazon. Advances in Economic Botany 5. New York: New York Botanical Garden Press.

Descola, P. 1994. In the society of nature. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Duke, J. A., and R. Vásquez. 1994. Amazonian ethnobotanical dictionary. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

Eden, M. 1990. Ecology and land management in Amazonia. London: Belhaven Press.

Emperaire, L., F. Pinton, and G. Second. 1998. Une gestion dynamique de la diversité variétale du manioc en Amazonie du nord-ouest. (Dynamic management of manioc varietal diversity in northwestern Amazonia). Nature, Science et Société 6: 27–42.

Ferguson, B. R. 1995. Yanomami warfare: A political history. Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press.

Glaser, B., and W. I. Woods, eds. 2004. Amazonian dark earths: Explorations in space and time. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

Goldman, I. 1963. The Cubeo: Indians of the northwest Amazon. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Heckenberger, M. J., J. C. Russell, J. R. Toney, and M. J. Schmidt. 2007. The legacy of cultural landscapes in the Brazilian Amazon: Implications for biodiversity. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362:197–208.

Heckler, S., and S. Zent. 2008. Piavva manioc varietals: Hyperdiversity or social currency? Human Ecology 36:679–97.
Hiraoka, M. 1992. Caboclo and Ribereño resource management in Amazonia: A review. In Conservation of neotropical forests: Working from traditional resource use, ed. K. H. Redford and C. Padoch, 134–57. New York: Columbia University Press.

Holmberg, A. R. 1969. Nomads of the long bow: The Siriono of eastern Bolivia. Garden City, NY: American Museum Science Books.

Hugh-Jones, S. 1992. Yesterday’s luxuries, tomorrow’s necessities: Business and barter in northwest Amazonia. In Barter, exchange and value: An anthropological approach, ed. C. Humphrey and S. Hugh-Jones, 42–74. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Jackson, J. E. 1983. The fish people: Linguistic exogamy and Tukanoan identity in northwest Amazonia. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Jarvis, D. I., A. H. D. Brown, P. Hung Cuong, L. Collado-Panduro, L. Latournerie-Moreno, S. Gyawali, T. Tanto, et al. 2008. A global perspective of the richness and evenness of traditional crop-variety diversity maintained by farming communities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 (14): 5326–31.

Johnson, A. W. 1972. Individuality and experimentation in traditional agriculture. Human Ecology 1 (2): 149–60.
———. 2003. Families of the forest: The Matsigenka Indians of the Peruvian Amazon. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Kainer, K. A., and M. L. Durvea. 1992. Tapping women’s knowledge: Plant resource use in extractive reserves, Acre, Brazil. Economic Botany 46 (4): 408–25.

Lamont, S. R., W. H. Eshbaugh, and A. M. Greenberg. 1999. Species composition, diversity, and use of homegardens among three Amazonian villages. Economic Botany 53 (3): 312–26.

Louette, D., A. Charrier, and J. Berthaud. 1997. In situ conservation of maize in Mexico: Genetic diversity and maize seed management in a traditional community. Economic Botany 51 (1): 20–38.

McGrath, D. G. 2002. Final report of the Santarem sub-cluster. Tokyo: United Nations University.

McGuire, S. J. 2008. Securing access to seed: Social relations and sorghum seed exchange in eastern Ethiopia. Human Ecology 36:217–29.

McKey, D., L. Emperaire, M. Elias, F. Pinton, T. Robert, S. Desmoulière, and L. Rival. 2001. Local management and regional dynamics of variety diversity of cassava in Amazonia. Genetics Selection Evolution 33:S465–90.

Miller, R. P., and P. K. R. Nair. 2006. Indigenous agroforestry systems in Amazonia: From prehistory to today. Agroforestry Systems 66:151–64.

Miller, R. P., J. W. Penn, Jr., and J. van Leeuwen. 2006. Amazonian homegardens: Their ethnohistory and potential contribution to agroforestry development. In Tropical homegardens: A time-tested example of sustainable agroforestry, ed. B. M. Kumar and P. K. R. Nair, 43–60. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.

Nagarajan, L., and M. Smale. 2007. Village seed systems and the biological diversity of millet crops in marginal environments of India. Euphytica 155:167–82.

Nagarajan, L., M. Smale, and P. Glewwe. 2007. Determinants of millet diversity at the household-farm and village-community levels in the drylands of India: The role of local seed systems. Agricultural Economics 36:157–67.

Oakley, E., and J. H. Momsen. 2007. Women and seed management: A study of two villages in Bangladesh. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 28:90–106.

Padoch, C., and W. de Jong. 1991. The house gardens of Santa Rosa: Diversity and variability in an Amazonian agricultural system. Economic Botany 45 (2): 166–75.
———. 1992. Diversity, variation, and change in ribereño agriculture. In Conservation of neotropical forests: Working from traditional resource use, ed. K. H. Redford and C. Padoch, 158–74. New York: Columbia University Press.

Penn, J. W. 2006. The cultivation of camu camu (Myrciaria dubia): A tree planting programme in the Peruvian Amazon. Forests, Trees and Livelihoods 16:85–101.

Perrault-Archambault, M., and O. T. Coomes. 2008. Distribution of agrobiodiversity in home gardens along the Corrientes River, Peruvian Amazon. Economic Botany 62 (2): 109–26.
———. 2009. Local seed exchange: A social network analysis among the Achuar of the Peruvian Amazon. Unpublished manuscript.

Perreault, T. 2005. Why Chacras (swidden gardens) persist: Agrobiodiversity, food security, and cultural identity in the Ecuadorian Amazon. Human Organization 64 (4): 327–39.

Pinedo-Vasquez, R. Sears, I. Cardama, and M. Pinedo Panduro. 2004. A hybrid concept for understanding the functionality of seed systems in smallholder societies of the Peruvian Amazon. In Seed systems and crop genetic diversity on-farm, ed. D. I. Jarvis, R. Sevilla-Panizo, J.-L. Chávez-Servia, and T. Hodgkins, 41–50. Rome: International Plant Genetic Resources Institute.

Posey, D., and W. Balee, eds. 1989. Resource management in Amazonia: Indigenous and folk strategies. Advances in Economic Botany 7. New York: New York Botanical Garden Press.

Pujol, B., F. Renoux, M. Elias, L. Rival, and D. Mckey. 2007. The unappreciated ecology of landrace populations: Conservation consequences of soil seed banks in cassava. Biological Conservation 136:541–51.
Rana, R. B., C. Garforth, B. Sthapit, and D. Jarvis. 2007. Influence of socio-economic and cultural factors in rice varietal diversity management on-farm in Nepal. Agriculture and Human Values 24: 461–72.

Redford, K. H., and C. Padoch, eds. 1992. Conservation of neotropical forests: Working from traditional resource use. New York: Columbia University Press.

Reeve, M.-E. 1994. Regional integration in the western Amazon: The early colonial encounter and the Jesuit years: 1537–1767. Ethnohistory 41 (1): 106–38.

Reichel-Dolmatoff, G. 1971. Amazonian cosmos: The sexual and religious symbolism of the Tukano Indians. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Salick, J., N. Cellinese, and S. Knapp. 1997. Indigenous diversity of cassava: Generation, maintenance, use and loss among the Amuesah, Peruvian Upper Amazon. Economic Botany 51 (1): 6–19.

Salick, J., and M. Lundberg. 1990. Variation and change in Amuesha agriculture, Peruvian Upper Amazon. Advances in Economic Botany 8:199–223.

Schultz, R. E., and R. F. Raffauf. 1990. The healing forest: Medicinal and toxic plants of the northwest Amazonia. Portland, OR: Dioscorides Press.

Seboka, B., and A. Deressa. 2000. Validating farmers’ indigenous social networks for local seed supply in central Rift Valley of Ethiopia. The Journal of Agricultural Education and Extension 6 (4): 245–54.

Smith, N. J. H. 1996. Home gardens as a springboard for agroforestry development in Amazonia. International Tree Crops Journal 9:11–30.

Smole, W. J. 1976. The Yanoama Indians: A cultural geography. Austin: The University of Texas Press.

van Etten, J., and S. de Bruin. 2007. Regional and local maize seed exchange and replacement in the western highlands of Guatemala. Plant Genetic Resources: Characterization and Utilization 5 (2): 57–70.

Watson, M. J. 2000. Crop exchange in Amazonia: Understanding the dynamics of planting material transfer in traditional upland communities in the Peruvian Amazon. Unpublished B.A. honors thesis, Department of Geography, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Wezel, A., and J. Ohl. 2005. Does remoteness from urban centres influence plant diversity in homegardens and swidden fields? A case study from the Matsiguenka in the Amazonian rain forests of Peru. Agroforestry Systems 65:241–51.

Willeman, L., X. Scheldeman, V. Soto Cabellos, S. R. Salazar, and L. Guarino. 2007. Spatial patterns of diversity and genetic erosion of traditional cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) in the Peruvian Amazon: An evaluation of socio-economic and environmental indicators. Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution 54:1599–612.

Wilson, W., and D. Dufour. 2006. Ethnobotanical evidence for cultivar selection among the Tukanoans: Manioc (Manihot esculenta, Crantz) in the northwestern Amazon. Culture and Agriculture 28 (2): 122–30.

WinklerPrins, A. M. G. A. 2002. House-lot gardens in Santarém, Pará, Brazil: Linking rural with urban. Urban Ecosystems 6:43–65.

Zimmerer, K. S. 2003. Geographies of seed networks for food plants (potato, ulluco) and approaches to agrobiodiversity conservation in the Andean countries. Society and Natural Resources 16:583–601.

OLIVER T. COOMES is a Professor in the Department of Geography at McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada H3A 2K6. E-mail: oliver.coomes@mcgill.ca. His research interests include agrobiodiversity, rainforest resource use and conservation, and peasant adaptation to environmental change in Amazonia and elsewhere in the Neotropics.