Optimizing Antiretroviral Uptake in Rural Botswana: Advancing the World Health Organization’s Treat All Program

Matlhogonolo Kelepile & Sue C. Grady

To cite this article: Matlhogonolo Kelepile & Sue C. Grady (2020) Optimizing Antiretroviral Uptake in Rural Botswana: Advancing the World Health Organization’s Treat All Program, The Professional Geographer, 72:3, 448-466, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2020.1734034

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2020.1734034

Published online: 16 Apr 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 42

View related articles

View Crossmark data
Optimizing Antiretroviral Uptake in Rural Botswana: Advancing the World Health Organization’s Treat All Program

Matlhogonolo Kelepile
University of Botswana

Sue C. Grady
Michigan State University

Botswana was the first African country to introduce free antiretroviral treatment (ART) to people living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), but today it has the third highest HIV prevalence rate (20.3 per 100 population) in the world. This study investigates the availability and accessibility of ART facilities in Botswana and the utilization of ART services in districts with high HIV prevalence and low percentages of ART uptake. Availability and accessibility are measured using Botswana’s ART site model and road network analysis. Microdata on HIV status from the Botswana AIDS Impact Survey IV (BAIS IV) survey, and patient data on antiretroviral (ARV) utilization is examined at the health district level. The results show the spatial mean centers of hierarchically clustered ART facilities within ART sites are strategically located in areas of high population density. Many rural people across the country travel more than three hours to ART services. Within five rural health districts there are substantial ART facility patient deficits. Future planning should focus on increasing ART services and road infrastructure in rural areas, ART uptake for men, and ART adherence in relation to circular migration and social stigmas in rural destinations to ensure the success of the Treat All Program in Botswana.

Key Words: Africa, AIDS, Botswana, health care access, HIV, rural health.

虽然博茨瓦纳是非洲最先向人类免疫缺陷病毒（HIV）患者免费提供抗逆转录病毒治疗（ART）的国家，但如今却成为全球艾滋病病毒感染率第三高的国家（每百人中20.3人）。本研究调查了博茨瓦纳抗病毒治疗设施的可用性和可及性，以及HIV感染率高和ART应用率低的地区对ART服务的使用情况。研究采用博茨瓦纳ART服务站点模型和道路网络分析评估可用性和可及性。此外，还从卫生区层面对基于第四次博茨瓦纳艾滋病影响调查（BAIS IV）的HIV状态微数据以及抗逆转录病毒（ARV）治疗相关患者数据进行分析。结果表明，ART站点内分层集群的ART设施，其空间均值中心出于战略考虑都安排在人口密度高的地区。但全国各地很多农村居民需要花三个多小时的时间到中心接受ART治疗。在五个农村卫生区中，存在ART治疗设施严重不足的问题。在未来的规划工作中，应着重于增强农村地区的ART服务和道路基础设施，提高男性获得ART治疗的比例。ART服务应考虑到循环式人员流动以及农村地区污名化的问题，以确保博茨瓦纳“全民治疗”（Treat All Program）得以实现。关键词：非洲，艾滋病，博茨瓦纳，获取医疗服务，HIV，农村卫生。

Botswana fue el primer país africano en introducir el tratamiento antirretroviral gratis (ART) para la gente portadora del virus de inmunodeficiencia humana (VIH), aunque hoy registra la tercera tasa más alta de prevalencia del VIH del mundo (20.3 por cada 100 habitantes). Este estudio investiga la disponibilidad y accesibilidad de los servicios de ART en Botswana, y la utilización de estos mismos servicios en distritos con alta prevalencia del VIH y bajos porcentajes en la adopción del ART. La disponibilidad y accesibilidad se miden usando el modelo del sitio ART y el análisis de la red vial de Botswana. Los microdatos sobre el estatus del VIH derivados del IV Estudio sobre el Impacto del SIDA en Botswana (BAIS IV), y los datos del paciente sobre utilización del antirretroviral (ARV) se examinan a nivel de distrito de salud. Los resultados indican que los centros espaciales medios de servicios ART, agrupados de manera jerárquica dentro de los sitios ART, están localizados estratégicamente en áreas de alta densidad poblacional. Mucha gente rural a lo largo y ancho del país se desplaza por más de tres horas para obtener servicios ART. Dentro de cinco de los distritos rurales de salud hay déficits sustanciales de f servicios ART para los pacientes. La planificación futura deberá estar enfocada a incrementar los servicios ART y la infraestructura vial en las áreas rurales, el uso de ART por hombres y la adhesión al ART en lo que se refiere a la migración circular y los estigmas sociales en destinos rurales, para asegurar en Botswana el éxito del Programa de Tratamiento para Todos. Palabras clave: acceso a la salud pública, Africa, Botswana, salud rural, SIDA, VIH.

In 2018, an estimated 37.9 million (range = 32.7–44.0 million) people worldwide were infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), for an adult prevalence rate of 0.8 per 100 population (United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS [UNAIDS] 2019). Of these, there were approximately 1.6 million (range = 1.2–2.1 million) new HIV infections, for a global incidence rate of 0.40 per 1,000 population (UNAIDS 2019). Worldwide, a majority of new infections occurred in the United Nations region of East and Southern Africa (\(N=800,000\), for an incidence rate of 3.2 per 1,000 population; UNAIDS 2019). In 2015, the World Health Organization (WHO) implemented the Treat
All Program, a 90–90–90 target treatment strategy for 2030, whereby 90 percent of people living with HIV know their HIV status, 90 percent of people who know their HIV-positive status receive antiretroviral treatment (ART, also referred to as ART uptake), and 90 percent of people on ART achieve a suppressed or nondetectable viral load (UNAIDS 2019). The premise of the program is, as ART uptake increases, the viral load of people living with HIV decreases, thereby reducing person-to-person transmission and resulting in the elimination of new HIV infections. In the East and Southern Africa region, 85.0 percent of people living with HIV know their HIV status, 79.0 percent of people who know their HIV-positive status receive ART, and 87.0 percent of people on ART have a suppressed viral load (UNAIDS 2019). Despite this programmatic success, East and Southern Africa continues to have the highest number of new HIV infections among the UN regions.

The four countries with the highest HIV prevalence among adults in the world are in the East and Southern Africa region—Eswatini, \( N = 190,000 \) (27.3 per 100 population); Lesotho, \( N = 330,000 \) (23.6 per 100 population); Botswana, \( N = 350,000 \) (20.3 per 100 population); and South Africa, \( N = 7.5 \) million (20.4 per 100 population; UNAIDS 2019). Of these, South Africa has the greatest number of people living with HIV followed by Botswana. Eswatini introduced free antiretroviral drugs (ARVs) in 2003; thereafter, South Africa and Lesotho initiated treatment in 2004 (WHO 2005). Botswana was the first African country to provide free ARVs in 2002, yet remains one of the countries most affected by HIV (UNAIDS 2019) and is therefore the focus of this study.

HIV Prevalence

Botswana joined other countries in Africa addressing the HIV epidemic by conducting its first national population-based survey at the household level in 2001 (Statistics Botswana 2001). This was the first of four such surveys of HIV conducted in Botswana (BAIS I, BAIS II, BAIS III, BAIS IV; Statistics Botswana 2001, 2004, 2008, 2013a). These surveys used complex sampling schemes comprising enumeration units by which individuals received HIV testing. Weights were assigned to these individuals to obtain a national representation of HIV-negative and HIV-positive status among adult men and women in BAIS I to IV, with children eighteen months and older added in BAIS IV. The goals of the BAIS surveys were to obtain biological data and sociodemographic and behavioral information on people living with HIV to inform HIV prevention and intervention programs. Table 1 shows the temporal trends in HIV adjusted incidence (Mastro et al. 2010) and crude prevalence rates by

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Year</th>
    <th colspan="2">No. HIV tested positive</th>
    <th colspan="2">HIV adjusted incidence rate</th>
    <th colspan="2">HIV prevalence rate</th>
    <th colspan="2">HIV prevalence rate by age groups (years)</th>
    <th colspan="2">HIV prevalence rate by demographic and residential characteristics</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Male</th>
    <th>Female</th>
    <th>Married male</th>
    <th>Married female</th>
    <th>Separated male</th>
    <th>Separated female</th>
    <th>Cities</th>
    <th>Towns</th>
    <th>Urban villages</th>
    <th>Rural</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2004</td>
    <td>2,422</td>
    <td>11,583</td>
    <td>171</td>
    <td>198</td>
    <td>13.9</td>
    <td>17.6</td>
    <td>30.2</td>
    <td>20.2</td>
    <td>21.3</td>
    <td>17.4</td>
    <td>15.6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2008</td>
    <td>180,830</td>
    <td>84,9131</td>
    <td>2.5</td>
    <td>176</td>
    <td>14.2</td>
    <td>22.3</td>
    <td>20.2</td>
    <td>32.6</td>
    <td>19.1</td>
    <td>22.1</td>
    <td>16.6</td>
    <td>17.1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2013</td>
    <td>213,518</td>
    <td>943500</td>
    <td>1.4</td>
    <td>185</td>
    <td>15.6</td>
    <td>20.9</td>
    <td>19.6</td>
    <td>14.9</td>
    <td>51.2</td>
    <td>18.6</td>
    <td>20.2</td>
    <td>16.8</td>
    <td>15.8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Year</td>
    <td>1.5–4</td>
    <td>5–9</td>
    <td>10–14</td>
    <td>15–19</td>
    <td>20–24</td>
    <td>25–29</td>
    <td>30–34</td>
    <td>35–39</td>
    <td>40–44</td>
    <td>45–49</td>
    <td>50–54</td>
    <td>55–59</td>
    <td>60–64</td>
    <td>65+</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2004</td>
    <td>5.9</td>
    <td>3.8</td>
    <td>3.1</td>
    <td>9.1</td>
    <td>22.9</td>
    <td>36.2</td>
    <td>33.3</td>
    <td>33.6</td>
    <td>31.7</td>
    <td>23.3</td>
    <td>11.0</td>
    <td>15.2</td>
    <td>8.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2008</td>
    <td>2.2</td>
    <td>4.7</td>
    <td>3.5</td>
    <td>3.7</td>
    <td>2.5</td>
    <td>25.9</td>
    <td>39.7</td>
    <td>40.5</td>
    <td>40.6</td>
    <td>29.8</td>
    <td>22.8</td>
    <td>15.4</td>
    <td>10.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2013</td>
    <td>1.2</td>
    <td>4.3</td>
    <td>5.0</td>
    <td>5.0</td>
    <td>5.0</td>
    <td>21.2</td>
    <td>34.0</td>
    <td>43.8</td>
    <td>41.6</td>
    <td>42.2</td>
    <td>26.2</td>
    <td>22.8</td>
    <td>19.5</td>
    <td>10.0</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Table 1 Botswana AIDS Impact Surveys (BAIS II, III, and IV) by HIV adjusted incidence, crude prevalence rates, and demographic and residential characteristics

Notes: HIV adjusted incidence rates calculated using Recent Infection Testing Algorithm (RITA) methodology by Mastro et al. (2010) referenced in the Botswana AIDS Impacts Surveys (Statistics Botswana 2004, 2008, 2013a).
Source: Botswana AIDS Impact Surveys (Statistics Botswana 2004, 2008, 2013a).
demographic and residential characteristics reported in these surveys. Whereas HIV adjusted incidence decreased from 2.5 per 100 population in 2008 to 1.4 per 100 in 2013, the crude prevalence of HIV slightly increased (17.6 to 18.5). Females had a higher HIV prevalence rate compared to males and females separated from their spouse had the highest HIV prevalence (51.2) among marital groups. Although there was a decline in HIV prevalence among the youngest population age groups (younger than ten years), there was an increase among those ten to nineteen years old. For those twenty-five to thirty-four years old, HIV prevalence declined, but after age thirty-nine, HIV prevalence increased, with the greatest increase (42.2 percent) in the age group from forty-five to forty-nine years. This cross-over effect supports the proposition of ART success and longer life expectancy among those who might have initiated ART earlier in the epidemic. The increase in HIV prevalence among teens requires further investigation. Finally, the temporal trends in HIV prevalence by place of residence have remained relatively stable, demonstrating a generalized HIV epidemic with the highest HIV prevalence in 2013 in towns (20.2) and cities (18.6), followed by peri-urban villages (16.8) and rural areas (15.8). In Botswana, cities and towns are urban areas defined as any settlement with a population of 5,000 or above (Botswana Habitat III Report 2014).

ART Uptake

In 2002, Botswana offered free ART to all HIV-infected citizens with a criterion CD4 count of 200 cells/mm³ or less. In 2010, the WHO recommended that HIV-infected persons with a CD4 count of 350 cells/mm³ or less receive access to ARVs (WHO 2013). In 2013, those guidelines were increased to a CD4 count of 500 cells/mm³ or less to ensure a greater number of HIV-infected people receive treatment (WHO 2013, 2016). In 2012, Botswana adopted the 2010 recommendation of a CD4 count of 350 cells/mm³ or less as a guide by which to offer ART but did not adopt the subsequent 2013 guidelines (Statistics Botswana 2013a). Instead in 2015, Botswana implemented the Treat All Program to include universal access to ART regardless of CD4 count (UNAIDS 2017). In June 2016, this program was officially launched and although some ART facilities are still using the CD4 count of 350 cells/mm³ criteria, the rollout of universal access to ART continues. Recently viral load was added in conjunction with CD4 count to evaluate treatment effectiveness.

The provision of free ART is built around an ART site model composed of a hierarchical cluster of ART facilities, including a hospital, satellite clinics, and health posts. ART sites might cross health district boundaries, such that ART facilities in contiguous districts can comprise a common ART site. All patients registered with a particular clinic are assigned a physician who monitors their health and prescribes monthly ART. In Botswana, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) is dispensed (Statistics Botswana 2013a). Each patient has a medical card that includes his or her demographic information, medical history, CD4 count and viral load, and ARV drug regime, which is updated monthly during his or her clinic visit. Once a month these cards are faxed to the ART site hospital, which in turn inputs the data into a standardized reporting format (Statistics Botswana 2013a). This compiled report is sent to the Monitoring and Evaluation Unit of Botswana’s Ministry of Health and Wellness (MoHW; Statistics Botswana 2013a). The data from the most recent 2017 MoHW report are used in this study as described next.

Study Purpose

The purposes of this study are to investigate (1) the availability and accessibility of ART facilities in Botswana, and (2) the utilization of ART services in districts with high HIV prevalence and low percentage of ART uptake. Potential barriers to ART utilization and ARV adherence are also discussed. The findings from this study will inform the rollout of the Treat All Program in Botswana.

Data

Botswana’s health districts (\( N = 26 \)) in which the BAIS surveys were conducted are the geographic unit of analysis (Figure 1).

Crude and sex-stratified HIV prevalence rates were calculated using the BAIS IV microdata obtained from Statistics Botswana (2019). These microdata comprise information on people sampled within and across enumeration areas as defined in the BAIS IV survey, including sampling site information, sociodemographic and behavioral characteristics, and HIV test results. The BAIS survey microdata were publicly available, therefore ethical approval was not sought.

Data on ART uptake were obtained with permission from the MoHW Monitoring and Evaluation Unit in the summers of 2016 and 2017. In 2017, there were 302,453 people living with HIV who received ART in Botswana with a majority (93.5 percent) of people enrolled in the public sector. There were also 19,477 people (6.4 percent) living with HIV receiving ART in the private sector, but these reports were not available at the health district level. People accessing ART in the private sector primarily lived in urban areas (cities, mining or industrial towns, and peri-urban villages; Botswana MoHW Monitoring and Evaluation Unit 2017);
Figure 1 Reference map of health districts in Botswana.

therefore, data on percentage of ART uptake might not be a comprehensive reflection of overall service utilization in urban areas.

Two sources of population data were used in this study: population counts for males and females by census districts whose boundaries were a close
spatial match to those of health districts (Statistics Botswana 2018), and population density (counts per 100 m) obtained from the Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC), a data center in NASA’s Earth Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS 2018). The names of all ART and non-ART health care facilities (hospitals, clinics, and health posts) in the ART uptake data set were searched on Google Maps and their latitude and longitude locations were converted to a shapefile format and displayed in ArcGIS (version 10.5; Environmental Systems Research Institute [ESRI] 2018a). The population density data were in raster format and also input into ArcGIS. Shapefiles of Botswana’s health districts, road network, and physical features were obtained from the Botswana Department of Surveys and Mapping (2019) also during the summer of 2016. All geographic data sets were projected using a common geographic projection for Botswana, ARC_1950_ UTM 34S.

Methods

ART facility availability was evaluated by visualizing their locations within and across ART sites. Because ART sites comprise a hierarchical cluster of ART facilities, their spatial mean centers were calculated for visual display in relation to the road network, population density, and sociodemographic characteristics. ART facility accessibility was evaluated using a road network analysis that accounted for geographic attributes, including costs, restriction barriers, and urban to rural hierarchy. Because road transportation is the major mode of travel in Botswana, covering about 93 percent of total volume of passenger transport (Botswana Department of Surveys and Mapping 2019), it was appropriate to use a road network approach by which to estimate access to ART facilities. The road network analysis included first assigning speed limits along different road types. The national speed limit in Botswana is 120 km/hour on highways (also referred to as tarred roads) outside of cities; 100 km/hour on tarred roads approaching towns and peri-urban villages; 60 km/hour for gravel roads in rural areas; and 40 km/hour on tracks or dirt roads in residential areas, which could be within cities, towns, peri-urban villages, or rural areas (Botswana Statistics 2013b). The second step in the road network analysis was to convert the speed limits to minutes (min) using the length (km) of each road type; for example, 60 min/120 km/hour (tarred road) = 0.5 min * road length 60 km = 30 min; or 60 min/40 km/hour (track) = 1.5 min * road length 60 km = 90 min). In this study 30, 60, 90, 120, and 180 minutes were assumed to be appropriate timing to access an ART facility for residents traveling on these different road types within and between cities, towns, peri-urban villages, and most rural areas. Two additional modeling parameters included assigning a search tolerance of 60 km from each road node to the nearest ART facility, which is also the relative radius by which to capture adjacent health districts in Botswana; and assigning national parks as restrictive barriers, assuming people would take alternate routes around the parks to the ART facility. The modeled output generated detailed and nonoverlapping polygons to visualize the drive times in minutes to the nearest ART facility. These polygons were overlaid on top of the population density map to estimate the magnitude of the local population and the time it would take residents to travel to the nearest ART facility. The network analysis was conducted using the Network Analyst extension in ArcGIS version 10.5 (ESRI 2018b).

Finally, the utilization of ART facilities for people living with HIV was measured by mapping HIV prevalence rates at the health district level using the BAIS IV microdata (HIV positives/[HIV positives + HIV negatives] * 1,000 population) and natural break classification scheme. The percentage of ART uptake by health district was derived by calculating the number of people receiving ART divided by the estimated number of HIV positives. To estimate the number of HIV positives for 2017, a direct method of sex-standardization was used, and the 2017 populations of males and females were multiplied by 2013 sex-specific HIV prevalence rates for each health district. Districts with a high HIV prevalence (greater than the national rate = 18.5) and low percentage of ART uptake (below 80 percent) were identified using a scatterplot (Figure 2) and plot diagnostics (GeoDa 2019). Five rural districts were identified (Mahalapye, Kweneng East, Goodhope, Kgatleng, and Mabutsane) for further study of ART utilization at the local level.

The local level analysis was conducted by assigning ART facilities as peri-urban village or rural, based on location. The BAIS IV microdata enumeration areas were used to calculate the number and percentage of HIV positives residing in peri-urban villages versus rural areas for each of the five rural health districts. These percentage distributions were applied to the 2017 HIV positives data to estimate the number of people in 2017 living with HIV in peri-urban villages or rural areas. Thereafter, the number of people receiving ART and the number of HIV positives were summed to calculate the district-level percentage of ART uptake utilization at the facility level, the number of people receiving ART was subtracted by the estimated number of HIV positives for each facility \( \gamma = x + (x*(1-p)) \) to obtain the HIV patient deficit, where \( x \) = the number of people receiving ART in that facility and \( p \) = the percentage of ART uptake in peri-urban villages or rural areas in the respective district. Graduate symbols were used to display the magnitude of ART
Figure 2 Scatterplot of HIV prevalence by antiretroviral treatment (ART) uptake at the health district level in Botswana including five rural districts for in-depth study. Note: Increasing ART uptake results in a slight reduction in HIV prevalence (\( \beta = -0.011 \)); however, that relationship is not significant (p value = 0.549).

facility patient deficit for each ART facility within the five rural districts.

Results

In general, the weighted mean centers of ART facilities within ART sites were located along a network of tarred roads that run in a circular pattern within the country with facilities along routes into the interior and outward toward bordering countries. ART facilities were also available along gravel roads and tracks within the ART sites with an increased number of ART facilities located in populated areas (Figure 3).

Table 2 is a summary of the sociodemographic characteristics of patients receiving ART services within ART sites. All ART sites were launched between 2002 and 2004. Approximately twice as many women (63.6 percent) compared to men (36.4 percent) received ART services across all ART sites. Serowe and Mahalapye served the greatest percentage of children infected with HIV (7.8 and 7.6 percent, respectively). The case-fatality rate per 1,000 HIV positives was highest in the rural areas of Gantsi (240.0), followed by Tsabong (201.8) and Mahalapye (204.5), compared to the national rate (87.9).

The UNAIDS national HIV prevalence rate (22.0 per 100 population) was higher than that reported in the BAIS IV (18.5) survey of Botswana due to case inclusion differences; that is, the UNAIDS rate included people fifteen years and older compared to the BAIS IV, which included people eighteen months and older (inclusion of younger ages with lower HIV infection rates). Table 3 and Figure 4 show the HIV prevalence rate and percentage of ART uptake for health districts in Botswana. The two districts with the highest HIV prevalence, Selebi-Phikwe (27.5) and Francistown (24.3), also reported ART uptake over 85 percent. The three districts with the lowest HIV prevalence, Kgalagadi (11.1), Southern (11.8), and Kweneng West (11.8), also reported higher ART uptake, at 102.5, 79.8, and 77.0 percent, respectively.

Table 4 shows the estimated percentage of ART uptake and ART facility patient deficits in the five rural health districts. The findings from Table 4 are described in relation to Figures 5 through 9.

Mahalapye district (Figure 5) had the third highest HIV prevalence rate (23.1) with an estimated 25,161 people living with HIV. ART uptake was
ART Sites
• ID 1 = Francistown
• ID 2 = Gaborone
• ID 3 = Molepolole
• ID 4 = Maun
• ID 5 = Thamaga
• ID 6 = Palapye
• ID 7 = Serowe
• ID 8 = Mahalapye
• ID 9 = Mochudi
• ID 10 = Kanye
• ID 11 = Selebi-Phikwe
• ID 12 = Tutume
• ID 13 = Gumare
• ID 14 = Bobonong
• ID 15 = Lobatse
• ID 16 = Lethlakane
• ID 17 = Jwaneng
• ID 18 = Masunga
• ID 19 = Sefhare
• ID 20 = Kasane
• ID 21 = Goodhope
• ID 22 = Romotswa
• ID 23 = Gantsi
• ID 24 = Orapa
• ID 25 = Tsabong
• ID 26 = Gweta
• ID 27 = Hukuntsi
• ID 28 = Mmadinare
• ID 29 = Rakops

Drive Times to ART Facilities
<= 30 min
31 - 60 min
61 - 90 min
91 - 120 min
121 - 180 min

Districts
Roads
Tarred Roads
National Parks

Spatial Mean Center of ART Site

Figure 3 Antiretroviral treatment (ART) site model and drive times to ART site facilities.
Table 2  Antiretroviral treatment (ART) sites and participating patient characteristics, Botswana, 2017

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>ART site</th>
    <th>ART site launch date</th>
    <th>Total no. ART</th>
    <th>Women ART (%)</th>
    <th>Men ART (%)</th>
    <th>Children ART (%)</th>
    <th>No. cumulative deaths</th>
    <th>Case fatality rate<sup>a</sup></th>
  </tr>
  <tr><td>Francistown</td><td>2002</td><td>33,707</td><td>64.6</td><td>35.4</td><td>1.3</td><td>3,315</td><td>98.3</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Gaborone</td><td>2002</td><td>33,332</td><td>64.6</td><td>35.4</td><td>1.3</td><td>3,011</td><td>90.3</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Molepolole</td><td>2003</td><td>16,666</td><td>64.2</td><td>35.8</td><td>1.7</td><td>1,779</td><td>166.2</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Maun</td><td>2002</td><td>15,671</td><td>62.5</td><td>37.5</td><td>1.1</td><td>981</td><td>100.1</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Thamaga</td><td>2004</td><td>15,373</td><td>65.7</td><td>34.3</td><td>0.6</td><td>945</td><td>93.6</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Palapye</td><td>2004</td><td>14,124</td><td>62.3</td><td>37.7</td><td>1.5</td><td>886</td><td>100.6</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Serowe</td><td>2002</td><td>13,589</td><td>63.9</td><td>36.1</td><td>7.8</td><td>1,542</td><td>177.6</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Mahalapye</td><td>2003</td><td>12,301</td><td>60.7</td><td>39.3</td><td>7.6</td><td>1,526</td><td>204.5</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Mochudi</td><td>2004</td><td>11,028</td><td>64.1</td><td>35.9</td><td>1.5</td><td>739</td><td>104.5</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Kanye</td><td>2004</td><td>10,989</td><td>59.9</td><td>40.1</td><td>1.7</td><td>888</td><td>131.9</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Selebi-Phikwe</td><td>2004</td><td>10,867</td><td>61.5</td><td>38.5</td><td>1.1</td><td>664</td><td>99.4</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Tutume</td><td>2003</td><td>9,978</td><td>66.9</td><td>33.1</td><td>2.1</td><td>724</td><td>108.4</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Gumare</td><td>2004</td><td>8,357</td><td>65.7</td><td>34.3</td><td>2.4</td><td>739</td><td>134.5</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Bobonong</td><td>2004</td><td>7,975</td><td>65.3</td><td>34.7</td><td>2.2</td><td>645</td><td>123.8</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Lobatse</td><td>2004</td><td>7,163</td><td>63.3</td><td>36.7</td><td>1.5</td><td>573</td><td>126.3</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Lethlhakane</td><td>2004</td><td>6,131</td><td>63.2</td><td>36.8</td><td>2.3</td><td>321</td><td>82.8</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Jwaneng</td><td>2003</td><td>6,015</td><td>61.7</td><td>38.3</td><td>1.7</td><td>711</td><td>191.5</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Masunga</td><td>2004</td><td>6,002</td><td>65.2</td><td>34.8</td><td>2.3</td><td>573</td><td>146.5</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Sefhare</td><td>2004</td><td>5,532</td><td>61.8</td><td>38.2</td><td>0.4</td><td>524</td><td>121.3</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Kasane</td><td>2004</td><td>5,460</td><td>62.7</td><td>37.3</td><td>2.5</td><td>324</td><td>94.7</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Goodhope</td><td>2004</td><td>5,456</td><td>61.2</td><td>38.8</td><td>2.1</td><td>587</td><td>175.7</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Ramotswa</td><td>2004</td><td>4,659</td><td>63.9</td><td>36.1</td><td>1.6</td><td>511</td><td>171.5</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Gantsi</td><td>2004</td><td>3,782</td><td>62.6</td><td>37.8</td><td>1.4</td><td>568</td><td>240.0</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Orapa</td><td>2003</td><td>3,748</td><td>67.5</td><td>32.5</td><td>1.4</td><td>222</td><td>87.7</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Tsabong</td><td>2004</td><td>3,559</td><td>65.6</td><td>34.4</td><td>1.3</td><td>492</td><td>210.8</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Gweta</td><td>2004</td><td>3,340</td><td>66.0</td><td>34.0</td><td>2.5</td><td>338</td><td>153.4</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Hukuntsi</td><td>2004</td><td>3,329</td><td>63.8</td><td>36.2</td><td>1.3</td><td>283</td><td>133.2</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Mmadinar</td><td>2004</td><td>3,174</td><td>67.9</td><td>32.1</td><td>3.7</td><td>298</td><td>138.3</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Rakops</td><td>2004</td><td>1,659</td><td>65.5</td><td>34.5</td><td>3.3</td><td>186</td><td>171.1</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Total</td><td>-</td><td>282,976</td><td>63.6</td><td>36.4</td><td>2.1</td><td>24,875</td><td>87.9</td></tr>
</table>

*Case fatality rate per 1,000 HIV infections.

Source: Botswana Ministry of Health and Wellness (MoHW) Monitoring and Evaluation Unit (2017).

70.9 percent, indicating that 7,328 people living with HIV are not using ART services. The percentage of ART uptake was relatively similar in peri-urban villages and rural areas (70.3 and 71.8 percent, respectively) with a slightly higher patient deficit in peri-urban villages (\( N = -4,398 \)) compared to rural areas (\( N = -2,930 \)), respectively. The Mahalapye District Hospital (ART Site 8) in the peri-urban village of Mahalapye and the Sefhare Primary Hospital (ART Site 19) in the peri-urban village of Sefhare are situated along tarred roads connecting Gaborone and Francistown. ART patient deficits are highest in these two facilities and attending clinics. Rural ART satellite clinics and health posts are accessible by gravel roads and tracks in the east bordering South Africa and the south, north of Gaborone, with ART patient deficits across these facilities. With the rollout of the Treat All Program, the need for ART services will thus increase in Mahalapye and Sefhare in addition to rural clinics and health posts. ART services could be added to existing health posts in the interior (Pallaroad, Makoswane, and Makwate) to serve rural residents who live more than 180 minutes (three or more hours) from an ART facility.

Kweneng East district (Figure 6) had the fourth highest HIV prevalence rate (21.5) and the greatest estimated number of people living with HIV (\( N = 53,145 \)) of whom 45,959 (86.5 percent) resided in peri-urban villages. ART uptake was 50.0 percent, indicating that 26,558 people living with HIV were not using ART services. ART uptake was low in both peri-urban villages (50.6 percent) and rural areas (42.6 percent), with a substantial patient deficit in peri-urban villages (\( N = -22,690 \)). The Scottish Livingstone Hospital (ART Site 3) in the peri-urban village of Molepolole and Thamaga Primary Hospital (ART Site 5) in the peri-urban village of Thamaga, in addition to a number of ART clinics directly west of Gaborone, are accessible by tarred roads. In the populated south, ART facility patient deficits are highest. Gravel roads dominate north–south travel on the east side of the district connecting residents migrating from Gaborone to Boatlanaame. In Boatlanaame, residents must travel outside of the district to ART facilities within ART Site 3. With the rollout of the Treat All Program, a substantial increase in ART services will be needed in peri-urban villages in the south. A new ART clinic or health post could replace an existing mobile health post outside of Boatlanaame to increase ART utilization in this rural area.

Goodhope district (Figure 7) is one of the poorest districts in Botswana, with an overall poverty rate of 46.0 percent and three villages that experience extreme poverty (over 60.0 percent; World Bank Group 2010). The HIV prevalence rate was 20.3, with an estimated 9,071 people living with HIV, of whom a similar number resided
Table 3  HIV prevalence rate estimates and percentage of antiretroviral treatment (ART) uptake at the health district level in Botswana

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2"> </th>
    <th colspan="2">BAIS IV rate 2013</th>
    <th colspan="2">Census 2017</th>
    <th colspan="3">HIV 2017</th>
    <th colspan="2">BAIS II</th>
    <th colspan="2">BAIS III</th>
    <th colspan="2">BAIS IV</th>
    <th colspan="2">MoHW</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Men</th>
    <th>Women</th>
    <th>No. men</th>
    <th>No. women</th>
    <th>Estimated no. males</th>
    <th>Estimated no. females</th>
    <th>Estimated total</th>
    <th>2004 HIV rate</th>
    <th>2008 HIV rate</th>
    <th>2013 HIV rate</th>
    <th>2017 HIV rate</th>
    <th>ART no.</th>
    <th>Uptake ART (%)</th>
  </tr>
  <tr><td>Gaborone</td><td>12.4</td><td>19.7</td><td>117,277</td><td>117,498</td><td>14,542</td><td>23,147</td><td>37,689</td><td>24.3</td><td>17.2</td><td>17.0</td><td>33,332</td><td>88.4</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Francistown</td><td>19.3</td><td>26.3</td><td>50,995</td><td>56,233</td><td>9,842</td><td>14,789</td><td>24,631</td><td>37.5</td><td>23.1</td><td>24.3</td><td>33,707</td><td>136.8</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Lobatse</td><td>12.5</td><td>19.8</td><td>13,917</td><td>14,576</td><td>1,740</td><td>2,886</td><td>4,626</td><td>13.6</td><td>16.3</td><td>17.2</td><td>7,163</td><td>154.9</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Selebi-Phikwe</td><td>23</td><td>27</td><td>23,236</td><td>26,224</td><td>5,344</td><td>7,080</td><td>12,425</td><td>38.3</td><td>26.4</td><td>27.5</td><td>10,867</td><td>87.5</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Jwaneng</td><td>8.3</td><td>16.1</td><td>6,885</td><td>9,585</td><td>571</td><td>1,543</td><td>2,115</td><td>27.6</td><td>15.7</td><td>12.8</td><td>4,658</td><td>220.3</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Southern</td><td>9.9</td><td>12.3</td><td>64,099</td><td>72,000</td><td>6,346</td><td>8,856</td><td>15,202</td><td>23.5</td><td>13.3</td><td>11.8</td><td>12,127</td><td>79.8</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Goodhope</td><td>7.8</td><td>23.7</td><td>28,052</td><td>29,044</td><td>2,188</td><td>6,883</td><td>9,071</td><td>28.4</td><td>13.5</td><td>20.3</td><td>5,456</td><td>60.1</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Mabutsane</td><td>10.4</td><td>21.9</td><td>6,661</td><td>7,939</td><td>693</td><td>1,739</td><td>2,431</td><td>39.8</td><td>16.1</td><td>18.8</td><td>1,357</td><td>55.8</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Southeast</td><td>17.7</td><td>14.2</td><td>47,251</td><td>52,042</td><td>8,363</td><td>7,390</td><td>15,753</td><td>27.7</td><td>12.6</td><td>16.6</td><td>4,659</td><td>29.6</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Kweneng East</td><td>17.8</td><td>20</td><td>136,102</td><td>144,593</td><td>24,226</td><td>28,919</td><td>53,145</td><td>28.1</td><td>16.7</td><td>21.5</td><td>26,587</td><td>50.0</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Kweneng West</td><td>6.1</td><td>14.6</td><td>26,861</td><td>27,153</td><td>1,639</td><td>3,964</td><td>5,603</td><td>15.6</td><td>10.2</td><td>11.8</td><td>4,314</td><td>77.0</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Kgatleng</td><td>14.4</td><td>23.2</td><td>49,123</td><td>50,008</td><td>7,074</td><td>11,602</td><td>18,676</td><td>28.5</td><td>15.8</td><td>19.9</td><td>11,028</td><td>59.1</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Serowe/Palapye</td><td>14.3</td><td>16.3</td><td>88,719</td><td>99,107</td><td>12,687</td><td>16,154</td><td>28,841</td><td>31.8</td><td>20.0</td><td>17.1</td><td>27,723</td><td>96.1</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Mahlalapye</td><td>17.4</td><td>22.6</td><td>58,794</td><td>66,064</td><td>10,230</td><td>14,930</td><td>25,161</td><td>34.9</td><td>17.1</td><td>23.1</td><td>17,833</td><td>70.9</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Boribwa</td><td>13.2</td><td>19.2</td><td>37,539</td><td>43,971</td><td>4,955</td><td>8,442</td><td>13,398</td><td>41.5</td><td>18.9</td><td>19.3</td><td>11,149</td><td>83.2</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Boteti</td><td>14.6</td><td>21.8</td><td>44,678</td><td>38,062</td><td>7,225</td><td>9,752</td><td>19,133</td><td>25.3</td><td>14.6</td><td>20.3</td><td>11,536</td><td>60.3</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Tutume</td><td>12.8</td><td>19.3</td><td>74,114</td><td>84,464</td><td>9,487</td><td>16,302</td><td>25,788</td><td>43.8</td><td>20.0</td><td>18.2</td><td>13,318</td><td>51.6</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Northeast</td><td>13.2</td><td>18.8</td><td>30,687</td><td>33,646</td><td>4,051</td><td>6,325</td><td>10,376</td><td>40.5</td><td>21.8</td><td>17.7</td><td>6,002</td><td>57.8</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Ngami</td><td>12</td><td>15.7</td><td>43,801</td><td>49,331</td><td>5,256</td><td>7,745</td><td>13,001</td><td>36.2</td><td>19.8</td><td>15.2</td><td>18,273</td><td>140.5</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Okavango</td><td>9</td><td>15</td><td>27,616</td><td>34,446</td><td>2,485</td><td>5,167</td><td>7,652</td><td>20.5</td><td>16.5</td><td>13.5</td><td>5,755</td><td>75.2</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Chobe</td><td>14.4</td><td>18.1</td><td>14,069</td><td>13,319</td><td>2,026</td><td>2,411</td><td>4,437</td><td>77.9</td><td>23.0</td><td>17.7</td><td>5,460</td><td>123.1</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Ghanzi</td><td>12.8</td><td>18.9</td><td>21,114</td><td>22,707</td><td>2,703</td><td>4,292</td><td>6,994</td><td>30.4</td><td>13.5</td><td>17.1</td><td>3,782</td><td>54.1</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Kgalagadi</td><td>6.6</td><td>13</td><td>17,179</td><td>17,984</td><td>1,134</td><td>2,338</td><td>3,472</td><td>26.4</td><td>19.1</td><td>11.1</td><td>3,559</td><td>102.5</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Hukuntsi</td><td>15.1</td><td>15.7</td><td>12,494</td><td>10,015</td><td>1,887</td><td>1,572</td><td>3,459</td><td>36.3</td><td>11.9</td><td>18.1</td><td>3,329</td><td>96.2</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Total</td><td>14.1</td><td>19.2</td><td>1,041,263</td><td>1,120,011</td><td>146,818</td><td>215,042</td><td>361,860</td><td>31.2</td><td>17.6</td><td>18.5</td><td>282,976</td><td>78.2</td></tr>
</table>

Notes: BAIS = Botswana AIDS Impact Survey.
Source: Botswana Ministry of Health and Wellness (MoHW) Monitoring and Evaluation Unit (2017).
Figure 4 (A) HIV prevalence and (B) antiretroviral treatment (ART) uptake at the health district level in Botswana.
Table 4  Estimated percent antiretroviral treatment (ART) uptake and ART facility patient deficits in selected rural districts in Botswana

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Health district</th>
    <th colspan="2">BAIS IV 2013</th>
    <th colspan="4">MoHW 2017</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Total no.</th>
    <th>%</th>
    <th>Estimate no. HIV positive</th>
    <th>No. ART</th>
    <th>ART uptake %</th>
    <th>ART estimated no. patient deficit</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mahalapye<sup>a</sup></td>
    <td>Peri-urban villages</td>
    <td>35,961</td>
    <td>58.8</td>
    <td>14,789</td>
    <td>10,391</td>
    <td>70.3</td>
    <td>-4,398</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Rural residents</td>
    <td>37,225</td>
    <td>41.2</td>
    <td>10,372</td>
    <td>7,442</td>
    <td>71.8</td>
    <td>-2,930</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Total</td>
    <td>73,186</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>25,161</td>
    <td>17,833</td>
    <td>70.9</td>
    <td>-7,328</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Kweneng East<sup>b</sup></td>
    <td>Peri-urban villages</td>
    <td>130,240</td>
    <td>86.5</td>
    <td>45,969</td>
    <td>23,269</td>
    <td>50.6</td>
    <td>-22,690</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Rural</td>
    <td>30,245</td>
    <td>13.5</td>
    <td>7,186</td>
    <td>3,318</td>
    <td>46.2</td>
    <td>-3,868</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Total</td>
    <td>160,485</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>53,154</td>
    <td>26,587</td>
    <td>50.0</td>
    <td>-26,585</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Goodhope<sup>c</sup></td>
    <td>Peri-urban villages</td>
    <td>11,528</td>
    <td>51.8</td>
    <td>4,703</td>
    <td>3,281</td>
    <td>69.8</td>
    <td>-1,422</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Rural</td>
    <td>21,300</td>
    <td>48.2</td>
    <td>4,368</td>
    <td>2,175</td>
    <td>49.8</td>
    <td>-2,193</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Total</td>
    <td>32,827</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>9,071</td>
    <td>5,456</td>
    <td>60.1</td>
    <td>-3,615</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Kgatleng<sup>d</sup></td>
    <td>Peri-urban villages</td>
    <td>25,256</td>
    <td>43.7</td>
    <td>8,152</td>
    <td>7,881</td>
    <td>96.7</td>
    <td>-271</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Rural</td>
    <td>22,953</td>
    <td>56.3</td>
    <td>10,524</td>
    <td>3,147</td>
    <td>29.9</td>
    <td>-7,377</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Total</td>
    <td>48,209</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>18,676</td>
    <td>11,028</td>
    <td>59.0</td>
    <td>-7,648</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mabutsane<sup>e</sup></td>
    <td>Rural</td>
    <td>8,158</td>
    <td>100.0</td>
    <td>2,431</td>
    <td>1,357</td>
    <td>55.8</td>
    <td>-600</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Notes: ART facility patient deficits reflect the number of people living with HIV not receiving ART services living in peri-urban villages versus rural areas within the health district. BAIS = Botswana AIDS Impact Survey; MoHW = Ministry of Health and Wellness.
<sup>a</sup>Facility-level analysis 2017 HIV positive = 23,081 (ART patient deficit = -5,185).
<sup>b</sup>Facility-level analysis 2017 HIV positive = 39,110 (ART patient deficit = -13,005).
<sup>c</sup>Facility-level analysis 2017 HIV positive = 7,539 (ART patient deficit = -1,797).
<sup>d</sup>Facility-level analysis 2017 HIV positive = 13,446 (ART patient deficit = -1,381).
<sup>e</sup>Facility-level analysis 2017 HIV positive = 1,957 (ART patient deficit = -600).
Source: BAIS IV microdata obtained from Statistics Botswana (2019); ART service data obtained from the Botswana Ministry of Health and Wellness (MoHW) Monitoring and Evaluation Unit 2017.

in peri-urban villages (\(N=4,703\)) and rural areas (\(N=4,368\)). ART uptake rate was 60.1 percent, with greater patient deficits in rural areas (\(N=-2,193\)) compared to peri-urban villages (\(N=-1,422\)). The Goodhope Primary Hospital and Mmathehe Clinic are located in the peri-urban village of Borolong, where a majority of the district’s population resides. Both of these ART sites have a surplus of patients receiving ART, suggestive of migration from outside this area. ART satellite clinics and health posts are situated along a gravel road network in the southeast and south bordering South Africa with patient deficits across these facilities. Within the sparsely populated interior, rural residents must travel on gravel roads or tracks over three hours to an ART facility. Adding ART services to one or more existing health posts in the interior as well as adding a new ART facility in Motokwe would further serve the rural poor in this district.

Kgatleng district (Figure 8) is north of Gaborone, east of Kweneng East district and bordering South Africa. The HIV prevalence rate was 19.9 percent, with an estimated 18,676 people living with HIV. The ART uptake was 50.9 percent, indicating that 7,648 people living with HIV were not using ART services, a majority (\(N=-7,377\)) of whom resided in rural areas. The Deborah Relief Memorial Hospital is located in the peri-urban village of Mochudi, which is in close proximity to other peri-urban villages (Bokaa, Rasesa, and Pilane) directly north of Gaborone. A tarred road connecting Mochudi with Francistown runs through the interior of the district. Gravel roads and tracks dominate the east and west, where high densities of rural populations reside. With the rollout of the Treat All Program, there will be an increased need for ART services across ART facilities, particularly in rural areas. ART services could be added to one or more existing health post(s) located along tracks in the northwest as well as adding a new ART facility in the interior where rural residents have to travel three or more hours to access an ART facility.

Mabutsane (Figure 9) is the poorest district in Botswana, with 17.1 percent of people living in poverty (World Bank Group 2010). The HIV prevalence rate was 18.8, with an estimated 2,431 people living with HIV. ART uptake was 55.8 percent at the Mabutsane Clinic, indicating that 600 people living with HIV were not using ART services in the health district of Mabutsane. The Jwaneng Mining Hospital shares ART services in ART Site 17 with Mabutsane and is accessible via tarred roads. With the rollout of the Treat All Program, ART services could be added to the Sekoma Health Post, thereby increasing access to rural residents living in extreme poverty.
Figure 5  Antiretroviral treatment (ART) facility patient deficits (\( N = 5,185 \)) in Mahalapye Health District, Botswana.

Discussion

To provide ART services to all people living with HIV in Botswana, there will be a substantial increase in demand for HIV testing, ARV drug dispensing, and patient follow-up in ART facilities. This demand will include people living with HIV who are currently followed for a decline in CD4 count, people living with HIV who are assigned to an ART facility but are ARV nonadherent, and those with newly diagnosed HIV infections. This study provided an overview of the ART site model and the availability and accessibility of ART facilities within health districts, including ART facility patient deficits in selected peri-urban villages and rural areas. In addition, there are rural populations across
Figure 6 Antiretroviral treatment (ART) facility patient deficits (N = 13,005) in Kweneng East Health District, Botswana.

Botswana who need to travel more than three hours to attend an ART facility. With the rollout of Botswana’s Treat All Program, reducing travel time to ART facilities will be important, as it has been shown that the farther people live from an ART facility, the lower their desire to learn of their HIV
Figure 7 Antiretroviral treatment (ART) facility patient deficits (N = 1,797) in Goodhope Health District, Botswana.

status, due to indirect (travel) costs (Musheke et al. 2013). For people who do know their HIV-positive status, economic and logistic barriers might impede their ability to access ART services (Plazy et al. 2016). As the provision of ART services is increased, potential challenges to ART utilization and ARV adherence needed to reduce viral load and eliminate future transmission could still exist.

In Botswana, three of the five rural health districts with high HIV prevalence and low ART uptake rates (Mahalapye, Kgotleng, and Goodhope) border South Africa or Zimbabwe and are entry and exit points for travel and local trade between the countries. The contribution of migration across these borders to HIV incidence is not well known. The most common form of mobility in Botswana is circular migration, particularly between Gaborone and the rural health districts, Kgotleng, Kweneng East, and Mabutsane, but also among districts throughout the country. Circular migration is defined as a pattern of recurrent migration to and from a specific destination (Taylor et al. 2011) and is an important aspect of Botswana’s culture, as there are no tribal affiliations in the cities; that is, someone can be born and raised in the city, but he or she will always be tied to his or her parents’ home village (Botswana Habitat III Report 2014). The geographic literature on circular migration emphasizes the need to understand the nature of destinations (Massey et al. 1993; Taylor et al. 2011), and in particular, how migrants integrate into local networks (Boyd 1989). Sellier et al. (2006) found that community stigmas might prompt migrants to keep their HIV status secret. When that secrecy extends to destination household members, migrants might take their medication privately, thereby increasing the likelihood of missed doses. In Botswana, the most important stigma is related to culture and the idea that HIV is a disease of the promiscuous (Mbonu, van den Borne, and De Vries
Figure 8 Antiretroviral treatment (ART) facility patient deficits (N = 1,381) in Kgalagadi Health District, Botswana.

2009) and sinful (Bene and Darkoh 2014). Although these and other studies (Jochelson, Mothibeli, and Leger 1991; Barongo et al. 1992; Quinn 1994) have found mobility to be a key driver of HIV transmission (Mundandi et al. 2006; Colebunders and Kenyon 2015), still other studies have focused on the contagious diffusion of HIV within localized places, such as high-poverty and rural destinations (Oppong 1998).

Poverty is perpetuated by low levels of education, high unemployment, and low income, thereby marginalizing populations such as women and people living in rural areas (Ajakaiye and Adeyeye 2001). Oppong (1998) used vulnerability theory to explain that HIV transmission in rural areas occurs because “adverse life circumstances such as hunger and disease drive vulnerable groups of people to risky survival activities” (438). This theory is also supported by Watts and Bohle (1993). Food insecurity and hunger can thereby lead to poor ARV adherence because the side effects are greater if not taken with food, or if taken with food that is low in nutritional value (King, Burka, and Winchester 2018). Also, in rural areas where traditional doctors predominate, people living with HIV are told not to mix ARVs with traditional herbal treatments due to the potential of serious side effects (Bene and Darkoh 2014; King, Burka, and Winchester 2018). This change in behavior from traditional practices to ART is easiest during the early initiation of ARVs when people believe “ARV therapy will improve their lives,” but over time if adherence becomes
Figure 9  Antiretroviral treatment (ART) facility patient deficit (\( N = 600 \)) in Mabutsane Health District, Botswana.

challenging and health does not improve, people might lose hope and resume traditional herbs (Bene and Darkoh 2014, 176). Finally, this study found that more women than men seek ART services, which might be due to women’s greater involvement in community health-related matters and follow-up when feeling sick, compared to men, who might keep their illnesses to themselves (Bene and Darkoh 2014). Further research on cultural attitudes and beliefs toward HIV as an illness and its effect on ART utilization and ARV adherence in poor and rural destination areas is thereby warranted.

Limitations
A limitation of this study is not knowing the number of patients who received ART in the private health sector (approximately 6 percent of the population), creating potential underestimations of ART uptake in districts with cities and towns, such as Gaborone in the South East district. In addition, to estimate HIV prevalence in 2017, a direct method of sex standardization was used because only the variable sex or age was available in the 2017 census data. Providing future census counts of sex by age would improve HIV estimation results and other future
health studies. Furthermore, it was assumed that district-level HIV prevalence and the proportion of HIV positive persons in peri-urban villages and rural areas in 2013 remained stable through 2017. These HIV-positive proportions were used in the calculation of HIV positives at the facility level, which might have led to an over- or underestimation of patient deficits. In addition, to avoid the modifiable areal unit problem, the results of HIV positives at the district versus facility levels must be interpreted separately, because the former were calculated using summary census and HIV prevalence rates at the health district level and the latter were calculated using individual ART service data at the ART site level. As a way to reduce the modifiable areal unit problem and improve the robustness of HIV estimates, the census data on sex by age could be made available for researchers and the upcoming BAIS V survey could include information on ART uptake in addition to HIV test results. Moreover, there was the potential for boundary effects in the measurement of drive times to ART facilities for border districts with road networks that did not extend beyond Botswana; in addition, the road network measurements did not consider walking or bicycling as alternate modes of transportation, which could be used in rural areas. Finally, the availability and accessibility of ART services were not evaluated in terms of affordability or accommodation because ARV drugs are free and information on resources within facilities was not available.

Conclusions

The rollout of the Treat All Program is underway in Botswana, and this study provides timely information on the need for future ART services. To further reduce HIV transmission in Botswana, HIV testing could be enhanced in rural health districts, in particular those bordering South Africa and Zimbabwe where the trade of goods and services and border crossings occur. For rural residents, investment of money in the scale-up of ART services in addition to improved road infrastructure will enhance ART access (i.e., HIV testing and ARV initiation). For circular migrants living with HIV, additional education on how to manage ARVs at destinations could improve ARV adherence. ART services should also continue to emphasize ways to promote ARV adherence, including continuing education on the limitations of taking ARVs and traditional medicines. With increased ART adherence, physical health improvements will lead to optimism of treatment success, thereby reducing viral load and eliminating future HIV transmission.

Future research should also focus on pre- and postexposure prophylaxis care in the evaluation of ART uptake and ARV treatment and adherence.

The services provided with the Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission program (Ferguson et al. 2012; Weiss et al. 2014) for vulnerable women who become pregnant or recently gave birth should also be incorporated into ART site and facility evaluations, in particular for health districts such as Kgotleng and Mabutsane with high HIV prevalence, high poverty rates, and low ART uptake.

Finally, previous studies on HIV in some southern African countries have shown that ART service planning strategies are often not aligned with historical and present-day cultural practices, including those in which people are dependent on their environment. Future research should therefore focus on features of climate change, such as rising temperatures and water scarcity and rationing, as potential environmental and behavioral barriers to ART access, ART utilization, and ARV adherence to ensure the timely success of the Treat All Program in Botswana.

Acknowledgments

This research is dedicated to Dr. Florence Margai, an African scholar and mentor to both authors. Dr. Margai’s research and teaching focused on vulnerable population groups and innovative geographic approaches to target health promotion and disease prevention and intervention campaigns. This research carries on the motivation of Dr. Margai to ensure the health and well-being of the African people. The authors also acknowledge the Center for Gender in Global Context at Michigan State University for their encouragement and support of this research.

Literature Cited

Ajakaiye, D. O., and V. A. Adeyeye. 2001. Concepts, measurement and causes of poverty. Central Bank of Nigeria Economic and Financial Review 39 (4):8–44.

Barongo, L. R., M. W. Borgdorff, F. F. Mosha, A. Nicoll, H. Grosskurth, K. P. Senkoro, J. N. Newell, et al. 1992. The epidemiology of HIV-1 infection in urban areas, roadside settlement and rural villages in Mwanza Region, Tanzania. AIDS 6 (12):1521–28. doi: 10.1097/00002030-199212000-00016.

Bene, M., and M. B. Darkoh. 2014. The constraints of antiretroviral uptake in rural areas: The case of Thamaga and surrounding villages, Botswana. Sabara Journal 11:167–77. doi: 10.1080/17290376.2014.972057.

Botswana Department of Surveys and Mapping. 2019. Africa Business Directory. Accessed March 11, 2020. http://maps.prodafrika.com/location/Botswana.

Botswana Habitat III Report. 2014. Gabarone, Botswana: Ministry of Lands and Housing.

Botswana Ministry of Health and Wellness (MoHW) Monitoring and Evaluation Unit. 2017. ART patient
update summary. Gaborone, Botswana: Department of HIV and AIDS Prevention and Care, HIV/AIDS Information Management Division, Monitoring and Evaluation Unit.
Boyd, M. 1989. Family and personal networks in international migration: Recent developments and new agendas. International Migration Review 23 (3):638–70. doi: 10.1177/019791838902300313.
Colebunders, R., and C. Kenyon. 2015. Behaviour, not mobility, is a risk factor for HIV. The Lancet. HIV 2 (6): e223–e224. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3018(15)00057-0.
Earth Observing System Data and Information System. 2018. Accessed April 10, 2018. https://earthdata.nasa.gov/.
Environmental Systems Research Institute. 2018a. ArcGIS version 10.5. Redlands, CA: ESRI. Accessed April 2, 2018. http://www.esri.com.
Environmental Systems Research Institute. 2018b. Guide to network analysis. Redlands, CA: ESRI. Accessed April 2, 2018. http://www.esri.com.
Ferguson, L., A. D. Grant, D. Watson-Jones, T. Kahawita, J. O. Ong’ech, and D. A. Ross. 2012. Linking women who test HIV-positive in pregnancy-related services to long-term HIV care and treatment services: A systematic review. Tropical Medicine & International Health 17 (5):564–80. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3156.2012.02958.x.
GeoDa. 2019. Accessed October 1, 2019. https://spatial.uchicago.edu/geoda.
Jochelson, K., M. Mothibeli, and J. P. Leger. 1991. Human immunodeficiency virus and migrant labor in South Africa. International Journal of Health Services 21 (1):157–73. doi: 10.2190/11UE-L88J-46HN-HROK.
King, B., M. Burk, and M. S. Winchester. 2018. HIV citizenship in uneven landscapes. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 108 (6):1685–99. doi: 10.1080/24694452.2018.1457428.
Massey, D. S., J. Arango, G. Hugo, A. Kouaouci, A. Pellegrino, and J. E. Taylor. 1993. Theories of international migration: A review and appraisal. Population and Development Review 19 (3):431–66. doi: 10.2307/2938462.
Mastro, T. D., A. A. Kim, T. Hallett, T. Rehle, A. Welte, O. Laeyendecker, T. Olouoh, and J. M. Garcia-Calleja. 2010. Estimating HIV incidence in populations using tests for recent infection: Issues, challenges and the way forward. AIDS 2 (1):1–14. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e32833f142.
Mbonu, N. C., B. van den Borne, and N. K. De Vries. 2009. Stigma of people with HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa: A literature review. Journal of Tropical Medicine 2009:1–14. doi: 10.1155/2009/145891.
Mundandi, C., D. Vissers, H. Voeten, D. Habbema, and S. Gregson. 2006. No difference in HIV incidence and sexual behavior between out-migrants and residents in rural Manicaland, Zimbabwe. Tropical Medicine and International Health 11 (5):705–11. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3156.2006.01614.x.
Musheke, M., H. Ntalasha, S. Gari, O. Mckenzie, V. Bond, A. Martin-Hilber, and S. Merten. 2013. A systematic review of qualitative findings on factors enabling and deterring uptake of HIV testing in sub-Saharan Africa. BMC Public Health 13 (1):220. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-13-220.
Oppong, J. 1998. Geography of HIV/AIDS in Ghana, 1986–1995. The Professional Geographer 50 (4):437–48. doi: 10.1111/0033-0124.00131.
Plazy, M., K. El Farouki, C. Iwuij, N. Okesola, J. Orne-Gliemann, J. Larmarange, F. Lert, M. L. Newell, F. Dabis, and R. Dray-Spira. 2016. Access to HIV care in the context of universal test and treat: Challenges within the ANRS 12249 TasP cluster-randomized trial in rural South Africa. Journal of the International AIDS Society 19 (1):20913. doi: 10.7448/IAS.19.1.20913.
Quinn, T. C. 1994. Population migration and the spread of types 1 and 2 human immunodeficiency viruses. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 91 (7):2407–14. doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.7.2407.
Sellier, P., P. Clevenbergh, L. Ljubicic, G. Simoneau, J. Evans, V. Delecuy, M. Diemer, M. Bendemoun, S. Mouly, and J. F. Bergmann. 2006. Comparative evaluation of adherence to antiretroviral therapy in sub-Saharan African native HIV infected patients in France and Africa. Clinical Infectious Diseases 43 (5):654–57. doi: 10.1086/506436.
Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center. 2018. NASA’s Earth Observing System and Information System hosted by Columbia University. Accessed May 2, 2018. http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu.
Statistics Botswana. 2001. Botswana AIDS Impact Survey (BAIS I). Statistical report. National AIDS Coordinating Agency, Central Statistics Office. Accessed March 17, 2018. http://botswana.microdatahub.com/index.php/catalog/.
Statistics Botswana. 2004. Botswana AIDS Impact Survey (BAIS II). Statistical report. National AIDS Coordinating Agency, Central Statistics Office. Accessed March 17, 2018. http://botswana.microdatahub.com/index.php/catalog/.
Statistics Botswana. 2008. Botswana AIDS Impact Survey (BAIS III). Statistical report. National AIDS Coordinating Agency, Central Statistics Office. Accessed March 18, 2018. http://botswana.microdatahub.com/index.php/catalog/.
Statistics Botswana. 2013a. Botswana AIDS Impact Survey IV (BAIS IV). Statistical report. National AIDS Coordinating Agency, Central Statistics Office. Accessed March 18, 2018. http://botswana.microdatahub.com/index.php/catalog/.
Statistics Botswana. 2013b. Botswana transport & infrastructure statistics 2011. Accessed April 3, 2020. http://www.statsbots.org.bw/sites/default/files/publications/Transport%20%20Infrastructure%20Statistics%202011%20Report.pdf
Statistics Botswana. 2018. Botswana demographic survey report 2017. Accessed April 3, 2020. http://www.statsbots.org.bw/sites/default/files/publications/Botswana%20Demographic%20Survey%20Report%202017.pdf
Statistics Botswana. 2019. Data portal. Accessed September 30, 2019. http://www.statsbots.org.bw/data-portal-0.
Taylor, B. S., L. S. Garduno, E. V. Reyes, R. Valino, R. Rojas, Y. Donostorg, K. Brudney, and J. Hirsch. 2011. HIV care for geographically mobile populations. Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine: A Journal of Translational and Personalized Medicine 78 (3):342–51. doi: 10.1002/msj.20255.
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). 2019. Online AIDSINFO database. Accessed October 10, 2019. http://www.unaids.org/en/topic/data.

Watts, M. J., and H. G. Bohle. 1993. The space of vulnerability: The causal structure of hunger and famine. Progress in Human Geography 17 (1):43–67. doi: 10.1177/030913259301700103.

Weiss, S. M., P. Karl, V. L. Olga, M. E. Shikwane, C. Ryan, and D. L. Jones. 2014. Improving PMTCT uptake in rural South Africa. Journal of the International Association of Providers of AIDS Care 13 (3):269–76. doi: 10.1177/2325957413488203.

World Bank Group. 2010. Mapping poverty in Botswana 2010. Accessed July 12, 2018. http://www.statsbots.org.bw/sites/default/files/publications/POVERTY%20Mapping%202010_May%2028%202015.pdf.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2005. HIV/AIDS case studies. Accessed March 15, 2018. http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/casestudies/en/.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2013. HIV/AIDS consolidated ARV guidelines. Accessed March 22, 2018. http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/arv2013/art/startadolescents_rationale/en/.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2016. HIV/AIDS consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: Recommendations for a public health approach. Accessed March 22, 2018. http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/arv/arv-2016/en/.

MATLHOGONOLO KELEPILE is a Lecturer in the Department of Environmental Science, Faculty of Science at the University of Botswana, Private Bag UB 0022, Gaborone, Botswana. E-mail: mathhogonolo.kelepile@norpip.ub.bw. Her research interests include medical and health geography, population geography, and geospatial technologies with applications in HIV/AIDS research and its treatment therapies, including antiretroviral adherence.

SUE C. GRADY is an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography, Environment, and Spatial Sciences at Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48823. E-mail: gradys@msu.edu. Her research interests include medical and health geography, population geography, and spatial epidemiology with applications in maternal and infant health, including infant mortality.