Cottagers in an Urban Field

Greg Halseth
University of Northern British Columbia

Mark W. Rosenberg
Queen's University

The use of rural areas by the urban population is an important organizing principle in the study of the rural hinterland of urban centers. One of the important land uses identified within the urban field is recreation. This paper focuses on cottage property ownership in one part of the urban field, the rural-recreational countryside. Using three case studies from Canada, it was found that cottage properties account for a large proportion of local residential property. Although most cottage properties are owned by urban residents, up to one-quarter are owned by local residents. Using a questionnaire survey, it was also found that cottage owners are more likely to be older, better educated, and have higher incomes than rural residents. Key Words: urban field, rural-recreational countryside, cottagers.

Introduction

The rural hinterland surrounding cities is a complex geographic landscape where local land use changes are differentially combined with development pressures generated by the processes of urbanization (Bryant et al. 1982; Osborne 1988). The pattern of recreational land uses of the urban-based population is one of the organizing constructs of the urban field or city's countryside models of the rural hinterland surrounding cities (Friedmann and Miller 1965; Bryant et al. 1982). This paper is interested in one of the important and longstanding forms of recreational land use in the rural hinterlands of cities, that of cottage or second-home property ownership. The goal is to fill a gap in what is currently a paucity of data identifying the cottage property-owning population. For a variety of reasons, there has been renewed interest in rural and small-town research in recent years (Leckie 1989, 1993; Davies and Yeates 1991; Flora and Christenson 1991; Mackenzie 1992; Gober et al. 1993), and in the particular phenomenon of cottage or second-home ownership (Coppock 1977; Jaakson 1986; Wilkinson and Murray 1991; Gill and Clark 1992; Halseth 1992). At present, however, the published research has not offered a conceptual or statistical profile of the cottage owner population, nor has it offered a comparative examination of the profiles of cottage owners and rural residents.

To address this gap in current research, this paper undertakes a fourfold examination of cottage property owners and ownership using information from three case studies in Canada. The first issue to be examined involves a comparison of the distribution of cottage properties as a proportion of all residential properties within the study areas. The purpose of this comparison is to establish the relative importance of cottage properties as a component of the local residential property stock. The second issue concerns identification of the place of permanent residence for cottage property owners. This analysis explores the extent to which cottage property ownership in the urban field is controlled by urban residents. Third, a family structure and socioeconomic status profile of seasonal-use cottage property owners is developed from a questionnaire survey conducted in each study area. Finally, the profile of cottage property owners is compared to that of residents living year-round in the surrounding rural countryside.

These issues are important because much of the existing research on cottage or recreational pressures within the urban field rests upon anecdotal information or untested assumptions. For example, there are assumptions as to the extent of cottaging activity within particular portions of the urban field and assumptions that most cottagers are urban residents fleeing to weekend retreats in the countryside. There are also assumptions made about important differences between cottagers and local rural residents. This paper provides an opportunity to test and interpret some of these assumptions in light of case study evidence. Of specific interest is the research question: How different are cottagers from rural residents? The ration-
ale for seeking an answer to this question is the growing importance of this secondary housing market and the ways in which cottagers are changing the rural landscape into, on the one hand, an idealized version of the "rural" (i.e., beautiful scenery but with all the conveniences of urban life), and on the other, the ways in which each additional cottager makes a rural place even more urban.

Background

The summer cottage at the lake is an immediately recognizable element of the recreational countryside. Indeed, cottages are a relatively common element within Western society. Examples from France (Clout 1977), Great Britain (Copdock 1977; Rogers 1977), Czechoslovakia (Gardavsky 1977), Sweden (Geipel 1992), and Australia (Robertson 1977) stand as testament that the phenomenon is widespread. However, academic research has made only tentative attempts at tying together the importance of cottaging in the rural countryside and the role of cottage communities within the local rural community (Ragatz 1970; Copdock 1977; Jordan 1980; Wilkinson and Murray 1991; Halseth 1993a).

If cottages and cottage properties are relatively common within Western society, access to cottage ownership is certainly not ubiquitous. The costs of cottage property ownership are considerable, and access to ownership is limited by socioeconomic status. Economic costs are not, however, a new framework for explaining the pattern of higher socioeconomic status among cottage owners as compared to rural residents. As Wolfe (1965, 6) argued, the cottage may be a burden in many ways, but the burden on the pocketbook is the heaviest of all. There are the costs of maintaining a separate home, including the original cost of land and dwelling, taxes, electricity, furnishings. There are the extra costs of pleasurable possessions and activities, such as boats and golf equipment. There is the expense of travelling to and from the cottage.

Halseth (1993a) has recently argued in a Canadian context that changes to property assessment, property taxation, and personal capital gains tax regulations are increasing not only the costs of obtaining cottage property but also the costs of maintaining the property. While the relationship between household income and the ability to own a cottage property can be greatly complicated by factors such as property inheritance, there is clearly an economic cost to cottage property ownership that acts as a very real barrier to people who might otherwise wish to purchase "their own piece of the good life."

A second pervasive explanation for socioeconomic differences between cottage property owners and rural residents involves the socially constructed image of the cottage. This has far less to do with simple economic costs and is more intimately bound up with the idea of the cottage as a symbol of status within society. Wolfe (1965, 7) has argued that cottage ownership confers upon the owner the status and markings of being "among the elect." Cottage property assumes the identity not only of a separate place, but also of a place defined by the type of social nuances often associated with the country club.

In Canada, the cottage and the act of cottaging have deep historical roots. This legacy has made the socially constructed image of the cottage as a status symbol a part of Canadian folklore and culture. Cross's (1992) popular review of the summer house offers an insightful historical discussion of its origins as a wilderness escape for the elite of society. She argues that these elites, ranging from Roman senators to American presidents to the wealthiest entrepreneurs of the Gilded Age, have all made use of the summer house, both as a retreat from the pressures of urban life and as a symbol of the station they had achieved in society. Wyckoff (1990, 335) offers a critical historical interpretation of wilderness resorts and retreats as part of an influential melange of landscapes of private power and wealth. For Wyckoff, these landscapes of power are part of a longstanding process whereby the affluent within society work toward the creation of landscapes marked by social and spatial exclusivity. The small cottage in the mountains or by the lake or seashore represents in a rather more democratized form the desire to capture and be part of the panache, style, and status of the early resorts.

Along the Rideau Lakes, the "historic pattern of recreational land use and cottage development mirrors that of other central Canadian resort areas in that it was initially developed as
a resort hotel destination in the 'northern' wilderness catering to an elite able to afford such distractions" (Halseth and Rosenberg 1990, 104). During these early years, the cottage provided upper-class families with a way to spend their summers in the countryside while the wage earner commuted to the city during the business week (Kennedy 1984). The role of the cottage as a symbol of social status continues to be an important explanation of socioeconomic differences between cottage property owners and rural residents. While accessibility to the image of status through cottage ownership may have become democratized during the 1960-1980 period, the increasing costs of purchasing and maintaining these occasional-use properties may be reinforcing its earlier exclusivity.

A recasting of the economic and the social status explanations for differences between cottage property owners and rural residents is emerging within the rural restructuring literature. Cloke and Goodwin have recently offered a summation of the pressures of change in rural areas. Building upon an integration of economic and social forces, they argue that "the commodification of rural idylls and rural lifestyles [has generated] a new theatre of consumption . . ." (Cloke and Goodwin 1992, 328). Citing immigration based on recreation, leisure, and tourism, Cloke and Goodwin (1992, 331) suggest that "this can lead to the occurrence of 'two nations' in the same rural place . . . [with] a contesting of local political power . . . [and] local cultural images." Phillips (1993) has elaborated upon parts of this argument in a careful discussion of rural gentrification in Britain. Of importance to this discussion is Phillips's (1993) argument for greater attention to diversity both within and between rural localities in evaluating explanations of the pressures, processes, and outcomes of residential change. This paper uses case study research findings to examine cottage property ownership and to develop a socioeconomic profile of cottagers for comparison with local rural residents.

Study Areas

The three case studies examined in this paper are the Rideau Lakes area of Ontario, the Cultus Lake area of British Columbia, and the Beaubassin coastline of New Brunswick. In each case, the study areas are located near the outer bounds of the urban field and contain a mix of rural, small-town, and recreational property areas. Each study area also features established cottage property areas together with a rural community whose livelihood remains grounded in agriculture. In seeking to develop a socioeconomic profile of cottagers, we selected these study areas to explore possible regional variations in cottage landscapes. This is an important issue as there has been, and continues to be, tremendous variation in the strength of regional Canadian economies. To present information for only one study area runs the risk of making general statements based on findings that may in fact represent unique or idiosyncratic aspects of that region or area. Given that there is little additional research with which to compare our findings, it was decided that a multiple case study approach was more appropriate.

Within each study area the small-lot, intensively developed cottaging properties are set within a surrounding, less densely developed rural countryside. These distinct cottage property landscapes are readily distinguishable within each study area and are identified in this paper as part of the rural-recreational countryside. It is important to note at the outset that the rural-recreational countryside is only one component of the larger urban field.

The Rideau Lakes study area comprises six rural townships located in eastern Ontario along the central portion of the Rideau Canal waterway (Fig. 1). Situated within an area of dairying or more marginal agricultural activity, cottage properties form a distinctly linear pattern along the margins of the recreational lakes and waterways. The Rideau Lakes area is also one of the oldest cottaging landscapes in Canada. In most cases, the depth of cottage development rarely exceeds a single row of properties. The towns of Perth and Smiths Falls (1991 populations of 5,574 and 9,396, respectively) are immediately adjacent to the study area. The cities of Ottawa and Kingston are located approximately 30 miles, north and south respectively, from the Rideau Lakes.

The Cultus Lake area is located about 60 miles from metropolitan Vancouver in the Lower-Fraser Valley of southwestern British Columbia (Fig. 1). Two intensively developed
Figure 1: Study areas.

cottaging areas, Lindell Beach and Cultus Lake Park, are located at each end of Cultus Lake; a rural and agricultural area is found in the Columbia Valley. Bounded on the south by the international border with the United States and on the other sides by steep mountain slopes, the Cultus Lake area is a well-contained valley within which the very different landscapes of cottage and rural property areas are juxtaposed. Adjacent to the Cultus Lake area is the regional service center of Chilliwack (1991 population of 49,531).

The New Brunswick study area includes all of the Beaubassin Planning Commission region (Fig. 1). Located along the Northumberland Strait of the Gulf of St. Lawrence on New Brunswick's southeast coast, the study area features a mix of clustered (as at Cultus Lake) and dispersed (as along the Rideau Lakes) cottage properties. The towns of Shédiac and Cap-Pelé (1991 populations of 4,343 and 2,181, respectively) are located within the study area. The city of Moncton is approximately 25 miles west of the Beaubassin beaches. In a striking illustration of the close connection between urban residents and rural amenity areas, one of the only sections of four-lane divided highway through this part of Maritime Canada goes directly from downtown Moncton to the beach at Shédiac.

Data

There has been a longstanding gap in the geographic literature concerning definitions of cottaging activity and related issues of data
quality. Definitions of cottaging and cottagers, as a type of land use and as a class of residential occupancy respectively, have proved too malleable to operationalize in a consistent manner (Copppock 1977; Hart 1984; Jaakson 1986; Hinch 1990). Clearly, the residential landscape within cottaging areas is complex. In all three study areas described above, there are examples of permanent residents living year-round at cottage property along the lake and examples of farm property used only as summer retreats. Micro-level analysis of individual behavior suggests that there are also examples of property use that fall between these extremes (Geipel 1992; Halseth 1993b). In this sense, we must recognize that cottage property can be distinguished by patterns of location and patterns of use or occupancy. In each of our study areas, the small-lot cottage properties could be easily distinguished from surrounding agricultural or rural residential properties. In addition, property use in terms of seasonal or permanent occupancy could be readily ascertained from local government records. In order to address the specific research question of differences between cottagers and rural residents, this paper draws on survey data from both owners of seasonal-use cottage property and owners of rural or agricultural property.

Data used in this analysis derive from two sources. Data from local government property assessment and taxation records are used to explore questions of property distribution and ownership in areas featuring extensive cottaging activity. These records provide information on property use and location together with the mailing address of the property owner. For studies of cottaging activity in the urban field, data of this type are important both for identifying seasonal-use cottage properties and for providing confirmation of whether the owners of such cottage properties are urban residents (Halseth 1992). In order to develop a socioeconomic profile of cottage owners and compare it with a profile of rural residents, a questionnaire survey of local property owners was administered in each study area (Rosenberg and Halseth 1993). The survey, conducted in the summer of 1991, was used to obtain directly comparable household level information. A random sample of seasonal-use cottage owners and rural residents was drawn in each study area. The sample size in each area was determined by a larger research project examining the conversion of cottages into year-round homes; the number of questionnaires mailed to rural residents and to seasonal cottagers coincides with the number of converted cottage properties identified during the preceding 10-year period.

The analysis is organized around the two Resident Groups from the questionnaire survey. Seasonal residents are defined as those who own property within the small-lot cottaging areas and who are distinguished by the seasonal or periodic pattern of occupancy and by the maintenance of a permanent residence elsewhere. Rural residents are defined as the local population not living within the cottaging areas. Their residential landscape consists of permanent-use housing stock occupied by year-round residents. This distinction of property owners by settlement type and occupancy pattern is a significant departure from the standard farm/nonfarm treatment of rural area populations (Brunet 1980; Russwurm and Bryant 1984; Joseph and Smit 1985) and is one that seeks to introduce more of the complexity that is the rural landscape.

The sample sizes and response rates for the survey are listed in Table 1. The response rates compare favorably to those summarized in Feitelson's (1991) review of survey research methods. There is no information to suggest that nonresponses are systematically organized.

Results

Property Distribution

In the rural-recreational countryside, cottages and other recreational properties are an integral part of the landscape. In the three study areas examined in this paper, cottage properties account for a significant share of local residential property (Table 2). In fact, in two cases cottage properties represent the majority of local residences. Given these distributions, cottage properties, and the people who use them, can have an important impact on the local area. For example, cottage property ownership confers the right to vote in municipal elections. The issue as to which constituency, rural residents or cottage owners, holds the balance of local political power in debate over community change is a contentious one within
Table 1 Sample Sizes and Response Rates

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Study Areas and Resident Groups</th>
    <th>Questionnaires Mailed<sup>a</sup></th>
    <th>Number of Responses</th>
    <th>Response Rate (%)</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Rideau Lakes:</td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Rural</td>
    <td>294</td>
    <td>124</td>
    <td>42%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Seasonal</td>
    <td>295</td>
    <td>112</td>
    <td>38%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Cultus Lake:</td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Rural</td>
    <td>104</td>
    <td>39</td>
    <td>38%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Seasonal</td>
    <td>120</td>
    <td>40</td>
    <td>33%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Beaubassin:</td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Rural</td>
    <td>152</td>
    <td>51</td>
    <td>34%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Seasonal</td>
    <td>150</td>
    <td>60</td>
    <td>40%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>TOTAL</td>
    <td>1115</td>
    <td>426</td>
    <td>38%</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source: Rosenberg and Halseth (1993).
<sup>a</sup>The sampling frame was determined by the requirements of a research project examining the conversion of cottage properties from seasonal to year-round occupancy. For each study area, the number of questionnaires mailed out to seasonal residents and to rural residents corresponds to the number of converted cottage properties identified in those areas over the preceding 10-year period.

these rural areas. Despite the likelihood of these kinds of important and highly localized impacts, there continues to be relatively little geographic research directed at understanding the interactions and implications of this juxtaposition of two very different types of residential landscapes (Jordan 1980; Wilkinson and Murray 1991). Popular literature has, by contrast, been keenly interested in the social consequences of this juxtaposition (Gordon 1989; Cross 1992; Lampi 1992).

Cottage Property Ownership
The urban field and city countryside models of the rural hinterland of cities are very much urban-centric in orientation, that is, rural area changes fundamentally originate from the urban center (see Simmons 1981 and Troughton 1981). In the case of cottaging in the rural-recreational countryside, this conceptualization has been translated into an implied assumption that cottage properties are owned entirely by urban residents. Indeed, a large proportion of the sample of cottage property owners are residents of nearby urban centers (Table 3). This finding supports other research suggesting that urban and metropolitan area residents exert a considerable influence upon cottage property ownership in the rural-recreational countryside (Wolfe 1951; Hallman 1990; Wilkinson and Murray 1991). However, in the Rideau Lakes and Cultus Lake areas, between one-fifth and one-quarter of all cottage properties are owned by residents living within the study area itself or in an immediately adjacent small town. This result challenges the assumption that cottage owners are universally urban residents. Reasons for the large number of cottage property owners from within the local area are varied. Along the Rideau Lakes, several residents remarked that since private cottage ownership has effectively cut off public access to the lakes, they purchased a cottage lot in order to ensure access for their family. At Cultus Lake the cottaging areas began as recreational retreats for local residents, and it has only been

Table 2 Residential Property Distribution

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Study Area</th>
    <th rowspan="2">Total Number of Residential Properties<sup>a</sup></th>
    <th colspan="2">Cottage Area Properties<sup>b</sup></th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Number</th>
    <th>As % of total residential properties</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Rideau Lakes</td>
    <td>13,559</td>
    <td>5,516</td>
    <td>40.7%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Cultus Lake</td>
    <td>816</td>
    <td>616</td>
    <td>75.5%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Beaubassin</td>
    <td>3,490<sup>c</sup></td>
    <td>1,839<sup>c</sup></td>
    <td>52.8%</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source: Provincial property assessment records in each study area.
<sup>a</sup>Includes all farm residences, all permanent residences, and all seasonal residences. In the Beaubassin study area this number excludes residential properties within the incorporated towns of Shédiac and Cap-Pelé.
<sup>b</sup>Includes all small-lot residential properties located in the cottaging areas.
<sup>c</sup>Supplementary data supplied by Beaubassin Planning Commission.
Table 3 Distribution of Cottage Ownershipa

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Location of Permanent Residence of Cottage Owner</th>
    <th colspan="3">Percentage of Cottage Properties</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Rideau Lakes</th>
    <th>Cultus Lake</th>
    <th>Beaubassin</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Internalb</td>
    <td>6.2</td>
    <td>1.9</td>
    <td>2.0</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Adjacent Townsc</td>
    <td>21.6</td>
    <td>18.1</td>
    <td>2.7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Adjacent Rural/Small Townd</td>
    <td>6.9</td>
    <td>4.8</td>
    <td>8.0</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Adjacent Metropolitan Arease</td>
    <td>43.3</td>
    <td>71.2</td>
    <td>73.3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Other Canada</td>
    <td>13.1</td>
    <td>2.9</td>
    <td>11.3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>United States</td>
    <td>8.9</td>
    <td>1.1</td>
    <td>2.7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Sample Size</td>
    <td>295</td>
    <td>375</td>
    <td>150</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source: Questionnaire survey.
aThe Cultus Lake sample includes all seasonal-use cottage properties within the study area. The Rideau Lakes and Beaubassin area samples are based on property-owner address information collected for the random sample of seasonal-use cottage properties identified for the questionnaire survey. The sample size corresponds to the total number of questionnaires mailed to seasonal residents.
bWithin the respective study area boundaries.
cRideau Lakes = Perth, Smiths Falls, Westport. Cultus Lake = Chilliwack. Beaubassin = Shédiac, Cap-Pelé.
dCovers the region between each study area and the adjacent metropolitan area(s).
eRideau Lakes = Ottawa, Kingston. Cultus Lake = Vancouver. Beaubassin = Moncton.

over time that non-local residents have been able to supplant local residents' ownership of property within the cottage market.

Cottage Owners
Measures of family structure for seasonal-use cottage property owners are presented in Table 4. There is remarkable similarity across these family structure measures among seasonal residents in the three study areas. Over half of all respondents in each area are 55 years of age or older; over three-quarters of seasonal residents in each study area are married. Perhaps because of the slightly older age profile, a higher proportion of Cultus Lake respondents are widowed. Less than half of the seasonal residents have any children living at home. Not surprisingly, the Cultus Lake area has the lowest proportion of children living at home.

As with the family structure measures, there is considerable similarity in the responses of seasonal residents in terms of socioeconomic status across the three study areas (Table 5). More than half of seasonal residents have a university education. In the Rideau Lakes area this proportion reaches nearly three-quarters. More than two-thirds of seasonal residents report an income of over $50,000 per year. When retired households are dropped from the analysis, the proportion of seasonal residents reporting annual incomes of less than $20,000 falls to zero in each area. A large proportion of seasonal residents in the three study areas report that they are retired. This is an expected outcome in light of the age structure. Of those who are not retired, the clear majority are employed in professional occupations.

There are relatively few studies of the cottage property owner population with which to compare the profile developed in this paper. Hodge (1970) undertook a probe of cottagers living in the Toronto urban field. In that early cursory study, Hodge argued that cottagers tend to involve families, particularly those with young children, and tend to be clustered within the higher income categories. The predominance of higher incomes, and associated higher levels of education and occupational status, compares favorably with the profile of cottage property owners developed from our questionnaire survey. In terms of family structure, however, our profile differs markedly from that suggested by Hodge in that we note a pattern of older households without children living at home. A more recent study by Gill and Clark (1992) has developed a socioeconomic profile for second-home owners in the mountain resort of Whistler, British Columbia. As with our study, they find that second-home owners tend to have high income and education levels and that they tend to be employed in professional occupations. The age distribution of second-home owners surveyed by Gill and Clark is, however, concentrated between ages 35 and 54, and not the retirement years found in our survey. This may be an indication of important differences between the types of cottage/resort areas in the rural-recreational countryside and the types of households drawn to different recreational landscapes. These differences may have significant implications not only for determining
Table 4 Profiles of the Family Structure of Rural Resident and Seasonal Resident Respondents

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Age Structure (years)</th>
    <th colspan="2">Rideau Lakes</th>
    <th colspan="2">Cultus Lake</th>
    <th colspan="2">Beaubassin</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Rural (%)</th>
    <th>Seasonal (%)</th>
    <th>Rural (%)</th>
    <th>Seasonal (%)</th>
    <th>Rural (%)</th>
    <th>Seasonal (%)</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>25-34</td>
    <td>10.6</td>
    <td>3.0</td>
    <td>10.3</td>
    <td>2.6</td>
    <td>23.5</td>
    <td>5.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>35-44</td>
    <td>23.4</td>
    <td>19.0</td>
    <td>23.1</td>
    <td>10.5</td>
    <td>29.4</td>
    <td>12.5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>45-54</td>
    <td>22.6</td>
    <td>23.0</td>
    <td>20.5</td>
    <td>21.1</td>
    <td>13.7</td>
    <td>30.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>55-64</td>
    <td>19.4</td>
    <td>23.0</td>
    <td>28.2</td>
    <td>26.3</td>
    <td>9.8</td>
    <td>35.7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>65-74</td>
    <td>16.9</td>
    <td>21.0</td>
    <td>12.8</td>
    <td>31.6</td>
    <td>15.7</td>
    <td>12.5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>75+</td>
    <td>7.3</td>
    <td>11.0</td>
    <td>5.1</td>
    <td>7.9</td>
    <td>7.8</td>
    <td>3.6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>n=</td>
    <td>124</td>
    <td>100</td>
    <td>39</td>
    <td>38</td>
    <td>51</td>
    <td>56</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th colspan="7">Marital Status</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Single</td>
    <td>2.4</td>
    <td>3.9</td>
    <td>10.3</td>
    <td>0</td>
    <td>4.1</td>
    <td>1.8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Married</td>
    <td>81.5</td>
    <td>80.6</td>
    <td>82.1</td>
    <td>76.9</td>
    <td>73.5</td>
    <td>78.8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Widowed</td>
    <td>9.7</td>
    <td>10.7</td>
    <td>0</td>
    <td>20.5</td>
    <td>14.3</td>
    <td>12.5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Div/Sep.</td>
    <td>6.4</td>
    <td>4.8</td>
    <td>7.7</td>
    <td>2.6</td>
    <td>8.2</td>
    <td>8.9</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>n=</td>
    <td>124</td>
    <td>103</td>
    <td>39</td>
    <td>39</td>
    <td>49</td>
    <td>56</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th colspan="7">Children at Home</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Yes</td>
    <td>53.7</td>
    <td>41.2</td>
    <td>45.9</td>
    <td>28.9</td>
    <td>52.1</td>
    <td>44.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>n=</td>
    <td>121</td>
    <td>102</td>
    <td>37</td>
    <td>38</td>
    <td>48</td>
    <td>54</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source: Questionnaire survey.

who purchases property but also for the future costs of services provision to very different populations.

Contrasts with Rural Residents
There are notable differences in the age distribution of seasonal residents and rural residents (Table 4). While most respondents in both groups report being married, rural residents are younger. This is a somewhat surprising result given the greying of the rural population suggested in published research (Hodge 1987; Bekkering 1990; Hodge and Gutman 1991). Related to the differences in age profiles is the greater proportion of rural residents who have children living in the home, although there is less difference in the Beaubassin area between seasonal residents and rural residents on this variable.

The most marked differences between seasonal residents and rural residents involve measures of socioeconomic status (Table 5). More than half of the rural residents in each area have only a high school education or less. By contrast, a majority of seasonal residents have some education beyond the high school level. Sharp differences also exist between the two groups in terms of annual household income levels and occupational status of the household head. While approximately two-thirds of seasonal residents reported an annual household income of more than $50,000, more than half of the rural residents reported annual household incomes of less than $40,000. A smaller proportion of rural residents are retired. Among those still in the workforce, more rural residents are in service and secondary industry activities compared to the strong concentration of seasonal residents in professional occupations.

The differences in proportions of those falling into a particular demographic or socioeconomic category depending on whether they are a rural resident or a seasonal resident can be tested using Chi-square analysis. The analysis confirms the observations noted above (Table 6). Most of the observed differences between rural and seasonal residents are statistically significant (p < .05) or nearly so (p < .10). Only for marital status in Rideau Lakes and Beaubassin and for children at home in Cultus Lake are the differences not statistically significant or nearly so.

The strongest and most consistent differences occur with household income. There is an assumption within much research on cottage or second-home ownership that these owners must have higher incomes, and presumably other associated measures of higher socioeconomic status, in order to afford the additional costs of these occasional-use properties. The comparison of seasonal resident and rural resident profiles does lend support to this view. In all three study areas, seasonal residents reported higher levels of education and annual household incomes, and for those who are not retired, a higher proportion of professional occupations than do rural resi-
Table 5 Socio-economic Status Profiles of Rural Resident and Seasonal Resident Respondents

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2"></th>
    <th colspan="2">Rideau Lakes</th>
    <th colspan="2">Cultus Lake</th>
    <th colspan="2">Beaubassin</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Rural (%)</th>
    <th>Seasonal (%)</th>
    <th>Rural (%)</th>
    <th>Seasonal (%)</th>
    <th>Rural (%)</th>
    <th>Seasonal (%)</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Education:</td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>&lt;High School</td>
    <td>8.9</td>
    <td>2.9</td>
    <td>7.7</td>
    <td>2.6</td>
    <td>20.0</td>
    <td>5.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>High School</td>
    <td>46.3</td>
    <td>23.8</td>
    <td>53.9</td>
    <td>35.9</td>
    <td>46.0</td>
    <td>30.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>University</td>
    <td>40.7</td>
    <td>71.3</td>
    <td>35.9</td>
    <td>56.4</td>
    <td>34.0</td>
    <td>62.5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Other</td>
    <td>4.1</td>
    <td>2.0</td>
    <td>2.6</td>
    <td>5.1</td>
    <td>0.0</td>
    <td>1.8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>n=</td>
    <td>123</td>
    <td>101</td>
    <td>39</td>
    <td>39</td>
    <td>50</td>
    <td>56</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Household Income ($'000's)</td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>&lt;20</td>
    <td>20.5</td>
    <td>4.2</td>
    <td>26.3</td>
    <td>12.1</td>
    <td>8.5</td>
    <td>3.6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>20-29</td>
    <td>13.4</td>
    <td>7.4</td>
    <td>15.8</td>
    <td>3.0</td>
    <td>38.3</td>
    <td>3.6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>30-39</td>
    <td>14.3</td>
    <td>11.6</td>
    <td>18.4</td>
    <td>9.1</td>
    <td>23.4</td>
    <td>12.7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>40-49</td>
    <td>12.5</td>
    <td>11.6</td>
    <td>18.4</td>
    <td>9.1</td>
    <td>8.5</td>
    <td>12.7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>50+</td>
    <td>39.3</td>
    <td>65.2</td>
    <td>21.1</td>
    <td>66.7</td>
    <td>21.3</td>
    <td>67.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>n=</td>
    <td>112</td>
    <td>95</td>
    <td>38</td>
    <td>33</td>
    <td>47</td>
    <td>55</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Occupation</td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Professional</td>
    <td>19.3</td>
    <td>32.7</td>
    <td>21.6</td>
    <td>26.3</td>
    <td>17.1</td>
    <td>34.5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Service</td>
    <td>20.2</td>
    <td>12.2</td>
    <td>24.4</td>
    <td>13.2</td>
    <td>25.5</td>
    <td>16.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Primary</td>
    <td>10.9</td>
    <td>1.0</td>
    <td>8.1</td>
    <td>2.6</td>
    <td>2.1</td>
    <td>0</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Secondary</td>
    <td>10.9</td>
    <td>3.1</td>
    <td>10.8</td>
    <td>5.3</td>
    <td>24.7</td>
    <td>7.3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Other</td>
    <td>8.4</td>
    <td>8.2</td>
    <td>8.1</td>
    <td>10.5</td>
    <td>6.4</td>
    <td>7.3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Retired</td>
    <td>30.3</td>
    <td>42.8</td>
    <td>27.0</td>
    <td>42.1</td>
    <td>23.4</td>
    <td>34.5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>n=</td>
    <td>119</td>
    <td>98</td>
    <td>37</td>
    <td>38</td>
    <td>47</td>
    <td>55</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source: Questionnaire survey.

dents. These findings were consistent among study areas, even though there was wide variability in the strength of the regional economies in the three examples.

Discussion and Conclusions

There is growing academic interest in cottages and cottaging in the rural hinterlands of cities. At present, however, there is little published research that addresses the question of who these cottagers are, where they come from, and how they might be different from the rural and small-town populations in cottage areas. This paper has presented the results of a study of cottage property owners in three rural-recreational countryside areas of Canada. The findings from this research address several important questions concerning cottagers in the urban field, the answers to which had previously been based on assumptions or anecdotal evidence. It is clear from our examples that cottage properties do make up a large proportion of the residential property stock in particular parts of the rural countryside. Our findings suggest that while most cottage property owners as expected do come from large urban or metropolitan areas, up to one-quarter of cottage properties are in fact owned by local rural and small-town residents. Seasonal residents tend to be married with no children living at home, have an educational level beyond high school, have relatively high incomes, and are either employed in a professional occupation or retired. Compared to local rural and small-town residents, seasonal residents are more likely to be older, better educated, and have higher incomes.

Table 6 Summary Results Chi-square Analysis

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Variable</th>
    <th rowspan="2">Degrees of Freedom</th>
    <th colspan="3">Chi-square Results</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Rideau Lakes</th>
    <th>Cultus Lake</th>
    <th>Beaubassin</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Age Structure</td>
    <td>6</td>
    <td>12.494*</td>
    <td>17.196**</td>
    <td>47.728**</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Martial Status</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>0.935</td>
    <td>13.063**</td>
    <td>0.597</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Children at Home</td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>3.464*</td>
    <td>2.317</td>
    <td>10.209**</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Education</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>40.003**</td>
    <td>6.814**</td>
    <td>17.823**</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Household Income</td>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>19.285**</td>
    <td>15.599**</td>
    <td>18.769**</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Occupation</td>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>40.870**</td>
    <td>9.985*</td>
    <td>19.478**</td>
  </tr>
</table>

*Level of significance 0.10
**Level of significance 0.05
1 Expected cell counts less than 5. Results should be treated with caution.
The degree to which the case study areas described in this paper may be representative of the broader phenomena of cottaging and cottage property ownership cannot yet be evaluated. This is due in part to a scarcity of comparable case study research, but it is also due to a general lack of detailed information on this important economic and social activity available from standard sources such as the census. Within the limitations of the research described in this paper, however, these findings lend support to the premise that the rural-recreational countryside is a socially and geographically divided landscape. The fundamental division revolves around the separation of cottage properties from the rural and small-town milieu within which they are set, based on an economic differentiation, such as the ability to afford cottage property, and the socially constructed image of a cottage community as something separate from the rural milieu. Recognition and incorporation of both these explanations will be necessary if research is to move forward in considering the broader implications of cottage ownership within the rural landscape.

Theoretical explanations for differences in socioeconomic status between cottagers and rural area residents include the economic criteria of being able to maintain a second set of residential costs, the social status legacy of a historic association between resorts in the wilderness and the lifestyles of an affluent population, and the implications of economic restructuring in commodifying rural property for those with the time and money to afford this form of leisure activity. A better understanding of this activity takes on an urgency, however, given the economic, social, and demographic changes occurring across the contemporary rural landscape. Questions should be asked about the implications of the cottager profile developed in this paper for rural communities. For example, how will increasing environmental sensitivity affect the development of new, or the redevelopment of existing, cottage properties given the continuing demand for these recreational retreats? What are the local political ramifications as seasonal-use cottage property owners become more active in rural land use planning, property taxation, and servicing debates? As cottage property values increase relative to rural properties, will there be a widening of the socioeconomic distinctions between these groups occupying the same rural landscape? What will be the implications for rural communities if large numbers of retired cottagers move "to the lake" for their retirement years? While this paper has focused on developing a profile of the seasonal-use cottage-owner population, it is also a call for more research on the complex and widespread phenomenon of cottaging. Economic, community, health, and social service changes are all possible impacts resulting from cottaging activity in the rural-recreational countryside. An understanding of these pressures and the related processes is needed if we are to better understand the complex nature of the rural countryside.

Note

1Some of the data presented were originally collected for Recreational Home Conversion in Canada (Rosenberg and Halseth 1993), which was supported through the External Research Program of the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation.

Literature Cited

Bekkering, M. 1990. Patterns of change in the spatial distribution of Canada's elderly, 1966 to 1986. Master's thesis, Department of Geography, Queen's University, Kingston, Canada.

Brunet, Y. 1980. L'exode urbain, essai de classification de la population exubaine des Cantons de l'Est. Canadian Geographer 24:385–405.

Bryant, C. R., L. H. Russwurm, and A. G. McLellan. 1982. The City's Countryside—Land and Its Management in the Rural-Urban Fringe. London and New York: Longman Group Limited.

Cloke, P., and M. Goodwin. 1992. Conceptualizing countryside change: From post-Fordism to rural structured coherence. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 17:321–36.

Clout, H. D. 1977. Residences Secondaires in France. In Second Homes: Curse or Blessing, ed. J. T. Coppock, 47–62. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Coppock, J. T., ed. 1977. Second Homes: Curse or Blessing. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Cross, A. W. 1992. The Summer House—A Tradition of Leisure. Toronto: Harper Collins.

Davies, S., and M. Yeates. 1991. Exurbanization as a component of migration: A case study in Oxford County, Ontario. Canadian Geographer 35:177–86.

Feitelson, E. 1991. The potential of mail surveys in geography: Some empirical evidence. Professional Geographer 43:190–205.

Flora, C. B., and J. A. Christenson, eds. 1991. Rural Policies for the 1990s. Boulder: Westview Press.
Friedmann, J., and J. Miller. 1965. The urban field. Journal of the American Institute of Planners 31:312–20.

Gardavsky, V. 1977. Second homes in Czechoslovakia. In Second Homes: Curse or Blessing, ed. J. T. Coppock, 63–74. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Geipel, R. 1992. Territoriality at the microscale. In Person, Place and Thing: Interpretive and Empirical Essays in Cultural Geography, ed. S. T. Wong, 79–97. Baton Rouge, Louisiana: Department of Geography and Anthropology, Louisiana State University.

Gill, A., and P. Clark. 1992. Second-home development in the resort municipality of Whistler, British Columbia. In British Columbia: Geographical Essays in Honour of A. MacPherson, ed. P. M. Koroscil, 281–94. Burnaby, B.C.: Department of Geography, Simon Fraser University.

Gober, P., K. E. McHugh, and D. Leclerc. 1993. Job-rich but housing-poor: The dilemma of a western amenity town. Professional Geographer 45:12–20.

Gordon, C. 1989. At the Cottage: A Fearless Look at Canada’s Summer Obsession. Toronto: McLelland and Stewart.

Hallman, B. R. 1990. Migration, commuting and economic development in Toronto’s outer urban field: The Southern Georgian Bay region. Master’s thesis, Department of Geography, University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada.

Halseth, G. 1992. Cottage property ownership: Interpreting spatial patterns in an Eastern Ontario case study. Ontario Geography 38:32–42.

———. 1993a. Communities within communities: Local residential change and conflict in the rural-recreational countryside. Ph.D. diss., Department of Geography, Queen’s University, Kingston, Canada.

———. 1993b. Communities within communities: Changing “residential” areas at Cultus Lake, British Columbia. Journal of Rural Studies 9:175–87.

Halseth, G., and M. W. Rosenberg. 1990. Conversion of recreational residences: A case study of its measurement and management. Canadian Journal of Regional Science 13:99–115.

Hart, J. F. 1984. Population change in the Upper Lake States. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 74:221–43.

Hinch, T. D. 1990. A spatial analysis of tourist accommodation in Ontario: 1974 to 1988. Journal of Applied Recreation Research 15:239–64.

Hodge, G. 1970. Cottaging in the Toronto Urban Field: A Probe of Structure and Behaviour. Toronto: University of Toronto, Centre for Urban and Community Studies Research Paper No. 29.

———. 1987. Seniors in Canada’s Small Towns: Recent Trends and Their Implications. Vancouver: Centre for Human Settlements, University of British Columbia.

Hodge, G., and G. Gutman. 1991. Maintaining Seniors Independence in Rural Areas—A Guide to Planning for Housing and Support Services. Ottawa: Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation.

Jaakson, R. 1986. Second-home domestic tourism. Annals of Tourism Research 13:367–91.

Jordan, J. W. 1980. The summer people and the natives: Some effects of tourism in a Vermont vacation village. Annals of Tourism Research 7:34–55.

Joseph, A., and B. Smit. 1985. Rural residential development and municipal service provision. A Canadian case study. Journal of Rural Studies 1:321–37.

Kennedy, J. R. 1984. South Elmsley in the Making 1783–1983. Lombardy, Ontario: Township of South Elmsley.

Lampi, K. 1992. Cottage country from the other side of the fence. Globe and Mail 16 September, A26.

Leckie, G. J. 1989. Continuity and change in the farm community: Brooke Township, Ontario, 1965–86. Canadian Geographer 33:32–46.

———. 1993. Female farmers in Canada, 1971–1986. Professional Geographer 45:180–93.

Mackenzie, F. 1992. “The worse it got, the more we laughed”: A discourse of resistance among farmers of eastern Ontario. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 10:691–713.

Osborne, B. S. 1988. The Hinterland. In New Directions for the Study of Ontario’s Past—Papers of the Bicentennial Conference on the History of Ontario, eds. D. Gagan and R. Gagan, 267–83. Hamilton, Ontario: McMaster University.

Phillips, M. 1993. Rural gentrification and the processes of class colonisation. Journal of Rural Studies 9:123–40.

Ragatz, R. L. 1970. Vacation homes in the north-eastern United States: Seasonality in population distribution. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 60:447–55.

Robertson, R. W. 1977. Second-home decisions: The Australian context. In Second Homes: Curse or Blessing, ed. J. T. Coppock, 119–38. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Rogers, A. W. 1977. Second homes in England and Wales. In Second Homes: Curse or Blessing, ed. J. T. Coppock, 85–102. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Rosenberg, M. W., and G. Halseth. 1993. Recreational Home Conversion in Canada. Ottawa: Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation.

Russwurm, L. H., and C. R. Bryant. 1984. Changing population distribution and rural-urban relationships in Canadian urban fields, 1941–1976. In The Pressures of Change in Rural Canada, ed. M. F. Bunce and M. J. Troughton, 113–37. Toronto:
Atkinson College, York University, Geographical Monograph No. 14.
Simmons, T. 1981. The challenge of rural perspectives on the rural-urban fringe. In The Rural-Urban Fringe: Canadian Perspectives, ed. K. B. Beesley and L. H. Russwurm, 71–86. Toronto: Atkinson College, York University, Geographical Monograph No. 10.
Troughton, M. J. 1981. The rural-urban fringe: A challenge to resource management. In The Rural-Urban Fringe: Canadian Perspectives, ed. K. B. Beesley and L. H. Russwurm, 218–43. Toronto: Atkinson College, York University, Geographical Monograph No. 10.
Wilkinson, P. F., and A. L. Murray. 1991. Centre and periphery: The impacts of the leisure industry on a small town (Collingwood, Ontario). Society and Leisure 14:235–60.
Wolfe, R. I. 1951. Summer cottages in Ontario. Economic Geography 27:10–32.
———. 1965. About cottages and cottagers. Landscape 15:6–8.
Wyckoff, W. K. 1990. Landscapes of private power and wealth. In The Making of the American Landscape, ed. M. P. Conzen, 335–54. London: Harper Collins Academic.

GREG HALSETH (Ph.D., Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario) is Assistant Professor in the Geography Program, Faculty of Natural Resources and Environmental Studies, University of Northern British Columbia, Prince George, B.C., Canada V2N 4Z9. His research interests include issues of community change, specifically public participation and debate, in rural and suburban settings.

MARK ROSENBERG (Ph.D., London School of Economics and Political Science) is Associate Professor in the Department of Geography, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L 3N6. His current interests are population aging, medical geography, housing, and transportation, and their implications for public policy.

Forest-Landscape Structure along an Urban-To-Rural Gradient*

Kimberly E. Medley
Miami University

Steward T. A. Pickett
Institute of Ecosystem Studies

Human activities and forest-landscape structure are examined along a belt transect that extends 140 km from New York City to northwestern Connecticut. The study quantifies urban structures (population density, land use, transportation) and processes (population growth, urban land development) in the transect, and tests for relationships with the distribution, sizes, and shapes of forests. Our results identify distinct characteristics of urban and suburban environments based on the landscape structure of native forest vegetation. These findings are applicable to the management of natural areas along a gradient of urbanization. Key Words: conservation, forest ecology, landscape analyses, New York City, urbanization.

The altered environments of cities, coupled with the dynamic changes in land cover that occur when urban areas expand, profoundly influence the native vegetative cover of a landscape. Within most urbanized areas, human activities have resulted in a landscape that is characterized by a highly developed urban core and a trend toward diminishing anthropogenic influences at the periphery. It is evident that urban effects extend beyond city political boundaries or built-up areas of high human population density (Berry 1991). While

*Research support was provided to K. Medley through an AAG Research Grant and a postdoctoral appointment at the Institute of Ecosystem Studies. We thank T. Klak, E. McCann, R. V. Pouyat, C. Young, D. Lord, D. Hodge, and two anonymous reviewers for comments on earlier drafts. This paper is a contribution to the program for the Institute of Ecosystem Studies.