Presidential Address

Preadaptation and European Colonization in Rural North America

Terry G. Jordan

Department of Geography, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712

Abstract. The European colonization of rural North America and its resultant mosaic of cultures and ethnicity provided a rich subject material for historical geographers. Seven descriptive themes and concepts—region, diffusion, landscape, first effective settlement, simplification, environmental perception, and humans as modifiers of the earth—have traditionally been employed by geographers in their study of rural Euroamericans, providing an impressive empirical body of knowledge upon which to base our causal analyses. Seeking explanation, we began assertively as environmental determinists, subsequently moving to economic and cultural determinism. Few sought holistic explanations. It is here suggested that cultural ecology, and in particular the concept of preadaptation, offers an additional, potent, but largely unused explanatory device for the interpretation of overseas European farm settlement. If used in conjunction with economic and cultural determinism, preadaptation can contribute to our explanatory ability.

Key Words: adaptation, cultural ecology, diffusion, environmental perception, Europeans overseas, historical geography, human modification of the earth, landscape, North America, preadaptation, region.

ORTH American historical and cultural geographers have long demonstrated a profound interest in the overseas migrations of Europeans, the largest mass movement of people in world history, spanning four centuries and several continents (Schlichtmann 1977; Raitz 1979). Perhaps because the colonial areas remained dominantly rural during most of that period, attention has focused upon farm settlement. The "Berkeley school" of cultural-historical geographers has been particularly active in this intellectual venture, and Carl O. Sauer pursued the subject repeatedly (1941, 1966). Numerous students of Sauer followed his example, perhaps most notably Andrew H. Clark (1949, 1968), whose memorial volume was fittingly titled European Settlement and Development in North America (Gibson 1978). The interest passed abundantly, in turn, to third and fourth generation Berkeley students. Many other geographers on both sides of the Atlantic, unaffiliated with Berkeley, made substantial contributions to the study of European implantment in North America, including such luminaries as D. W. Meinig (1986), E. Estyn Evans (1969), and Walter M. Kollmorgen (1941). As a result of this multi-generational pursuit by diverse schools, geographers have built a major body of scholarly literature on traditional Euroamerican culture, gaining access to the best university presses and on occasion winning honors from outside the discipline.

Descriptive Themes and Concepts

From this compiled literature, we can glean seven essentially descriptive and by no means
mutually exclusive geographical themes and concepts relevant to the European occupancy of rural North America. The seven include region, diffusion, landscape, first effective settlement, simplification, environmental perception, and humans as modifiers of the earth.

At the simplest level, we have applied the concept of cultural region to the mapping of European groups in North America, a useful first step in geographical analysis (Smith 1930–31; Meigs 1941; Johnson 1951; Jordan 1970; Nostrand 1970, 1980; Vogeler 1976; Raitz 1978; Hopple 1979; Millward 1981; Louder and Waddell 1983; Estaville 1986; Gerlach 1986; Wacker 1986; West 1986; Allen and Turner 1987; Harris and Matthews 1987, pl. 44, 46, 68). In addition, some devotees of the regional method produced valuable monographs dealing with major ethnic enclaves (Gerlach 1976; Wilhelm 1980) or with colonial seaboard areas of European implantation (Clark 1959, 1968; Merrens 1964; Harris 1966; Lemon 1972; Earle 1975; Head 1976). Many among us interpreted the neo-European cultural regions of the colonial seaboard as nurseries or staging grounds for the subsequent evolution of American sectional cultures covering much larger areas (Meinig 1957–58; Mitchell 1978, 66–90; Pillsbury 1987, 50). Some geographers, by contrast, documented a desire on the part of certain transplanted European groups for rural isolation, segregation, and community, often in a marginal or refuge site, with resultant optimization of the shape and function of the ethnic region (Davis 1935; Bjorklund 1964; Rice 1973, 3–5, 92; Rechlin 1976, v, vi, 1; Wilhelm 1980, 219; Lehr 1985). Others measured the acculturative impact and decay of regionalism when such isolation broke down (Estaville 1988a, b). Still others, downplaying ethnicity, suggested that a weakness of region, place, and community prevailed from the first among overseas Europeans, indicating a new cultural order (Lemon 1978).

Geographical studies of the diffusion of European ways of life to overseas areas have been numerous, involving both material and nonmaterial culture (Clark 1960; Kaups 1966), and some of us littered our maps with the notorious “Berkeley arrows.” Most diffusionists believe that American agrarian cultures, in the main, were imported from Europe. People were not very inventive, in this view, and even the more adventurous, who emigrated, remained sufficiently conservative as to transfer methods and artifacts to the overseas settlement areas. Particularly abundant have been studies of immigrant farming practices in North America which demonstrated some measure of ethnic or regional distinctiveness based upon diffusion (Raup 1935; Kollmorgen 1941; Cozzens 1943; Hewes 1953; Warkentin 1959; Jordan 1966; Raitz and Mather 1971; Glick 1972; Gerlach 1976; McQuillan 1978; Baltensperger 1983; Butzer 1988). These studies have, however, also attracted debunkers (Lemon 1966). Some especially revealing diffusional studies utilized a comparative approach, in which the sending districts of migrants were analyzed alongside the receiving areas (Starczewska 1967; Mannion 1974; Ostergren 1988). Other geographers profitably investigated the migration process itself, as relocation diffusion, learning how migrants selected themselves for overseas settlement and demonstrating the potency of chain migration in transferring regional or local European cultural heritages to North America, where they often ultimately acquired an archaic, fossilized character (Rice 1977, 155, 175; Rice and Ostergren 1978; Lehr 1985). Another influential group of scholars downplayed diffusion from Europe, stressing instead frontier innovation and borrowing from indigenous groups as the keys to peculiarly American cultures. Robin Wells (1973, 6, 8–10) listed contact by overseas Europeans with aboriginal cultures as one of four defining traits of frontier sociocultural systems, assigning major importance to reciprocal diffusion between Indians and Euroamericans. Spanish colonization in North America requires major attention to this model, as does the Germano-Celtic settlement of the mesothermal forests on the eastern seaboard (Jordan and Kaups 1989, 87–90).

Closely related to the concept of diffusion is the principle of first effective settlement, proposed separately by Wilbur Zelinsky (1973, 13) and Fred Kniffen (1965, 551). In Zelinsky’s words, “the first group able to establish a viable, self-perpetuating society in an empty land are of crucial significance for the later social and cultural geography of the area,” regardless how small the initial group may be. The initial imprint tends to be durable, “surviving even where a new ethnic stock . . . succeeded the original settlers.” Successful diffusion, then, rested disproportionately upon sequence of arrival and
early success. Ineffectual occupancy paid no long-term diffusionary benefits (Gentilcore 1957).

Contradicting the diffusionists were a host of other historical geographers who stressed the modification of European culture overseas, recognizing that “our ancestors strove to make America something other than Europe” (Lemon 1980, 116), and that “the persistence of an exotic people . . . in a new home led inevitably to a new combination . . . and, thus, to the appearance of a new geographical entity” (Clark 1968, 3). In this manner, for example, the French feudal seigneurial system underwent a fundamental transformation in Québec (Harris 1966, 3, 7, 194–95). The major path of modification entailed a simplification of the imported cultures, for “Europeans established overseas drastically simplified versions of European society” (Harris 1977, 469; see also Glick 1972, 53). Most of the early proponents of this model believed simplification occurred at the point of departure, that only areal and temporal fragments of European culture diffused overseas, reflecting particular sources and periods of emigration. Harris (1977), by contrast, suggested that simplification occurred mainly at the point of arrival, in the overseas colonization areas. More cultural and institutional diversity was implanted than survived, regional differences of background faded, and multiple cultures collapsed into a few in the American setting. Much of the resultant distinctiveness of colonial culture derived from the juxtaposition and fusing of groups that had experienced little or no contact with each other in Europe. A Pennsylvanian culture, for example, reputedly took shape in the American Middle Colonies through “a fusion of more pluralistic complexes of primarily English, German, and Scotch-Irish origins” (Mitchell 1978, 67, 69). From the English came common law and language; Germans supposedly contributed the long rifle, Conestoga wagon, and “Dutch” barn; and the Scotch-Irish are said to have brought whiskey, the Ulster cabin plan, the potato, and subsistence hill farming with infield-outfield system (Evans 1969). Once crystallized, the fused, simplified American cultures quickly achieved a conservatism and rigidity which permitted persistence (Clark 1968, 380).

Environmental perception offered another fruitful theme for the historical geographical study of Europeans in rural North America. Practitioners of this behavioralistic approach investigated the differing images held by various European and Euroamerican groups of New World flora, climates, soils, and topography (McManis 1972; Blouet and Lawson 1975). The woodland/prairie ecotone received particular attention (McManis 1964; Jordan 1964; Peters 1970; Birch 1971). Nor has the venerable geographical concern with humans as modifiers of the earth been absent from studies of overseas Europeans (Clark 1949, 1956; Prunty 1965; Doughty 1983). It is fair to say, though, that we historical geographers have neglected this vital theme, in effect handing it over to historians and others (Cronon 1983; Crosby 1986).

Last among the seven approaches traditionally employed in the study of Europe overseas, and quite representative of the German-influenced Berkeley school, is cultural landscape. Practitioners of this methodology felt that the greater material artifacts of ordinary landscapes, such as houses, barns, settlement form and field patterns, possess diagnostic power to reveal diffusion, reflect socioeconomic systems, document past interactions between European culture and the American natural environment, measure acculturation, chart historical-cultural regions and suggest settlement processes (Sauer 1925; Bartz 1955; Wright 1958; Mather and Kaups 1963; Kniffen 1965; Wilson 1971; Mannion 1974; Wacker 1973, 1974; Winberry 1974; Tracie 1975; Gerlach 1976; Ensminger 1980–81; Lehr 1980; Glass 1986; Harris and Matthews 1987, pl. 41, 52, 55, 56). Devotees of the landscape approach relied very heavily upon field research to detect the American relict forms they felt constituted a highly valuable and revealing database for studying past cultures. Having spent most of my own career in this sort of activity, I can tell you it has offered an idyllic research life, ideally suited to a dyspeptic romantic who habitually disparages the modern world as frivolous, artificial, and ultimately self-destructive (Jordan 1982, 1985). The German romantic lurks in all of us landscapists, as surely as it did in our founder, August Meitzen (1895), whose benevolent gaze adorns my office wall.

Collectively, the previously described themes, concepts, and approaches taught us a great deal about what happened to Europeans in rural North America. None, however, allow us to
explain why events transpired and cultures evolved as they did, for each of the seven is inherently descriptive and nonexplanatory. Region offers little more than correlations between geographical space and specific culture traits, while diffusion’s “role in explaining culture has been greatly overestimated” (Steward 1955, 42; see also Denevan 1983, 399 and Bennett 1969, 63). Observing the landscape presence of relict artifacts may prove a particular cultural transfer but fails to explain it. Diffusion describes a procession but does not reveal a process. Simplification, first effective settlement, and environmental modification may accurately summarize what happened in the overseas zones of European colonization, but none deal with cause. Why should the first effective settlers have been so influential? What governed the survival or death of traits during the simplification process in America? How were the colonists’ environmental perceptions formed? Clearly, to achieve explanatory power, the models and concepts must be linked to causal mechanisms.

Seeking Explanations

While some historical geographers and other scholars studying overseas European settlement attempted to seek a balanced, multicausal answer, grappling with “intertwined processes” (Clark 1968, 370–71), most gravitated to one or another of three mainsprings which we can label environmental, economic, and cultural determinism. Most venerable is environmental determinism, whose proponents asserted that new and different natural settings overseas shaped Euroamerican cultures. F. J. Turner’s frontier thesis belongs in this category, since he explained the differences between American and European civilization by referring to the unique environment of the New World (Mikesell 1960, 63; Turner 1962, vii; Clark 1968, 383). Turner viewed the frontier as the place where Europeans met the physical environment, encountering a savage, remote, raw, untamed, wooded, and largely empty land in which the relics of the old civilization were of little value. Due to the reputedly corrosive influence of a forested environment on imported European cultures, ancestral institutions of law, religion, group discipline, agriculture, and finance suffered partial disintegration. The environmentally conditioned frontier way-of-life permanently stamped American civilization with democracy, individualism, anti-intellectualism, nationalism, optimism, innovative energetic ambition, and an idealistic view of progress and improvement. “Forest philosophy,” Turner wrote, “is the philosophy of American democracy” (1962, 207). Europe became culturally irrelevant.

The environmental determinist position was even more explicitly stated by Ellen Churchill Semple, who addressed, among other issues, the question of cultural simplification in colonial America. Acknowledging that coastal cultural enclaves had been “born of distinct old-world sources,” Semple proposed that when pioneers from these several ethnic enclaves probed westward through gaps in the Blue Ridge and entered the Great Valley of the Appalachians, they became caught together in a terrain-directed north-to-south migration flow that mixed and “obliterated the distinctive types of the coast” in a valley environment of “prevailing similarity.” Mountain-imposed isolation hindered markets and barred landed estates, fostering classlessness (Semple 1903, 61–62). Historian Walter Prescott Webb, whose connections with the geographical discipline were diverse, provided a classic environmental deterministic study of the Euroamerican settlement of the Great Plains (Webb 1931).

Economic Determinism

For a third of a century, the fate of European civilization in the North American wilderness was interpreted by many, particularly those with normative inclinations, in almost purely economic terms. A keynote for this era was sounded at mid-century, also by historian Webb (1951), who proposed an economic core/periphery model for explaining the American frontier. Europe, in Webb’s view, was the center from which a 400-year economic boom, lasting from about 1500 to 1900, emanated. At the beginning of that era, Europe retained much of its medieval character, with a rigidly stratified class society, a subsistence economy, little money, not much food, minimal personal freedom or individualism, and considerable rural communalism. In the Age of Discovery, Europeans
found vast resources in the rest of the world. Seizing and exploiting them, they precipitated the economic boom, and in the process, western civilization experienced fundamental changes, including the advent of capitalism, free enterprise, democracy, and individualism. So vast were the newfound resources, especially land, that a great many Europeans could take a share, causing wealth to become widely distributed, the class system to weaken, and communalism to vanish. To acquire a piece of the wealth, many Europeans emigrated, providing human raw material for the colonies. In Webb's thesis, then, the overseas colonists represented a completely new type of European, living on the outer margins of a massive, moving wave of resource annexation and exploitation. When all the resources had been seized, pioneers vanished, wealth once again began to be assembled in the hands of the few, and western civilization began an irreversible descent into neofeudalism.

Some historical geographers adhered to this doctrine of Economic Man in the wilderness. The simplification of European culture overseas, an overwhelming of cultural heritage, was attributed to the abundance of cheap land and the difficulty of access to market, an economic aberration that yielded a populist restructuring of society antipathetic to ethnicity (Harris 1977). In this view, tobacco prices became the greatest determinant of Chesapeake plantation culture, while in French Canada, furs achieved that honor (Mikesell 1960, 69; Clark 1968, 380–81; Earle 1975). Migrating belts of agricultural types, explained in Thünenian/Webbian terms, were endowed with great cultural significance (Peet 1969). Commercialism constituted the causal mainspring, the shaper of colonial American cultures, even in remote places such as the Shenandoah Valley (Mitchell 1977). Private property and the market ruled. Certain other geographers employed economic determinism to explain class struggle. They presented Euroamerican society not as populist, but instead, as dominated by capitalistic accumulative inequalities from the very first (Lemon 1980). Presumably the base pursuit of status, rather than egalitarianism, overwhelmed and simplified the imported ethnic cultures. Still others, recognizing the intellectual limitations of economic determinism, challenged the paradigm, even during its heyday (Clark 1968, 380–81; Hudson 1984, 22).

Cultural Determinism

A much less cohesive group of historical geographers, humanists in the main, pursued the notion that, in the study of Euroamericans, the causal forces in culture are themselves cultural in nature, that all aspects of culture are functionally interdependent and collectively self-explanatory. The proximate causes of American simplification, diffusion, first effective settlement, perceptions, regionalism, environmental modification, landscape, and innovation lay in the character of the imported cultures and societies. Some arrived at this position by ascribing a life-force to culture, a superorganicism that permitted entire culture-complexes to be diffused across the sea without essential change (Duncan 1980). Many of those who stressed continuity, diffusion, and transfer implicitly supported this sort of determinism.

Others pointed to attributes of European culture which, when placed in the colonial environment, spontaneously yielded societal forms difficult or impossible to obtain in Europe proper. These cultural mainsprings were largely ideological. For example, settlers arriving in the Middle Colonies reputedly already possessed a classic European liberalism, in which individual freedom, commercial-mindedness, and a desire for private control of wealth superseded public interest. Their ideology rested on a desire for material success at the level of the nuclear family. The essential ideological structure had arisen prior to the mass emigrations due to the demise of feudalism and the rise of Protestantism. Overseas colonial areas, through their offer of land and their denial of easy market access, provided the ideal setting for the new, family-based, egalitarian system to blossom. The common ideology helped to integrate the frontier and to simplify imported European culture (Lemon 1972; Harris 1977). Another key to simplification was supposedly syncretism. That is, the traits most likely to survive were shared, in proximate form, by several or all of the constituent ethnic groups prior to immigration and fusion (Newton 1974, 145–48). Colonial European culture, then, came about when a postfeudal, capitalistic, family-based ideology diffused to empty overseas lands and there spontaneously and syncretically overwhelmed Old World diversity.

Others viewed ideology not as a leveling
mechanism but, to the contrary, as supportive of local or regional emigrant community and ethnicity. An ideological underpinning was proposed to explain the character and long-term persistence of nineteenth-century European ethnic islands in the North American heartland (Tracie 1975; Rechlin 1976; Simpson-Housley 1978). Ideology also directed acculturation, yielding innovations, simplifications, and modifications that acted to support and propagate the ideology and its related ethnicity, while still allowing participation in the larger society (Bjorklund 1964). Imported kinship networks, achieved by chain migration, reinforced ideology and community, challenging the leveling economic forces (Ostergren 1988).

We historical geographers learned much from the preceding explanatory paradigms, even from environmentalism, though all have been criticized (Steward 1955, 36–38; Duncan 1980). But to get to my main point, I recommend utilizing also another explanatory methodology, one previously ignored by most of us who study overseas European rural settlement. This neglected paradigm is cultural ecology and, more particularly, adaptation.

Adaptation and Preadaptation

Cultural ecologists view culture as an adaptive system, as the uniquely human method of meeting physical environmental challenges. Culture serves to facilitate long-term, successful, nongenetic human adaptation to nature and to environmental change (Steward 1955, 30–42; Bennett 1969, 10–11; Mikesell 1978, 7–8). Viewed from this perspective, the European cultures transplanted to colonial settings become adaptive strategies being tested in new lands. The very founding of daughter colonies overseas could itself have been an adaptive device to relieve overpopulation.

Taking one step further, we come to the concept of preadaptation, involving trait complexes possessed by human societies in advance of migration that give them competitive advantage in occupying the new environment (Newton 1974). In other words, some European regional cultures were better preadapted for colonization in particular overseas environments than others. I propose that historical geographers applying these cultural ecological concepts, in particular preadaptation, can achieve additional explanatory power in the study of European colonization overseas (Hardesty 1986, 11; Jordan and Kaups 1987). The rate and degree to which imported European traits and practices survived in rural North America often hinged upon the level of preadaptation.

Perhaps the reason for the slow acceptance of cultural-ecological methodology by historical geographers has been the highly local scale on which it has generally been applied, a legacy of its anthropological beginnings (Steward 1955, 38). I see no reason why the hard-won principles derived from local studies cannot be applied on a broader scale. For example, one of the most valuable insights of contemporary cultural ecology, won at the local level, is the importance placed upon decision-making at the level of the individual person, a phenomenon often observed by geographers but never adequately explained (Clark 1968, 385; Glick 1972, 54; Wolpert 1964, 538; Denevan 1983).

If we apply preadaptation to the seven descriptive concepts mentioned earlier, an explanatory potential is at once evident. Simplification and diffusion become the process of weeding out maladaptive European traits in the colonial areas and the survival of preadapted ones which offered some advantage. Look closely at what took root in America and what withered, and you will often find adaptation at work. Simplification, by such reckoning, occurred largely in the colonial setting, and the necessity to adapt is the primary cause. First effective settlement achieved importance and durability precisely because it involved successful adaptation to the new environment. Later arrivals emulated it for that very reason. The borrowings from American indigenous peoples, including maize and herbal medicine, were, similarly, those which offered adaptive advantage. The cultural landscape will, by this reasoning, consist of European artifacts possessing preadaptive qualities, such as log construction or the “Dutch” barn of Pennsylvania (Jordan 1985, 1987–88, 75). Cultural regions, by their very existence, proclaim the adaptive virtues of their inhabitants. The human modification of the earth is best understood as the consequence of imposing adaptive strategies upon the land, and surely environmental perceptions were colored by previous adaptations.

It is high time for historical geographers to end our half-century or more of neglecting physical environmental factors. By ignoring
them, we have not negated such influences, but only succeeded in rendering our own works superficial and, in a fundamental way, merely descriptive. Should historical geographers choose not to pursue this ecological path to explanation, others can and will, as is already becoming evident in recent anthropological and archaeological literature (O'Brien 1984; Kloberdanz 1980; Green 1979).

Case Studies of Preadaptation

Very often, successful preadaptation resulted from the deliberate selection of settlement sites environmentally similar to the European homeland, a tendency well-documented and expressed in terms such as "latitude pull." Great Plains Russian Germans and North Woods Finns come immediately to mind. These groups were able to import their cultures and artifacts largely intact, with only minor modifications (van Cleef 1918, 194-98; Bennett 1969, 265; Petersen 1976; Kloberdanz 1980; Carlson 1981; Baltensperger 1983, 76-79). The close tie between Acadian French settlement and tidal marshes in the Bay of Fundy area may owe its origin to a few immigrants from the Norman marshes (Clark 1968, 109, 158-59, 385, 388-89, 399). On a broader scale, we need to remember Carl Sauer's suggestion (1941, 159, 165) that "it would be impossible . . . to cross an ocean anywhere else" and find environments as similar as those in northwestern Europe and northeastern Anglo-America. All of the accustomed crops and livestock of Germanic-core Europe thrived in the new setting, with profound results for the ultimate agricultural character of the American heartland.

In my own research, I have recently employed preadaptation as an explanatory device in two different studies. In the first project, done in co-authorship with Matti Kaups, we attempted to discover the origin of the highly successful woodland pioneering culture that took root in the Middle Colonies and subsequently spread through most of the forested areas of the eastern United States (Jordan and Kaups 1989). This backwoods colonization system was arguably the most successful in world history, achieving the very rapid settlement of an agricultural frontier. Our conclusion was that back-country Finns who came to the Delaware Valley colony of New Sweden beginning in the 1640s introduced a preadapted forest colonization strategy which, when mixed with contributions from the indigenous Delaware Indians, produced the prototype backwoods pioneer culture, the first effective settlement, along the lower Delaware River by 1660. The Scotch-Irish, who arrived on the frontier later and in much greater numbers, adopted the Fenno-Indian adaptive system and prompted an explosive expansion. Thus, in our view, a preadapted group from the European periphery held the key.

The second project grew out of a suggestion made by William Doolittle (1987) and relates to my ongoing interest in the diffusion of cattle ranching, a frontier culture as successful in initial occupancy of the North American grasslands as the Pennsylvanian backwoods colonization system was in the forests. Doolittle proposed that some Andalusian Spaniards from a highly localized area—the great marshes of the lower Guadalquivir—practiced a commercial range-cattle system ideally preadapted for transferral to the marshes of Gulf-coastal Mexico and for subsequent dispersal through lowland savannas. I pursued this idea through field reconnaissances in Mexico and Spain, elaborated upon it to develop a dual lowland/highland model of Iberian cattle herding, and came to the conclusion that two independent and preadapted Hispanic cattle-raising traditions had spread from their respective ecological niches in Iberia to similar settings in the Americas (Jordan 1989).

Case Studies of Maladaptation

We should also apply cultural-ecological principles to groups who possessed few, if any, preadapted traits, rendering their imported culture maladaptive. The Anaheim Germans of southern California and Utah Scandinavian Mormons stand as examples (Raup 1932; Wahlquist 1978, 128-29). Often, perhaps even typically, such groups quickly lost their traditional culture, accepting the better-adapted ecological strategies of their neighbors. In certain other cases, the maladaptation was only partial, as with the Hill Country Germans of Texas and Spaniards in highland Mexico (Wilhelm 1980, 6, 11, 218; Murphy 1986). Partly be-
cause the Spaniards insisted upon producing their traditional winter wheat in a land characterized by a summer precipitation maximum and, thus, better suited to Indian corn, they had to create extensive, fragile, and areally restricted irrigation systems. Perhaps partly as a consequence, the Indian imprint on highland farming remains vivid.

Occasionally, maladaptive characteristics became evident only some time after settlement. Ukrainians in western Canada, who came mainly from forested Galicia and Bukovina, chose marginal aspen bush parkland to settle—a marshy, stony, sandy land that, in the long run, offered little opportunity for commercial farming. They selected the parkland because it offered abundant wood, a commodity denied them by the landed gentry in their old homelands, as well as marsh for winter feed, roof thatching, livestock water, and game fowl. Their seemingly inept behavior initially had a sound ecological basis, becoming maladaptive only when they desired to make the transition from subsistence to commercial farming (Lehr 1975; Schlichtmann 1977, 12–13). Again, an adaptive perspective helps explain the Ukrainian settlement experience.

I have, in sum, found the ecological concept of preadaptation useful in helping explain the historical geography of Europeans in rural North America. I carefully avoid postulating “an omniscient and single-directed, rational being,” an Ecological Man if you will, recognizing instead that overseas European colonists had “finite abilities to perceive and store information” (Wolpert 1964, 537). We must acknowledge, too, that some facets of culture seem immune to ecological causal forces, that not all learned behavior is or need be adaptive. Further, my own bias is that we should employ cultural-ecological concepts in a possibilistic, particularistic manner, rather than in a universalizing way. We need to avoid the normative tendencies evident in some recent anthropological works in cultural ecology, for there, I believe, lies the way to neo-environmental determinism and placelessness (Rhoades and Thompson 1975; Green 1979). Proceeding with such caution and humility, we can join the explanatory power of cultural ecology to the causal insights gained earlier from economic and cultural determinism, approaching a more holistic methodology and explanation.

Acknowledgments

I appreciate the useful suggestions provided by William Doolittle and Gregory Knapp, who read a preliminary version of the paper. I am also grateful to Karl W. Butzer for sharing his insights on cultural ecology.

References

Allen, J. P., and Turner, E. J. 1987. We the people: An atlas of America’s ethnic diversity. New York: Macmillan.

Baltensperger, B. H. 1983. Agricultural change among Great Plains Russian Germans. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 73:75–88.

Barlz, F. 1955. Französische Einflüsse im Bilde der Kulturlandschaft Nordamerikas: Hufensiedlungen und Marschpolder in Kanada. Erdkunde 9: 286–305.

Bennett, J. W. 1969. Northern plainsmen: Adaptive strategy and agrarian life. Chicago: Aldine.

Birch, B. 1971. The environment and settlement of the prairie-woodland transition belt—a case study of Edwards County, Illinois. Southampton Research Series in Geography 6:3–31.

Bjorklund, E. M. 1964. Ideology and culture exemplified in southwestern Michigan. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 54:227–41.

Blouet, B. W., and Lawson, M. P., eds. 1975. Images of the plains: The role of human nature in settlement. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

Butzer, K. W. 1988. Cattle and sheep from old to New Spain: Historical antecedents. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 78:29–56.

Carlson, A. W. 1981. German-Russian houses in western North Dakota. Pioneer America 31(2):49–60.

Clark, A. H. 1949. The invasion of New Zealand by people, plants and animals: The South Island. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
———. 1956. The impact of exotic invasion on the remaining New World mid-latitude grasslands. In Man’s role in changing the face of the earth, ed. W. L. Thomas, Jr., pp. 737–62. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1959. Three centuries and the island. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
———. 1960. Old world origins and religious adherence in Nova Scotia. Geographical Review 50: 317–44.
———. 1968. Acadia: The geography of early Nova Scotia to 1760. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Cozzens, A. B. 1943. Conservation in German settlements of the Missouri Ozarks. Geographical Review 33:286–98.

Cronon, W. 1983. Changes in the land: Indians, colonists, and the ecology of New England. New York: Hill & Wang.

Crosby, A. W. 1986. Ecological imperialism: The biological expansion of Europe, 900–1900. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Davis, D. H. 1935. The Finland community, Minnesota. Geographical Review 25:382–94.

Denevan, W. M. 1983. Adaptation, variation, and cultural geography. The Professional Geographer 35:399–407.

Doolittle, W. E. 1987. Las Marismas to Pánuco to Texas: The transfer of open range cattle ranching from Iberia through northeastern Mexico. Yearbook of the Conference of Latin Americanist Geographers 13:3–11.

Doughtry, R. W. 1983. Wildlife and man in Texas: Environmental change and conservation. College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press.

Duncan, J. S. 1980. The superorganic in American cultural geography. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 70:181–98.

Earle, C. V. 1975. The evolution of a Tidewater settlement system: All Hallow’s Parish, Maryland, 1650–1783. Research Paper No. 170. Chicago: University of Chicago, Department of Geography.

Ensminger, R. F. 1980–81. A search for the origin of the Pennsylvania barn. Pennsylvania Folklife 30(2):50–69.

Estaville, L. E., Jr. 1986. Mapping the Louisiana French. Southeastern Geographer 26:90–113.

———. 1988a. Were the nineteenth-century Cajuns geographically isolated? Geoscience and Man 25:85–95.

———. 1988b. The Louisiana French in 1900. Journal of Historical Geography 14:342–59.

Evans, E. E. 1969. The Scotch-Irish: Their cultural adaptation and heritage in the American Old West. In Essays in Scotch-Irish history, ed. E. R. R. Green, pp. 69–86. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Gentilcore, R. L. 1957. Vincennes and French settlement in the Old Northwest. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 47:285–97.

Gerlach, R. L. 1976. Immigrants in the Ozarks: A study in ethnic geography. Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press.

———. 1986. Settlement patterns in Missouri: A study of population origins, with a wall map. Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press.

Gibson, J. R. 1978. European settlement and development in North America. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Glass, J. W. 1986. The Pennsylvania culture region: A view from the barn. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press.

Glick, T. F. 1972. The old world background of the irrigation system of San Antonio, Texas. El Paso, TX: Texas Western Press.

Green, S. 1979. The agricultural colonization of temperate forest habitats: An ecological model. In The Frontier, Vol. Two, ed. W. W. Savage, Jr. and S. I. Thompson, pp. 69–103. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press.

Hardesty, D. L. 1986. Rethinking cultural adaptation. The Professional Geographer 38:11–18.

Harris, R. C. 1966. The seigneurial system in early Canada: A geographical study. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

———. 1977. The simplification of Europe overseas. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 67:469–83.

———, and Matthews, G. J. 1987. Historical atlas of Canada, Vol. 1. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Head, C. G. 1976. Eighteenth-century Newfoundland: A geographer’s perspective. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Hewes, L. 1953. Tonitown: Ozark vineyard center. Economic Geography 29:125–43.

Hopple, L. C. 1979. Spatial organization of the southeastern Pennsylvania plain Dutch group culture region to 1975. Pennsylvania Folklife 29(1):13–26.

Hudson, J. C. 1984. Cultural geography of the upper Great Lakes region. Journal of Cultural Geography 5(1):19–32.

Johnson, H. B. 1951. The location of German immigrants in the Middle West. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 41:1–41.

Jordan, T. G. 1964. Between the forest and the prairie. Agricultural History 38:205–16.

———. 1966. German seed in Texas soil: Immigrant farmers in nineteenth-century Texas. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.

———. 1970. Population origin groups in rural Texas. Annals of the Association of American Geographers (map supplement 13) 60:404–5.

———. 1982. Texas graveyards: A cultural legacy. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.

———. 1985. American log buildings: An old world heritage. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.

———. 1987–88. Some neglected Swiss literature on the forebay bank barn. Pennsylvania Folklife 37:75–80.

———. 1989. An Iberian lowland/highland model for Latin American cattle ranching. Journal of Historical Geography 15:111–25.

———, and Kaups, M. 1987. Folk architecture in cultural and ecological context. Geographical Review 77:52–75.
———, and ———. 1989. The American backwoods frontier: An ethnic and ecological interpretation. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Kaups, M. 1966. Finnish place names in Minnesota: A study in cultural transfer. Geographical Review 56:377–97.

Kloberdanz, T. J. 1980. Plainsmen of three continents: Volga German adaptation to steppe, prairie, and pampa. In Ethnicity on the Great Plains, ed. F. C. Luebbe, pp. 54–72. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

Kniffen, F. B. 1965. Folk housing: Key to diffusion. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 55:549–77.

Kollmorgen, W. M. 1941. The German settlement in Cullman County, Alabama: An agricultural island in the Cotton Belt. Washington: U.S. Department of Agriculture.

Lehr, J. C. 1975. The rural settlement behaviour of Ukrainian pioneers in western Canada, 1891–1914. In Western Canadian research in geography: The Lethbridge papers, ed. B. M. Barr, pp. 51–66. British Columbia Geographical Series, 21, Occasional Papers in Geography. Vancouver: Tantalus Research.

———. 1980. The log buildings of Ukrainian settlers in western Canada. Prairie Forum 2:183–96.

———. 1985. Kinship and society in the Ukrainian pioneer settlement of the Canadian west. Canadian Geographer 29:207–19.

Lemon, J. T. 1966. The agricultural practices of national groups in eighteenth-century Pennsylvania. Geographical Review 56:467–96.

———. 1972. The best poor man’s country: A geographical study of early southeastern Pennsylvania. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

———. 1978. The weakness of place and community in early Pennsylvania. In European settlement and development in North America, ed. J. R. Gibson, pp. 190–207. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

———. 1980. Early Americans and their social environment. Journal of Historical Geography 6:115–31.

Louder, D. R., and Waddell, E., eds. 1983. Du continent perdu à l’archipel retrouvé: le Québec et l’Amérique française. Québec: Travaux du Département de Géographie de l’Université Laval, 6.

Mannion, J. J. 1974. Irish settlements in eastern Canada: A study of cultural transfer and adaptation. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Mather, E. C., and Kaups, M. 1963. The Finnish sauna: A cultural index to settlement. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 53:494–504.

McManis, D. R. 1964. The initial evaluation and utilization of the Illinois prairies. Research Paper no. 94. Chicago: University of Chicago, Department of Geography.

———. 1972. European impressions of the New England coast, 1497–1620. Research Paper no. 139. Chicago: University of Chicago, Department of Geography.

McQuillan, D. A. 1978. Farm size and work ethic: Measuring the success of immigrant farmers on the American grasslands, 1875–1925. Journal of Historical Geography 4:57–76.

Meigs, P., III. 1941. An ethno-telephonic survey of French Louisiana. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 31:243–50.

Meinig, D. W. 1957–58. The American colonial era: A geographic commentary. Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society, South Australian Branch, 1–22.

———. 1986. The shaping of America: A geographical perspective on 500 years of history, Vol. 1. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Meitzen, A. 1895. Siedlung und Agrarwesen der Westgermanen und Ostgermanen, der Kelten, Römer, Finnen und Slawen, 4 vols. Berlin: Wilhelm Hertz.

Merrens, H. R. 1964. Colonial North Carolina in the eighteenth century. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.

Mikesell, M. W. 1960. Comparative studies in frontier history. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 50:62–74.

———. 1978. Tradition and innovation in cultural geography. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 68:1–16.

Millward, H. 1981. Regional patterns of ethnicity in Nova Scotia: A geographical study. Halifax: International Education Centre, St. Mary’s University.

Mitchell, R. D. 1977. Commercialism and frontier: Perspectives on the early Shenandoah Valley. Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia.

———. 1978. The formation of early American cultural regions: An interpretation. In European settlement and development in North America, ed. J. R. Gibson, pp. 66–90. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Murphy, M. E. 1986. Irrigation in the Bajío region of colonial Mexico. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Newton, M. B., Jr. 1974. Cultural preadaptation and the upland South. Geoscience and Man 5: 143–154.

Nostrand, R. L. 1970. The Hispanic-American borderland: Delimitation of an American culture region. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 60:638–61.

———. 1980. The Hispano homeland in 1900. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 70:382–96.

O’Brien, M. J., ed. 1984. Grassland, forest, and his-
torical settlement. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

Ostergren, R. C. 1988. A community transplanted: The trans-Atlantic experience of a Swedish immigrant settlement in the upper Middle West, 1835–1915. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

Peet, R. 1969. The spatial expansion of commercial agriculture in the nineteenth century: A von Thünen explanation. Economic Geography 45: 283–301.

Peters, B. C. 1970. Pioneer evaluation of the Kalamazoo County landscape. Michigan Academician 3:15–25.

Petersen, A. J. 1976. The German-Russian house in Kansas: A study in persistence of form. Pioneer America 8(1):19–27.

Pillsbury, R. 1987. The Pennsylvania culture area: A reappraisal. North American Culture 3(2):37–54.

Prunty, M. C. 1965. Some geographic views of the role of fire in settlement processes in the South. Proceedings, Fourth Annual Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference, 161–68.

Raitz, K. B. 1978. Ethnic maps of North America. Geographical Review 68:335–50.
———. 1979. Themes in the cultural geography of European ethnic groups in the United States. Geographical Review 69:77–94.
———, and Mather, E. C. 1971. Norwegians and tobacco in western Wisconsin. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 61:684–96.

Raup, H. F. 1932. The German colonization of Anaheim, California. University of California Publications in Geography 6(3):123–46.
———. 1935. The Italian-Swiss dairymen of San Luis Obispo County, California. Yearbook of the Association of Pacific Coast Geographers 1:3–8.

Rechlin, A. T. M. 1976. Spatial behavior of the old order Amish of Nappanee, Indiana. Michigan Geographical Publication 18. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, Department of Geography.

Rhoades, R. E., and Thompson, S. I. 1975. Adaptive strategies in alpine environments: Beyond ecological particularism. American Ethnologist 2: 535–51.

Rice, J. G. 1973. Patterns of ethnicity in a Minnesota County, 1880–1905. Geographical Reports no. 4. Umeå, Sweden: University of Umeå, Department of Geography.
———. 1977. The role of culture and community in frontier prairie farming. Journal of Historical Geography 3:155–75.
———, and Ostergren, R. C. 1978. The decision to emigrate: A study in diffusion. Geografiska Annaler 60B:1–15.

Sauer, C. O. 1925. The morphology of landscape. University of California Publications in Geography 2(2):19–53.
———. 1941. The settlement of the humid east. In Climate and man: Yearbook of agriculture 1941, pp. 157–66. Washington: U.S. Department of Agriculture.
———. 1966. The early Spanish Main. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Schlichtmann, H. 1977. Ethnic themes in geographical research on western Canada. Canadian Ethnic Studies 9:9–41.

Semple, E. C. 1903. American history and its geographic conditions. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin.

Simpson-Housley, P. 1978. Hutterian religious ideology, environmental perception, and attitudes toward agriculture. Journal of Geography 77:145–48.

Smith, G.-H. 1930–31. Notes on the distribution of the foreign-born Scandinavian in Wisconsin in 1905. Wisconsin Magazine of History 14:419–36.

Starczewska, M. 1967. The historical geography of the oldest Polish settlement in the United States. Polish Review 12:11–40.

Steward, J. H. 1955. Theory of culture change: The methodology of multilinear evolution. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.

Tracie, C. J. 1975. Ethnicity and settlement in western Canada: Doukhobor village settlements in Saskatchewan. In Western Canadian Research in Geography: The Lethbridge papers, ed. B. M. Barr, pp. 67–76. British Columbia Geographical Series, 21, Occasional Papers in Geography. Vancouver: Tantalus Research.

Turner, F. J. 1962. The frontier in American history. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

van Cleef, E. 1918. The Finn in America. Geographical Review 6:185–214.

Vogeler, I. 1976. The Roman Catholic culture region of central Minnesota. Pioneer America 8:71–83.

Wacker, P. O. 1973. Folk architecture as an indicator of culture areas and culture diffusion: Dutch barns and barracks in New Jersey. Pioneer America 5(2):37–47.
———. 1974. Traditional house and barn types in New Jersey: Keys to acculturation, past culturogeographic regions, and settlement history. Geoscience and Man 5:163–76.
———. 1986. The Dutch culture area in the Northeast, 1609–1800. New Jersey History 104:1–21.

Wahlquist, W. L. 1978. Population growth in the Mormon core area, 1847–90. In The Mormon role in the settlement of the West, ed. R. H. Jackson, pp. 107–34. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press.

Warkentin, J. 1959. Mennonite agricultural settlements of southern Manitoba. Geographical Review 49:342–68.

Webb, W. P. 1931. The Great Plains. Boston: Ginn.
———. 1951. The great frontier. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.

Wells, R. 1973. Frontier systems as a sociocultural type. Papers in Anthropology (University of Oklahoma) 14(1):6–15.

West, R. C. 1986. An atlas of Louisiana surnames of French and Spanish origin. Baton Rouge, LA: Geo-science Publications, Louisiana State University.

Wilhelm, H. G. H. 1980. Organized German settlement and its effects on the frontier of south-central Texas. New York: Arno Press.

Wilson, E. M. 1971. Some similarities between American and European folk houses. Pioneer America 3(2):8–14.

Winberry, J. J. 1974. The log house in Mexico. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 64:54–69.

Wolpert, J. 1964. The decision process in spatial context. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 54:537–58.

Wright, M. 1958. The antecedents of the double-pen house type. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 48:109–17.

Zelinsky, W. 1973. The cultural geography of the United States. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.