The Problem with Empowerment: Social Reproduction and Women’s Food Projects in Jordan

Brittany Cook

To cite this article: Brittany Cook (2020): The Problem with Empowerment: Social Reproduction and Women’s Food Projects in Jordan, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2020.1747971

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2020.1747971

Published online: 12 May 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 3

View related articles

View Crossmark data
The Problem with Empowerment: Social Reproduction and Women’s Food Projects in Jordan

Brittany Cook
Department of History, Geography, and Philosophy, University of Louisiana at Lafayette

In Jordan, many women’s small food businesses and nonprofit projects have been supported as a sustainable rural development strategy. The prevalence of these projects in bazaars and festivals in Jordan indicates their prominence. Most studies of these projects have framed them in terms of microfinance or development goals such as women’s empowerment. The framework of empowerment has been widely critiqued, however, for its Western-centric assumptions about gender and economy. Instead, this article asks how women in rural food producing businesses and organizations are shifting social reproduction. By centering the question on social reproduction, or the work—paid or unpaid—that sustains life, food production for sale is not de facto more valuable than food production for the family. Through this focus on social reproduction, I found that rural women’s food projects often used their rural woman identity to build food projects that changed the social and spatial contexts of how they provided for their families. These changes depended heavily on how they engaged with development networks, how they organized or participated in producers’ organizations, and how they produced and sold their food. Analyzing food production as part of broader social reproduction calls attention to the nonmarket consequences of these food projects such as impacts on social relationships, identity, and food as sustenance. Identifying these nonmarket consequences is essential to better understanding how rural development efforts affect the social and economic fabric of rural life without assuming a priori what that life should look like. Key Words: empowerment, gender, Jordan, rural development, social reproduction.

作为一项可持续的农村发展战略，约旦对很多女性开办的小型食品企业和非营利性的项目提供了支持。这种类型的项目常见于约旦的集市和节日活动。这也体现出了它们的重要性。在对这些项目进行的研究中，大多都是以小额贷款或发展目标（例如增强妇女权能）为研究构架的。然而，赋权框架因其以西方为中心对性别和经济进行假设而广受批评。本研究采用了不同的研究角度，探讨了农村食品生产企业和组织中的女性是如何改变社会再生产的。由于研究侧重于社会再生或维持生活的有偿或无偿的工作，因此用于出售的粮食生产实际上并不比家庭自用的粮食生产更有价值。通过关注社会再生，我发现面向农村女性的粮食计划经常通过农村女性的身份来制定食品计划，这些计划改变了女性为家庭付出的社会和空间背景。这些变化在很大程度上取决于她们与发展网络的互动方式、组织或参与生产者团体的方式、以及生产和出售食品的方式。将食品生产作为更广泛社会再生产的一部分进行分析时，需要关注这些粮食项目在非市场领域中的结果，例如对社会关系、身份以及作为自用食物的影响。为更好地了解农村发展行动如何影响农村生活的社会和经济结构，而不是先验证假定可能的生活状态，找出这些非市场后果至关重要。 关键词：授权，性别，约旦，农村发展，社会再生产。

Numerosos negocios pequeños de alimentos y proyectos sin ánimo lucrativo de las mujeres de Jordania han sido apoyados como estrategia sustentable de desarrollo rural. El predominio de estos proyectos en bazaras y festivales de ese país es indicio de su importancia. La mayoría de los estudios sobre esos proyectos los enmarcan en términos de microfinanza o de los objetivos del desarrollo en lo que tienen que ver con el empoderamiento de las mujeres. Sin embargo, el marco del empoderamiento ha sido ampliamente criticado por sus supuestos de corte occidental acerca de género y economía. Desde otro punto de vista, este artículo se pregunta de qué manera las mujeres que están involucradas en negocios y organizaciones productoras de alimentos están cambiando la reproducción social. Al centrar la cuestión en la reproducción social, o en el trabajo—remunerado o no—que les sustenta la vida, la producción de alimentos para venta no es de facto más valiosa que la producción de alimentos para la familia. Con este foco sobre la reproducción social,
encontré que los proyectos alimentarios de las mujeres rurales a menudo usaron su identidad femenina rural para construir proyectos de alimentos que cambiaron los contextos sociales y espaciales sobre cómo ellas proveyeron sustento a sus familias. Estos cambios dependieron en gran medida de la manera como ellas se involucraron con las redes de desarrollo. Cómo organizaron o participaron en las organizaciones de los productores, y cómo produjeron su alimento y lo vendieron. Analizando la producción de alimentos como parte de una reproducción social más amplia se pone atención a las consecuencias no relacionadas con el mercado de estos proyectos de alimentos, tales como los impactos sobre las relaciones sociales, la identidad y sobre el alimento como sustento. Identificar estas consecuencias no mercantiles es esencial para entender mejor el modo como afectan los esfuerzos rurales la fábrica social y económica de la vida rural, sin asumir a priori la apariencia que esa vida deba tener. Palabras clave: desarrollo rural, empoderamiento, género, Jordania, reproducción social.

“All natural, organic, homemade from Ajloun” was Salma’s1 refrain every Friday at Souq Jara in Amman. At this weekly market, a few narrow alleys in an old neighborhood of Amman fill as vendors sell their wares to tourists and upper- and middle-class residents of Amman. Salma’s table was set up between a young man painting landscapes on black velvet and an older woman selling small ceramic items. The table was full of different-sized packages of zaatar, various seeds, sumac, dukkah, sage, tea, saffron, and bottles of olive oil, pomegranate syrup, and apple cider vinegar from Ajloun.2 Every Friday she woke up at her house around 6 a.m. to drive for an hour to Amman, in a van donated to her women’s charitable organization by a royal development program.3 The twelve-hour workday was tiring and the sales varied between US$100 and US$500 from week to week. Salma’s women’s charitable organization depended on the market to pay the bills, however. This charity business, consisting of three to five full-time employees and more than 100 women members who receive assistance or use the organization’s facilities, had become the center of Salma’s life.

Salma’s organization is just one of many women’s projects that have opened since the 1990s due to local and international development funds and programs focused on rural women as agents of rural development (see Talal 2004). Today, these women’s projects are present at nearly any outdoor market or festival in Jordan. Although these projects vary in product and organizational structure, most sell home-(women-)made food products. Using interview data with at least forty women4 in rural food projects and participant observation in one organization and seven markets, this article examines how women like Salma have developed organizations and businesses producing rural foods and the resultant effects on the social and spatial contexts of social reproduction. Social reproduction is labor, paid or unpaid, that supports the reproduction of daily life into new generations, including food production, maintaining social relationships, and preserving cultural knowledge and traditions (Winders and Smith 2019). Instead of focusing primarily on new profits and economic engagement, social reproduction highlights the similarities and differences of care labor as women transform food production from domestic work5 to the formal economy, doing much more than simply earning money for previously unpaid labor. Through this analysis, I found that women use their identity as rural women with development agencies and customers and adjust their food production to the needs and locations of customers to build businesses that provide for their families. This new form of social reproduction builds new networks and spaces and brings new opportunities and difficulties.

Analyses of these women’s projects have often been done in terms of their engagement with development networks and the success of empowerment (Kabeer 2005; Herman 2012; Al-Dajani and Marlow 2013), entrepreneurialism (Bock 2004; Anthopoulou 2010; Al-Dajani and Marlow 2013), microfinance (Roy 2010; Torri and Martinez 2014; Žiaková and Verner 2015), or economic engagement (Dababneh 2016). Although these approaches are important, women’s goals and strategies only partially fit within, and sometimes contradict, these projects and frameworks. Empowerment can be a problematic measurement for success in development (Cruikshank 1999; Mahmood 2005; McEwan and Bek 2006; Abu-Lughod 2009). Although scholars using empowerment frameworks have argued for evaluating projects based on women’s goals and perspectives instead of on masculinist measures such as profit (Anthopoulou 2010), empowerment largely remains focused on economic
empowerment or challenging gender norms. Therefore, I frame food production as social reproduction to address the Western, classed, and racial assumptions and false dichotomy regarding productive and reproductive labor. This shift refocuses our attention to women not as empowered subjects and indicators of development because they work but as agents of change in the social networks and spaces of socially necessary labor, monetized and not.

Drawing on fieldwork with women’s rural food businesses and organizations in Jordan, this article traces how women engage in nongovernmental organization (NGO) and development networks as they organize and transform food production, previously seen as domestic work, into income. First, I explore how women use the stereotypes about rural women to access development agencies’ resources to improve their businesses. Then, I examine the different ways in which women organize and the effects on the networks and spaces of women’s care labor. Finally, I examine the changes in food production practices that these women’s small businesses and organizations adopt to sell to consumers. I argue that understanding women’s food projects through an analysis of the changes in social reproduction highlights how women use their identity as rural women with development agencies and customers and adjust their food production to the needs and locations of customers to build businesses that provide for their families. When development agencies evaluate women’s food projects based on longevity and income alone, however, they reinforce a devaluation of care work and ignore women’s rural food projects’ impact on aspects of social reproduction such as social relationships, education, and food practices.

The Rise of Women’s Rural Food Businesses through Development and Beyond

Production of domestic goods and crafts through women’s small businesses and organizations has been a popular development strategy in Jordan (Al-Dajani and Marlow 2013; Ward 2014; Žiaková and Verner 2015) as well as other rural spaces across the globe (Weeks 2009; Anthopoulou 2010; Nguyen, Frederick, and Nguyen 2014; Valencia-Fourcans and Hawkins 2016). Often research analyzes these women’s projects as a development strategy, evaluating their effectiveness to increase women’s empowerment and entrepreneurialism (Chitsike 2000; Bock 2004; Anthopoulou 2010; Roy 2010) or to alleviate poverty through bottom billion capitalism programs such as microlending (Elyachar 2012; Sparke 2012; Blowfield and Dolan 2014; Jarar and Omar 2019). Analyzing women’s food projects in terms of economic development and increased market participation, however, obscures the way in which food production has always been labor. Instead, putting these food projects in the context of social reproduction and care labor emphasizes how food production is marketized. In this section, I first outline commonly used frames of analysis for women’s rural projects in development, the role of empowerment, and how work on social reproduction highlights the spaces, relationships, and gendered identities of this labor. Focusing on social reproduction draws a connection between women’s paid and unpaid labor, emphasizing the changes in socially necessary labor (paid and unpaid), instead of focusing primarily on the increase in women’s participation in the economy, a common goal of development programs.

International development agencies often view rural women as the oppressed and distressed development subject. Although not all food businesses and projects can be summarized as a development strategy, many international development agencies provide funds for these women’s food products. In this article, I consider development to be a set of processes functioning through contingent networks and institutions to advance particular economic, social, and political goals, as articulated between domestic and national decision makers (Ferguson 1994; T. Mitchell 2002; Li 2007; Escobar 2011). Many development initiatives support and encourage women’s small to medium enterprises across the globe for rural market-led development (Shortall 2004; Woods 2005; Bock 2015). This market-led development often involves collaboration across three sectors: governments, development agencies, and the private sector. These programs often support bottom-of-the-pyramid development, in which the poorest populations are seen as potential investment opportunities (Ahmad 2003; Roy 2010; Blowfield and Dolan 2014; Valencia-Fourcans and Hawkins 2016), with rural women as the ideal candidates (Rankin 2001; Roy 2010; Blowfield and Dolan 2014). For this reason, women are often actively encouraged to participate in such programs.
One method of evaluating the success of these projects and entrepreneurial development and gender equality has been to evaluate empowerment outcomes for women. Empowerment remains a large focus of both the entrepreneurialism scholarship as well as development more broadly (Kabeer 2005; Al-Dajani and Marlow 2013; Alkire et al. 2013). According to Keller and Mbewe (1991), “empowerment is a process whereby women become able to organize themselves to increase their own self-reliance, to assert their independent right to make choices and to control resources which will assist in challenging and eliminating their own subordination” (76). Building on this work, others define empowerment in terms of rights, political participation, and resistance (Moghadam and Senftova 2005; Weldon 2019). Evaluations of empowerment, however, are often shaped by particular ideas of feminist politics, dichotomies of liberalism and conservatism, and assumptions that women are oppressed (Brand 1998; Mahmood 2005; Abu-Lughod 2009; Al-Dajani et al. 2015). Mohanty (2003) argued that viewing women as oppressed or empowered provides equally false representations based on Western and classist assumptions about women, obscuring “the complexities of women’s lives and roles” (527). Although empowerment remains a dominant goal in development agencies and projects, I seek an alternative model that does not assume that Western ideas of empowerment are universally desirable.

This problematic, and sometimes divisive, framing of women’s well-being and rights affects the diversity of women in political movements in Jordan. Tension and disconnect often exist between the discourses of women who embrace secularization and the discourses of other groups of women advocating their interests based on Islamic values (Sonbol 2003). For example, demonstrations and debates around a universal idea of women’s rights often draw a more homogenous and upper-class group of women. In public demonstrations for labor rights, though, a larger and more class- and religiously diverse group of women participated than in movements framed in terms of women’s rights (Ababneh 2016). Within the social context of Jordan, debates about acceptable gender roles, public space, work, and women are multifaceted and do not map easily on upper class–lower class or religious–nonreligious spectrums how insiders and outsiders often assume. Kandiyoti (2011) called for “a moratorium on using terms such as ‘religious’ and ‘secular’ and focus[es] instead on actors, interests, and practices” (13). In supporting this sentiment, this article seeks a framework beyond gender rights, empowerment, and gender norms and instead focuses on the practices of women as they build their food businesses and organizations.

To further analyze the implications of these women’s projects, I focus on the changes to social reproduction and labor. Abarca (2007) used familial wealth to describe the positive social and cultural impacts such as nourishment and building social support networks, elements that are overlooked in market-based analyses of women’s food businesses. These outcomes can also be framed as social reproduction. Social reproduction is “the activities necessary to maintain and produce life daily and intergenerationally at both the individual and social scale” (Winders and Smith 2019, 872), such as, “shopping, cooking and cleaning, daily paperwork, social networking, minding the family store during or after hours, participating in religious or civic organizations, caring for children and the elderly (which often includes mediation with educational, medical, and religious institutions)” (K. Mitchell, Marston, and Katz 2003, 425). These activities include paid and unpaid labor, identity production, and the preservation of cultural knowledge and practices (Bezanson and Luxton 2006). Focusing on social reproduction is a form of gender politics because women disproportionately bear this often invisible and undervalued labor (Katz 2001; K. Mitchell, Marston, and Katz 2003; Federici 2012). Food production, whether for the family or for sale, is social reproduction, even if commodified. For rural women, producing food for sale so they might pay for their children’s education, social reproduction is in the skills they use, the food they provide, and the education of their children.

Feminist scholars have used social reproduction to highlight how invisible care labor, often done by women, is artificially separated from and devalued in comparison to productive labor (K. Mitchell, Marston, and Katz 2004; Winders and Smith 2019). Instead of focusing directly on gendered identity politics or economic participation, examining social reproduction traces the relationships and spaces of this work and the reforming of social groups and their values and identities (Katz 2001). K. Mitchell, Marston, and Katz (2004; and later advanced in Meehan and Strauss 2015) sought to get us away from the false dichotomy of reproductive and productive labor. Although this binary has long been overlapping for many women in the Global South
(Kunz 2010; Smith and Winders 2015), development is still entrenched in the idea one must, first and foremost, “get women in the workforce,” instead of thinking through alternative ways to value women’s care work.6 Therefore, Katz’s (2001) call for “insisting on the necessity of social reproduction” still resonates. In other words, assuming that productivity lies solely in the labor force masks the value of (often women’s) care work and the ways in which care labor happens within and beyond the home.

In summary, discussing social reproduction in women’s food projects highlights how women navigate and function within the multitude of constantly shifting cultural views about women, work, and space in Jordan without a priori valuing, or devaluing, market participation. By putting their labor in context of development practice, this article moves away from conceptualizing women as development agents, entrepreneurs, or businesswomen, strategies that can have negative connotations in some Jordanian communities (Sukarieh 2016). Instead, I analyze the diversity of women’s rural food projects in terms of how they access development networks to make changes in their social reproductive labor. By making this shift, I call attention to the ways in which women engage, often cursorily or temporarily, in development networks as they participate in food businesses or organizations, changing the spaces and social networks of their care labor in addition to changing their income.

Methodology

This article draws from data collected over fifteen months between January 2016 and August 2017 as part of a larger dissertation project on the olive industry in Jordan. During my time at markets and the olive festival, I noticed that women’s businesses and organizations filled a niche market selling rural food products. I conducted several months of participant observation with Salma’s charitable organization, living part time in the village near Ajloun, teaching English, packaging herbs, writing grants, and selling products at markets. I also attended trainings and markets featuring women’s food business owners. From these events, I arranged one-on-one and group interviews with women involved in different businesses and organizations in the Irbid, Ajloun, Jerash, and Salt areas. I focused on these areas because they are often considered the traditional agricultural areas due to settlement patterns, elevation, climate, and precipitation. Interviewees came from a variety of educational, experiential, and class backgrounds. Interviews were conducted at the place of choosing of the interviewee, usually being the home, the organization’s facilities, or during a market. Most interviewees in this part of the research are women, except one development agency employee, one business owner, and a few husbands who participated in parts of interviews.

My research assistant and I conducted interviews primarily in Arabic. Although I am conversant in Arabic, having a native speaker to help guide interviews maximized understanding and efficiency and also provided a valuable perspective on the cultural context of interviewees’ responses. Nadia and I held different outsider positionalities, she as an urban resident of Amman and Aqaba and I as an American woman. Our outsider status affected what information was discussed and people’s excitement, apprehension, and expectations about the interviews. Nadia transcribed interviews in Arabic, from which I used MAXQDA to do coding, identify themes, and organize my analysis. MAXQDA allowed me to work dynamically with English and Arabic transcripts by comparing coded parts side by side. I identified themes, in Arabic and English, around recurring themes from the interviews such as gender, projects, work, rural life, markets, trainings, and organizations. Although this research approach cannot claim to be a representative sample of all women’s food projects or development in Jordan, the diversity of participants and the perspectives reflected in this study do show a need for a more nuanced understanding of women’s food projects. In the following sections, this article analyzes the data collected from this methodology to discuss the changes in social reproduction as women engage in development networks, form organizations, and produce food for consumers.

Accessing Development Networks in Jordan

In Jordan, many of the women’s rural food projects have used financial and technical assistance resources from development programs to fund their new and existing small businesses and organizations. By foregrounding the ways in which women have engaged with these development networks, I approach development as practice (Moore 2005; Li 2007), existing through practices of distinct actors
instead of a coherent set of institutions. By focusing on practices, I highlight women’s contingent engagements with development networks offering financial support and technical assistance in the name of economic development and women’s empowerment. In this section, I trace how women’s organizations have developed alongside development trends in Jordan, how women pursue funding using their identities, and how women use trainings to gain skill and build their networks. Although funding has had dramatic impacts on many women’s projects across Jordan, among the interviewees in this study, participating in trainings was more ubiquitous than using loans or grant money. These trainings taught women how to produce products for consumers and thereby co-modify rural food production.

The predominant trend for development programs to pursue poverty relief through the economic empowerment of women has led to the proliferation of women’s organizations in the Middle East and across the globe (Rignall and Atia 2017). This current trend is part of a longer history of NGO growth in Jordan (see Barghouti [1974]; Honey and Kharmeh [1989]; Talal [2004] for discussions of NGOs and development in Jordan; Harrigan, El-Said, et al. 2006; Harmsen 2008). After structural readjustment in Jordan, NGOs boomed, increasing by 67 percent between 1989 and 1994 (Harmsen 2008). This increase coincides with global trends in structural readjustment programs and the resulting reliance on NGO development and market-led growth in Jordan (Harrigan, El-Said, et al. 2006; Harrigan, Wang, et al. 2006; Mossallam 2015) and globally (Nagar et al. 2002; Roberts, Jones, and Fröhling 2005). As market solutions to poverty relief simultaneously increased with a growing push for addressing human rights issues from international donors (Harmsen 2008), it follows that women’s small businesses became an attractive development strategy. Through this process, women are constructed as benefactors of national and international, private and public development efforts, often with the explicit goal of putting women in the workforce, a topic of debate in Jordan, which is discussed later in this article.

During my fieldwork, this web of international and national funding sources was visible from fliers for events and Facebook pages. These logos of large companies and banks, international development and aid programs, embassies, and local (often royal) development funds show the footprint of the trisectoral (state, civil society, and capital) development agents at work in Jordan. Even large local development agencies such as the Jordan Enterprise Development Corporation are largely funded by international entities such as the European Union. This intersection of local and international government and capital leads to projects encouraging market-led approaches to development over more structural changes. These market-led approaches put the responsibility for poverty on market subjects instead of on decreased public support programs and spatial marginalization of rural areas (Lenner 2015). Through this strategy of help for self-help, agencies and governments support women’s small businesses instead of addressing the structural peripheralization of rural spaces (Lenner 2015). Due to the widespread support from trisectoral development agents, women can use these networks in various ways, which has contributed to a proliferation of these women’s organizations.

Grant and funding opportunities often reflect international funders’ gendered and spatial conceptions of need and are therefore specifically targeted to women and rural areas, causing local NGOs to often write grants incorporating women to be awarded the grant. For example, when I was working with a professional association in the olive sector in Jordan, we incorporated women’s businesses into our grant proposal to meet the grant criteria. We also focused on choosing women from rural regions the grant criteria identified. Because this is a common feature in grant criteria, it follows that grant applicants often propose projects with women’s small businesses to appeal to donors. This incentivizes projects such as women’s small businesses over other potential solutions to rural concerns such as infrastructure development, addressing these gendered and spatial perceptions of need from the perspective of national and international funders, instead of needs identified by local actors.

Likewise, women also try to access these funds through international and local private and public sources to support their new or existing projects. One informant, Um Ahmed, had a well-established food business with the help of her husband and children, delivering meals and selling food products at markets. She sought help from local agencies on her application for a United States Agency for International Development (USAID) grant to expand her business into a shop space outside of her home. The agency assistance was necessary because these large USAID
grants are cumbersome to apply for and come with many restrictions on how to use the money. According to Areej, who works in an NGO assisting women’s businesses, easier sources of money such as the Ministry of Planning grants and loans required women to register as organizations. She said,

Here in Irbid, in the 1990s, there were five or six [women’s] organizations. Then came the 2000s and maybe there were 100 of them. After that 250 organizations (laughter). Why? Because, for example, if you don’t have an organization, but I have one, I tell you that I took 7,000 dinar from the Ministry of Planning and I did a project. Now before there were [loans] they’d give you without (anything). So people started taking money for organizations because of the money. (Interview with Shireen, 31 July 2017, Arabic,7 Irbid, Jordan)

In other words, many of the women’s organizations, from the 1990s to today, formed to access funds and not necessarily to better organize women’s efforts. The funds filled a gap because, during that time, unemployment and the rising cost of living caused many women to go into the informal sector in Jordan (Moghadam 2005). According to the consultant, although some organizations did legitimate charity or cooperative work, many people would take the money and use it to pay for other things such as house repairs. Although the Ministry of Planning decreased the amount of money available through grants and loans, women began to also seek money from other sources.

Although none of the women I talked with personally had fallen into debt, many had taken advantage of training opportunities provided by IRADA, an organization started by the Ministry of Planning and private donors to help combat failing women’s businesses and debt. IRADA fulfills this need by advising business owners, starting from the inception of their business plan, to diminish this predatory and superfluous loan seeking and granting. Not all of the women I interviewed worked directly with IRADA, but nearly everyone knew of their services and knew someone who used them. They also arrange consultation with experts and trainings for the business owners. For example, several of the women attended IRADA’s trainings on food quality. Trainings helped women gain essential business skills, especially for those who have never engaged in projects outside the home. In one training I attended, the women workshopped their experiences in designing products, ordering supplies, budgeting supplies and their labor, and marketing. The workshop entailed both lectures from experts and discussions with the business owners.

Development agencies, such as IRADA and other private companies, NGOs, and development programs such as USAID, provide a variety of trainings for women with small food businesses. From the perspective of the development agents, trainings are a general insurance policy to try to prevent women’s funded businesses from failing by teaching them how to plan, budget, and market and increase the profits of existing projects. These trainings are not always tied to a loan or grant. In fact some organizations formed the workshop first, and then found women to fill seats instead of tailoring workshops from participants’ demands.8 Women see the trainings as useful opportunities to grow their networks and to learn new strategies to improve their projects. Interviewees described trainings in all aspects of production, from production skills to marketing. One interviewee who produces labneh9 from her house said: “[Oh we had training in] food safety, pricing, marketing, marketing to tourists, making pickles and jams, mushrooms, dried tomatoes, how to preserve taste, job skills for rural women, development programs and how to build a women’s project.” These trainings show women how to calculate their labor as a budget line and to change their food production practices to appeal to customers. Although workshops are often designed under the pretense that rural women need help becoming business people, women with a variety of business experience use the trainings, despite the repetition, to get new ideas and meet new people.

In summary, the popularity of women’s food projects stems, in part, from how development networks, involving private and public international and national entities, see rural women as ideal targets of economic and social development. Their funding mechanisms seek to make women into successful market subjects to fix rural poverty. Therefore, instead of addressing structural issues that women face in rural areas, they have fed an increase in women’s projects, some of which have landed women in debtor’s prison.10 Instead of taking another strategy, these development agencies developed trainings, with a negligible impact on business success (Al Attar 2015), to train women to maximize profits. Although many of the food projects do not receive formal aid, they are viewed similarly as
being in need of professionalization, which the women I interviewed used as an opportunity to learn new skills, meet new people, and gain legitimacy. The following section examines how women form different type of organizations to access resources and support their businesses.

Women’s Organizing Strategies

This section examines how forming organizations in various ways affects the social and spatial aspects of food production and social reproduction. Through this analysis, I identify how particular strategies of organizing affect and constrain these women’s efforts to produce goods. Most women in this study, at least at one point, participated in larger organization of other women and businesses. These organizational strategies shape how women access resources and their new social networks.

Women’s food organizations were one of two types of جمعية (jam’iyya), or organization.11 The two main types of women’s organizations for women’s food projects were جمعية خيرية (jam’iyya khayriyya or charitable organization) and جمعية تعاونيّة (jam’iyya ta’aawiniyya or cooperative organization). The difference between charitable and cooperative is in how they deal with profits. The charitable organization must either put the profits back into the organization or provide a service for the community. Women who ran charitable organizations ran programs providing used clothing for children, a gym, wheelchairs for people in the community, classes on domestic abuse, and support services for women. These organizations often struggle to balance the dual demands of providing services for the community and producing revenue through selling goods and grant writing. Cooperative organizations can distribute profits among the members and investors as they see fit. How funds in the cooperative organizations are redistributed varies; some are more focused on generating profit and splitting it among the members, whereas others are more focused on everyone having their own business and the organization functioning as a support mechanism.

Organizing, often with the explicit purpose to begin producing goods, built strong connections with women outside of their former social circles. Women noted how long hours organizing, producing, and selling goods together developed new bonds between the women in new spaces outside of the home. They also remarked that they spend much more time away from home due to their work on the project, especially in women’s organizations producing goods in a central location together. Even organizations that paid women a salary instead of splitting the profits portrayed the female employees as equal participants in the project. For example, in one interview, the manager of a large women’s organization corrected us when we referred to the women who are paid to work there as employees. She said, “They aren’t employees; they are shareholders.” Although this correction tries to mask the wage labor and hierarchical dynamics of the project, her insistence demonstrates how women portray their organizations, emphasizing the communities they create and their benefits.

The reputation of the organization combined with the new social network gave women a way to address pertinent needs in the rural areas. Many of the women see the organization as central to shifting gender norms about the acceptability of women in public space and even their rights in the family. One cooperative member, Aisha said,

But the presence of [women’s] organizations in rural societies is so necessary. … Not only in name and to bring funding, no—especially if they work, they will affect change

[Nadia:] Break traditional patterns?

[Aisha:] Ah, of course. (Interview with Aisha and other two other cooperative members, 25 July 2017, Arabic, Jerash, Jordan)

The women believed that the organization could invoke real change. For example, many of the women’s families disliked them starting their own business outside of the house. Their families were more willing to support them, however, when they joined an organization run by someone with a good reputation in the community. This support was also reinforced once families saw that this work could be profitable.

Organizations also strengthened women’s business networks. Organizations that do not produce the goods together provide trainings, invitations to markets, and a network for support and coordination. Market spaces in malls and outdoor markets can be competitive, but these women’s organizations put women in contact with government ministries and companies organizing markets. This coordination also helped women to network among each other and to create a social bond decreasing the amount of
price cutting. Several women identified price cutting—in which someone will say “I’ll give it to you cheaper than them” or “I’ll give you the same price plus a free item”—as one of their biggest challenges. Second, charitable organizations used their status as a charitable society as added value in markets, asking passersby to help the women in the village by buying their (high-quality and often expensive) products. This price premium is not exclusive to charitable organizations, however, because rural women are already seen as emblems of poverty and therefore any of the women’s organizations, charitable or otherwise, can leverage the idea of helping women when selling their products (Le Polain de Waroux and Lambin 2013).

In addition to social capital as a resource, being registered as an organization allowed organizers to apply for governmental support. Furthermore, even though individuals are able to apply for some other grants, it is more persuasive to apply as an organization. The access to larger amounts of money is not always beneficial, though. Aisha’s organization used grant money from the Norwegian embassy to rehabilitate an old house in which they prepare, store, and present their products, and host visitors. The funding was not enough, however, even with profits from production.

The project was a simple idea—this [type of] production. How these [development] projects take an organization producing pickles, jams—it is simple. But the funding was not enough. We developed quickly and wanted to begin to welcome tourists. We began to offer breakfasts, and so we wanted to fix the place more. I mean, it brought us money, but not enough. Not enough for the rent of the house, not enough for that stuff. I mean, before awhile we said to them that we reached a dangerous stage. [We told them that] we are exceeding [the funding] and so we need support and funding. It would be a disaster if we stayed like that, a disaster. [In this case,] your effort alone is not enough for you. There are obligations, I mean, when the project is not complete. For example, I have the working kitchen, it is not suited for breakfast and lunch meals, and even though the necessities were complete, it was simple, the funding, I think 12,000. And it wasn’t done by our own hands. For we still need a lot, like fixing the garden, fixing the workshop, fixing the storage, we need it all. (Interview with Aisha and two other cooperative members, 25 July 2017, Arabic, Jerash, Jordan)

In this organization, a lot of money had been put into reconstructing an old house to be attractive to tourists, but not enough money and time was put into designing the kitchen in the best way for the women. At the time of the interview, the organization was operating fully, but our discussion revealed anxieties about the long-term sustainability of their current model of production. They felt that maintaining the house to host groups placed great financial pressure on them. The women expressed this anxiety by discussing how, in times of financial insufficiency, the women used money from their personal savings to sustain the organization. This example shows how quick growth from outside funding sources can push projects into a dangerous position in which the project does not have enough extra capital to handle swings in the market, risking the collapse of the project.

Another organization we visited and conducted interviews in was founded through a private company. The company recruited women, who were not part of an existing organization, to work together to later become an independent organization. The private company arranged all of the supplies and sales and the women learned how to produce the various goods such as jams and pickles. They designed the products and packaging to appeal to high-end Ammani and international customers, offering small containers with very professional labels. The group of women was trying to register as an organization because their funding under the company was set to expire. The women were confident that they would continue the same work but unsure how they would find and pay for a new location. The Ministry of Local Governments provided their current spacious location for free, but the contract was expiring soon without guarantee of renewal. Continuing their production in a similar space would be extravagantly costly. This is another example of how a large initial external investment causes the organization to grow quickly without a definite plan for how to continue after the initial support ends.

In summary, women’s organizing methods shape their access and exposure to different opportunities and restrictions. Being registered allows for more governmental control (Harmsen 2008), but it also allows them to apply for more funding opportunities. Being in a group helps distribute the burden of financial and cultural pressure, but it also can increase costs and other pressures. Funding, particularly in large amounts, can put women in a precarious position by quickly building a project that has
high operating costs. When this happens, after the end of the grant, a large percentage of the revenue must be reinvested in the business or organization. In contrast, in networking organizations or individual businesses, women’s individual businesses often grew slowly through different stages, from home production and enlisting family members’ assistance, to hiring other women and having a separate kitchen space. In terms of social reproduction, organizing helps women gain access to new networks of people and resources supporting their business through funding, training, or marketing and sales, changing the social context of many of the women. Through this new context and increased income, women acknowledge the time it takes away from their families but also acknowledge the new opportunities, such as education, this brings for their children.

Food Production for Consumers

We need to break down the wall between unpaid reproductive work and paid productive work and recognize their interdependence. (Kabeer 2015)

Production of rural food goods for consumers is a repetitive process through which social reproduction is reformulated as business owners produce food, others buy it to provide for themselves and others, and the business owners take those profits to provide for their families’ needs. In this section, I trace how food, labor, and identity are intertwined and shifting as women produce for consumers. As these women use their small businesses or organizations to assert rural identities, innovate on previous traditions, and shift their social relations and mobility, they also use the income to provide better opportunities, such as education, for their children. Therefore, in this section, I trace the coconstitution of previously domestic social reproductive work into production by women’s food projects. By examining this process as connected to social reproduction, I highlight the value of women’s unpaid labor prior to producing food for profit. I found that women’s food projects did not cause women to abandon their care labor in favor of becoming market producers but instead shifted the sociospatial dynamics of care labor to feed others through paid production and provided opportunities to their families through the income, reformulating food and identity in the process.

Although development agents support these projects to maximize returns and economic growth, most women I interviewed discussed the ability to provide for their families as more important than becoming better earning business people. These two aspects are not mutually exclusive, but these social and cultural aspects of women’s food businesses are often ignored in market-based approaches (Abarca 2007). In development agencies’ capital- and production-focused paradigms, social reproduction is often treated separately or ignored altogether (K. Mitchell, Marston, and Katz 2004; Bakker and Silvey 2008; Meehan and Strauss 2015), despite its centrality in the politics of development and the state (Clark 2016) and despite its centrality to the women’s goals. In a group interview with members of a business association of women’s food businesses, we12 asked what their earnings have allowed them to do, and nearly all of the women began discussing how many of their children have gone to college. In other words, they did not self-identify as entrepreneurs as a primary identity and motivation, as seen in other studies of women’s businesses (e.g., Bock 2004). Instead, they thought about their projects as directly helping their role as mothers by sending their children to college and, hopefully, allowing them to take on more prestigious jobs. One husband who often helps his wife’s business told me, “Can you imagine, from this sort of work, that now our village has three doctors and four engineers?” Although the women discussed strategies for improving their revenue, they focused on its impacts in terms of this new mode of social reproduction for rural women, with business growth often being a secondary or low priority.

The revenue from these projects depends on customers’ perceptions of rural women as knowledgeable about food. Many women asserted authority in their food preparation knowledge through their identity as women and often fellahat (rural women13). For example, one woman, when we asked her what encouraged her to produce pickles from home, said, “First of all, I am a fellaha and a farmer before I am a producer.” She tried selling the vegetables at market, but it did not bring enough return. Then she thought about how producing pickles, already commonly done at home, could bring more money. She told us many women in a similar position to her have done the same thing. This type of knowledge production in terms of social identity is another
form of social reproduction (Katz 2001). Therefore, sustaining and reshaping rural knowledge through food production is also a form of social reproduction for these farming women. The goods that they sell come from a culture of women working the land with their families and providing for their sustenance.

Although not all women producing food products are also farmers, this identity of rural women who are more in touch with the land and traditions was apparent in the way in which women market their products at markets. Women’s businesses facilitated a public encounter asserting this knowledge-based identity. When I worked markets with Salma’s organization, both the women from the organization and their customers expressed how the rural women have knowledge that urban dwellers lack. The rural women remarked that people from Amman do not know about certain types of breads and grains that are common knowledge in the rural areas. When discussing the demand in the urban markets for rural goods, the rural women often discussed serving urbanites who are far from home or have lost their connection with the land. They talked about the medicinal value of the herbs that you cannot find in the supermarkets of Amman. They boasted about the value of a home-cooked meal or homemade goods. While they are marketing this imagery to gain value for their products in the local market, they also reproduce and reconfigure the knowledge and skills of rural food products through their sales in urban spaces. They are also asserting the value of their specialized knowledge in conversations with often affluent urban consumers.

Women in food projects often sought to innovate or improve the quality of their food products for the urban markets, reproducing, yet reformulating, rural food production. Although this change could be viewed as simply the commodification of their domestic labor or upgrading production, it is more salient to understand the conjunction of tradition and change as a reflection of how the women are working strategically within their economic contexts (Ferguson 2010). Innovation in food products (e.g., trying new techniques in the kitchen to ease labor or improve taste) is not new, but doing so to gain a competitive advantage (e.g., trying new techniques to make your product more attractive to consumers) is a new practice for rural women. As I observed during participant observation and interviews, some producers appeal to customers by simply ensuring a good taste, and others try creating new techniques and flavors to remain competitive in the local market. At one organization, women boasted how they incorporate nontraditional herbs and flavors into their jams. They also discussed reviving medicinal uses of herbs and foods their (and the previous) generation had lost. They noted that their products mark a return to previous practices and they have enjoyed learning these things. In other words, taking this labor into a new space—market spaces—creates new reasons for innovation, change, and even a return to older practices and knowledges. Because many different women’s organizations make similar products, women often focus on a few items they do really well, find ways to market themselves, or innovate in new ways (e.g., adding unique spices to jams or adding glitter to soap).

Part of selling their product was also selling the image of the rural woman. At markets, customers would often talk about better times, traditions, and the idyllic lifestyle of rural areas. Like in tourism, this image is an imagined space that does not include the difficulties of actual everyday life there. Even local media seemed to desire this image. When I worked at Souq Jara, the news crew came following a member of parliament, and he went straight for the woman sitting on the ground making traditional shrak bread over a fire while wearing an old, flour-covered abaya. Meanwhile, the head of the organization, also a rural woman, dressed in pants and a blouse, tried to speak with the member of parliament, but he and the cameras focused on getting a shot with the woman making bread. This rural image in Jordan is often used in national imagery and discourses (Massad 2001). That said, some rural foodways are distinct and uncommon in Amman. The scene at markets, however, demonstrates how this image of rural identity is packaged for consumers, causing business owners to invest in graphic design and packaging. For example, consumers might want to see rural imagery, but they do not want to buy their olive oil in an unlabeled metal container like you would see in most rural households. This contradiction sheds light on the ways in which producing for consumers is fundamentally different than domestic production. Additionally, the rural women are selling their rural identity while creating spaces and networks outside of what is usually associated with rural women.
Similar to the need to sell a rural image, the women must also demonstrate quality to convey trustworthiness to their new consumers (Higgins, Dibden, and Cocklin 2008). For example, many women focused on neat, well-designed packaging, safety certificates, and advertising. Although their marketing depended, to a degree, on a traditional rural ideal, the parameters of food safety and marketing changed the product. For example, the women might be producing jam with the same ingredients their grandmothers did, but their grandmothers never had to get a food safety certificate or print an expiration date on a beautifully packaged bottle of jam. In the urban markets and festivals, the packaging can be compensated for by performance. Several interviewees said the best way to prove high quality is to get people to taste your product. Many women go to festivals at which they are one of several different women’s businesses selling similar items. Having a clean, organized setup and allowing people to taste your product is the best way to ensure people buy your product. Asserting value through markets occurs within this general shift of market-led development and a commodification of rural identity. For these women, selling the rural image involves changing production practices, making new products, and changing the spaces of production.

This shift from working in the home to outside is seen by some in Jordan as shameful. Many women cited this “culture of shame,” or ithaqāfa al-‘ayb, as the biggest challenge they faced in the beginning of their projects, whether they started the business alone or with other people. A woman who works in a consulting company, speaking from her experience working with women’s food projects and other businesses owners, said, “The women [who start businesses] face all the problems like a man does—licensing, funding, and marketing—but they also have to overcome the culture of shame.” Although women globally are shamed for being away from their families for work disproportionately to men (Markantoni and van Hoven 2012), in Jordan the idea of the culture of shame is also tied to reputation and honor. Thus, one woman said she prefers to go to markets further from home as a way to access consumers who will pay higher prices and to escape the looks and comments from acquaintances and family at more local markets.

Women have several strategies for overcoming this culture of shame. Women who could not or chose not to go to markets had other women take their products and sell them, often with their own name and sometimes with the name of the other woman. Through this method, they did not have to worry about relatives who, despite the immediate family’s support, would still criticize them for working outside of the home. Within the household, women took up several strategies for overcoming their families’ concern about the shame. Some started their business from home, using their children’s labor. Once the business grew, as one business owner said about her family, “they liked the profits, changed their minds, and then they were with me.” This support is evident in the markets, where husbands can be seen working for their wives who are primarily dealing with customers. Because of the gendered nature of this work, women are also selling their own image and therefore are the main sales interface, despite the culture of shame around women interacting with men.

In summary, understanding how food production for consumers shifts and extends social reproductive labor into public space highlights how food, labor, and women’s social networks are reformulated. Although other studies of women’s businesses have been critical of the continuation of gendered labor roles, scholars should be careful not to conflate their personal politics as academics with the goals and strategies of other women. These women did not mention a desire to escape food production. Instead, they talked of the ways in which they shifted the spatial and social contexts of this labor to further provide for their families and themselves, which gave them increased confidence. Although food production for consumers led to income and increased self-confidence, it is more than self-empowerment; women talked about these gains in terms of providing nourishment to consumers, interacting with their customers, and providing new opportunities for their families and communities.

Conclusion

Rural women across Jordan have started creating and participating in rural food projects that market food, and often women’s rural identity, to consumers. Development agencies have played a large role in supporting these projects to increase women’s market participation as an empowerment strategy. These women are not eschewing unproductive domestic
work for empowered, productive market participation, however; these projects, their structures, and the effects they have on women are much more nuanced than growing profits. Most women interviewed cited supporting their families by educating their children as the most important outcome of running these food projects. Asserting that women’s small businesses are not a shift from unproductive to productive labor but a change in the type and spaces of reproductive work draws attention to women’s goals like investing in their children and communities with their new income. Through an examination of women’s access to development networks, formation of organizations, and changes in food production, I found that rural women leverage their identities to access resources, build their networks, and sell food for income. Their work—food production, a key part of social reproduction—now feeds another type of social reproduction, educating their children.

Furthermore, women use, change, and reproduce the rural woman identity. Despite the varied backgrounds of the women interviewed, several used the identity of a rural woman to access funds because rural women are seen as in need of support. They also use this identity to assert quality in their food production, even if they have never personally made those products before. Meanwhile, selling their products places women in spaces and networks that were often previously foreclosed to them. Finally, the food production reproduces a rural woman identity to Amman consumers, albeit in a new, professionalized way, and to the women’s families, who often help with the labor. Although the entry into new spaces and networks could be considered empowerment, remaining grounded in the changes happening without ascribing the term empowerment, highlights the changes taking place without evoking the problematic discourses of rights and empowerment (Ababneh 2016). It also resists a priori giving these new spaces and networks value over others, allowing for critique of these new networks and spaces and reformulated rural identities without telling women what they should or should not be doing with particular people in particular places.

Furthermore, incorporating a broader examination of women’s organizations and their strategies calls attention to the nonmarket pressures they face. For example, funding sources, especially large ones, can lead to growth that places additional pressure on producers. The external funding that the bigger organizations obtained fueled a rapid expansion that was difficult to maintain without additional funds and labor time. Although organizing into coproducing organizations often fostered a sense of community, when done so with large grants, it sometimes led women to invest more personal money and time into the organization, which could be unsustainable and riskier, potentially decreasing their ability to support their families. In other words, growth is just one part of the story of these women’s businesses and organizations, and it is not automatically a positive or negative indicator.

Likewise, the goal of this article is not to say that the proliferation of women’s food businesses is good or bad. Instead, this article takes seriously the fact that rural women have always labored and that engagement in food producing businesses has led to shifts in the social and spatial context of women’s paid and unpaid labor. Examining social reproduction highlights the range of benefits and challenges of these projects, beyond dollars earned or universal empowerment indexes. Supporting women business owners has brought more money to some families, but it has also fundamentally reshaped the forms, time, and space of social reproduction in some of these families. The long-term impacts of these changes are hard to predict. To have truly sustainable rural community development, however, further research is needed on the intersection of these women’s projects, the changes they create, and the role of differences such as class, social status, and location. As economic pressure on rural families grows in Jordan, understanding these differences in conjunction with a more complex model than “more women in the workforce is good” will be essential to sustainable rural development that supports the diversity of needs and perspectives in rural Jordan.

Acknowledgments

Thank you to all of the people from various organizations and food businesses who shared their time and experiences with me. Thank you to Nadia for her work in interviews, in transcribing and translating, and in contributing to the research project. Thank you to Dr. Sara Ababneh and the Center for Strategic Studies at the University of Jordan for the affiliation while I was completing my research. Thank you to Dr. Anna Secor for reading and
working through many drafts of this article. Thank you to Dr. Tad Mutersbaugh, Dr. Sue Roberts, Dr. Hsain Ilahaine, and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback. Any errors and omissions are mine alone.

Funding

Thank you to the Fulbright U.S. student program, the Council of Overseas American Research Centers and the American Center for Oriental Research, and the Society of Women Geographers for funding parts of this research

Notes

1. Names of interviewees are pseudonyms.
2. Some of these products, such as sesame seeds, were purchased from outside of Ajloun and then washed, dried, and packaged at the organization’s office. Other products such as sumac were purchased from local residents and then repackaged. Some products, such as Jameed, were made by employees of the organization.
3. The Hashemite family has several development organizations that, alongside other international development agencies, fund projects across Jordan.
4. Three interviews included multiple women. Forty is based on the number of women who spoke and were transcribed as being present. In one of the interviews, however, some women were only present for part of the interview and some women were present but did not contribute verbally.
5. Whereas several women who were interviewed mentioned that they had worked other jobs before this, many were previously unemployed—the ideal target population for development agencies.
6. See work on feminist political economy (Bakker 2007; Hoskyns and Rai 2007; Bakker and Silvey 2008; Federici 2012).
7. All interview quotes were translated by the author.
8. Women can request that IRADA arrange consultation or trainings based on their specific need.
9. This is yogurt cheese.
10. There has been a cycle of women going into debt from microfinance and other loans, sometimes resulting in imprisonment (Jarar and Omar 2019; “Zakat Fund Approves 11th Batch of Aid for Indebted Women” 2019). In some cases, the women took the loans for other people.
11. I found one instance of a professional organization of female engineers also selling food products, but I did not include them here because they are not based in the rural northeast.
12. “We” refers to the research assistant, Nadia, and I.
13. Tarawneh (2013) outlined other rural identities in Jordan. Fellah was the most commonly mentioned term (to express a rural identity) in my interviews, but there are more nuances to the meaning of this word in relation to other identities that were not evident through my interviews.

References

Ababneh, S. 2016. Troubling the political: Women in the Jordanian day-waged labor movement. International Journal of Middle East Studies 48 (1):87–112.
Abarca, M. E. 2007. Charlas culinarias: Mexican women speak from their public kitchens. Food and Foodways 15 (3–4):183–212.
Abu-Lughod, L. 2009. Dialects of women’s empowerment: The international circuitry of the Arab Human Development Report 2005. International Journal of Middle East Studies 41 (1):83–103.
Ahmad, M. M. 2003. Distant voices: The views of the field workers of NGOs in Bangladesh on microcredit. The Geographical Journal 169 (1):65–74.
Al Attar, Z. H. 2015. A case study of IRADA: Its impact on the development and enhancing the legitimacy of home-based businesses in key poverty areas in Jordan. Accessed April 19, 2020. https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/etd/5482.
Al-Dajani, H., S. Carter, E. Shaw, and S. Marlow. 2015. Entrepreneurship among the displaced and dispossessed: Exploring the limits of emancipatory entrepreneuring. British Journal of Management 26 (4):713–30. doi: 10.1111/1467-8551.12119.
Al-Dajani, H., and S. Marlow. 2013. Empowerment and entrepreneurship: A theoretical framework. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research 19 (5):503–24. doi: 10.1108/IJEBR-10-2011-0138.
Alkire, S., R. Meinzen-Dick, A. Peterman, A. Quisumbing, G. Seymour, and A. Vaz. 2013. The women’s empowerment in agriculture index. World Development 52:71–91. doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2013.06.007.
Anthopoulou, T. 2010. Rural women in local agrofood production: Between entrepreneurial initiatives and family strategies. A case study in Greece. Journal of Rural Studies 26 (4):394–403. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2010.03.004.
Bakker, I. 2007. Social reproduction and the constitution of a gendered political economy. New Political Economy 12 (4):541–56. doi: 10.1080/13563460701661561.
Bakker, I., and R. Silvey. 2008. Beyond states and markets: The challenges of social reproduction. London and New York: Routledge.
Barghouti, S. M. 1974. The role of communication in Jordan’s rural development. Journalism Quarterly 51 (3):418–24. doi: 10.1177/107769907405100305.
Bezanson, K., and M. Luxton. 2006. Social reproduction: Feminist political economy challenges neo-liberalism. Montreal, QC, Canada: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Blowfield, M., and C. S. Dolan. 2014. Business as a development agent: Evidence of possibility and improbability. Third World Quarterly 35 (1):22–42. doi: 10.1080/01436597.2013.868982.
Bock, B. B. 2004. Fitting in and multi-tasking: Dutch farm women’s strategies in rural entrepreneurship. Sociologia Ruralis 44 (3):245–60. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9523.2004.00274.x.

Bock, B. B. 2015. Gender mainstreaming and rural development policy: The trivialisation of rural gender issues. Gender, Place & Culture 22 (5):731–45.

Brand, L. 1998. Women, the state, and political liberalization. New York: Columbia University Press.

Chitsike, C. 2000. Culture as a barrier to rural women’s entrepreneurship: Experience from Zimbabwe. Gender & Development 8 (1):71–77. doi: 10.1080/714923408.

Clark, J. H. 2016. The “life” of the state: Social reproduction and geopolitics in Turkey’s Kurdish question. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 106 (5):1176–93. doi: 10.1080/24694452.2016.1187061.

Cruikshank, B. 1999. The will to empower: Democratic citizens and other subjects. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Dababneh, A. 2016. Women’s economic participation in Jordan: Reality and challenges of the private sector. Accessed April 27, 2018. http://www.phenixcenter.net/uploads/en_phenixcenter.net_636403794832269707.pdf.

Elyachar, J. 2012. Next practices: Knowledge, infrastructure, and public goods at the bottom of the pyramid. Public Culture 24 (1):109–29. doi: 10.1215/08992363-1443583.

Escobar, A. 2011. Encountering development: The making and unmaking of the third world. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. doi: 10.1086/ahr/101.5.1523.

Federici, S. 2012. Revolution at point zero: Housework, reproduction, and feminist struggle. Oakland, CA: PM Press.

Ferguson, J. 1994. The anti-politics machine: Development, depoliticization, and bureaucratic power in Lesotho. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Ferguson, J. 2010. The uses of neoliberalism. Antipode 41 (Suppl. 1):166–84.

Harmsen, E. 2008. Islam, civil society and social work: Muslim voluntary welfare associations in Jordan between patronage and empowerment. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.

Harrigan, J., H. El-Said, and C. Wang. 2006. The IMF and the World Bank in Jordan: A case of over optimism and elusive growth. The Review of International Organizations 1 (3):263–92. doi: 10.1007/s11558-006-9490-8.

Harrigan, J., C. Wang, and H. El-Said. 2006. The economic and political determinants of IMF and World Bank lending in the Middle East and North Africa. World Development 34 (2):247–70. doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2005.07.016.

Herman, A. 2012. Tactical ethics: How the discourses of fairtrade and black economic empowerment change and interact in wine networks from South Africa to the UK. Geoforum 43 (6):1121–30. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2012.07.006.

Higgins, V., J. Dibden, and C. Cocklin. 2008. Building alternative agri-food networks: Certification, embeddedness and agri-environmental governance. Journal of Rural Studies 24 (1):15–27. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2007.06.002.

Honey, R., and S. A. Kharmeh. 1989. Rural policy in Jordan’s 1986–1990 development plan. Journal of Rural Studies 5 (1):75–85. doi: 10.1016/0743-0167(89)90022-3.

Hoskyns, C., and S. M. Rai. 2007. Recasting the global political economy: Counting women’s unpaid work. New Political Economy 12 (3):297–317. doi: 10.1080/13563460701485268.

Jarar, S., and F. Omar. 2019. الترفيه الريفي: كيف أن [Wild empowerment: How microcredit has taken the lives of women and their families]. 7iber. Accessed November 1, 2019. https://www.7iber.com/society/%d8%a7%d9%84%d8%b3%d8%a7%d9%85%d8%b1%d9%85%d8%a7%d9%86%d8%aa-%d8%a7%d9%84%d9%82%d8%b1%d9%88%d8%b6-%d8%a7%d9%84%d8%b5%d8%b5%d8%ba%d9%8a%d8%b1%d8%a9-%d9%84%d9%81%d9%8a-%d8%a7%d9%84%d8%a3%d8%b1%d8%af%d9%86/.

Kabeer, N. 2005. Gender equality and women’s empowerment: A critical analysis of the third Millennium Development Goal. Gender & Development 13 (1):13–24. doi: 10.1080/13552070512331332273.

Kabeer, N. 2015. Breaking the wall of gender inequality. Berlin, Germany. Accessed November 5, 2018. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YBHDgoIHcGc.

Kandiyoti, D. 2011. Disentangling religion and politics: Whither gender equality? IDS Bulletin 42 (1):10–14. doi: 10.1111/j.1759-5436.2011.00195.x.

Katz, C. 2001. Vagabond capitalism and the necessity of social reproduction. Antipode 33 (4):709–28. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8330.2007.00207.

Keller, B., and D. C. Mbewe. 1991. Policy and planning for the empowerment of Zambia’s women farmers. Canadian Journal of Development Studies/Revue Canadienne d’Études du Développement 12 (1):75–88. doi: 10.1080/02255189.1991.9669421.

Kunz, R. 2010. The crisis of social reproduction in rural Mexico: Challenging the “re-privatization of social reproduction” thesis. Review of International Political Economy 17 (5):913–45. doi: 10.1080/09692291003669444.

Lenner, K. 2015. Projects of improvement, continuities of neglect: Re-fragmenting the periphery in southern rural Jordan. Middle East—Topics & Arguments 5:77–88.

Le Polain de Waroux, Y., and E. F. Lambin. 2013. Niche commodities and rural poverty alleviation: Contextualizing the contribution of argan oil to rural livelihoods in Morocco. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 103 (3):589–607. doi: 10.1080/00045608.2012.720234.

Li, T. M. 2007. Practices of assemblage and community forest management. Economy and Society 36 (2):263–93.

Mahmood, S. 2005. Politics of piety: The Islamic revival and the feminist subject. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Markantoni, M., and B. van Hoven. 2012. Bringing “invisible” side activities to light: A case study of rural female entrepreneurs in the Veenkoloniën, The Netherlands. Journal of Rural Studies 28 (4):507–16. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2012.05.006.

Massad, J. A. 2001. Colonial effects: The making of national identity in Jordan. New York: Columbia University Press. doi: 10.1086/ahr/108.1.305.
McEwan, C., and D. Bek. 2006. (Re)politicizing empowerment: Lessons from the South African wine industry. Geoforum 37 (6):1021–34. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2006.06.004.

Meehan, K., and K. Strauss. 2015. Precarious worlds: Contested geographies of social reproduction. Atlanta: University of Georgia Press.

Mitchell, K., S. A. Marston, and C. Katz. 2003. Introduction: Life’s work: An introduction, review and critique. Antipode 35 (3):415–42. doi: 10.1111/1467-8330.00333.

Mitchell, K., S. A. Marston, and C. Katz. 2004. Life’s work: Geographies of social reproduction. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.

Mitchell, T. 2002. Rule of experts: Egypt, techno-politics, modernity. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Moghadam, V. M. 2005. Women’s economic participation in the Middle East: What difference has the neoliberal policy turn made? Journal of Middle East Women’s Studies 1 (1):110–46. doi: 10.1215/15525864-2005-1006.

Moghadam, V. M., and L. Senftova. 2005. Measuring women’s empowerment: Participation and rights in civil, political, social, economic, and cultural domains. International Social Science Journal 57 (184):389–412. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2451.2005.00557.x.

Mohanty, C. T. 2003. “Under Western Eyes” revisited: Feminist solidarity through anticapitalist struggles. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 28 (2):499–535. doi: 10.1086/342914.

Moore, D. S. 2005. Suffering for territory: Race, place, and power in Zimbabwe. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Mossallam, M. 2015. The IMF in the Arab world: Lessons unlearned. Accessed September 7, 2017. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2705927.

Nagar, R., V. Lawson, L. McDowell, and S. Hanson. 2002. Locating globalization: Feminist (re)readings of the subjects and spaces of globalization. Economic Geography 78 (3):257–84. doi: 10.2307/4140810.

Nguyen, C., H. Frederick, and H. Nguyen. 2014. Female entrepreneurship in rural Vietnam: An exploratory study. International Journal of Gender and Entrepreneurship 6 (1):50–67. doi: 10.1108/IJGE-04-2013-0034.

Rankin, K. N. 2001. Governing development: Neoliberalism, microcredit, and rational economic woman. Economy and Society 30 (1):18–37. doi: 10.1080/03085140020019070.

Rignall, K., and M. Atia. 2017. The global rural: Relational geographies of poverty and uneven development. Geography Compass 11 (7):e12322. doi: 10.1111/gec3.12322.

Roberts, S. M., J. P. Jones, and O. Fröhling. 2005. NGOs and the globalization of managerialism: A research framework. World Development 33 (11):1845–64. doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2005.07.004.

Roy, A. 2010. Poverty capital: Microfinance and the making of development. London and New York: Routledge.

Shortall, S. 2004. Social or economic goals, civic inclusion or exclusion? An analysis of rural development theory and practice. Sociologia Ruralis 44 (1):109–23. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9523.2004.00265.x.

Smith, B. E., and J. Winders. 2015. Whose lives, which work? Class discrepancies in life’s work. In Precarious worlds: Contested geographies of social reproduction, ed. K. Meehan and K. Strauss, 18. Athens: University of Georgia Press.

Sonbol, A. E. A. 2003. Women of the Jordan: Islam, labor, and the law. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.

Sparke, M. 2012. Book review symposium. Antipode 44 (2):517–22. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8330.2011.00970_1.x.

Sukarieh, M. 2016. On class, culture, and the creation of the neoliberal subject: The case of Jordan. Anthropological Quarterly 89 (4):1201–25. doi: 10.1353/anq.2016.0073.

Talal, B. B. 2004. Rethinking an NGO: Development, donors and civil society in Jordan. New York: I.B.Tauris.

Tarawneh, M. F. 2013. Rural capitalist development in The Jordan Valley: The case of Deir Alla—The rise and demise of social groups. Leiden, The Netherlands: Sidestone Press.

Torri, M. C., and A. Martinez. 2014. Women’s empowerment and micro-enterprise in India: Constructing a new development paradigm? Progress in Development Studies 14 (1):31–48. doi: 10.1177/1464993413504347.

Valencia-Fourcans, L., and R. Hawkins. 2016. Representations of women in microcredit promotional materials: The case of Espoir Ecuador. Journal of International Development 28 (4):507–27. doi: 10.1002/jid.3136.

Ward, E. 2014. Microfinance in Jordan isn’t helping to empower women. The Guardian, August 20. Accessed February 15, 2018. http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/aug/20/microfinance-jordan-empower-women-donors.

Weeks, J. R. 2009. Women business owners in the Middle East and North Africa: A five-country research study. International Journal of Gender and Entrepreneurship 1 (1):77–85. doi: 10.1108/17566260910942354.

Weldon, S. L. 2019. Power, exclusion and empowerment: Feminist innovation in political science. Women’s Studies International Forum 72:127–36. doi: 10.1016/j.wsif.2018.05.014.

Winders, J., and B. E. Smith. 2019. Social reproduction and capitalist production: A genealogy of dominant imaginaries. Progress in Human Geography 43 (5):871–89. doi: 10.1177/0309132518791730.

Woods, M. 2005. Rural geography: Processes, responses and experiences in rural restructuring. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Zakat Fund approves 11th batch of aid for indebted women. 2019. Jordan Times, October 23. Accessed October 27, 2019. http://www.jordantimes.com/news/local/zakat-fund-approves-11th-batch-aid-indebted-women.

Žiaková, M., and V. Verner. 2015. Microfinance as a tool for poverty reduction: A study of Jordan. Scientia Agriculturae Bohemica 46 (4):172–80. Accessed February 15, 2018. https://www.degruyter.com/view/j/sab.2015.46.issue-4/sab-2015-0033/sab-2015-0033.xml.

BRITTANY COOK is an Assistant Professor of Geography at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, LA 70504. E-mail: Brittany.cook@louisiana.edu. Her research interests are in political ecology and feminist political geography. Her work examines the intersection of international flows of capital, ideas of development, and rural spaces in Jordan.