Mobility Disadvantage and Livelihood Opportunities of Marginalized Widowed Women in Rural Uganda

Deborah Naybor, Jessie P. H. Poon & Irene Casas

To cite this article: Deborah Naybor, Jessie P. H. Poon & Irene Casas (2016) Mobility Disadvantage and Livelihood Opportunities of Marginalized Widowed Women in Rural Uganda, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 106:2, 404-412, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2015.1113110

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2015.1113110

Published online: 12 Jan 2016.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 74

View related articles

View Crossmark data
Mobility Disadvantage and Livelihood Opportunities of Marginalized Widowed Women in Rural Uganda

Deborah Naybor,* Jessie P. H. Poon,† and Irene Casas‡

*Department of Environmental Studies, Paul Smiths College
†Department of Geography, University at Buffalo
‡School of History and Social Sciences, Louisiana Tech University

The adverse effect of mobility restrictions on the livelihood of economically marginalized women in rural Africa is considerable. This study investigates the space–time paths of twenty-seven widowed women in rural Uganda through methodological pluralism that integrates multiple sources of quantitative and qualitative data collected from Global Positioning System tracking, in-depth interviews, and participant observation. Geographic information systems mapping of activity space suggests that mobility patterns are characterized by frequent short repetitive trips and less flexible space–time budgets. In turn, this reduces opportunities to pursue diversified sources of income that enhance livelihood. Statistical regressions and qualitative interviews also show, however, that access to use of motorized vehicles such as cars and motorcycle taxis significantly strengthens livelihood by reducing time poverty, rendering time as a resource for pursuing income opportunities. Key Words: GIS, livelihood, space–time, transportation, Uganda.

能动性的限制，对于生活在非洲农村经济上边缘化的女性生计而言，具有不利的影响。本研究透过整合从全球定位系统追踪、深度访谈和参与式观察取得的各种量化与质化数据来源的多重方法论，探讨乌干达农村二十七位寡妇的时空路径。地理信息系统对于活动空间的地图绘製显示，她们的能动性模式以经常性的短程反复旅次和较缺乏弹性的时空预算为特徵。这种情况随之减少了追求能够促进生计的多样化收入来源的机会。但统计回归与质化访谈亦同时显示，拥有利用诸如汽车与摩托出租车的机动车辆之管道，透过降低时间贫穷，显着地增加了生计，而时间则成为追求所得机会的资源。 关键词： 地理信息系统, 生计, 时空, 运输, 乌干达。

Es considerable el efecto adverso que tienen las restricciones de movilidad sobre la subsistencia de mujeres económicamente marginadas del África rural. Este estudio investiga las trayectorias espacio-temporales de veintisiete viudas en la Uganda rural mediante un pluralismo metodológico que integra múltiples fuentes de datos cuantitativos y cualitativos obtenidos por rastreo del Sistema de Posicionamiento Global, por entrevistas a profundidad y observación participativa. El mapeo de la actividad espacial por sistemas de información geográfica sugiere que los patrones de movilidad están caracterizados por la frecuencia de viajes cortos repetidos y por presupuestos menos flexibles del espacio-tiempo. A su turno, esto reduce las oportunidades para buscar otras fuentes de ingreso que mejoren la subsistencia. Las regresiones estadísticas y las entrevistas cualitativas muestran también, sin embargo, que el acceso al uso de vehículos motorizados, tales como automóviles y mototaxis, fortalece significativamente la subsistencia al reducir la pobreza del tiempo, convirtiendo al tiempo en un recurso para buscar oportunidades de ingreso. Palabras clave: SIG, subsistencia, espacio-tiempo, transporte, Uganda.

Transportation and mobility are relevant influences on livelihood opportunities among marginalized populations in rural Africa, whose most common mode of transportation is walking. Lack of infrastructure and accessible affordable transportation in sub-Saharan Africa creates a widening mobility gap. The divide between those who can afford and access transportation and “Africans stranded in rural villages where mobility deprivation is acute” (Pirie 2009, 22) limits livelihood strategies that affect economic survivability adversely. This article examines time use and mobility of a sample of marginalized Ugandan women in the context of their economic activities. We attempt to understand the relationship between mobility and livelihood by engaging in methodological triangulation of geographic information systems (GIS), quantitative data, and qualitative data.

The subjects of this study are widowed women in remote rural Uganda. These women are extremely poor and most rely on subsistence agriculture for survival in difficult conditions. Ellis (2000) theorized that livelihood, the activities required for survivability and satisfaction of basic human needs, is less uncertain among the poor if they pursue a diversified range of
income sources besides farming. Mobility constraints for pursuing diversified income are also formidable, however. Using methodological pluralism that favors multiple sources of data and quantitative as well as qualitative approaches, we analyze the patterns of everyday mobility among the women and the influence of mobility on their livelihoods.

In the next section, we frame mobility within the time geography literature, highlighting constraints on human movement. We then detail the research methodology, including the recruitment of women and collection of Global Positioning System (GPS), survey, and qualitative data. This is followed by an elaboration of the findings before concluding with implications of the analysis.

Space–Time and Mobility

Hagerstrand’s (1970) time geography focused on the limitations of human activity and the influence of fixed and flexible activities on time use and spatial location (Pred 1977). The framework offers a way to trace daily routines as specific locations of time and space (Miller 2005). The space–time path, which illustrates how people choose their course within their spatial–temporal environment (Corbett 2001), has proven to have greater significance in exposing patterns of human behavior through the use of new communication and information technology (Kwan and Webber 2003; Couclelis 2009). The number of tasks that each person can achieve depends on movement through a web of paths between stations where tasks are performed. Thrift (2005) observed that as individuals allocate certain spaces to fit certain needs, they use “time as a resource, allocating particular intervals to particular uses” (4).

Time use in space is a relevant framework for understanding the relationship between mobility and livelihood in rural sub-Saharan Africa, where lack of ability to pay for transport adversely affects mobility, livelihood, and health care (Porter 2002; Jaramillo, Grindlay, and Lizarraga 2012). Spatial capacity for livelihood opportunities depends on resource endowment, economic opportunity, and social capital (Bebbington 2009). Yet to take full advantage of these opportunities, the poor have to be able to negotiate the distance to access resources and convert them into productive assets. Access to affordable transportation could be limited by many factors, including poverty, poor road conditions, and cultural restrictions, especially in regard to gender (e.g., women riding a bicycle is not culturally acceptable in this village). For the rural poor in Africa, affordable transportation is usually confined to the bicycle, and motorized vehicle use is limited due to cost. It is important to note, however, that motorized transportation such as the car tends in general to be used less by women even in industrialized countries, as a result of gendered differences in economic power and patriarchal social structures (Scheiner and Holz-Rau 2012).

In Kenya, Oluoko-Odingo (2011) found that better transport networks improved farmers’ health through access to better medical care and also helped to stabilize food prices. Temporal constraints on spatial freedom involve choice and access, influenced by a wide variety of actors within a social framework. For example, many of the women in our study expressed a desire to work at a shop but could not be away from their home for hours each day due to reproductive responsibilities. The women have learned to work within spatiotemporal confines by developing survival strategies that influence livelihood under harsh physical conditions.

Walker and Vajjhala (2009) found that gender dimensions of social marginalization and vulnerability can be evaluated in terms of transport using GIS data. Yamano and Kijima (2011) used GIS data from 894 rural households in Uganda and found that perishable and high-income crops are more at risk of damage on long, rough roads to illustrate the importance of transportation and mobility on the ability of rural farmers to increase their livelihood levels. Taken together, the “mobility of poverty” (McQuoid and Dijst 2012, 27) is a pressing problem that demands scholarly attention if impoverished women in Africa are to improve their livelihood.

Study Area, Data, and Methodology

Shoval (2008) maintained that data collected on time and travel are often distorted because of the laborious process of logging time diaries. For this reason, we use GPS tracking to more accurately track our subjects’ space–time paths and to understand the impact of mobility patterns on livelihood. United Nations Economic Commission for Africa studies found that high illiteracy rates in Africa call for face-to-face interviews rather than the use of diaries. Even collecting minimal accurate time diary information can be difficult, though, due to budget limitations and a “general lack of adherence to rigid time schedules by African people, particularly in rural areas” (Abdourahman 2010, 27).
Twenty-seven widowed women, age twenty-three to seventy-three, volunteered for the study. They carried GPS tracking devices over a period of three months, for an average of twenty days per participant. The storage of data is triggered by motion and stored on-board until downloaded. To assure ethical human subject compliance, the women controlled which days they collected data and for how long. This ensures privacy as participants were reluctant to disclose trips, for example, to an HIV/AIDS clinic or illegal alcohol vendor.

The women were recruited through local community leaders and were compensated at the rate of $1 for every day that they collected data (equivalent to their daily average earnings) and $2 plus a provided meal for participation in interviews. In addition to GPS tracking, participant observation provided data on cycles of activities, social structure, and temporal patterns during three two-week intervals within a one-year period. The home and farm of each woman were visited several times, as well as the local marketplace, churches, clinics, schools, and water sources. A two-hour semistructured interview with each participant gathered both quantitative and qualitative data on education, social life, family, livelihood, health, transportation, and time use. Livelihood factors included questions that allowed for assessment of the individual’s level of subsistence and market agriculture and other methods of earning income. Triangulation of multiple sources of data, both quantitative and qualitative, enhances methodological pluralism that has come to underscore much geographic research (Poon 2005).

Women who have been widowed were chosen because they are among the most marginalized groups in Uganda (International Fund for Agricultural Development 2012). The Uganda Bureau of Statistics (2010) reported that over 79 percent of widows are dependent on subsistence farming and lack physical and financial resources, increasing their poverty vulnerability. In addition, the subjects are more willing than married women to provide information on their activity spaces and livelihoods and act more independent of male-dominated influence on time use and decision making. Evers and Walters (2000) found that men in sub-Saharan Africa dominate women’s inputs in cash crops. Although a small group had remarried or found male companions since being widowed, they indicated that they had entered into the relationship with more decision-making power and economic independence.

The research was conducted in the village of Nakagongo in south central Uganda. It is a rural community that is highly dependent on agriculture and subsistence farming. The nearest paved road is approximately eight miles from the village in the town of Kyotera, which has a population of about 8,000. There are small informal and formal shops at scattered market areas in nearby villages, with the nearest small town, Bethlehem (population estimated at less than 1,000), acting as a trading and community center approximately three miles southwest of Nakagongo. One third of the study participants live near the local market, and the rest are located off-road. Porter (2002, 291) aptly noted that “to live off-road is to be invisible.” The Uganda National Household Survey 2009–2010 reported that only 19.6 percent of Ugandan communities have paved roads, and 18 percent of towns or villages have a bus stop (Uganda Bureau of Statistics 2010). No public transportation is available in the area, but there are infrequent minibuses for hire in Bethlehem and larger buses from Kyotera for hire for longer trips. Bicycle or motorcycle taxis operated by local men are available in the village area but the fees are $0.50 to $1.00, almost an average day’s wage for many of the participants.

Space–Time Analysis of Rural Ugandan Widows

Space–time paths were created from ArcGIS using the widows’ GPS tracking data. The paths were constructed by connecting the sorted temporal sequence of all the locations visited by a subject. Given that GPS tracking data were collected for different periods of time, we used the longest period of consecutive data of each subject to calculate the space–time path. Time budget was examined by analyzing time spent in various economic, household, and social activities. Specific attention is paid to productive (income producing), reproductive (household) work, and patterns of spatial fixity. As the geographic literature has shown, women’s reproductive work influences their daily patterns of mobility (Hanson and Pratt 1995; Schwanen, Kwan, and Ren 2008; Kwan 2012; McQuoid and Dijst 2012) and thereby impacts livelihood. The women farm and sell excess crops, and they raise livestock such as goats, chicken, and pigs. They also engage in informal work (e.g., crafts and sewing) and waged work in the rural labor market. A diversified range of activities decreases livelihood uncertainty: The more diversified the workers’ sources of income, the better their survivability.
Figure 1. (A) Less diversified livelihood. (B) More diversified livelihood. (Color figure available online.)

In Figure 1, we present space–time paths of two women. Figure 1 represents the average of their “less diversified” and “more diversified” livelihood groups: The first, Subject 5, is characterized by fewer livelihood activities, whereas the second, Subject 21, has a wider range of income opportunities. The most frequently visited point is each woman’s home, with multiple trips in and out of their home base, but Subject 5 is also characterized by a higher spatial fixity. The upper right side of each graphic shows a wider range of movement for Subject 21, with less concentrated movement close to home (upper left) than Subject 5. This variance in the range of mobility also appears in the time prism diagram at the bottom of
Figure 1A and 1B. The vertical lines of the time prism for Subject 5 indicate more time without motion and more time spent closer to home. It also shows shorter trips within a closer distance. This woman’s activities are mostly constrained within an areal extent of around \(230 \times 115\) square feet. For the woman with a more diversified livelihood, the area is much larger at \(755 \times 345\) square feet.

Figure 1A implies that women with a less diversified livelihood spend more of their “spatial budget” closer to their homes. Repetitive trips are often conducted for a single activity. One explanation, supported by ethnographic observation and interviews, is that limits on the women’s physical carrying capacity of goods or cargo will require multiple daily trips to move goods from home to the point of sale. This diminishes the women’s physical energy and increases time poverty by reducing time for more productive work or participation in the rural labor market. Because the women report that they are time poor due to reproductive responsibilities, they often sell their crops and other goods to friends and neighbors who are close by but pay a low price. On a day of the authors’ visit, one participant made several trips to a neighbor’s home to sell eggs to her buyer. Finding her neighbor away, the woman merely returned later to try again. She walked back and forth for several trips hoping to find her buyer at home. The high frequency of short repetitive trips points to mobility information gaps arising from lack of capacity to gather buyer information.

Transportation factors were analyzed next in the context of mobility. The twenty-seven women were asked about their modes and usage of transportation. All of the women reported walking as the most common mode of transportation, even when they are extremely ill. Approximately half of the women are able to hire a bicycle taxi (BIKE) within the village or to a nearby town approximately once a week or more. One quarter are able to hire a motorcycle taxi (MOTORBIKE) once a week or more. Bus and car use are infrequent, though, with less than 20 percent reporting usage several times a month.

Bicycle taxis are common in the Nakagongo area, but almost one third of the women cannot afford to pay for any form of transportation on a regular basis. Take the case of two participants who are thirty-nine (12) and forty (3) years old, respectively. Both are engaged in subsistence farming, growing sweet potatoes and bananas, but it is barely sufficient to feed their families. Participant 12 also raises pigs and chickens to supplement her meager means but needs to work on other farms to earn extra money. Ability to diversify one’s livelihood depends on a more flexible spatial budget:

I travel to different places by foot because I don’t have any bicycle at home. I try to use a bicycle taxi on long distances and I would use the bus but cannot use these because of being poor. (Participant 12)

I do walk to other people’s homes in order to earn some money for my family but it is too far away. I can’t go every day. (Participant 3)

Access by bicycle taxi is used within the village area and the motorcycle taxi is used to travel to larger towns farther away. The participants reported cost as the biggest deterrent to the use of paid transport. Restricted mobility arising from lack of access to wheeled transportation adversely affects not just livelihood but also the ability to meet basic human needs such as health. One woman, age twenty-nine, with very young children informed us that

Sickness has become a routine in our family and at times when someone is totally ill, we have no quick means of transport, which puts someone’s life in danger. (Participant 26)

This woman relies on her eldest child, four years of age, to fetch water. She is unable to sell much of her crops (i.e., peanuts and corn), as the demand lies in farther markets. She reported that she has never ridden in a car or bus.

Wheeled transportation reduces physical exertion through decreased walking and ease of load transfer (Calvo 1994). Reduction of fatigue improves work capability and health. Forty percent of the participants reported that they were unable to work for at least five days per month due to illness, and many complained that they are often too sick or weak to travel to the field or market. The motorcycle taxi is relatively widespread but is outside the budget of most of the women for more than occasional use. Although this mode can reduce travel time and decrease physical exertion, it does not increase carrying capacity of goods or cargo that the women badly need to raise the volume of their sales. Access to motorized transport has become a basic need for these women (Lucas 2011).

Approximately 37 percent of women are only able to get a ride in a car once or twice a year to visit relatives or travel to the hospital. Like Participant 26, several reported that they had never ridden in a car before. Those who used car transportation on a monthly basis combined trips to the hospital, visits to relatives, and the trading of goods in the city. The
Table 1. The effect of transport modes on livelihood

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Variable</th>
    <th>Car</th>
    <th>Bicycle</th>
    <th>Motorbike</th>
    <th>Bus</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>AGE</td>
    <td>-0.086 (0.007)*</td>
    <td>-0.129 (0.076)</td>
    <td>-0.115 (0.004)*</td>
    <td>-0.015 (0.040)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>EDUC</td>
    <td>-0.004 (0.079)</td>
    <td>-0.219 (0.292)</td>
    <td>0.002 (0.045)</td>
    <td>-0.258 (0.303)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>FAM</td>
    <td>0.017 (0.052)</td>
    <td>0.237 (0.189)</td>
    <td>0.005 (0.029)</td>
    <td>0.256 (0.196)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>HEALTH</td>
    <td>0.029 (0.115)</td>
    <td>0.331 (0.424)</td>
    <td>0.109 (0.065)</td>
    <td>0.350 (0.442)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>CAR</td>
    <td>3.391 (0.196)*</td>
    <td>—</td>
    <td>—</td>
    <td>—</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>BIKE</td>
    <td>—</td>
    <td>-4.347 (3.142)</td>
    <td>—</td>
    <td>—</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>MOTOR-BIKE</td>
    <td>—</td>
    <td>—</td>
    <td>9.593 (0.307)*</td>
    <td>—</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>BUS</td>
    <td>—</td>
    <td>—</td>
    <td>—</td>
    <td>-0.777 (2.075)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>R<sup>2</sup></td>
    <td>0.945</td>
    <td>0.248</td>
    <td>0.982</td>
    <td>0.186</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses.
*p < 0.01.

majority of the group, though, uses the bus for occasional trips to larger cities more than a couple of hours away or could not afford to make the trip at all.

Interestingly, several women indicated that the cost of transportation and time away from household and reproductive responsibilities would not be worth the potential net income. One woman whose home is located on a main road near the market area is able to sell excess crops in front of her home that fetch up to three times the price of off-road locations. Heavy household and field chores hinder her ability to do so on a regular basis, however. To improve and stabilize their livelihood, rural families must be less reliant on subsistence food production and engage in activities that enhance diverse income sources (Ellis and Bahiigwa 2011).

The mean age of participants is 36.5 years, and they travel an average of 6 miles per day, of which 2.3 miles are in pursuit of livelihood opportunities, with the remainder of their travel dedicated to reproductive work. Many of our subjects are also integrated into family networks that help reduce their reproductive burden. Family capital, however, is a two-edged sword. Although it increases access to resources and opportunities, particularly access to transportation from family members and relatives, some of the women are also the main caretakers of young children and the elderly in the family network. The survey sought data on family capital by asking the subject to rate the level of assistance from children who contribute to reproductive and field chores. The mean of 2.5 out of 4.0 indicates that assistance from children is only slightly above average. This is perhaps surprising given Porter’s (2011) and Porter et al.’s (2012) observation that young African girls will often perform chores like fetching water and other load-carrying activities. Participants who gave this question a lower rating felt that their children were too young or sick to be of much assistance, despite their help with household chores. Those whose children were able to help with farming and animal care rated the assistance higher.

To quantify and test the livelihood–transportation relationship more rigorously, we perform regressions on the four modes of transportation. Because the relationship is likely to suffer from reverse causality, we control for endogeneity using two-stage least squares (2SLS) regressions. In the first stage of 2SLS, transport usage of each mode \( T_i \) is estimated as a linear regression of livelihood diversification, productive time, and demographics (age, education). Productive time is included to satisfy the identification requirement because the model requires us to include a variable that directly affects \( T_i \). Women who encounter spatio-temporal constraints because of distant fields or markets and greater reproductive activities have a lower productive time so that

\[
T_i = L_i \alpha_1 + X_i \alpha_2 + PT_i \alpha_3,
\]

where \( T_i \) is the usage per month of transport mode (car, motorbike, bus, and bicycle), \( L_i \) is livelihood diversification, \( X_i \) is the demographic variable (age, education), and \( PT_i \) is productive time.

In the second stage, \( L_i \) is estimated as a linear function of predicted \( T'_i \) corrected for endogeneity, demographic factors (i.e., age and education), and other relevant determinants (health, family capital). \( L_i \) is a count of various livelihood activities. The higher the count, the more diversified and stable the women's livelihood. A low count, on the other hand, implies that the woman has a more uncertain source of income because she is highly dependent on subsistence agriculture. \( T'_i \) is estimated for four principal transportation modes: bicycle taxi, bus, motorcycle taxi, and car.
Age and education are in the model because we expect younger and more educated widows’ livelihood to be more diversified, as they are physically stronger or they possess a set of skills to pursue nonfarm or waged work. Along with demographic factors, we also expect that better health and a higher family capital (i.e., assistance from children) increase time budget for productive work. In the second stage of the regression, \( T_i \) is replaced by predicted \( T'_i \) from Equation 1 such that

\[
L_i = T_i \beta_1 + X_i \beta_2 + Q_i \beta_3 + e_i,
\]

where \( L_i \) is livelihood diversification, \( T'_i \) is predicted transport mode use (car, motorcycle taxi, bus, and bicycle), \( X_i \) represents individual demographic variables (age, education), and \( Q_i \) is other determinants of livelihood (health and family capital).

Table 1 reports the results of the 2SLS. Of the demographic variables, only age is significant for both car and motorcycle taxi at the 1 percent level. The estimate is negative, indicating that a more stable livelihood is associated with younger women. This makes sense because many of the older widows we observed lacked the physical strength to pursue a wider range of income-generating activities. Education, health, and family capital do not significantly influence livelihood. Both car and motorcycle taxi use are highly significant at 1 percent, however. The estimates are positive and quite high at 3.391 and 9.593, respectively. The \( R^2 \) values of 0.945 for car and 0.982 are also high, indicating a good fit. This is not the case for bicycle taxi (\( R^2 = 0.248 \)) or bus (\( R^2 = 0.186 \)).

Taken together, the 2SLS regressions suggest that access to a motorized form of vehicle, namely, car and motorcycle taxi, increases the women’s ability to spend more time in various livelihood activities by increasing the flexibility of their spatial budget. The women are only able to transport small quantities of products to points of sale, as walking or sitting on the back of a bicycle limits the volume of goods ferried. Car travel occurs largely through friends and relatives at little cost, but motorcycle taxis are more widespread and allow the women to travel to nearby towns and villages for market transactions. They provide the participants with much needed mobility, increase their capacity to move goods in larger volumes to and from more distant markets, and offer increased opportunities to pursue waged or nonfarm work located farther away. They reduce time poverty by freeing time up for livelihood activities. They are also not so affordable to the very poor, however; hence, women with lower usage of both cars and motorcycle taxis are vulnerable to less stable livelihoods. Buses are available in the towns but not in the village areas, which might explain their lack of significance.

Overall the analysis in this section highlights two findings. First, women whose livelihood is less diversified also experience less flexible space–time budgets. Second, wheeled transportation strengthens livelihood and enables the women to pursue a wider range of income opportunities but tends to be cost-prohibitive for many of the women.

Conclusion

Pirie (2009) noted that “a person’s rank in a spectrum of geographical mobility should not have to be a matter of birthright or location. In Africa of all places, there is reason to devise a new morality of mobility” (30). Integration of GIS data from GPS tracking, ethnographic observation, and participation, as well as survey and interview data, help to provide insight into the realities of gendered mobility disadvantage among widowed women of Nakagongo, Uganda.

Repetitive patterns of movement illustrate spatial restrictions and a less flexible space–time budget among women with less diversified livelihoods. They increase the women’s spatial fixity by forcing the women to trade off time budgets between productive work and basic as well as reproductive needs. Participants with less stable livelihoods find little time to tend to their crops and livestock or join the rural labor market when they are confronted with a rudimentary transport infrastructure. Coupled with caring for the elderly and young children, many of them are also time poor. Space–time patterns show multiple daily trips to the market or buyers’ homes that verify the reality of life in a walking world. This life is grounded in fragmented economic spaces that offer challenging options for better mobility. Lack of mobility also translates into unmet basic health needs. Regressions confirm that for women who have access to a car or can afford motorcycle taxis, livelihood is more diversified and less uncertain.

Because access to advanced modes might depend on friends, relatives, or partners, this suggests that women who are networked might have better access to transport resources. Given the findings, one future direction for further research lies in exploring the role of social networks not so much as a resource for reducing the burden of reproductive activities but as a mobility resource that directly affects livelihood.
Acknowledgments

We are grateful to the women of Nakagongo who participated in the study. Thank you to the anonymous referees for their insightful and constructive feedback and to Tim Schwanen for his advice as editor.

Funding

This research was made possible through the financial support of the Institute for Research and Education on Women and Gender, the Mark Diamond Research Foundation, and the University at Buffalo Calkins Applied GIS Award.

References

Abdourahman, O. I. 2010. Time poverty: A contributor to women’s poverty? Journal Statistique Africain 11:16–36.
ArcGIS, Version 10.0, ESRI, Redlands, CA.
Bebbington, A. 2009. Latin America: Contesting extraction, producing geographies. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 30:7–12.
Calvo, C. M. 1994. Case study on intermediate means of transport bicycles and rural women in Uganda. Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Policy Program Working Paper 12, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Corbett, J. 2001. CSISS classics. Torsten Hagerstrand: Time geography. http://www.csiss.org/classics/content/29 (last accessed 7 May 2014).
Couclelis, H. 2009. Rethinking time geography in the information age. Environment and Planning A 41:1556–75.
Ellis, F. 2000. Rural livelihoods and diversity in developing countries. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, F., and G. Bahiigwa. 2011. Livelihoods and rural poverty reduction in Uganda. World Development 31:997–1013.
Evers, B., and B. Walters. 2000. Extra-household factors and women farmers’ supply response in sub-Saharan Africa. World Development 28:1341–45.
Hagerstrand, T. 1970. What about people in regional science? Regional Science Association Paper 24:7–21.
Hanson, S., and G. Pratt. 1995. Gender, work and space. London and New York: Routledge.
International Fund for Agricultural Development 2012. Uganda, Ghana and Cote D’Ivoire: The situation of widows. http://wwwifad.org/gender/learning/challenges.widows/55.htm (last accessed 7 May 2014).
Jaramillo, C., A. Grindlay, and C. Lizarraga. 2012. Spatial disparity in transport social needs and public transport provision in Santiago de Cali (Colombia). Journal of Transport Geography 24:340–57.
Kwan, M.-P. 2012. How GIS can help address the uncertain geographic context problem in social science research. Annal of GIS 18:245–55.
Kwan, M. P., and J. Weber. 2003. Individual accessibility revisited: Implications for geographical analysis in the 21st century. Geographical Analysis 35:341–53.
Lucas, K. 2011. Making the connections between transport disadvantage and the social exclusion of low-income populations in the Tshwane Region of South Africa. Journal of Transport Geography 19:1320–34.
McQuoid, J., and M. Dijst. 2012. Bringing emotions to time geography: The case of mobilities of poverty. Journal of Transport Geography 23:26–34.
Miller, H. 2005. Necessary space–time conditions for human interaction. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 32:381–401.
Oluoko-Odingo, A. A. 2011. Vulnerability and adaption to food insecurity and poverty in Kenya. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 101:1–20.
Pirie, G. 2009. Virtual mobility: Moralizing versus measuring geographical mobility in Africa. Afrika Focus 22:21–35.
Poon, J. P. H. 2005. Quantitative methods III: Not positively positivist. Progress in Human Geography 29:766–72.
Porter, G. 2002. Living in a walking world: Rural mobility and social equity issues in sub-Saharan Africa. World Development 30:285–300.
———. 2011. I think a woman who travels a lot is befriending other men and that’s why she travels: Mobility constraints and their implications for rural women and girls in sub-Saharan Africa. Gender, Place and Culture 18:65–81.
Porter, G., K. Hampshire, A. Abane, A. Munthali, E. Robson, M. Mashiri, A. Tanle, G. Maponga, and S. Dube. 2012. Child porterage and Africa’s transport gap: Evidence from Ghana, Malawi and South Africa. World Development 40:2136–54.
Pred, A. 1977. The choreography of existence: Comments on Hagerstrand’s time–geography and its usefulness. Economic Geography 53:207–21.
Scheiner, J., and C. Holz-Rau. 2012. Gendered travel mode choice: A focus on car deficient households. Journal of Transport Geography 24:250–61.
Schwanen, T., and M. P. Kwan. 2012. Guest editorial: Critical space–time geographies. Environment and Planning A 44:2043–48.
Schwanen, T., M. P. Kwan, and F. Ren. 2008. How fixed is fixed? Gendered rigidity of space–time constraints and geographies of everyday activities. Geoforum 39:2109–21.
Shoval, N. 2008. Tracking technologies and urban analysis. Cities 25:21–28.
Thrift, N. 2005. From born to made: Technology, biology and space. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 30:463–76.
Uganda Bureau of Statistics. 2010. Uganda National Household Survey 2009/2010. http://www.ubos.org/UNHS0910/unhs200910.pdf (last accessed 20 April 2014).
Walker, W., and S. Vajjhala. 2009. Gender and GIS: Mapping the links between spatial exclusion, transport access, and the millennium development goals in Lesotho, Ethiopia, and Ghana. Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 09–27, Resources for the Future, Washington, DC.
Yamano, T., and Y. Kijima. 2011. Market access, soil fertility and income in East Africa. In Emerging development of agriculture in East Africa, ed. T. Yamano, K. Otsuka, and F. Place, 187–202. London: Springer.

DEBORAH NAYBOR is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Environmental Studies at Paul Smith’s College, Paul Smiths, NY 12970. E-mail: dnaybor@paulsmiths.edu. Her research interests include the impact of environmental change on vulnerable populations and global food security.

JESSIE P. H. POON is Professor in the Department of Geography at University at Buffalo–SUNY, Buffalo, NY 14261. E-mail: jesspoon@buffalo.edu. Her research interests include economic development, trade, and human capital with an areal focus on East and Southeast Asia.

IRENE CASAS is an Associate Professor in the School of History and Social Sciences at Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, LA 71270. E-mail: icasas@latech.edu. Her research interests include transportation, health, spatial analysis, and GIS.