Patterns of Avian Population Density, Habitat Use, and Flocking Behavior in Urban and Rural Habitats During Winter*

Peter H. Yaukey
University of New Orleans

This study examined the use of urban and rural habitats by woodland bird species in winter in the vicinity of Athens, Georgia, USA. Population densities of most species on urban sites were either comparable to or greater than those on rural sites, and most species were flexible in their habitat use patterns. On urban sites, only the golden-crowned kinglet consistently avoided vegetation that had been opened either by felling trees or clearing undergrowth. Nuthatches and chickadees flocked together less often at urban than at rural sites. Key Words: urban environments, environmental change, avian ecology, birds, conservation.

Introduction

Urbanization is accompanied by a wide variety of changes in the physical environment, including changes in climate and micro-climate, hydrology, vegetation, and wildlife populations (see discussions by Gill and Bonnett 1973; Douglas 1983; Adams and Dove 1989). The influence of urban areas on the surrounding rural landscape occurs through processes such as the outward diffusion of pollutants borne by air and water, and through the consumption of land by expanding metropolitan areas. The outward expansion of urban areas causes either destruction or fragmentation of the vegetation in the surrounding rural landscape. Researchers of forest fragmentation associated with urbanization usually consider the urban landscape from the perspective of organisms that require undisturbed forests, and for which urban areas represent a sea of uninhabitable land dotted with a few (at most) isolated islands of suitable undeveloped habitat. However, such a characterization oversimplifies the urban landscape, which really incorporates a wide variety of disturbed habitats that vary greatly in their usefulness to plants and animals. Some varieties of urban land use, especially parks and residential areas, leave a substantial portion of the original vegetative cover intact, or allow vegetation to reestablish itself after it has been cut. Other land uses, such as commercial and industrial areas with their parking lots, roadways, and buildings, remove virtually all of the vegetation from the landscape. While even the most natural urban habitats are unsuitable for some forest plants or animals, such relatively undisturbed areas lend diversity to the urban landscape and enable several forms of native flora and wildlife to occur in some areas of the city.

Research on the biotic communities in urban environments has focused largely on urban wildlife (e.g., Davis and Glick 1978; Poynton and Roberts 1985; Adams and Dove 1989), especially birds. Studies of the use of urban areas by birds have shown remarkably consistent results. Although several species adapted to urban areas often increase in number when urbanization occurs (Emlen 1974; Guthrie 1974), urban areas are typically inhabited by a smaller number of species (species richness) than are undeveloped areas (Batten 1972; Emlen 1974; Gavareski 1976; Vale and Vale 1976; Lancaster and Rees 1979; Jones 1981; Beisinger and Osborne 1982; Franklin and Wilkinson 1986; Horak and Cringan 1986; Mills et al. 1989; cf. Aldrich and Coffin 1980). Often, the species that disappear are those that require mature forest or dense ground cover. However, despite reduced species richness, urban development typically results in an increase in total bird density due to population increases of some species (including exotics)

*The author thanks Kathleen Parker, H. Ronald Pulliam, David Muth, Paul Knapp, David Butler, Vernon Meentemeyer, Albert Parker, and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful guidance. The author also thanks the State Botanical Garden of Georgia, the School of Forest Resources at the University of Georgia, and the many benevolent landowners who allowed me access to their property. Chris Hamilton constructed the map of the study area.
well suited to urban areas (Pitelka 1942; Woolfenden and Rohwer 1969; Guthrie 1974; Vale and Vale 1976; Huhtalo and Jarvinen 1977; Aldrich and Coffin 1980; Franklin and Wilkinson 1986; Rosenberg et al. 1987; Mills et al. 1989; Smith and Schaefer 1992). Despite such increases in density, urbanization is of concern to conservationists because endangered and threatened species often survive poorly in urban areas.

Researchers have discovered positive relationships between vegetation volume and both bird species richness (Goldstein et al. 1986) and diversity (Hohtola 1978) when studying habitat use within urban areas. Bird species richness has been reported to be higher in urban habitats with more trees (Lancaster and Rees 1979). Native plants have been positively associated with both the species richness (Green 1984; Rosenberg et al. 1987; Mills et al. 1989) and the diversity and abundance of native birds (Green 1984).

Most urban bird studies have been conducted in summer, and few studies have examined anything beyond the basic population sizes and gross habitat use patterns of birds in urban areas. Studies of bird behavior in urban areas, apart from nest-placement studies, are rare (cf. Moulton and Adams 1991). If urbanization is to be managed to minimize the loss of species, however, it is important to study the habits of birds that use these urban areas. By understanding what life history characteristics allow these birds to thrive in urban habitats, it ultimately may be possible to understand why some species are vulnerable to urbanization, and to identify procedures that could ameliorate the effect of urbanization on them.

The purpose of this paper is to examine the use of urban habitats by native wintering birds in northern Georgia, focusing on the use of urban residential developments. It examines native bird species that are known to use such developments and addresses three questions: (1) Do these species occur in urban areas at different population densities than in rural areas? (2) When these species use urban areas, do they extensively use highly disturbed habitats or concentrate their activity into small patches of relatively natural vegetation? (3) Does the flocking behavior of these species in urban areas differ from that in rural areas? Flocking behavior was studied because changes in this avian survival strategy could potentially affect the ability of birds to use urban areas.

Study Areas

Eight study sites near Athens, Georgia (33°56' N, 83°24' W), representing different densities of urban development were examined between November and February in the winters of 1989–1990 and 1990–1991 (Fig. 1). Four primary sites were studied the most extensively. Two primary sites (Whitehall Forest, 15.2 ha, and Botanical Garden, 7.6 ha) were rural sites selected for comparison with the other, urban sites. Both had large areas of woodland dominated by loblolly pines (Pinus taeda) and shortleaf pines (P. echinata), and neither site had residences or bird feeders; however, both contained roads or power lines, and several greenhouses were present at the Botanical Garden. The other two primary sites contained high densities of residences: 31 in 6.7 ha at the Pine View Drive site, and 44 in 7.0 ha at the Davis Estates site. Lot sizes were generally ≤0.2 ha (0.5 acre). Bird feeders were present at least three residences at each site. In addition to these primary sites, four secondary urban sites were visited solely to examine flocking behavior. The Red Fox Run East, Red Fox Run West, and Whitehall Lot sites were extensively forested and held lower densities of residences than Pine View Drive or Davis Estates. All three, except perhaps Red Fox Run East, held bird feeders. They were examined only during the first winter of the study. The final site was Oconee Cemetery, an urban cemetery that included an ornamental pine grove of approximately 1.7 ha surrounded on most sides by lawn and no buildings. Smaller areas of both hardwood forest and scrubby mixed growth were also present. This site was examined only during the second winter.

Data and Methods

Study Species

This study focused on small arboreal birds common in pine woodlands. These were the brown-headed nuthatch (Sitta pusilla), Carolina chickadee (Parus carolinensis), tufted titmouse (Parus bicolor), golden-crowned kinglet (Regulus satrapa), ruby-crowned kinglet (Regulus calendula), pine warbler (Dendroica pinus),
Figure 1: Map of study sites.

yellow-rumped warbler (Dendroica coronata), red-bellied woodpecker (Melanerpes carolinus), hairy woodpecker (Picoides villosus), downy woodpecker (Picoides pubescens), and yellow-bellied sapsucker (Sphyrapicus varius). These species were selected because they commonly form mixed flocks in winter. The two kinglet species, the yellow-rumped warbler, and the sapsucker do not breed in Georgia; the other species do, and occur in northern Georgia the year round.

I focused my examination of flocking behavior on the brown-headed nuthatch because it was numerous and occurred commonly both in and out of mixed-species flocks. I examined its flocking behavior by examining its association with two parids (family Paridae), the Carolina chickadee, and the tufted titmouse, because they are generally considered to be the nuclear members of mixed flocks (e.g., Morse 1967, 1970).

Bird Abundances

To determine the population densities of the study species, a series of censuses was conducted in which birds were counted along
straight-line transects at the four primary sites on 15 different dates in 1990–1991, at various hours of the day. Transects varied from 30 m to 440 m in length, passed within 25 m of all points on each site, and were walked at a rate of 40 m/minute. To examine whether bird densities were greater at rural than at urban sites, because of, for instance, restricted habitat suitability for woodland birds at urban sites, the density of each species was compared between each rural and urban site using one-tailed Mann-Whitney U-tests (Griffith and Amrhein 1991).

To assess whether density calculations had been affected by missing birds that were relatively far from the transect (Emlen 1971, 1977), densities were recalculated using only birds within 5 m of the transect (where detection was optimal) and compared with the original calculations. Although densities of several species may have been underestimated, these analyses indicated that variations in detectability among sites or habitat types had at most a minor effect on the patterns of distribution of any species among sites and habitat types reported below. Hairy woodpeckers and sapsuckers were excluded from the detectability analyses because of the small number observed.

Habitat Characterization

Areas of similar habitat at the four primary sites were mapped on base maps (obtained from tax assessors and other official sources) according to their degree of canopy closure, dominant tree life form, and openness of understory. The canopy was classified as either “open” (trees felled for timber harvesting or to make room for a yard or house) or “closed” (canopy appeared natural). Dominant tree life forms were classified as “deciduous” (< 10% of canopy stems were pine), “pine” (> 90% pine), or “mixed” (10–90% pine). Stem frequencies were estimated visually. The understory of each stand was categorized as either “open” (recently mowed or raked) or “closed” (not mowed or raked; seedlings present). Together, these yielded 12 categories of habitat (2 × 3 × 2). At two sites, a thirteenth category of habitat was included for stands of short pines (ca. 5 m tall). Borders between vegetation types were marked in the field on the base maps of the study sites, referring to property boundaries depicted on those maps; distance measurements used in mapping were obtained by pacing, and directions were measured with a Brunton compass.

To examine whether birds avoided the most disturbed habitats at urban sites, the frequency of observation of each species was compared between habitats with open versus closed canopies, and between habitats with open versus closed understories, using one-tailed \( \chi^2 \) tests and Yates’ correction for continuity (Zar 1984).

Measurement of Distances between Nuthatches and Parids

I quantified the flocking behavior of nuthatches by assessing whether they were flocked with parids and by measuring the distances among birds that were flocked. To gather these data, I followed a nuthatch flock at a study site. At ten-minute intervals I located the first visible nuthatch, and paced the distance from it to the first chickadee I detected. In most cases, this appeared to be the closest chickadee to the nuthatch. These data may have been biased to include the most active or noisy individuals of both species, but did so at all sites. If no chickadee was present within 50 m, the nuthatch was recorded as “unflocked.” I measured the distance to the first titmouse detected in the same fashion. In the first winter, a nuthatch was not recorded to be unflocked until an additional ten minutes elapsed without my detecting a parid. Although only the nuthatch-parid association within the flock was examined, these birds consistently were part of larger multispecific groups that typically traveled together through the habitat while foraging.

Distance data were condensed from the range of one to 50 meters to a scale of one to ten; each unit represented five meters of distance. This compensated for the slight inaccuracies of pacing long distances through vegetation. Two-tailed Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests (Zar 1984) were used to compare inter-bird distances among sites, with “unflocked” observations (> 50 m) included as the highest distance category in these analyses.

Effect of Interspecific Attraction on Variations in Flocking

Although differences in interspecific flocking behavior among sites can reflect changes in the
attraction of the birds to each other, they may also reflect other factors such as the distribution of resources used by the birds, or their densities or intraspecific grouping. One way to assess the effect of variations in interspecific attraction on flocking is to ascertain whether variations in flocking among sites can be explained by these other factors; if so, interspecific attraction need not be invoked as an explanation. To determine whether variations in flock participation (occurrence within 50 m of each other) among sites could be accounted for apart from variations in interspecific attraction, an estimate was made of how close the birds should be to each other at each site in the absence of interspecific attraction. This was evaluated by taking a map of the locations of parids detected in a single census, and distributing fictitious nuthatches onto the map to determine what proportion of them would be within 50 m of a parid. Nuthatches were placed in all the locations where they had actually been observed in censuses throughout the winter, both to realistically replicate their use of different locations on the site and to generate a large sample. The proportion of fictitious nuthatches that were within 50 m of a parid was averaged for all 15 censuses at each site.

Effects of Habitat Configuration on Variations in Flocking

Interspecific distances might vary among sites because of differences in the habitat configurations of the sites, such as differential availability of habitats in which both species could occur. The effect of this was examined by randomly distributing parids and nuthatches onto maps of each study site in a way that mimicked their observed habitat use patterns, and then seeing how close together the birds ended up at each site. Specifically, the probability that a nuthatch would be within 50 m of a parid on a given date at a site was estimated by randomly placing parids onto a map of the site, with the same number in each habitat (and the same number within 50 m of a conspecific parid) as was observed in the census that day. Then, 100 nuthatches (representing locations of 100 field observations) were randomly distributed on the map, but constrained so that the proportion in each habitat type equaled their season-long proportionate use of each habitat type on all sites (sites were lumped to overcome small sample sizes). The proportion of nuthatches within 50 m of a parid was calculated in this fashion for each census date, and averaged across all census dates at the site. Differences in the average density and intraspecific flocking of the parids at each site could confound comparisons among sites; thus, between two and six censuses were excluded from each site in such a way that maximally equalized these factors. Despite this, analyses at the Botanical Garden were conducted with fewer titmice than elsewhere.

This procedure overestimated inter-bird distances because it did not incorporate interspecific attraction. However, this bias occurred at all sites, so inter-site comparisons were still valid.

Results

Bird Densities at the Study Sites

Of the 44 tests in which the density of a species was compared between urban and rural sites, only two showed species to be more numerous at the rural site: Golden-crowned kinglet densities were higher at the Botanical Garden than Davis Estates, and downy woodpecker densities were higher at Whitehall than at Pine View (Table 1). Densities of all species either appeared higher at both of the urban sites than at either rural site, or did not vary with development in any consistent pattern.

Habitat Use Patterns

In general, the study species appeared flexible in their vegetation use, varying substantially from site to site in the percentage of time they spent in each type of vegetation (Table 2). Each species occurred in habitats with closed canopies and understories in the majority of observations at each rural site, except for the ruby-crowned kinglet at the Botanical Garden (43%). Heavy use of the closed vegetation types at these sites was not surprising, because such habitat types composed at least 65% of each site. Some flexibility of the species in adjusting to habitat disturbance was apparent at the Botanical Garden, where several species also extensively used areas of mixed woods that had open canopies.

All species exhibited a general pattern of expansion into the more open habitat types at the urban Pine View Drive site (Table 2). At least 50% of the observations of each species
Table 1 Densitiesa of Birds in 15 Censuses of the Primary Study Sites

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Species</th>
    <th colspan="4">Rural<sup>b</sup></th>
    <th colspan="4">Urban</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th colspan="2">Botanical Garden</th>
    <th colspan="2">Whitehall</th>
    <th colspan="2">Pine View</th>
    <th colspan="2">Davis Estates</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th></th>
    <th>Mean</th>
    <th>S.D.<sup>c</sup></th>
    <th>Mean</th>
    <th>S.D.</th>
    <th>Mean</th>
    <th>S.D.</th>
    <th>Mean</th>
    <th>S.D.</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>B-h. Nuthatch</td>
    <td>1.05</td>
    <td>(1.50)</td>
    <td>2.85</td>
    <td>(2.38)</td>
    <td>4.17</td>
    <td>(2.40)</td>
    <td>4.32</td>
    <td>(4.25)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>C. Chickadee</td>
    <td>3.41</td>
    <td>(2.15)</td>
    <td>3.60</td>
    <td>(2.63)</td>
    <td>5.36</td>
    <td>(2.69)</td>
    <td>5.66</td>
    <td>(3.24)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>T. Titmouse</td>
    <td>0.44</td>
    <td>(0.64)</td>
    <td>1.89</td>
    <td>(1.76)</td>
    <td>1.49</td>
    <td>(2.03)</td>
    <td>2.40</td>
    <td>(3.43)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>G-c. Kinglet</td>
    <td>9.61</td>
    <td>(6.24)*</td>
    <td>6.54</td>
    <td>(3.98)</td>
    <td>8.53</td>
    <td>(4.11)</td>
    <td>5.47</td>
    <td>(3.45)*</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>R-c. Kinglet</td>
    <td>4.02</td>
    <td>(2.64)</td>
    <td>3.42</td>
    <td>(1.54)</td>
    <td>3.77</td>
    <td>(2.63)</td>
    <td>4.80</td>
    <td>(3.95)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>P. Warbler</td>
    <td>0.61</td>
    <td>(1.20)</td>
    <td>1.05</td>
    <td>(1.11)</td>
    <td>1.98</td>
    <td>(2.30)</td>
    <td>1.92</td>
    <td>(2.35)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Y-r. Warbler</td>
    <td>1.48</td>
    <td>(1.30)</td>
    <td>0.09</td>
    <td>(0.23)</td>
    <td>1.98</td>
    <td>(2.68)</td>
    <td>7.10</td>
    <td>(9.50)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>R-b. Woodpecker</td>
    <td>0.70</td>
    <td>(0.84)</td>
    <td>0.48</td>
    <td>(0.58)</td>
    <td>0.20</td>
    <td>(0.52)</td>
    <td>1.92</td>
    <td>(1.69)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>D. Woodpecker</td>
    <td>0.17</td>
    <td>(0.46)</td>
    <td>0.66</td>
    <td>(0.66)*</td>
    <td>0.10</td>
    <td>(0.38)*</td>
    <td>0.86</td>
    <td>(1.31)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>H. Woodpecker</td>
    <td>0.00</td>
    <td>(0.00)</td>
    <td>0.04</td>
    <td>(0.17)</td>
    <td>0.00</td>
    <td>(0.00)</td>
    <td>0.10</td>
    <td>(0.37)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Y-b. Sapsucker</td>
    <td>0.09</td>
    <td>(0.34)</td>
    <td>0.00</td>
    <td>(0.00)</td>
    <td>0.20</td>
    <td>(0.77)</td>
    <td>0.00</td>
    <td>(0.00)</td>
  </tr>
</table>

aPer 10 ha.
bDensity in each urban site was compared with that in each rural site for each species; site pairs in which the rural site had a statistically significant higher density than the urban site (Mann-Whitney U-tests; P < 0.05) are marked with asterisks.
cStandard deviation of density.

were in habitats with an open understory or open canopy, or with trees that were much shorter than normal canopy height (pines ca. 5 m tall). The nuthatch made heavy use of pines that had both open canopies and open understories, with 58% of its observations occurring in this habitat. The yellow-rumped warbler focused heavily on stands of short pines, where it occurred in 79% of the observations.

At the urban Davis Estates site, the switch to open habitats was even greater. At least 60% of the observations of each species were in habitats with open canopies or open understories. Many species made heavy use of pines with an open understory and closed canopy, and of mixed pine/hardwood areas with both an open canopy and understory. Many species also heavily used pines with an open canopy and open understory, where the majority of pine and yellow-rumped warblers were recorded. These observations do not indicate that the study species preferred human-disturbed habitats, but simply that they used them frequently, despite being native to less-disturbed woodlands.

Use of Open-Canopy Vegetation

To statistically examine whether woodland species demonstrated a preference for closed-canopy vegetation within urban areas, their frequency of occurrence was compared between habitats with open and closed canopies using \( \chi^2 \) tests. At Pine View, only the chickadee and golden-crowned kinglet used closed-canopy habitats more than expected by chance (Table 2). At Davis Estates, only the nuthatch, golden-crowned kinglet, and red-bellied woodpecker used closed canopy areas more than would be expected by chance. Thus, only the golden-crowned kinglet significantly concentrated into closed canopy areas at both sites, although red-bellied woodpecker data were unavailable from Pine View. All other species spent extensive time in open canopy areas. Thus, most native forest birds did not show a statistically significant preference for closed canopy areas within urban sites.

Use of Open-Understory Vegetation

\( \chi^2 \) tests were also used to determine whether native woodland species showed a preference for habitats with closed understories. At Pine View, significantly more chickadees, golden-crowned kinglets, and ruby-crowned kinglets were recorded in areas with closed understories than expected by chance (Table 2). At Davis Estates, the golden-crowned kinglet was again more often found in closed understory habitats than would be expected by chance. Thus, although some species at Pine View concentrated into areas with closed understories, no species except the golden-crowned kinglet showed this pattern significantly at both sites.

Flocking Patterns at Urban and Rural Sites

In 1990–1991, nuthatches and chickadees differed in their flocking patterns between the two urban primary sites and the two rural pri-
Table 2 Percentage Use of Different Habitats by Study Species

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Habitat<sup>a</sup></th>
    <th colspan="4">Pine</th>
    <th colspan="4">Mixed</th>
    <th rowspan="2">Dec</th>
    <th rowspan="2">SP</th>
    <th rowspan="2">N<sup>b</sup></th>
    <th rowspan="2">P(CC)<sup>c</sup></th>
    <th rowspan="2">P(UJ)<sup>d</sup></th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>CC</th><th>CO</th><th>OC</th><th>OO</th>
    <th>CC</th><th>CO</th><th>OC</th><th>OO</th>
  </tr>
  <tr><td>Botanical Garden<br>Habitat Available<sup>e</sup></td><td>51</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>21</td><td>1</td><td>17</td><td>&lt;1</td><td>12</td><td>NS</td><td>—</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Nuthatch</td><td>58</td><td>8</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>17</td><td>0</td><td>17</td><td>0</td><td>12</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Chickadee</td><td>41</td><td>5</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>33</td><td>0</td><td>10</td><td>3</td><td>39</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Golden-cr Kinglet</td><td>45</td><td>1</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>31</td><td>1</td><td>9</td><td>9</td><td>103</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Ruby-cr Kinglet</td><td>43</td><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>45</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>42</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Yellow-r Warbler</td><td>67</td><td>7</td><td>7</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>20</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>15</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Whitehall Forest<br>Habitat Available<sup>e</sup></td><td>51</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>19</td><td>0</td><td>22</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>60</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Nuthatch</td><td>55</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>22</td><td>0</td><td>17</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>72</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Chickadee</td><td>32</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>33</td><td>0</td><td>24</td><td>0</td><td>8</td><td>0</td><td>40</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Titmouse</td><td>45</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>13</td><td>20</td><td>0</td><td>13</td><td>0</td><td>10</td><td>0</td><td>40</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Golden-cr Kinglet</td><td>52</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>3</td><td>27</td><td>0</td><td>13</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>128</td><td>&lt;0.05</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Ruby-cr Kinglet</td><td>56</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>18</td><td>0</td><td>23</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>66</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Pine Warbler</td><td>67</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>19</td><td>0</td><td>10</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>21</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Downy Woodpecker</td><td>67</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>33</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>12</td><td>—</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Pine View Drive<br>Habitat Available<sup>e</sup></td><td>14</td><td>9</td><td>1</td><td>22</td><td>5</td><td>&lt;1</td><td>4</td><td>36</td><td>1</td><td>8</td><td>40</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Nuthatch</td><td>3</td><td>8</td><td>20</td><td>58</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>8</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>51</td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Chickadee</td><td>22</td><td>12</td><td>0</td><td>18</td><td>14</td><td>0</td><td>10</td><td>10</td><td>0</td><td>16</td><td>51</td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Golden-cr Kinglet</td><td>44</td><td>6</td><td>0</td><td>23</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>6</td><td>10</td><td>0</td><td>11</td><td>71</td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Ruby-cr Kinglet</td><td>22</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>28</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>6</td><td>13</td><td>0</td><td>28</td><td>32</td><td>NS</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Pine Warbler</td><td>42</td><td>0</td><td>8</td><td>25</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>8</td><td>0</td><td>17</td><td>12</td><td>—</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Yellow-r Warbler</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>11</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>79</td><td>19</td><td>—</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Davis Estates<br>Habitat Available<sup>e</sup></td><td>5</td><td>7</td><td>1</td><td>16</td><td>8</td><td>9</td><td>3</td><td>41</td><td>10</td><td>0</td><td>44</td><td>&lt;0.05</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Nuthatch</td><td>2</td><td>39</td><td>0</td><td>25</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>30</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>23</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Chickadee</td><td>8</td><td>14</td><td>0</td><td>24</td><td>10</td><td>6</td><td>8</td><td>29</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>51</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Titmouse</td><td>0</td><td>22</td><td>0</td><td>9</td><td>17</td><td>9</td><td>4</td><td>30</td><td>9</td><td>0</td><td>23</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Golden-cr Kinglet</td><td>15</td><td>15</td><td>2</td><td>19</td><td>15</td><td>8</td><td>2</td><td>15</td><td>10</td><td>0</td><td>48</td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Ruby-cr Kinglet</td><td>2</td><td>14</td><td>2</td><td>34</td><td>7</td><td>7</td><td>2</td><td>27</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>44</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Pine Warbler</td><td>6</td><td>18</td><td>0</td><td>65</td><td>6</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>6</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>17</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Yellow-r Warbler</td><td>2</td><td>18</td><td>2</td><td>51</td><td>7</td><td>4</td><td>0</td><td>16</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td>57</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
  <tr><td>Red-b Woodpecker</td><td>18</td><td>18</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>24</td><td>12</td><td>18</td><td>12</td><td>0</td><td>17</td><td>&lt;0.01</td><td>NS</td><td>NS</td></tr>
</table>

<sup>a</sup>Habitat abbreviations: CC=Closed canopy and understory; CO=Closed canopy and open understory; OC=Open canopy and closed understory; OO=Open canopy and open understory; Dec=Deciduous; SP=Short pines.
<sup>b</sup>Sample size (number of birds used to calculate % use of each habitat). Some birds that were not categorized to habitat precisely enough to use in calculations of % habitat use could nevertheless be determined to be in open/closed canopy or understory habitats, and were included in the \( \chi^2 \) tests (thus, sample sizes in some \( \chi^2 \) tests were greater than N). All \( \chi^2 \) tests for which 15 observations were available were calculated.
<sup>c</sup>Probability (in \( \chi^2 \) tests) that birds used closed canopy habitats (CC, CO, and Dec areas with closed canopies) more than open ones (all other habitats); df = 1 in all tests.
<sup>d</sup>Probability (in \( \chi^2 \) tests) that birds used closed understory habitats (CC, OC, and Dec or Sp areas with closed understories) more than open ones (all other habitats); df = 1 in all tests.
<sup>e</sup>Percentage of study site covered by each habitat type.

mary sites (Table 3). The strongest pattern evident within these data was a lower tendency for nuthatches to occur in flocks with chickadees at the urban sites. However, it also appears that nuthatches that did flock with chickadees were usually closer to those chickadees at the Botanical Garden than at either urban site.

In 1989–1990, three secondary sites (Red Fox Run East, Red Fox Run West, and Whitehall Lot) with lower residential densities than the primary urban sites were examined. Nuthatch-chickadee flocking patterns on these sites were variable, but appeared approximately intermediate between urban (high residential density) primary and rural primary sites. In 1990–1991, the Oconee Cemetery was examined; no nuthatch was ever flocked with a chickadee during sampling there.

Although nuthatch-titmouse flocking patterns varied among sites, this was not clearly related to differences in urbanization among the four primary sites (Table 3). The secondary sites also showed no pattern related to urbanization, as they showed both relatively long (Whitehall Lot) and short (Red Fox Run West) nuthatch-titmouse distances relative to other sites. Nuthatches at Oconee Cemetery were never flocked with titmice.
Table 3  Statistically Significant Differences in Nuthatch-Parid Flocking among Sites, in Kolmogorov-Smirnov Tests

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Year</th>
    <th>Species</th>
    <th>Site 1<sup>a</sup></th>
    <th>N</th>
    <th>Site 2</th>
    <th>N</th>
    <th>P</th>
  </tr>
  <tr><td>1989–90</td><td>Chickadee</td><td>BG</td><td>90</td><td>PV</td><td>36</td><td>&lt;0.01</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1989–90</td><td>Chickadee</td><td>BG</td><td>90</td><td>RE</td><td>40</td><td>&lt;0.01</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1989–90</td><td>Chickadee</td><td>BG</td><td>90</td><td>WF</td><td>102</td><td>&lt;0.01</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1989–90</td><td>Chickadee</td><td>BG</td><td>77</td><td>PV</td><td>69</td><td>&lt;0.05</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Chickadee</td><td>BG</td><td>77</td><td>DE</td><td>71</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Chickadee</td><td>BG</td><td>77</td><td>OC</td><td>33</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Chickadee</td><td>WF</td><td>91</td><td>PV</td><td>69</td><td>&lt;0.05</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Chickadee</td><td>WF</td><td>91</td><td>DE</td><td>71</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Chickadee</td><td>WF</td><td>91</td><td>OC</td><td>33</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Chickadee</td><td>PV</td><td>69</td><td>DE</td><td>71</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Chickadee</td><td>PV</td><td>69</td><td>OC</td><td>33</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1989–90</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>RW</td><td>36</td><td>PV</td><td>33</td><td>&lt;0.05</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1989–90</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>RW</td><td>36</td><td>BG</td><td>83</td><td>&lt;0.05</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1989–90</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>RW</td><td>36</td><td>WL</td><td>40</td><td>&lt;0.05</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1989–90</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>DE</td><td>33</td><td>WL</td><td>40</td><td>&lt;0.05</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1989–90</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>RE</td><td>35</td><td>WL</td><td>40</td><td>&lt;0.05</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1989–90</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>WF</td><td>97</td><td>WL</td><td>40</td><td>&lt;0.05</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>WF</td><td>75</td><td>BG</td><td>67</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>WF</td><td>75</td><td>PV</td><td>61</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>WF</td><td>75</td><td>DE</td><td>57</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>WF</td><td>75</td><td>OC</td><td>22</td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>BG</td><td>67</td><td>OC</td><td>22</td><td>&lt;0.01</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>WF</td><td>75</td><td>OC</td><td>22</td><td>&lt;0.05</td></tr>
  <tr><td>1990–91</td><td>Titmouse</td><td>DE</td><td>57</td><td>OC</td><td>22</td><td>&lt;0.01</td></tr>
</table>

<sup>a</sup>Site abbreviations: BG=Botanical Garden; WF=Whitehall Forest; PV=Pine View; DE=Davis Estates; RE=Red Fox Run East; RW=Red Fox Run West; WL=Whitehall Lot; OC=Oconee Cemetery. In each case, birds were closer together at site 1 than at site 2.

Effect of Parid Density on Distances between Bird Species

It is possible that nuthatches were closer to parids at some sites simply because parids were more numerous at those sites. The highest mean chickadee densities were recorded at Davis Estates, followed by Pine View, Whitehall, and the Botanical Garden (Table 1). This sequence of decreasing density also represents sites with progressively more nuthatches flocked within 50 m of chickadees, except that Whitehall and the Botanical Garden are reversed. Thus, chickadee density differences cannot account for differences in grouping among sites. The highest mean titmouse density was at Davis Estates, followed by Whitehall, Pine View, and the Botanical Garden (Table 1). This is fairly similar to the order of sites ranked according to proximity of the birds; the most nuthatches were within 50 m of a titmouse at Whitehall, followed by Davis Estates, the Botanical Garden, and Pine View. Thus, Titmouse density cannot be ruled out as a potentially relevant influence on nuthatch-titmouse flocking.

Effect of Interspecific Attraction on Variations in Flocking

When the locations at which nuthatches and chickadees were found in censuses were used to estimate how distances between these species should have varied among sites in the absence of interspecific attraction, the results suggested that interspecific distances should have varied minimally among sites (Table 4). Even the small amount of variation in interbird distances that could have been produced without interspecific attractions did not produce the same pattern of variation among sites as was observed; nuthatches were predicted to be within 50 m of a chickadee most often (27% of the time) at Davis Estates and least often at Whitehall (20%), the opposite of the observed pattern. This suggests that variations in interspecific attraction among sites could contribute to intersite variations in nuthatch-chickadee distances. There is less evidence of a role for interspecific attraction in variation in nuthatch-titmouse distances. Examining the locations of sightings of these species in censuses suggested that nuthatches should have been within 50 m of a titmouse most often at Whitehall, followed by Davis Estates, which they were, even in the absence of interspecific attractions.

When nuthatches and either chickadees or titmice were placed on maps according to their habitat (vegetation) use patterns to determine whether variations in habitat configurations among sites could account for differences in
Table 4 Proportions of Nuthatches Observed within 50 m of Parids at Four Sites, Compared with Proportions Predicted Based on Birds Having No Interspecific Attraction, and Based on Habitat Configurations of the Sites

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Method</th>
    <th colspan="4">Proportion of Nuthatches within 50 m of:</th>
    <th colspan="4">Proportion of Nuthatches within 50 m of:</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Chickadee Site*</th>
    <th>Titmouse Site</th>
    <th>Chickadee Site*</th>
    <th>Titmouse Site</th>
    <th>Chickadee Site*</th>
    <th>Titmouse Site</th>
    <th>Chickadee Site*</th>
    <th>Titmouse Site</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Observed</td>
    <td>0.86</td>
    <td>0.87</td>
    <td>0.68</td>
    <td>0.28</td>
    <td>0.40</td>
    <td>0.76</td>
    <td>0.28</td>
    <td>0.46</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Predicted (no attraction)</td>
    <td>0.22</td>
    <td>0.20</td>
    <td>0.21</td>
    <td>0.27</td>
    <td>0.01</td>
    <td>0.10</td>
    <td>0.06</td>
    <td>0.09</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Predicted (habitat configuration)</td>
    <td>0.23</td>
    <td>0.20</td>
    <td>0.20</td>
    <td>0.20</td>
    <td>0.06</td>
    <td>0.08</td>
    <td>0.09</td>
    <td>0.08</td>
  </tr>
</table>

*BG=Botanical Garden; WF=Whitehall Forest; PV=Pine View; DE=Davis Estates.

distances between birds, these analyses showed that habitat configurations should produce virtually no variation in the proximity of the birds among sites (Table 4). Thus, changes in habitat configurations among sites are unlikely to have produced significant differences in distances between nuthatches and parids among sites.

Discussion

This study sought to determine whether the native woodland species that winter in urban areas do so in large or small numbers relative to rural areas, and whether birds wintering in urban areas make widespread use of human-disturbed habitats or concentrate into less-disturbed habitats within those areas. The native woodland bird species considered in this study used urban areas at high densities and were generalistic in their habitat use within such areas, showing little preference for habitats with closed canopies or understories. Although some previous studies have reported parids to use urban areas in lower densities than rural areas, these studies have mainly been conducted in summer (cf. Graber and Graber 1979). The different findings of the present study may be explained partially by seasonal changes in the habitat use of the birds; indeed, DeGraaf (1978) and DeGraaf and Wentworth (1981) found that chickadee densities in residential neighborhoods were greater in winter than summer. These differences emphasize the need for studies on urban wildlife to be conducted at all seasons.

The high densities of birds in urban areas in this study could have been caused by a variety of factors that either increased survival in the urban areas, increased reproduction (if young birds remained at the site until the following winter), or attracted birds from surrounding habitats. The frequent use of bird feeders in this study by both parids suggests that, for these species, bird feeding may have increased densities in urban areas, either by attracting parids to the study area (Graber and Graber 1979) or by decreasing their overwinter mortality (Jansson et al. 1981; Brittingham and Temple 1988).

For nuthatches, which used feeders less often, high densities in the urban areas may have resulted from their extensive foraging in ornamental pines in residential yards. The affinity of nuthatches for pine seeds may have attracted them to these areas, where sampling suggested that cones may have been more numerous than at the rural sites (mean counts of cones per cone-bearing tree were 363.4 at Pine View (N = 31), 295.3 at Davis Estates (N = 32), 249.1 at the Botanical Garden (N = 27), and 151.9 at Whitehall (N = 21); counts represent numbers of cones visible through binoculars from a position approximately 5–10 m from the trunk). The high densities of some other species are difficult to interpret. One possibility stems from the tendency of all of these species to travel with mixed flocks containing parids. These birds may simply have been attracted to urban areas by the presence of parids, rather than because of any other site characteristics associated with urbanization. In addition to feeders and ornamental plantings, a variety of other factors could also produce high bird densities in urban areas (e.g., increased over-winter survival produced by anthropogenic heat, reduced hawk populations, etc.).

Another goal of this study was to determine whether the social behavior of birds using urban areas differed from that in rural areas. The social relationship of nuthatches to chickadees
did appear to change, as these species were flocked together more often at rural than urban sites. The lack of mixed flock participation by nuthatches at Oconee Cemetery suggested that heterospecific flocking for some species may virtually disappear because of urbanization under particular circumstances. Nuthatches here appeared to not flock because they heavily used an ornamental pine stand that was typically avoided by both parids, perhaps because of its isolation from other areas of tall trees. Thus, creation of an isolated area of habitat that is used by one species and not others may force normally social birds to avoid flocking heterospecifically. In more natural habitats, it is very unusual to find nuthatches in places with no parids (personal observation).

Despite the apparent importance of habitat configuration to birds in the cemetery, the analyses of habitat preferences and locations of species occurrence on other sites suggested that differences in the configuration of vegetation and other resources among the four primary sites did not produce the differences in flocking. The failure of these explanations provides indirect support for the idea that birds were farther apart at urban sites because the affinity of the birds for each other was diminished. Many authors have proposed advantages that animals may obtain by forming groups, and these tend to be related to either foraging enhancement (e.g., Krebs 1973; Morse 1977, 1980; Barnard and Stephens 1983) or predator avoidance (e.g., Pulliam 1973; Powell 1974; Thompson and Barnard 1983; Sullivan 1984a, b; Hogstad 1988). It is plausible that these species may have procured food more easily in urban than rural areas because of the proximity of bird feeders, or may have faced fewer predators in urban areas if fewer hawks were present there. Either of these mechanisms could have decreased the profitability of flocking for these birds, causing flocks to break down in urban areas. However, field experiments conducted at Whitehall Forest and the Botanical Garden (Yaukey 1991) have suggested that changes in predation pressure are more likely than changes in food availability to result in changes in grouping behavior for these species.

Conclusions

This study represents one of the few urban bird studies conducted in the southeastern United States in winter. There are several reasons not to extrapolate these findings to other species in different habitats. Because the precolonial pine woodlands of the southeastern United States had a relatively open structure, the birds examined here may be more suited to open, disturbed vegetation than are birds from regions that had more dense forest cover. Also, the species were studied at a time of year (winter) when they are likely to be generalistic in their habitat use. Summer studies may find birds much less tolerant of habitat disturbance and urban development.

This study has shown that several species of birds that used urban residential developments in winter occurred at high densities, and in a broad variety of habitats, within those developments. Further work is needed to determine whether other species found in urban areas also use them generalistically and in high densities relative to rural areas. Are there any species that can persist in urban areas year after year, simply by hanging on in small fragments of relict habitat? Although studies have shown that patches of undeveloped habitat within urban areas hold species absent from the developed neighborhoods themselves (Tilghman 1987a, b), such studies have not run for long enough to determine the stability of such populations.

The results of this study highlight the complexity of the urbanization process, which produces multifaceted changes in both the landscape and the organisms that inhabit it. While many wildlife species disappear from urbanized landscapes, many others remain, such as those in this study. While the species in this study occupied residential developments, areas of the city with different land use patterns are likely to hold different communities of birds that behave differently than those in the neighborhoods studied here. The urban landscape is best characterized as a complex set of habitats with different degrees and types of disturbance, which retain different components of the original biota. The flora and fauna that remain may undergo a variety of changes. The native birds in residential developments in this study showed different patterns of density, habitat use, and social behavior than birds in rural areas. Such complex differences reveal that the effects of habitat disturbance cannot be adequately described by simple studies of changes in community composition associated
with urbanization; they encompass a variety of complex alterations of behavior. The nuances of these changes, together with their significance for the survival and reproduction of the birds, must be more adequately understood before the impact of urbanization on the landscape and its wildlife can be comprehended fully.

Literature Cited

Adams, L. W., and L. E. Dove. 1989. Wildlife Reserves and Corridors in the Urban Environment. Columbia, MO: National Institute for Urban Wildlife.

Aldrich, J. W., and R. W. Coffin. 1980. Breeding bird populations from forest to suburbia after thirty-seven years. American Birds 34:3–7.

Barnard, C. J., and Stephens, H. 1983. Costs and benefits of single and mixed-species flocking in fieldfares Turdus pilaris and redwings T. iliacus. Behaviour 84:91–123.

Batten, L. A. 1972. Breeding bird species diversity in relation to increasing urbanisation. Bird Study 19:157–66.

Beissinger, S. R., and D. R. Osborne. 1982. Effects of urbanization on avian community organization. Condor 84:75–83.

Brittingham, M. C., and S. A. Temple. 1988. Impacts of supplemental feeding on survival rates of black-capped chickadees. Ecology 69:581–89.

Davis, A. M., and T. F. Glick. 1978. Urban ecosystems and island biogeography. Environmental Conservation 5:299–304.

DeGraaf, R. M. 1978. Avian communities and habitat associations in cities and suburbs. In Wildlife and People, ed. C. M. Kirkpatrick, 7–24. Lafayette, IN: Purdue University, Department of Forestry and Natural Resources.

DeGraaf, R. M., and J. M. Wentworth. 1981. Urban bird communities and habitats in New England. Transactions of the North American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference 46:396–413.

Douglas, I. 1983. The Urban Environment. London: Edward Arnold.

Emlen, J. T. 1971. Population densities of birds derived from transect counts. Auk 88:323–42.

———. 1974. An urban bird community in Tucson, Arizona: Derivation, structure and regulation. Condor 76:184–97.

———. 1977. Estimating breeding season bird densities from transect counts. Auk 94:455–68.

Franklin, T. M., and J. R. Wilkinson. 1986. Predicted effects on birdlife of two development plans for an urban estate. In Wildlife Conservation and New Residential Developments, ed. K. Stenberg and W. W. Shaw, 105–17. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona, School of Renewable Natural Resources.

Gavareski, C. A. 1976. Relation of park size and vegetation to urban bird populations in Seattle, Washington. Condor 78:375–82.

Gill, D., and P. A. Bonnett. 1973. Nature in the Urban Landscape: A Study of City Ecosystems. Baltimore, MD: New York Press.

Goldstein, E. L., M. Gross, and R. M. DeGraaf. 1986. Breeding birds and vegetation: A quantitative assessment. Urban Ecology 9:377–85.

Graber, J. W., and R. R. Graber. 1979. Severe winter weather and bird populations in southern Illinois. Wilson Bulletin 91:88–103.

Green, R. J. 1984. Native and exotic birds in a suburban habitat. Australian Wildlife Research 11:181–90.

Griffith, D. A., and C. G. Amrhein. 1991. Statistical Analysis for Geographers. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Guthrie, D. A. 1974. Suburban bird populations in southern California. American Midland Naturalist 92:461–66.

Hogstad, O. 1988. Advantages of social foraging of willow tits Parus montanus. Ibis 130:275–83.

Hohtola, E. 1978. Differential changes in bird community structure with urbanisation: A study in central Finland. Ornis Scandinavica 9:94–100.

Horak, G. C., and A. T. Cringan. 1986. Christmas Bird Count trends in a rapidly growing community in northern Colorado. In Wildlife Conservation and New Residential Developments, ed. K. Stenberg and W. W. Shaw, 21–30. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona, School of Renewable Natural Resources.

Huhtalo, H., and O. Jarvinen. 1977. Quantitative comparison of the urban bird community in Tornio, Northern Finland. Bird Study 24:179–85.

Jansson, C., J. Ekman, and A. Von Bromselen. 1981. Winter mortality and food supply in tits Parus spp. Oikos 37:313–22.

Jones, D. N. 1981. Temporal change in the suburban avifauna of an inland city. Australian Wildlife Research 8:109–19.

Krebs, J. R. 1973. Social learning and the significance of mixed-species flocks of chickadees (Parus spp.). Canadian Journal of Zoology 51:1,275–88.

Lancaster, R. K., and W. E. Rees. 1979. Bird communities and the structure of urban habitats. Canadian Journal of Zoology 57:2,358–68.

Mills, G. S., J. B. Dunning, Jr., and J. M. Bates. 1989. Effects of urbanization on breeding bird community structure in southwestern desert habitats. Condor 91:416–28.

Morse, D. H. 1967. Foraging relationships of brown-headed nuthatches and pine warblers. Ecology 48:94–103.

———. 1970. Ecological aspects of some mixed-species foraging flocks of birds. Ecological Monographs 40:119–68.
______. 1977. Feeding behavior and predator avoidance in hetero-specific groups. Bioscience 27:332–39.

______. 1980. Behavioral Mechanisms in Ecology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Moulton, C. A., and L. W. Adams. 1991. Effects of urbanization on foraging strategy of woodpeckers. In Wildlife Conservation in Metropolitan Environments, ed. L. W. Adams and D. L. Leedy, 67–73. Symposium Series 2. Columbia, MD: National Institute for Urban Wildlife.

Pitelka, F. A. 1942. High populations of breeding birds within an artificial habitat. Condor 44:172–74.

Powell, G. V. N. 1974. Experimental analysis of the social value of flocking by starlings (Sturnus vulgaris) in relation to predation and foraging. Animal Behaviour 22:501–05.

Poynton, J. C., and D. C. Roberts. 1985. Urban open space planning in South Africa: A biogeographical perspective. South African Journal of Science 81:33–7.

Pulliam, H. R. 1973. On the advantages of flocking. Journal of Theoretical Biology 38:419–22.

Rosenberg, K. V., S. B. Terrill, and G. H. Rosenberg. 1987. Value of suburban habitats to desert riparian birds. Wilson Bulletin 99:642–54.

Smith, R. J., and J. M. Schaefer. 1992. Avian characteristics of an urban strip corridor. Wilson Bulletin 104:732–38.

Sullivan, K. A. 1984a. The advantages of social foraging in downy woodpeckers. Animal Behaviour 32:16–22.

———. 1984b. Information exploitation by downy woodpeckers in mixed-species flocks. Behaviour 91:294–311.

Thompson, D. B. A., and Barnard, C. J. 1983. Anti-predator responses in mixed-species associations of lapwings, golden plovers and black-headed gulls. Animal Behaviour 31:585–93.

Tilghman, N. G. 1987a. Characteristics of urban woodlands affecting winter bird diversity and abundance. Forest Ecology and Management 21:163–75.

———. 1987b. Characteristics of urban woodlands affecting breeding bird diversity and abundance. Landscape and Urban Planning 14:481–95.

Vale, T. R., and G. R. Vale. 1976. Suburban bird populations in west-central California. Journal of Biogeography 3:157–65.

Woofenden, G. E., and S. A. Rohwer. 1969. Breeding birds in a Florida suburb. Bulletin of the Florida State Museum 13:1–83.

Yaukey, P. 1991. The effects of residential development on interspecific grouping in the brown-headed nuthatch (Sitta pusilla). Ph.D. diss., University of Georgia, Athens, GA.

Zar, J. H. 1984. Biostatistical Analysis. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

PETER H. YAUKEY is Assistant Professor at the University of New Orleans, New Orleans, LA 70148. His research interests cover various aspects of biogeography, including animal migration, large-scale patterns of animal distribution, and the effects of environmental change on wildlife.