Article type    : Original Article

E-COMMERCE, TAOBAO VILLAGES AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN CHINA

Yehua Dennis Wei, Professor
    Department of Geography
    University of Utah
    Salt Lake City, UT 84112-9155, USA
    Email: wei@geog.utah.edu

Juan Lin, Assistant Professor & Corresponding Author
    College of Tourism
    Fujian Normal University
    Fuzhou, China
    Email: fqlinjuan@foxmail.com

Ling Zhang, Assistant Professor
    Department of Geography
    University of Central Arkansas
    Conway, Arkansas 72035, USA
    Email: cathezhl@gmail.com

We would like to acknowledge the funding of the US National Science Foundation (1759746) and the Ford Foundation (129647)

February 2019
ABSTRACT. China’s phenomenal growth and unprecedented urbanization are accompanied by social and environment problems such as rising inequality and rural stagnation. However, a new form of development based on Alibaba Group’s Taobao e-commerce platform, known as Taobao villages, has emerged in rural China to capitalize from e-commerce and sustain rural development. We investigate development trajectories and organizational structure of Taobao villages to better understand e-commerce and regional development in rural China, including the role of entrepreneurs, firms, and local states. We find that Taobao villages are being produced through economic restructuring and institutional change in response to shifting economic contexts. We have identified five development models of Taobao villages: production-oriented Xishan, Qiaoyun and Bainiu models, and market-oriented Beishan and Qingyanliu models. We also find that local states and ICT (information and communication technology) firms have played an important role in facilitating the development of Taobao villages. Taobao villages have to work closely with their local and external networks to upgrade technology, enhance innovation, and increase added value. Local contexts and spatial networking are essential to the development of Taobao villages. As a new form of regional development, Taobao villages may provide a pathway to economic development for rural areas in other developing countries.

Keywords: global production network (GPN), global value chain (GVC), e-commerce, Taobao villages, regional development, rural China

Since the economic reform initiated in the late 1970s, China has experienced rapid growth and profound change. The orthodox socialist economy has been reformed and transformed, under the triple process of globalization, decentralization and marketization (Wei 2000). China’s success in economic growth has been conceptualized as the China miracle, or the China model. However, China has had multiple pathways to development, and the China model is in fact composed of various
regional models (Lin, 1997; Wei, 2002; Wei and others 2007). Three well-known models—the Sunan model centered on township and village enterprises (TVEs) in southern Jiangsu province, the externally driven Pearl River Delta (PRD) model, and the Wenzhou model based on family businesses in southern Zhejiang province— have been coined to describe urbanization and regional development in China (for example, Oi 1995; Sit and Yang 1997; Wei 2000; Ma and Cui 2002; Wei 2011; Wei 2015a).

China’s rapid growth and urbanization have brought prosperity and poverty reduction to the country but are also accompanied by social and environment problems such as rising inequality, land grabbing, and air pollution. Chinese cities and regions have become more unequal, fragmented, and vulnerable, and urban villages and shanty areas have even been called Chinese-style “slums” (Wang and others 2009, Zheng and others 2009). Meanwhile, some rural townships and villages have been declining and deserted, and even become “ghost towns” and “hollow villages” (Liu and others 2011). How to avoid the problems of over-urbanization and slum formation in cities while sustaining the development of the countryside and improving the life of rural people have become challenging issues for China, as well as other developing countries undergoing rapid urbanization.

The globalization and restructuring process is accompanied by informationization, which is also reconfiguring production-market relationship and influencing regional development in China. More recently, a new form of regional development based on online platforms has emerged in rural villages to overcome geographical barriers and capitalize from the e-commerce development. These villages utilize Alibaba Group’s Taobao e-commerce platform, its mass-selling site for individuals, to sustain rural development. The successful ones have been known as Taobao villages, which have largely escaped the attention of international scholars, although the World Bank (2016) has promoted Taobao villages as an instrument for poverty reduction and shared prosperity in developing countries.
This paper investigates development trajectories and organizational structure of Taobao villages in Zhejiang Province. We will scrutinize the recent development of Taobao villages and the restructuring of development models in China, and examine forces shaping the trajectories of urbanization and regional development, especially the role of local states and contexts. This paper has the following objectives: (1) to better understand the development of Taobao villages and the transformation of rural China; (2) to examine the role of local governments and ICT (information and communication technology) firms in regional development; (3) to explore theoretical and policy implications of the development of Taobao villages. We hope to broaden the scope of existing literature on regional development, which has not fully considered the role of e-commerce, the importance of urban-rural networks, and the significance of the countryside. Taobao villages are an excellent case of the recent development of rural China, which may provide a new pathway of regional development for rural areas in other developing countries.

<<A-HEAD>> GLOBALIZATION, INFORMATIONIZATION, AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

What causes uneven regional development has generated heated debates since the 1950s. The development-from-above (or top-down) paradigm popular in the 1950s and 1960s argues for state-directed development that stresses the growth-diffusion effects. The persistence of poverty and inequality prompted the promotion of the development-from-below approach in the 1970s and 1980s by emphasizing bottom-up development based on local resources (Stohr and Taylor 1981). These debates have been renewed since the intensification of globalization in the late 1980s and the restructuring of the global production network (GPN), characterized by the relocation of low-end production functions to developing countries to tap the pool of cheap labor and retention of innovative functions in advanced economies.
To understand the globalization process, the global value chain (GVC) perspective emphasizes value chain governance in development and change. Gereffi and others (2005) identify five types of value chain governance: markets, modular, relational, captive, and hierarchy. Building on the GVC perspective, the GPN perspective connects regional development with global processes and emphasizes the role of leading transnational corporations (TNCs) and their strategic coupling in regional development (Yeung 2009). GPNs are organizational platforms through which actors in different regional and national economies compete and cooperate for a great share of value creation, transportation, and capture through geographically dispersed economic activities (Yeung and Coe 2015). Cities in developing countries have been increasingly incorporated into the GPN, creating globalizing cities and sprawling metropolitan regions, while the countryside has been experiencing outmigration and stagnation.

However, theories of globalization tend to exaggerate the importance of global processes in regional development and underestimate the role of regions and institutions in global economic restructuring (Sayer 2004; Storper 1997; Scott 1998). The GPN perspective falls short in explaining how regions actually translate ties with global markets into local development outcomes (Murphy and Schindler 2011); and inserting the GPN is a pathway of development known as the East Asian model, not necessary for a big country like China with strong state power and a large domestic market (Wei 2011; Wei and others 2011).

Globalism has especially been challenged by theories of industrial districts and clusters, which are characterized by flexible specialization and agglomeration economies with a synergistic combination of dense local networks, local innovation, as well as small firm formation and clustering (Piore and Sabel 1984; Pyke and Sengenberger 1992; Scott 1998). Such districts are the foundation for the rise of “new regionalism,” via which notions of localization, clustering, innovation milieu, learning regions, and relational assets are considered fundamental to regional growth and
competitiveness. The industrial district literature, however, has also been criticized for its failure to take into account of the effects of globalization and the role of states (Whitford 2001; Hadjimichalis 2006; Wei and others 2007). Scholars have increasingly recognized varied forms of industrial districts (Markusen 1996). Industrial districts in developing countries have structures and development processes that are different from typical Marshallian industrial districts (MIDs) in that they emphasize the importance of family circles, active local states, informal networks, the cohabitation of small firms and Fordist giants, and a low degree of specialization (Rabellotti 1995; Pietrobelli and Barrera 2002; Wei and others 2011).

Since the global financial crisis in 2008, scholars have been rethinking globalization, informationization, and the fortune of regions. Compared to GPN 1.0, which focuses on the organizational structure and geographical distribution of TNC networks, GPN 2.0 emphasizes the relationships among participants in the GPN (Yeung and Coe 2015). The GPNs create new opportunities for international knowledge dissemination and reverse knowledge outsourcing for enterprises and industrial areas in developing countries (Ernst 2010). Institutions can play an important role in influencing the structure of network. Empirical work, however, remains limited.

While in Globalization 1.0 the dynamic force was globalizing countries, in Globalization 2.0 the key agent of change was multinational companies (MNEs). In Globalization 3.0, individuals are empowered to act globally through the use of ICTs (Friedman 2005; Panchal and Fathianathan 2008). "Internet +" is the result of the highly developed ICTs, forming a wider and newer form of economic and social development based on internet infrastructure. The extensive application of the Internet is greatly accelerating the process of development and change. E-commerce is exerting a much greater impact on the regional economy (Lewis and Cockrill 2002; Burt and Sparks 2003). It has the potential to improve efficiency and productivity in many areas (Lawrence and Tar 2010). However, e-commerce has also caused intense competition, swift change, and job losses (Willis 2004).
The popularity of the Internet has partially broken the urban and rural information asymmetry, and "Internet +" may provide new opportunities for rural areas. Globalization 3.0 and “Internet +” make it possible for rural areas to develop a new pathway to regional development. On the other hand, less developed areas are struggling to catch up with the technological revolution, creating a new digital divide and regional inequality. Moreover, less globalized regions, especially rural areas, tend to be less integrated into the global economy. Their development typically relies more on local forces, although globalization can help rural areas to build local production networks and enable them to benefit from international links (Ernst 2010). Rural areas are also less populated with lower agglomeration economies, more based on less profitable agriculture, and more distant from urban markets.

<<A-HEAD>> THE CHINESE CONTEXT AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS

Since the reform of the late 1970s, three well-known models, namely the Sunan model, the Wenzhou model, and the PRD model, have generated considerable scholarly attention. The Sunan model attributes the development of Sunan to the local state–directed TVEs, conceptualized as local state corporatism (Oi 1999) and development/urbanization from below (Ma and Fan 1994). However, since the mid-1990s, TVEs have been undergoing ownership restructuring through the processes of marketization and privatization. With deeper globalization and intensified competition, the Sunan model has embraced globalization and influx of global capital (Wei 2002). Sunan has globalized regional development and moved “beyond the Sunan model” (Wei 2002, 2011; Wei and others 2011). Such development, however, is troubled by problems of weak TNC local embeddedness, overly relying on manufacturing, and lack of indigenous innovation (Wei and Liao, 2013).
Wenzhou has attempted to restructure its production model based on family-owned small businesses by industrial upgrading, diversification, and scaling up regional development (Wei and others 2007; Wei 2011). It has been connected into a range of GPNs and shows variegated capitalism (Zhang and Peck 2016). A group of companies with national significance has emerged in Wenzhou, and some have gained significant competitiveness, such as the low and medium-voltage electronics industry. However, the Wenzhou model is still largely manufacturing based, with problems of overcapacity, lack of economics of scale, and weak local innovation capacity, and is still troubled by structural, relational, and intergenerational lock-in (Wei et al 2007).

Because of earlier reform and opening up, the PRD obtained investment from Hong Kong and kept “one step ahead” of other regions in growth and transition (Lin 1997). The PRD has attempted to domesticate globalization and promote indigenous innovation (Lu and Wei 2007).

Shenzhen, the largest special economic zone of China, has become one of the most innovative cities and a leading high-tech center in China. However, significant gap still exists in Guangdong province, where the peripheral region is still much less developed than the PRD and the core-peripheral structure has even been intensified (Liao and Wei 2012).

Regional development is a complex process integrating various forces at work. The triple transition framework conceptualizes China’s economic transition as a triple process of globalization, decentralization, and marketization, which interactively influence urban, industrial, and regional development in China (Wei 2000). The triple process varies with time and space, and can also be expanded to incorporate new processes. The Sunan and Wenzhou models have also been based on the countryside, and the problems these models face largely reflect the challenges of rural China. The migrant workers in coastal cities are mainly from the countryside, which has further drained the talents and labor in the rural areas.
Jessop and Sum (2000) note the increased importance of “Siliconisation” as an accumulation strategy in East Asia. E-commerce has been booming in both developed and developing countries. China in particular has bet heavily on e-commerce, and a group of Chinese e-commerce firms including Alibaba have become global leaders. The rise of e-commerce in China includes the development of rural e-commerce as well, which has brought new hope and opportunity to break the urban-rural dual structure and promote rural economic and regional development.

The rise of e-commerce may have provided a new opportunity for the development of rural villages. Rural villages in China, especially in the Yangtze River Delta (YRD) where Alibaba is located, have attempted to capitalize from the rise of e-commerce. The costs of developing online shops between urban and rural areas are similar. Rural areas even enjoy advantages in lower labor and rent costs. These villages, using Alibaba’s Taobao e-commerce platform, its mass-selling site for individuals similar to Amazon, have become known as Taobao villages in China. Information is relatively symmetrical among online entrepreneurs since the Taobao platform makes relationship among suppliers, factories, and service providers closer and facilitates the division of labor towards specialization (Leong and others 2016). However, Taobao villages are still very unevenly distributed in China. While some are prosperous, others are struggling and have even declined. How do local states and context matter? The role of firms, especially Alibaba, in the development of Taobao villages is also unclear.

In East Asia, the market is “governed” (for example, Wade 1990). The economic reform has placed economic growth at the top of its agenda and the cadre system promotes government officers based on their economic achievements. Decentralization has also empowered local governments in using local resources for development. Local states in China have become more involved in economic development, and have thus come to be described as developmental and entrepreneurial states (Duckett 1998; Wu 2003), which even act like “industrial firms” (Walder
1995). Scholars have illustrated that the state, global capital, and local agents have developed a complex network in the making of industrial parks/clusters and the transformation of Chinese cities and regions (Cartier 2001; Pereira 2003; Wang and Lee 2007; Wei 2015b). However, the Chinese state is transitional, and its role varies with time and scale. Village governments in China may function quite differently from municipal governments. Villages are at the lowest level of the bureaucratic system of China, and the resources that village mayors can control are very limited. They are also largely excluded from the cadre promotion system, limited by their hukou (household registration system) status as farmers. Villages are therefore often marginalized in resource allocation because of limited local power and resources. However, as we will illustrate in this paper, villages have scaled up development efforts by working with upper-level governments and networking with ICT firms.

Taobao villages are China’s unique social and economic phenomenon. We need to place them in the Chinese context and networks. Relatively few studies have analyzed this unique phenomenon. In this research, we ask: where and how have the Taobao villages been developed? How are Taobao online stores embedded in the networks of producers and customers? What are the roles of local states, local contexts, and ICT firms in the development of Taobao villages?

<<A-HEAD>> RESEARCH SETTINGS AND METHODOLOGY

The study area of this research is Zhejiang Province, which is located in the YRD and neighbors Shanghai to the north (Figure 1). With a population of 55.39 million in 2015, it covers an area of 104,140 square kilometers, occupying about 1 percent of China’s territory. Zhejiang is one of the most developed provinces in China and has recorded rapid growth since the reform. It produced 4,288.7 billion yuan of GDP in 2015, ranking the fourth among China’s 31 provinces. In 2016 Zhejiang
had 11 prefectural level municipalities and 90 county-level units, which comprised 36 municipal districts and 54 counties (including 33 rural counties, 20 county-level cities, and one autonomous county).

Alibaba Group, the largest e-commerce company in China, is headquartered in Hangzhou, Zhejiang’s provincial capital. Taobao.com is a consumer-to-consumer (C2C) e-commerce platform operated by Alibaba. It dominates China’s online marketplace with about 60 percent of online sales in China taking place on it. Taobao.com has fostered the emergence of Taobao villages—rural areas featured with a large number of e-tailers (electronic retailers) on the Taobao platform. Taobao villages have expanded rapidly in China, increasing from 20 in 2009 to 1,311 in August 2016.

AliResearch (2014), the research arm of the Alibaba Group, has defined a Taobao village as a cluster of rural e-tailers within an administrative village where (1) villagers spontaneously started e-commerce and primarily use the Taobao platform; (2) the total annual e-commerce transaction volume is at least 10 million yuan ($1.6 million); (3) at least 10 percent of village households actively engage in e-commerce or at least 100 active online stores have been opened by villagers. In some rural areas, e-commerce is gaining sufficient scale to lead to the formation of bigger clusters of rural e-tailers. These clusters are referred to as “Taobao Towns.” Based on Alibaba, a “Taobao Town” is defined as a town, township, or subdistrict that has at least three Taobao Villages (AliResearch 2014). The first group of 19 Taobao towns were identified at the end of 2014.

Data used in this study were primarily collected from two sources: reports on Taobao villages published by AliResearch, and our own surveys and interviews. In July 2016, we conducted surveys of online enterprises in 22 Taobao villages and industrial parks in Hangzhou, Yiwu, and Lishui cities (Figure 1). We personally delivered 269 survey forms to online enterprises in the Taobao villages in these cities and received 254 effective returns, with an effective return rate of 94.42
percent. Moreover, we also conducted in-depth interviews with local entrepreneurs, e-commerce trade association representatives, and village government officers.

<<A-HEAD>> PATTERNS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TAOBAO VILLAGES

<<B-HEAD>> DEVELOPMENT PATTERNS OF THE TAOBAO VILLAGES

Since the mid-1990s, e-commerce has gradually developed in China and greatly influenced economic growth and development models in rural areas. Although the concept of Taobao Village is new, rural e-commerce has developed rapidly in the recent decade.

As shown in Table 1, there were only 20 Taobao villages in 2013. In 2015, this number changed to 780 with an increase rate of 268 percent. It skyrocketed to 1,311 in August 2016. Coefficient of variation (CV), an indicator to measure inequality, for Taobao villages in prefectural-level-cities grew from 0.36 in 2014 to 1.50 in 2016, indicating that Taobao villages are highly concentrated and have an increasingly uneven distribution

Table 1 also lists the top three cities with the largest number of Taobao villages. In 2014, Guangzhou had 23 Taobao villages, followed by Quanzhou (17) and Xingtai (14). In 2015, Zhejiang’s development in rural e-commerce became evident. Jinhua and Wenzhou both had 56 Taobao villages, tied for the first place. In 2016, the agglomeration effect in Zhejiang was further strengthened. The top three cities were all in Zhejiang and their total number exceeded 300.

Taobao villages initially developed in the coastal region and then spread to the central and western regions (Figure 3). The first few Taobao villages were located in coastal provinces like Guangdong, Fujian, Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Shandong, and Hebei. In 2014, most Taobao villages were concentrated in the Yangtze River Delta, the Pearl River Delta, and the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region.
Only four were found in the central and western regions. In 2015, Taobao villages expanded into 17 province, and Zhejiang, Guangdong, and Jiangsu were clearly leading the development. In 2016, Taobao villages showed a significant spatial clustering in Zhejiang, Guangdong, and Jiangsu, accounting for 74 percent of the national total.

Taobao villages grow rapidly with locational preferences. They expanded quickly in areas where rural e-commerce could integrate with local industries to achieve economies of scale. Our analysis also reveals that Taobao villages are more likely to locate in the second-tier cities. In 2014, nine of the top ten cities for Taobao villages were in the second or lower tier cities. Fewer Taobao villages were found in the top tier cities with few rural villages and higher costs of rent and labor. Because of spontaneous grassroots imitation and government promotion, Taobao villages also quickly developed in central and western China, which could provide a good example for poverty eradication in backward areas.

<<B-Head>> CHARACTERISTICS OF TAobao VILLAGES IN ZHEJIANG PROVINCE

Zhejiang is spearheading China’s rapid e-commerce development. It is the cradle of Taobao villages characterized by their early inception, fast development and large number. Zhejiang has the largest scale of Taobao villages. As Table 2 shows, it is leading the development of Taobao villages in China. There were 62 Taobao villages in Zhejiang in 2014, accounting for 29.25 percent of the national total. The number of Taobao villages rapidly increased to 280 in 2015 and 506 in 2016, and the share expanded to 35.9 percent and 38.60 percent respectively.

Taobao villages in Zhejiang show a significant spatial agglomeration (Figure 2). They are mainly concentrated in Hangzhou of Northern Zhejiang, Jinhua of Central Zhejiang, and Taizhou and Wenzhou of Southeastern Zhejiang. The number of Taobao villages in these four prefecture-level cities was 38 in 2014, 184 in 2015, and 368 in 2016, respectively accounting for 61.29 percent, 65.71
percent, and 72.73 percent of the provincial total. Coefficient of variation (CV) of Taobao villages in county-level units increased from 0.72 in 2014 to 1.40 in 2016. At the county level, Taobao villages also show tendency of agglomeration. Yongjia County was the number one county-level unit in 2014 with seven Taobao villages. Two years later, Yiwu City with 65 Taobao villages was ranked the first. The number of county-level units involved in Taobao villages increased from 23 in 2014 to 62 in 2016.

Based on our survey in 2016, we have identified the following characteristics of Taobao villages in Zhejiang (Table 3). Rural e-commerce in Zhejiang started around 2006 and has vigorously developed in recent years. In our survey, most of the online shops were established in the recent five years. There were 109 (42.91 percent) online enterprises established after 2013. 81 (31.89 percent) enterprises opened between 2010 and 2012, and 57 (22.44 percent) established between 2006 and 2009. Only 6 (2.36 percent) online stores were opened before 2006.

Taobao villages are mostly constituted of small enterprises in terms of annual sales and number of employees. With regard to annual sales, 60 (23.62 percent) online enterprises made less than 100,000 yuan in 2015, 85 (33.64 percent) stores between 100,000 and 500,000 yuan, and 52 (20.47 percent) enterprises between 500,000 and 1,000,000 yuan (Table 3). There were 39 (15.35 percent) online stores with annual sales ranging from 1 to 5 million yuan. Only 18 (7.09 percent) enterprises had annual sales more than 5 million yuan. The lower annual sales of most online stores are because of the lower price of commodities that they sell. Although there were nine online enterprises with annual sales exceeding 10 million yuan, eight of which were in Yiwu. They mostly sell accessories and household goods. Only one of them sells watches.

In terms of number of employees, a substantial proportion (88.58 percent) of online enterprises had less than ten employees, and 57.87 percent of online stores had less than five employees (Table
3). Only 29 online enterprises had more than ten employees. Online enterprises with employees of 11 to 20, 21 to 100, and more than 100 respectively accounted for 6.69 percent, 3.54 percent and 1.18 percent. Among those small enterprises with less than five employees, 27.89 percent of them were completely family enterprises with all the employees being family members; more than half of them hired one or two nonfamily members to help their business. Family enterprises are generally dominated by couples or brothers, assisted by parents. Meanwhile, rural online entrepreneurs tend to hire their relatives and friends, which reflects the important role of social relational network in rural e-commerce.

Rural e-commerce has become a major income source for Taobao villages. We use the share of online revenue in total family income to see how e-commerce has weighed in rural economic development. More than 76 percent of the online entrepreneurs earned at least half of their family income from e-commerce (Table 3). 34.25 percent of them identified e-commerce as their sole income source. 21.65 percent of the online entrepreneurs earned 80.0 percent-99.9 percent of their total income from online revenues and 20.08 percent of them got 50.0 percent-79.9 percent of family income from e-commerce. Offline revenues and family members engaged in other occupations also contribute to family income. A small proportion (9.06 percent) of online enterprises was established to help existing physical stores to extend online market or operated by physical store owners in their spare time.

The average education level of rural e-commerce employees is low. In our survey, 103 (40.56 percent) online enterprises did not have any employee with bachelor or higher degree. Approximately half of the online stores hired one or two college graduates (Table 3). Those online enterprises that had more than ten employees with bachelor or higher degree were all operated by owners who also had offline real economy. This indicates that the threshold of rural e-commerce is very low, especially in terms of employees’ education level.
<<A-Head>> Development Models: Production Based vs. Market Orientation

Based on the literature review and our fieldwork in Zhejiang, we have identified two major types of development models of Taobao villages: production oriented, representing Taobao villages based on rural natural or agricultural products including crops, and market oriented (Table 4). This classification moves beyond the typical models of GPN, which are largely production-based, by adding market-oriented models in considering the rise of e-commerce. They also represent different locations and development levels. Hangzhou is the provincial capital, with the most developed economy and market, where Alibaba is located, while Lishui is the least developed in Zhejiang province and more dependent on agriculture and natural resources. Yiwu City is a rising star of economic development in China based on its booming small-commodity trade market.

<<A-Head>> Production Oriented

<<B-Head>> Xishan Model: Family Workshop-Based Production Model

The Xishan model is based on small online enterprises that are largely dependent on local natural resources. It represents a development trajectory centered on family workshops, characteristic of low technology, low R&D investment, and specialized product type. Xishan Village is located in Dawangba Town, Songyang County, Lishui Municipality. It used to rely on agriculture for food and income. Given the abundant forest resources in Xishan, wood processing industry slowly developed during the 1990s. With knowledge in wood processing, local villagers later began to produce simple furniture. In 2008 some carpenters in Xishan began to sell furniture on Taobao.com. They primarily focused on wardrobes and shoe racks, which are easy to produce and sold well.
The Xishan model is essentially a production-oriented model based on local resources and centered on family workshops. Each family usually focuses on one single product to achieve the scale effect. Local government played an important role in helping Xishan meeting e-commerce requirements. The Bureau of Transportation in Songyang County built an urban-rural logistics system with three large logistics companies to facilitate the rural e-commerce development in Xishan. Local villagers achieved success from rural e-commerce. Similar to Xishan Village, some Taobao Villages in Zhejiang produce and sell rattan and wood-carving products based on their local natural resources. However, few of these workshops upgrade their products due to the lack of technology and investment. For ready-to-assemble furniture, it is critical for furniture firms to meet the packaging and logistics requirements. Problems of low quality and low production efficiency have restricted the development of Xishan model in the fierce market competition. Some of the small shops have closed, and this model is in decline.

<<B-Head>> QIAOYUN MODEL: MARSHALLIAN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

Qiaoyun Village is historically known for its wooden-toy industry. Qiaoyun model is based on the development of small and medium enterprises concentrated in Qiaoyun Village, which is 1.5 km from the Yunhe county seat and 60 km away from Lishui city district. It took about 40 years to shape the Qiaoyun Model, a typical MID. Pine wood processing industry used to be the leading industry in Qiaoyun. Although many wood processing firms shut down later, the relevant technology and talents laid the foundation for the wooden-toy industry. In the 1970s, some firms began to produce wooden toys. The wooden toy industry further developed in the 1990s, and flourished with the development of Taobao marketplace. Local firms specialize in certain products, such as tracks, puzzles, and chess, and a special division of labor, such as cutting, painting, and modeling, has
formed. Regional production networks grew substantially in the recent years and largely aligned with Qiaoyun Village as their center.

The wooden-toy industry in Qiaoyun is closely embedded in the local context. The online enterprises are mainly operated by local people. Interpersonal trust helps to reduce transaction costs in local production system and facilitate the flow of information and knowledge. Social relationships and cooperation contribute to cultivate a local industrial culture. The wooden-toy industry has become a pillar industry based on local craft tradition and supported by the county government that helped to build a Taobao industrial park in the village as an incubator and knowledge center. Burgeoning rural e-commerce not only makes Qiaoyun an important wooden-toy production center but also connects it to the global market. In our survey, 38.78 percent of online enterprises in Qiaoyun have cross-border sales. Average share of cross-border sales is 4.27 percent, and the highest is up to 70 percent. Qiaoyun’s wooden toys have been exported to the United States, Russia, Brazil, and others, and have won recognition in the international market. Many large international toy companies, such as Lego, PIKO, and Melissa & Doug, have their products manufactured in Qiaoyun.

<<B-Head>> BAINIU MODEL: HUB-AND-SPOKE PRODUCTION MODEL

The Bainiu model is a combination of local agricultural products and partial outsourcing. Bainiu Village is located 60 km in the west of Linan City, and 100 km away from Hangzhou city center. Linan abounds with pecans. By the end of 2016, there were 21 Taobao villages in Linan selling roasted seeds and nuts. The rural online enterprises in Bainiu build a strong local production network with processing factories in the towns, which serve as hubs and provide processing service. Bainiu enjoys convenient transportation due to its proximity to the interprovincial highway and is easily accessible to major logistics companies. The first online enterprise in Bainiu began in 2007 and became very
profitable. The products were homegrown and homemade pecans, and the biggest investment was just the computer. This new development was soon imitated by other villagers.

With the expansion of the online market, family-based production was often ineffective in meeting the market need. The division of labor and modular production began to form. First, two villagers in Bainiu set up small processing factories, where manual removal is replaced by husk remover machines. After initial processing, pecans are transported to large processing factories in the towns. Food hygiene and product quality control can be guaranteed in the large factories, which can also help diversify products and increase product lines. The production chain of pecans is extended by intensive and deep processing. Third-party service providers also help rural enterprises to cultivate their brands. Nearly half of online enterprises in Bainiu have registered their own brands. They also outsource the packaging design. Finally, products are transported to their own houses for online sales. The Bainiu model has been successful in rural areas specialized in producing agricultural products that are easy to store and transport, such as tea leaves, Chinese dates, dried bamboo shoots, and the like. While Bainiu represents a more advanced stage of rural e-commerce development, online selling of agricultural products is now widely used in rural China, with the demand for food in cities and strong support of local governments.

<<A-Head>> Market Oriented

<<B-Head>> Beishan Model: Hub-and-Spoke Brand Management

The Beishan model is a typical hub-and-spoke network with one lead enterprise and a large number of local online distributors. This model is characteristic of self-owned brand, production outsourcing, and online distribution. Beishan Village is 30 km away from Jinyun county seat and 70 km away from Lishui. Leaders and ideas play a decisive role in the development process of e-commerce (Lane
2010). In 2006, Zhenhong Lu, the pioneer of rural-ecommerce in Beishan, opened a store on Taobao, selling outdoor equipment such as hiking and camping gear. However, this online store could only sell products of existing brands and was once sued by a brand for selling their products without permission. Therefore, in 2008, Lu registered Beishan Wolf as a self-owned brand of outdoor equipment.

From the value chain perspective, Beishan Wolf controls R&D and distribution, sectors that have the most value, and outsources production to factories which have the best technology. Inter-regional production networks are formed between Beishan Wolf and these factories, which are responsible for specific production lines. Meanwhile, Beishan Wolf practices brand management across the distribution network. Ninety percent of the online enterprises in Beishan Village are distributors of Beishan Wolf. They can directly sell Beishan Wolf products without paying any extra fees. With this unique brand management model, rural e-commerce developed quickly in Beishan Village. Local governments also invested to improve Internet infrastructure, provide training to new online entrepreneurs and help build warehouses to keep Beishan’s momentum going. As a domestic brand, Beishan Wolf has already opened overseas market, and overseas sales accounted for 2.54 percent of the total revenue (The Taobao Village Survey, 2016).

<<B-Head>> QINGYANLIU MODEL: LOCAL MARKETPLACE-BASED MODEL

The Qingyanliu model is market oriented and based on the local marketplace. Qingyanliu Village is located in Yiwu City, which is well-known for the largest small commodity wholesale market in the world. Up to 1.7 million types of small commodities are available there. The huge inventory and low prices of commodities provide a solid foundation for the development of rural e-commerce nearby. Qingyanliu’s rural e-commerce cluster has developed from a few local online enterprises. Many
people come to Qingyanliu from other regions to engage in e-commerce because it has a stable online market demand and a strong local wholesale industry. Qingyanliu model is also characteristic of the unique market network within the local online enterprises.

A concept of “online supermarket” has developed in Qingyanliu, in which a wholesaler directly purchases from factories or local whole marketplaces and then provides information of commodities to smaller online stores. They put them on sale and only purchase the commodities from the wholesaler after they receive online orders. Small and new online enterprises can benefit from this model since it can greatly reduce the inventory cost. Moreover, in the era of Globalization 3.0, individuals and small organizations are empowered by advanced technology to go global. Qingyanliu also leads the development of cross-border e-commerce. Yiwu owns three provincial cross-border e-commerce parks and eight provincial (public) cross-border e-commerce warehouses. Similar to the Qingyunliu model, rural e-commerce clusters have rapidly developed in many local marketplace-based Taobao villages, such as the footwear industry in Wenling, Zhejiang Province, and garment industry in Jinjiang, Fujian Province.

<<A-HEAD>> ROLE OF FIRMS AND INSTITUTIONS

Institutions have played an important role in the development of rural e-commerce and Taobao villages in China. Two powerful organizational actors stand out as important enablers of the development of Taobao villages: the lead firm, Alibaba Group, and the government.
THE FIRM: THE ALIBABA GROUP

The lead ICT firm, Alibaba Group, is the cornerstone of the development of rural e-commerce in China. Alibaba has established a complete online trading system, regulated the online market, and mapped out the strategic plan for Taobao villages.

Alibaba built the e-commerce platform Taobao.com, which has low threshold, high efficiency, and simple operation. To encourage rural e-commerce development, Alibaba spares no effort to regulate the online trading system, cultivate e-commerce talents, and build logistics network. Taobao.com is a convenient platform, on which online transactions can easily take place. This platform also provides a third-party online payment service, Alipay, and an instant messenger, TradeManager, to facilitate the communication between buyers and sellers. Alibaba's Taobao University provides training courses for people at different levels to learn how to sell online. Alibaba also established the AliResearch Institute to analyze and investigate new socioeconomic phenomena brought about by the Internet and e-commerce.

Alibaba constantly implements standards and regulations to the online market. To be able to sell on Taobao.com, online store owners have to complete the real name authentication by personal identification numbers or business licenses. Sellers have to truthfully provide the relevant information about their products on Taobao.com. Certifications are required for certain types of products. To protect intellectual property rights, Alibaba manages to crack down on counterfeits on its platform, including alleged misuse of other entities’ trademarks, copyrights, and patents.

“Rural Taobao” is Alibaba’s core strategy for e-commerce development, which aims to promote two-way trade between rural and urban regions by removing bottlenecks in information and logistics. Alibaba does so by building rural e-commerce infrastructure at county and village levels and cultivating rural e-commerce talents. As part of the “Rural Taobao” initiative, Alibaba in 2014
announced it would invest 10 billion yuan ($1.6 billion) over the next three to five years to build 1,000 county-level Taobao rural operation centers and 100,000 village-level Taobao rural service centers. In 2013, Alibaba founded the Cainiao network with a consortium of major logistics companies. The Cainiao network is scalable and nimble and makes it possible to reach almost anywhere in China, including remote rural areas. With the improvement to the logistics network, Taobao.com can give full play to the advantages of e-commerce.

<<B-Head>> LOGISTICS COMPANIES

The logistics industry has developed rapidly in China, and many express companies have emerged in the recent decade. They have greatly helped improve the accessibility of Taobao villages and efficiency of rural e-commerce. Ten years ago, most express companies did not pick up or deliver to rural areas. However, Taobao villages have opened a huge market in rural areas. These days almost all express companies provide free pick-up service for Taobao villages. In addition, franchisees of logistics companies have the power to negotiate prices with their customers. Based on the number of packages, rural online enterprises can enjoy a big discount, up to 70 percent off. China's continuously improved transport network accelerates the express delivery. For example, one package from anywhere in Zhejiang can be delivered to any city in the YRD within 24 hours and to any village within 48 hours.
<<A-Head>> GOVERNMENTS

<<B-Head>> SERVICE PROVIDERS

Developing countries have made continuing improvement in ICT infrastructure and in statutory regulations regarding e-commerce (Le and others 2012). ICT infrastructure is relatively backward in rural areas, which largely limits the development of rural e-commerce. Rural areas should improve the accessibility to infrastructure, technologies, and practical knowledge (Lefebvre and Lefebvre 2002). Governments at all levels in China have provided a variety of services to solve these problems.

First, local governments have provided basic education and training about e-commerce for rural online entrepreneurs. In our survey, 68.90 percent of the rural entrepreneurs have heard about this policy (Table 5). The training aims to enable villagers to use the Internet, understand the importance of e-commerce, and master basic operational skills.

Second, the government constantly improves the infrastructure in rural areas. Warehousing and logistics are the lifeblood of rural e-commerce. Local governments in Zhejiang actively engage in building warehouses and logistics systems to facilitate rural e-commerce development. They also invest to improve power, Internet, and telephone networks in rural areas.

Finally, local governments provide subsidies and tax incentives to attract large rural e-commerce enterprises to move into e-commerce industrial parks and even waive certain fees. More than half of our surveyed enterprises have recognized subsidy policies. Rural online enterprises can enjoy the benefits of knowledge spillovers and promote technological innovation and brand cultivation in the e-commerce industrial parks.
Governments in both industrialized and developing countries see e-commerce as very important, as it constitutes a promising instrument of economic growth and a job creation tool (Lefebvre and Lefebvre 2002). Taobao villages can be a powerful growth engine if the government helps to increase its scale and scope. Through the bottom-up grassroots development, Taobao villages grow rapidly but disorderly due to the lack of national regulations and local guidance. In some regions, homogeneous online enterprises are confronted with cutthroat competition within and between Taobao villages. Fierce competitions also cause price wars among rural online enterprises, with little attention paid to product quality. Local government advocates industrial upgrading in Taobao villages by promoting brand strategy to avoid homogeneous competition. Currently, Taobao villages are mainly concentrated in low cost and low value-added products, such as crops, clothing, shoes and daily necessities. Local governments are providing support for online enterprises in terms of registering companies, cultivating brands, and upgrading technology.

The government also advocates scaling up of Taobao villages through the construction of e-commerce industrial parks. Place, space, and embeddedness continue to matter in the “new economy” of multichannel distribution (Wrigley and Currah 2006). The key is to facilitate the geographical concentration of related and mutually supportive firms (Porter 2000). Compared to the poor spatial accessibility in most rural areas, e-commerce industrial parks have large storage capacity, higher efficiency, and more opportunities to achieve value-added services, and may also attract third-party service providers. These industrial parks often provide preferential policies to new arrivals, increase the diversity of rural e-commerce and enhance the spillover of information and knowledge. In our survey, Yunhe county government has built different e-commerce industrial parks for different groups, such as e-venture parks for beginners and cross-border e-commerce industrial parks for large enterprises. With the support of the government, Yunhe wooden-toy industry has
achieved great success even when both domestic and international markets were sluggish. On the contrary, Beishan village is facing online store closure after the lead enterprise moved to the township industrial park.

<<B-Head>> INTERMEDIARY

In order to strengthen the local production network and form interregional production networks, the government has acted as an intermediary to coordinate networks among different parties. They have actively promoted their local rural e-commerce on many occasions and attract suppliers from other regions. Table 5 shows that respectively 76.38 percent and 74.41 percent of rural online entrepreneurs recognized these initiatives of the government.

To coordinate the networks among rural online entrepreneurs, the government encourages the establishment of local e-commerce associations to facilitate resource sharing and avoid disorderly competition. In our survey, 37.80 percent of rural online enterprises joined official associations, and 33.07 percent of them joined informal alliances. As an intermediary, the government facilitates the communication among rural online entrepreneurs and promotes their cooperation.

<<A-HEAD>> DISCUSSION: PROBLEMS AND POLICY ISSUES

The development of e-commerce in an emerging economy may present a number of challenges that are not present in a developed economy (Hempel and Kwong 2001). The absence of adequate basic infrastructure and the lack of national level ICT strategies have created a significant barrier in the adoption and growth of e-commerce in developing countries (Lawrence and Tar 2010). Although existing studies tend to focus on the initial stage of e-commerce development and cannot indicate if
it is successful or not, most studies are quite optimistic about the great potential of e-commerce in developing countries. Our empirical study of Taobao villages in Zhejiang suggested the initial success of e-commerce in most cases.

Although Alibaba and local governments provide great support for rural e-commerce, Taobao villages are still facing many problems, such as intense competition, low technology, insufficient funds, the lack of talent, and location disadvantages. The shortage of e-commerce talent is one of the most serious issues. With the increasingly fierce competition in e-commerce, rural entrepreneurs have recognized the importance of expertise in the economy, management, law, and production (Willis 2004). They hope local governments and associations can actively provide them with training of professional skills. The government also guides local college graduates to return to and invest in their hometowns by engaging in rural e-commerce.

In addition to talent, funding is another important factor that limits technological upgrading in Taobao villages. Our survey shows 80.71 percent of rural online entrepreneurs start the businesses mainly with their own funds, and 64.96 percent of them do not raise funds through other channels. The lack of funding largely limits industrial scale and innovation. Table 6 shows that the share of independent new products in total new products is very low in most rural online enterprises. One hundred and sixteen enterprises didn’t have any independent new products in the past year. Meanwhile, 41.73 percent of them have not invested in new products or technology, and 31.10 percent of them used less than 10 percent of annual sales for R&D. Rural online entrepreneurs are eager to get loans such as microfinance from financial institutions to increase the scale for further development. The government needs to increase the availability and accessibility of finance and social capital. Location disadvantages may lead to information asymmetry. More cooperation platforms and information channels are needed to extend the rural e-commerce industry chain.
Gibbs and others (2003) argue that trade and telecommunication liberalization are likely to have the biggest impact on e-commerce, by making ICT and Internet access more affordable to firms and consumers. Scholars also highlight the importance of business infrastructure and culture in electronic marketplace development (Hempel and Kwong 2001; Lawrence and Tar 2010). Therefore, governments should develop various types of policies to promote e-commerce adoption (Lawrence and Tar 2010).

<<A-HEAD>> CONCLUSION

This paper analyzes the development and organization of Taobao villages in China. Their spatial pattern shows significant agglomeration in the eastern coastal region, but Taobao villages have also developed in interior China in recent years. In the case study of Taobao villages in Zhejiang, we find that Taobao villages develop not only in developed areas such as Hangzhou, but also in secondary cities such as Yiwu, and even in the least developed areas like Lishui. Similar to the development of the ICT industry, Taobao villages started in the more developed regions, but gradually emerged in less developed regions as well, which show the diffusion trend amid concentration. E-commerce provides opportunities for the development of rural areas in less developed regions.

We have identified two types of Taobao villages: production oriented and market oriented. Local natural resources and agricultural products based rural e-commerce is the most prevalent development model in rural China and the most duplicable one. The successful ones have developed the division of labor to improve productivity with the economy of scale such as the Qiaoyun model. They have also been well connected to the larger production and market networks in China. For places lacking natural resources, Taobao villages can still be successful by connecting to the marketplace (for example, the Qingyanliu model) or developing brands such as the Beishan model.
The success of Taobao villages also depends on the lead ICT firm Alibaba and local governments. Alibaba not only provides and regulates the e-commerce platform Taobao.com, but also actively promotes the development of rural e-commerce through its Rural Taobao strategy, infrastructure construction, and training and education. Although Taobao villages are mostly spontaneous grassroots development, local governments also play important roles in their development as service providers, advocators, and intermediaries. In addition, the government promotes the rural e-commerce cluster through e-commerce industrial parks, connects Taobao villages with the broader international market through cross-border e-commerce, and embeds them in the global production networks. The successful Taobao villages often scale up their development efforts by seeking the support from upper-level governments, given the lack of resources and political power of Taobao villages. Lead firms such as Beishan Wolf can create interregional production networks and occupy the high value-added position in the value chain. These development models of Taobao villages may provide a pathway to economic development for rural areas in other developing countries.

The future for Taobao villages is highly uncertain despite their rapid growth in recent years. Apparently, most Taobao villages are still in the low value-added position. They are struggling to cultivate their own brands and seek differentiation strategies to succeed in the fierce market competition. For example, Xishan Village had an initial success but lacked improvement and innovation in their products. With competition from other newly developed Taobao villages, many online stores have been shut down in Xishan. Its remote location and lack of resources also constitute a natural barrier to its development. Therefore, sustainable development of Taobao villages highly depends on their network relations and innovation capability. Also, development of Taobao villages in peripheral regions is challenging due to inadequate infrastructure and inability to
attract talent. The spatial concentration and agglomeration of Taobao villages in costal China might be maintained in the future.

Globalization and the "Internet +" have reduced spatial barriers and information asymmetry in development, and poor regions and rural areas may seize the new opportunities to develop their economies. Taobao villages in China have acted as an incubator to help bridge knowledge, digital, social, and even cultural divides. They can give full play to the advantages of rural resources and traditional products and serve as a new engine for economic growth in rural areas. With the ambition of Alibaba to promote e-commerce in other developing countries, rural villages there have the opportunity to develop Taobao villages, which is certainly dependent on a number of conditions, including local context, entrepreneurs, and the capable state institutions.

References

AliResearch. 2014-2016. Research Report on China’s Taobao Villages. Hangzhou: Alibaba.

Burt, S., and L. Sparks. 2003. E-commerce and the Retail Process. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services 10 (5): 275–286.

Cartier, C. 2001. Zone Fever, the Arable Land Debate, and Real Estate Speculation. Journal of Contemporary China 10: 445–469.

Duckett, J. 1998. The Entrepreneurial State in China. London: Routledge.

Ernst, D. 2010. Upgrading Through Innovation in a Small Network Economy: Insights from Taiwan's IT Industry. Economics of Innovation and New Technology 19 (4): 295–324.
Feldman, M., J. Francis., and J. Bercovitz. 2005. Creating a Cluster While Building a Firm. Regional Studies 39 (1): 129–141.

Friedman, T. L. 2005. The World is Flat. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Gereffi, G., J. Humphrey., and T. Sturgeon. 2005. The Governance of Global Value Chains. Review of International Political Economy 12 (1): 78–104.

Gibbs, J., K. L. Kraemer., and J. Dedrick. 2003. Environment and Policy Factors Shaping Global E-Commerce Diffusion. The Information Society 19 (1): 5–18.

Hadjimichalis, C. 2006. The End of Third Italy as We Knew It? Antipode 38 (1): 82–106.

Hempel, P. S., and Y. K. Kwong. 2001. B2B E-Commerce in Emerging Economies. Journal of Strategic Information Systems 10 (4): 335–355.

Jessop, B., and N. L. Sum. 2000. An Entrepreneurial City in Action: Hong Kong's Emerging Strategies in and for (Inter) Urban Competition. Urban Studies 37 (12): 2287–2313.

Lane, S. 2010. National E-Commerce Extension Initiative for Rural Entrepreneurs. Choices 25 (4).

Lawrence, J. E., and U. A. Tar. 2010. Barriers to E-Commerce in Developing Countries. Information, Society and Justice Journal 3 (1): 23–35.

Le, V. H., F. Rowe., D. Truex., and M. Q. Huynh. 2012. An empirical Study of Determinants of E-Commerce Adoption in SMEs in Vietnam an Economy in Transition. Journal of Global Information Management 20 (3): 1–35.

Lefebvre, L. A., and E. Lefebvre. 2002. E-Commerce and Virtual Enterprises. Technovation 22 (5): 313–323.
Leong, C. M. L., S. L. Pan., S. Newell., and L. Cui. 2016. The Emergence of Self-Organizing E-Commerce Ecosystems in Remote Villages of China. MIS Quarterly 40 (2): 475–484.

Lewis, R., and A. Cockrill. 2002. Going Global-Remaining Local. International Journal of Information Management 22 (3): 195–209.

Liao, F. H. F., and Y. H. D. Wei. 2012. Dynamics, Space, and Regional Inequality in Provincial China. Applied Geography 35(1–2): 71–83.

Lin, G. C. 1997. Red Capitalism in South China. Vancouver: UBC press.

Liu, Y. S., Y. Liu., Y. F. Chen., and. H. L. Lou. 2011. The Process and Driving Forces of Rural Hollowing in China Under Rapid Urbanization. Journal of Geographical Sciences 20 (6): 876–888.

Lu, L., and Y.H. D. Wei. 2007. Domesticating Globalisation, New Economic Spaces and Regional Polarisation in Guangdong Province, China. Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 98 (2): 225–244.

Ma, L. J. C., and M. Fan. 1994. Urbanisation from Below: The Growth of Towns in Jiangsu, China. Urban Studies 31 (10): 1625–1645.

———————, and G. Cui. 2002. Economic Transition at The Local Level: Diverse Forms of Town Development in China. Post-Soviet Geography and Economics 43 (2): 79–103.

Markusen, A. 1996. Sticky Places in Slippery Space. Economic Geography 72 (3): 293–313.

Murphy, J. T., and S. Schindler. 2011. Globalizing Development in Bolivia. Journal of Economic Geography 11 (1): 61–85.

Oi, J. C. 1995. The Role of the Local State in China's Transitional Economy. China Quarterly 144 (144): 1132–1149.
———-. 1999. Rural China Takes off. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Panchal, J. H., and M. Fathianathan. 2008. Product Realization in the Age of Mass Collaboration. ASME Design Automation Conference.

Pereira, A. A. 2003. State Collaboration and Development Strategies in China. New York: Routledge.

Pietrobelli, C., and T. O. Barrera. 2002. Enterprise Clusters and Industrial Districts in Colombia's Fashion Sector. European Planning Studies 10 (5): 541–562.

Piore, M., and C. Sabel. 1984. The Second Industrial Divide. New York: Basic Books.

Porter, M. E. 2000. Location, Competition, and Economic Development. Economic Development Quarterly 14 (1): 15–34.

Pyke, F., and W. Sengenberger. 1992. Industrial Districts and Local Economic Regeneration. Industrial & Labor Relations Review 46 (4): 110–117.

Rabellotti, R. 1995. Is There an “Industrial District Model”? World Development 23 (1): 29–41.

Sayer, A. 2004. Seeking the Geographies of Power. Economy and Society 33 (2): 255–270.

Scott, A. J. 1998. Regions and the World Economy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Stohr, W. B., and D. R. F. Taylor (eds.). 1981. Development from Above or Below? Chichester: Wiley.

Storper, M. 1997. The Regional World. Guilford Press.

Wade, R. 1990. Governing the Market. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Walder, A. G. 1995. Local Governments as Industrial Firms. American Journal of Sociology 101 (2): 263–301.
Wang, J. H., and C. K. Lee. 2007. Global Production Networks and Local Institution Building. Environment and Planning A 39: 1873–1888.

Wang, Y.P., Y. Wang., and J. Wu. 2009. Urbanization and Informal Development in China. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 33 (4): 957–773.

Wei, Y. H. D. 2000. Regional Development in China. New York: Routledge.

———————. 2002. Beyond the Sunan Model. Environment and Planning A 34 (10): 1725–1747.

———————. 2007. Regional Development in China. Eurasian Geography & Economics 48 (1): 16–36.

———————. 2011. Beyond the GPN–New Regionalism Divide in China. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography 93 (3): 237–251.

———————. 2015a. Spatiality of Regional Inequality. Applied Geography 61: 1–10.

———————. 2015b. Network Linkages and Local Embeddedness of Foreign Ventures in China. Regional Studies 49 (2): 287–299.

———————., W. Li., and C. Wang. 2007. Restructuring Industrial Districts, Scaling up Regional Development. Economic Geography 83 (4): 421–444.

———————., and F. H. F. Liao. 2013. The Embeddedness of Transnational Corporations in Chinese Cities. Habitat International 40 (3): 82–90.

———————., I. Liefner., and C.H. Miao. 2011. Network Configurations and R&D Activities of the ICT Industry in Suzhou Municipality, China. Geoforum 42 (4): 484–495.

Whitford, J. 2001. The Decline of a Model? Economy & Society 30 (1): 38–65.
Willis, J. L. 2004. What Impact Will E-Commerce Have on the US Economy? Economic Review-Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 89 (2): 53–71.

World Bank. 2016. The Taobao Villages as an Instrument for Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity. New York: World Bank.

Wrigley, N., and A. Currah. 2006. Globalizing Retail and the “New E-Conomy”. Geoforum 37 (3): 340–351.

Wu, F. 2003. The (Post-) Socialist Entrepreneurial City as a State Project. Urban Studies 40 (9): 1673–1698.

Yeung, H. W.C. 2009. Regional Development and the Competitive Dynamics of Global Production Networks. Regional Studies 43 (3): 325–351.

———————, and N. Coe. 2015. Toward a Dynamic Theory of Global Production Networks. Economic Geography 91 (1): 29–58.

Zhang, J., and J. Peck. 2016. Variegated Capitalism, Chinese Style: Regional Models, Multi-Scalar Constructions. Regional Studies 50 (1): 52–78.

Zheng, S. Q., F. J. Long, C. C. Fan., and Y. Z. Gu. 2009. Urban Villages in China. Eurasian Economics and Geography 50 (4): 425–446.
Table 1. Taobao villages and Taobao towns in China, 2013-2016

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Year</th>
    <th>2013</th>
    <th>2014</th>
    <th>2015</th>
    <th>2016</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Taobao villages</td>
    <td>20</td>
    <td>212</td>
    <td>780</td>
    <td>1311</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Taobao towns</td>
    <td>-</td>
    <td>19</td>
    <td>71</td>
    <td>135</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Involved provinces</td>
    <td>7</td>
    <td>10</td>
    <td>17</td>
    <td>18</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>CV</td>
    <td>0.36</td>
    <td>1.01</td>
    <td>1.35</td>
    <td>1.50</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>No.1 Prefecture (Taobao villages)</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>Guangzhou (23)</td>
    <td>Jinhua (56)</td>
    <td>Taizhou (107)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>No.2 Prefecture (Taobao villages)</td>
    <td>Heze (2) Lishui (2)</td>
    <td>Quanzhou (17)</td>
    <td>Wenzhou (56)</td>
    <td>Wenzhou (101)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>No.3 Prefecture (Taobao villages)</td>
    <td>Lin'an (2)</td>
    <td>Xingtai (14)</td>
    <td>Quanzhou (47)</td>
    <td>Jinhua (95)</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source : AliResearch (2014-2016)

Table 2. Taobao villages in Zhejiang province, 2014-2016

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Year</th>
    <th>Taobao villages</th>
    <th>Share of national total</th>
    <th>No.1 county-level unit (Taobao villages)</th>
    <th>Involved county-level units</th>
    <th>CV</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2014</td>
    <td>62</td>
    <td>29.25%</td>
    <td>Yongjia (7)</td>
    <td>23</td>
    <td>0.72</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2015</td>
    <td>280</td>
    <td>35.90%</td>
    <td>Yiwu (37)</td>
    <td>55</td>
    <td>1.32</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2016</td>
    <td>506</td>
    <td>38.60%</td>
    <td>Yiwu (65)</td>
    <td>62</td>
    <td>1.40</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source : AliResearch (2014-2016)
Table 3. Structure of rural online enterprises in Zhejiang province

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Attribute</th>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Number of cases</th>
    <th>Percent</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="5">Year established</td>
    <td>Before 2006</td>
    <td>6</td>
    <td>2.36</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2006-2009</td>
    <td>58</td>
    <td>22.83</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2010-2012</td>
    <td>81</td>
    <td>31.89</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2013-2015</td>
    <td>88</td>
    <td>34.65</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2016</td>
    <td>21</td>
    <td>8.27</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="5">Annual sales in 2015 (RMB)</td>
    <td>less than 100,000</td>
    <td>60</td>
    <td>25.98</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>100,000-500,000</td>
    <td>85</td>
    <td>33.64</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>500,000-1 million</td>
    <td>52</td>
    <td>20.47</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>1-5 million</td>
    <td>39</td>
    <td>15.35</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>over 5 million</td>
    <td>18</td>
    <td>7.09</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="5">Share of online revenue in total family income</td>
    <td>less than 20%</td>
    <td>23</td>
    <td>9.06</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>20.0%-49.9%</td>
    <td>38</td>
    <td>14.96</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>50.0%-79.9%</td>
    <td>51</td>
    <td>20.08</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>80.0%-99.9%</td>
    <td>55</td>
    <td>21.65</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>100%</td>
    <td>87</td>
    <td>34.25</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="5">Employees</td>
    <td>Less than 5 persons</td>
    <td>146</td>
    <td>57.87</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>5-10 persons</td>
    <td>78</td>
    <td>30.71</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>11-20 persons</td>
    <td>17</td>
    <td>6.69</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>20-100 persons</td>
    <td>9</td>
    <td>3.54</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>more than 100 persons</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>1.18</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="5">Employees with bachelor or higher degree</td>
    <td>None</td>
    <td>103</td>
    <td>40.56</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>1-5 persons</td>
    <td>128</td>
    <td>50.39</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>6-10 persons</td>
    <td>16</td>
    <td>6.30</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>11-20 persons</td>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>1.97</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>more than 20 persons</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>0.08</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source: The Taobao village survey
Table 4. Development models of Taobao villages in Zhejiang province

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Models</th>
    <th>Raw Materials</th>
    <th>Production</th>
    <th>Relationship Network</th>
    <th>Entrepreneurs</th>
    <th>Production Space</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Xishan model: family workshop based</td>
    <td>Local natural resources</td>
    <td>Family-workshops</td>
    <td>Families-Families</td>
    <td>Local people</td>
    <td>Village</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Producti on oriented</td>
    <td>Qiaoyun model: Marshallian industrial districts</td>
    <td>Purchase</td>
    <td>Family-workshops</td>
    <td>Families-Families</td>
    <td>Local people</td>
    <td>Village</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Bainiu model: hub-and-spoke production</td>
    <td>Homegrown</td>
    <td>Processed by factories in towns</td>
    <td>Factories-Families</td>
    <td>Local people</td>
    <td>Town</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Market oriented</td>
    <td>Beishan Model: hub-and-spoke brand management</td>
    <td>Purchase</td>
    <td>Subcontracting</td>
    <td>Lead enterprise-distributors</td>
    <td>Local people</td>
    <td>Inter-province</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Qingyanliu model: local marketplace based</td>
    <td>Purchase</td>
    <td>Factories</td>
    <td>Factories-distributors</td>
    <td>Outsiders</td>
    <td>City</td>
  </tr>
</table>
Table 5. Online enterprises’ awareness of government supports

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Government support</th>
    <th>Number of cases</th>
    <th>Percent</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Promotion</td>
    <td>194</td>
    <td>76.38</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Training</td>
    <td>175</td>
    <td>68.90</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Attracting suppliers</td>
    <td>189</td>
    <td>74.41</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Warehouse and logistics</td>
    <td>140</td>
    <td>55.12</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Communication infrastructure</td>
    <td>138</td>
    <td>54.33</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Funds</td>
    <td>139</td>
    <td>54.72</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source: The Taobao village survey

Table 6. Independent new products and R&D investment of online enterprises

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Attribute</th>
    <th rowspan="2">Category</th>
    <th colspan="2">Number of cases</th>
    <th rowspan="2">Percent</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th></th>
    <th></th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="5">Share of independent new products in total new products (percent)</td>
    <td>None</td>
    <td>116</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>45.67</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>0.01-20.00</td>
    <td>56</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>22.05</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>20.01-50.00</td>
    <td>43</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>16.93</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>50.01-80.00</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>1.18</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>80.01-100</td>
    <td>30</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>11.81</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="5">Share of R&D investment in annual sales (percent)</td>
    <td>None</td>
    <td>106</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>41.73</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>0.1-10.0</td>
    <td>79</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>31.1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>10.1-20.0</td>
    <td>24</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>9.45</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>20.1-50</td>
    <td>36</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>14.17</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>more than 50</td>
    <td>9</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>3.54</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source: The Taobao village survey
Figure 1. Study areas in Zhejiang
Figure 2. Rapid development of Taobao villages in China, 2014-2016

Source : AliResearch, 2014-2016
Figure 3. Taobao villages in Zhejiang, 2014-2016

Source : AliResearch, 2014-2016