Annals of the Association of American Geographers
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

Agro-Ecology and Food Sovereignty Movements in Chile: Sociospatial Practices for Alternative Peasant Futures
Beatriz Cid Aguayo a & Alex Latta b
a Department of Sociology and Anthropology, University of Concepción, Chile
b Department of Global Studies, Wilfrid Laurier University, Canada
Published online: 28 Jan 2015.

To cite this article: Beatriz Cid Aguayo & Alex Latta (2015): Agro-Ecology and Food Sovereignty Movements in Chile: Sociospatial Practices for Alternative Peasant Futures, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2014.985626

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2014.985626

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions
Agro-Ecology and Food Sovereignty Movements in Chile: Sociospatial Practices for Alternative Peasant Futures

Beatriz Cid Aguayo* and Alex Latta†

*Department of Sociology and Anthropology, University of Concepción, Chile
†Department of Global Studies, Wilfrid Laurier University, Canada

The agro-ecology and food sovereignty movements of southern Chile promote alternatives to the hegemonic agro-export regime that dominates the landscape. We explore these mobilizations and the strategies they employ, with a particular focus on a network of peasant women “seed curators.” The global agri-food complex relies on a flat and universalizing spatiality of land as resource and food as commodity, in which the character and fate of individual places is of little importance. This is paired with a hierarchical monopolization of knowledge, where producers become recipients rather than creators and custodians of agricultural inputs and know-how. In response, peasant movements have given birth to alternative spatial practices based on horizontal networks that join together interdependent producers and places. By sharing traditional and agro-ecological knowledge, cultivating alternate circuits of exchange, and building urban–rural partnerships, these movements seek to reshape the horizons of possibility both for peasant communities and for the broader agri-food system.

Key Words: agro-ecology, agri-business, Chile, food sovereignty, peasant agriculture.

智利南部的农业生态与粮食主权运动，提倡在支配地景的霸权农产出口政体之外，寻求另赖可能。我们探讨这些动员及其所运用的策略，并特别关注一个名为“种子监护人”的女性农民网络。全球的农产品复合体，仰赖土地的扁平及普遍化空间性作为资源，以及粮食作为商品，其中个别地方的特徵与命运，并不具太大的重要性。而与其搭配的是知识的阶层式独佔，其中生产者成为接收者，而非创造者及农业投入与技术祕诀的看守人。农民运动，催生了根据将相互依存的生产者及地方连结在一起的水平网络的另类空间实践。透过分享传统及农业生态知识、培育交换的交替通路，以及建立城乡伙伴关係，这些运动企图同时为农民社群与更广泛的农产品系统，重塑可能性的范畴。

关键词：农业生态，农企业，智利，粮食主权，农民农业。

Los movimientos de agroecología y soberanía alimentaria del sur de Chile promueven alternativas al régimen hegemónico agro-exportador que domina el paisaje regional. Exploramos estas movilizaciones y las estrategias que ellas emplean, enfocándonos particularmente sobre una red de mujeres campesinas “curadoras de semillas.” El complejo global agro-alimentario depende de una espacialidad plana y universalizadora de la tierra como recurso y del alimento como mercadería, en la que el carácter y suerte de los lugares individuales revisten poca importancia. Lo anterior va de la mano con una monopolización jerárquica del conocimiento, donde los productores se convierten más en receptores que en creadores y custodios de los recursos agrícolas y del saber. Como respuesta, los movimientos campesinos han dado lugar a prácticas espaciales alternativas basadas en redes horizontales que conectan a los productores interdependientes con los lugares. Al compartir conocimiento tradicional y agro-ecológico, cultivando circuitos alternos de intercambio y construyendo compañías urbano-rurales, estos movimientos buscan reconfigurar los horizontes de posibilidad tanto para las comunidades campesinas como para el más amplio sistema agro-alimentario. Palabras clave: agroecología, agroindustria, Chile, soberanía alimentaria, agricultura campesina.

Chile figures centrally in the story of neoliberal globalization, both for being the first full-fledged neoliberal experiment and for the depth and durability of the changes that experiment set in train. Among the first and most important policy changes implemented after the country’s 1973 military coup was the reversal of agrarian reforms carried out under previous governments and the pursuit of a new agricultural model focused on export.

Over the ensuing twenty years, the Chilean countryside was dramatically reshaped by an intensification of agriculture and forestry, not carried out by the traditional landowning elite but rather by a new capitalist landowning class (Gómez and Echenique 1988). Meanwhile, small peasant farmers became rural proletarians, providing labor within the newly industrializing agricultural model (Echenique and Rolando 1991).
Our article locates alternate socioecological futures in the context of this transformed countryside. In the interstices of the now widespread agro-industrial model, we examine mobilizations for agro-ecological alternatives and food sovereignty in the Biobío region of southern Chile. These mobilizations offer heterogeneous political responses to the various impacts of the neoliberal model on the Chilean countryside, which include the industrialization of production, the homogenization of agricultural commodities, and the externalization of risk to local producers. We explore these mobilizations and the strategies they employ as a networked politics of place, embodied in everyday practices and embedded in a broader challenge to capitalist territorializations of rural space and rural–urban relationships.

Where the agro-industrial model relies on a flat and universalizing spatiality of land as resource and food as commodity, agro-ecological movements are giving birth to insurgent territorial configurations based on the particularities of local socinatural relations, along with principles of ethical consumption, urban–rural partnership, and solidaristic economic exchange. We bring together three perspectives to frame our analysis: (1) food sovereignty, as both an analytical frame and as a principle mobilized in the discourse of peasant activists (Sevilla Guzmán 2006; Wittman, Desmarais, and Wiebe 2010; Gutierrez Escobar 2011; Andrée et al. 2014); (2) postdevelopment and alter-globalization approaches that chart the way specific places generate practices, agencies, and possibilities that constitute alternatives to capitalist globalization (e.g., Gibson-Graham 2003, 2006; Escobar 2008; White and Williams 2012; Gibson-Graham, Cameron, and Healy 2013); and (3) a related literature that considers local mobilizations as forms of spatial politics interwoven with and enabled by broader sets of sociospatial relations and practices (e.g., Massey 2004; Tsing 2005; Jessop, Brenner, and Jones 2008; Neumann 2009).

After a brief discussion of methods, our arguments are organized in four parts. We begin by generating a theoretical basis for considering alternative economies and spatialities of agriculture and food. Next, we explore debates around peasant responses to the global agri-food regime. In the second half of the article we address the agrarian context in southern Chile, describing first the impacts of the agri-business complex and the response from food sovereignty movements, before turning to a deeper examination of the sociospatial practices that constitute agro-ecological alternatives.

Method

The case study is based on interviews carried out by the first author during 2012 and 2013, with peasant women who are part of a network of curadoras de semillas (seed “curators” or “healers,” hereafter curadoras) in southern Chile. The interviews are part of a larger research project that also examines two other sites of alternative agriculture in the region, namely, community-based urban agriculture and export-oriented certified organic farming. Research with the curadoras was carried out as part of a long-standing collaboration with Chile’s National Association of Rural and Indigenous Women (ANAMURI by the Spanish acronym), although not all members of the curadora network (nor all those interviewed) are part of ANAMURI. A snowball sampling approach was taken to the study, beginning with movement leaders and requesting referrals from interviewees. Twenty-three in-depth ethnographic interviews were conducted, eight with movement leaders and fifteen with curadoras. The average length of interviews was two hours, although in some cases more than one meeting took place. Mostly conducted in the homes of the research participants, interviews were recorded, transcribed, and coded using NVivo software (NVivo 10 2012). The analysis is also informed by participant observation at seed exchange events, as well as past experiences of several political and technical collaborations with ANAMURI between 2010 and 2013.

The majority of the interviews took place in Chile’s south-central Biobío region, where the network of curadoras is concentrated. The Biobío contains the largest remaining concentration of peasant farms and the most significant examples of alternative agricultural practices and movements in the country. That the members of the network are predominantly women speaks to a notable gendering of agricultural roles, where men are more likely to participate as laborers in industrial agriculture or other sectors of the mainstream economy, and women have taken increasing leadership in developing the kinds of alternative agricultural and economic practices associated with the food sovereignty movement.

Despite the fact that ANAMURI attempts to mobilize both indigenous as well as nonindigenous women, in Chile’s south it has had only partial success in achieving this intercultural objective. This is due in part to the troubled relationships between settler society and the Mapuche people, characterized by a history of land conquest and racism, but it is also related to a
tension between feminist values that inform ANAMURI and the traditional values of complementarity that structure gender relations in many Mapuche communities. Only three of the interviewees in the study were Mapuche, two curadoras and one movement leader. The gendered and racial dimensions of the curadora network are certainly deserving of further analysis. Nevertheless, we put these issues to one side to focus here on the sociospatial practices of the curadoras.

Economic and Spatial Dimensions of Contested Socionatural Selations

Gibson-Graham (1996, 2006) asserts that critical scholarship has overemphasized the pervasiveness of capitalism, ignoring the persistence of alternative modes of economic organization in the interstices of an always uneven and incomplete pattern of subjection to a global capitalist order (see also Williams 2005; Escobar 2008; Healy 2009; Williams et al. 2012). She argues that by embracing economic heterogeneity, “noncapitalism lost its negativity, becoming a multitude of specific economic activities and relations, and capitalism simultaneously lost its abstract singularity” (Gibson-Graham 2006, xxxiv). In the wake of this shift, research has connected economic heterogeneity with modes of adaptation or resistance in response to economic hardship, encapsulated by Gibson-Graham (2006) in the notion of “community economies” (see also Whitson 2007; Round, Williams, and Rodgers 2008; Williams et al. 2012). It has also taken up diverse economic practices as part of a political project of purposefully imagining and enacting alternatives to a capitalist order (e.g., Gibson-Graham 2006; Escobar 2008; Healy and Graham 2008; White and Williams 2012; Gibson-Graham, Cameron, and Healy 2013).

As Healy (2009) argues, there are key spatial dimensions to the project of rethinking economies as heterogeneous fields of possibility—what Gibson-Graham calls “a geography of ubiquity.” Healy suggests that this perspective offers a nonhierarchical or flattened politics of the global as an alternative to hierarchical scalar imaginaries where global forces are seen to penetrate and reconfigure local spaces. This alternative imaginary is a potentially empowering ontological shift, but we assert that the politics of space and scale persist and must be addressed as part of social and political practice (Moore 2008; Neumann 2009). In addition, it is crucial to note that the spatial imaginary of dominant economic narratives is also horizontal. For neoliberal ideologues, the global market is a flat and universalizing space, where order is spontaneously generated by competition among nations, regions, cities, enterprises, and individuals (e.g., Friedman 2005; see also Christopherson, Garretsen, and Martin 2008). For neo-Keynesian economists, the current global economy is unevenly scaled in favor of powerful nations and corporations, but appropriate policy measures could render it more egalitarian and hence more flat (Sheppard and Leitner 2010). Finally, in the practices of transnational corporations that organize global commodity chains, local cultural and ecological differences are inconvenient spatiotemporal factors to be overcome through the standardization of agricultural outputs (e.g., see Cid Aguayo 2007).

Given this context, we argue that Gibson-Graham’s place-based orientation (Gibson-Graham 2003, 2006; Gibson-Graham, Cameron, and Healy 2013; see also Escobar’s [2001] “localization strategies”) demands closer attention to counterhegemonic spatial practices that reconstruct localities and regions as sites where identity and agency are generated in negotiation with wider global forces. Moreover, following Jessop, Brenner, and Jones (2008), we seek to connect the politics of scale with a broader set of “sociospatial relations” that also include territories, places, and networks. Taking up Gibson-Graham’s notion of the economy as a field of difference, we can begin to trace the way that self-conscious movements for alternative food systems emerge against the grain of the sociospatial relations of capitalist agriculture.

Agro-Industry, Peasant Agriculture, and Food Sovereignty

In recent debates, the agrarian question has been developed in relation to the so-called corporate food regime (Friedmann 1995) and the Supermarket Revolution (McMichael 2005). This regime or revolution has fomented a reconcentration of agricultural lands and promotes monocropping for export, leading to increasingly precarious conditions for peasant economies and a renewed focus on global processes of “de-peasantization” (Araghi 2000). At the same time, it has become apparent that the plight of the peasantry cannot be understood simply in terms of peasants’ economic and territorial displacement. The agro-food complex has also colonized and reshaped relations of production, leading many peasants to lose control over
productive processes and develop dependency relations with agro-industry, becoming quasi-proletarians on their own land.

There are important sociospatial dimensions to this reorganization of peasant production. Goodman, Sorj, and Wilkinson (1987) describe parallel processes of “appropriationism” and “substitutionism” (see also Goodman and Redcliff 1991). The former involves the transformation of agricultural cycles into agro-industrial processes, replacing localized knowledge, practices, and agricultural inputs with deterritorialized scientific knowledge, globally standardized techniques, and industrially derived inputs. In spatial terms, these changes constitute a territorial flattening of agro-ecological relations, which facilitates the extraction of ecological capital and human labor. Appropriationism is complemented by substitutionism, which further standardizes food as it moves through the value chain, converting agricultural outputs into industrial materials and eventually into durable goods. This process furthers the standardization initiated in the appropriationism phase, usually constituting the total erasure of locational and temporal dimensions of agricultural production.

Through these related processes, mid- to large-size farms are articulated with agro-industry through “contract agriculture,” whereby producers commit to the use of standardized inputs and procedures in exchange for purchase agreements. This approach allows corporations to download production risks like climate inconsistency, disease, and pests. Producers who absorb these risks often end up trapped in a debt cycle driven by the annual costs of inputs (Glover and Kusterer 1990; Grossman 1998; Warning and Key 2002; Cid Aguayo 2007). In this way, risk is perhaps the only element of agricultural production that remains strongly localized within the agri-food system. Meanwhile, a composite of globally distributed place-based production ensures reliable corporate profitability.

Some peasants have responded to the globalization of agro-industrial production by participating in contract agriculture, a successful strategy for producers who can acquire more land and scale up production. Others have sold their land to become rural wage laborers or migrate to cities. Finally, some peasants have resisted market pressures to get big or sell out, instead seeking to revitalize local and regional economies of smallholder production, in the process reclaiming peasant identity as a new site of cultural, economic, and political agency. It is this final group that has taken up food sovereignty as a critical perspective and political agenda, especially in the Global South.

Food sovereignty stands in contrast to food security by focusing on modes of production instead of just affordability and reliability of access. As such, it puts the dominant agro-industrial model in question and converts food into a broader site of political engagement (see, e.g., Wittman, Desmarais, and Wiebe 2010; contributions to Andrée et al. 2014). It is notable that the concept emerged directly from peasant movements, especially the largest global peasant network, Vía Campesina (Wittman 2009; Ortega-Cerdà and Rivera-Ferre 2010; Gutiérrez Escobar 2011). In this vein, Wittman (2009) identifies food sovereignty as the basis for a reconstitution of agrarian citizenship. Ortega-Cerdà and Rivera-Ferre (2010) identify five dimensions of the food sovereignty agenda: (1) ensuring peasant access to agricultural inputs like land and seeds; (2) nurturing diversified, locally appropriate agricultural practices; (3) protecting and promoting local markets for the products of peasant agriculture; (4) ensuring all citizens’ rights to have healthy, locally produced food; and (5) promoting peasants’ right to full participation in setting agricultural policy.

The food sovereignty literature frequently makes explicit links to principles of agro-ecology, which seeks to foster a synergy between peasant knowledge and alternative agricultural science informed by ecological principles (Sevilla Guzmán 2006; Altieri 2009). We also find it crucial to emphasize the link between food sovereignty and movements to build social solidarity economies (e.g., see Gutiérrez Escobar 2011). Following Miller (2013, 529), the latter consist of “constructing concrete relations of collaborative production, transaction, consumption, and surplus reinvestment that can constitute a growing ‘outside’ to capitalist relations.” As Miller argues, movements for social solidarity economies can be seen as one potentially powerful political embodiment of the community economies paradigm set out by Gibson-Graham.

Agrarian Change and the Food Sovereignty Movement in Southern Chile

The 1980s saw a consolidation of the export-oriented agri-businesses model across Chile, especially in the market niches of fresh fruits and vegetables, premium wines, wood pulp, and Atlantic salmon. This process was fueled by state support for research and development, the flexibilization of the rural labor
market, and a dramatic opening to foreign investment. The sector’s expansion continued with little change in direction after the 1990 return to democracy under successive governments of the center-left parties of the Concertación (Cid Aguayo 2011).

Only the most isolated regions less apt for commercial agriculture have escaped the process of rural transformation, becoming “refuge areas” for peasant economies (Clapp 1998). The Biobío region, located in south-central Chile, contains an important concentration of those refuge areas. According to the most recent Farm Census (Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas 2007), this region holds 22 percent of the nation’s agricultural lands less than ten hectares in size (comprising 64.9 percent of the holdings in the region). These smallholders continue to face pressures associated with the agro-export economic model, especially in terms of an expanding forest industry. During the past twenty years, 1,330,163 hectares of farmland previously dedicated to crops such as wheat and sugar beets have been converted to forestry plantations (Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas 2007). For peasant farmers this expansion of plantation forestry has meant competition for water resources, contamination from agrochemicals, and the increased risk of forest fires. Some have opted to also plant trees or lease their land to forestry companies. For those who remain in agriculture, government policy has constituted another kind of pressure on traditional patterns of livelihood, with assistance programs that encourage the use of external inputs like improved seeds and fertilizers, and gauge farm viability in terms of producers’ integration into agro-industrial commodity chains.

In response to these pressures, the Biobío region has seen the rise of significant peasant organizing around the principles of both agro-ecology and food sovereignty. The region is home to two of the leading national organizations promoting agro-ecology, the Centre for Education and Technology of the South (CET Sur) and another called CET Yumbel. The region also concentrates the largest number of agro-ecological producers in Chile, including approximately 1,000 certified organic farms—half of all certified organic farms in the country (personal communication with organic certification agent, 23 March 2012). The agro-ecological movement in the Biobío region can be divided into three groups: (1) medium and large farms with a certain level of capitalization, focused on certified organic production for mainly international markets; (2) a small middle- and upper-class movement around the philosophy of permaculture; and (3) peasant federations, urban agricultural organizations, and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) focused on small-scale production for subsistence and local markets. This third group exhibits a strong affinity with the principles of food sovereignty, especially evidenced by the participation of female peasant producers in the National Association of Rural and Native Women (ANAMURI). ANAMURI was formed in the 1990s as an offshoot of existing male-dominated peasant organizations. It began its work with temporary agricultural employees as a response to the growth of a female agricultural proletariat but has reoriented its priorities toward the reinvention and revalorization of peasant identities and rural life. It has become the most important organization for peasant advocacy at the national level and is a member of Vía Campesina (Cid Aguayo 2011).

ANAMURI is the principle instigator of the network of curadoras de semillas that is the focus of this study. The curadoras protect and multiply a wide variety of seed in household gardens. In the Biobío region, the practice has its contemporary origins in a series of seed curator schools, implemented over the past decade by NGOs such as CET Sur and CET Yumbel. The curadoras work with seeds in two senses: both to physically preserve and reproduce local genetic diversity, and more metaphorically to “heal” the seeds as elements of a landscape under attack by agro-industrial practices. As one curadora describes the practice:

[A curadora is] a healer of seeds . . . [being a curadora] is to rescue the seeds and store them . . . to defend the seeds. The curadora defends everything that is not genetically modified. (CS01-I, 21 May 2012).1

Although the self-conscious identity of the curadoras is partly a product of the political discourse of ANAMURI, it also has its roots in peasant and indigenous traditions. The same curadora goes on to note the following:

Who are really accomplished curadoras, real custodians of seed, are our people, our Mapuche people. . . . [The practice represents] the continuation of our ancestors . . . [what is important is] nourishing yourself with legumes, nourishing yourself with that which comes from the earth, directly from the earth. . . . We started to plant, and care for the seeds, then we started the exchanges, and from there we started to be curadoras of seeds. (CS01-I, 21 May 2012)

The principles of food sovereignty are taken up in different ways by the women who participated in the
study. On the one hand, many of the curadoras conceive of food sovereignty in terms of their ability to put healthy food on the table and the right to consume products free of pesticides or potentially transgenic properties associated with industrial agriculture.

Sovereignty is the healthy nutrition that one harvests: the vegetables . . . the legumes, having a little farm for oneself, planting. . . . That’s healthy nutrition for a person. (CS02, 20 September 2012)

Food sovereignty in general terms . . . is a right that a person has to feed herself as she should, healthily. . . . One has to have the right to consume uncontaminated food, that’s what’s fundamental, right? (CS03, 13 July 2012)

On the other hand, among women who have more political formation and take leadership roles in ANAMURI there is a broader articulation both of rights claims and of the productive roles of peasant farmers in the rural economy, as visible in the following comments from movement leaders.

Food sovereignty . . . [implies] a set of rights for us, the campesinos and campesinas. It implies the right to water; it implies the right to land; it implies, let’s say, the principal right to continue maintaining our creole and native seeds from which the chain of nutrition starts. (ML01, 25 September 2013)2

So we talk about food sovereignty because as I have always said, and I’m going to repeat it on this occasion: the small female farmer is the one who produces the food for the community, and the small farmer is the one in charge—we the women—of the conservation, care, reproduction and protection of our seeds. (ML02-I, 28 June 2013)

This same leader clearly articulates the connection between food sovereignty and agro-ecology, emphasizing traditional peasant (and indigenous) knowledge as a basis for more ecologically sound modes of production.

[We are] trying to rescue natural forms of production . . . returning to the ancestral practices because, well, we know those practices from when we were children. . . . My paternal grandmother was a very intelligent woman . . . she organized corner boxes in the corrals, huge boxes, and there she collected all the manure every day, the leaves that fell, the ashes she collected, throwing everything in these piles of compost and mixing it up. (ML02-I, 28 June 2013)

We assert that the eco-political discourses and productive practices of these women, joined together in a network of seed saving and exchange, signal the emergence of socioecological alternatives to dominant agro-industrial practices. In the next section, we explore their networked place-based agency as an alternative spatial order operating in the interstices of the flattened capitalist landscape of Chile’s neoliberal model of rural modernization.

Theorizing the Sociospatial Practices of Food Sovereignty in Chile’s Biobío

In the most basic sense, the continued presence of independent peasant agriculturalists in the region constitutes a form of active resistance against the global agri-food system, as it conserves a heterogenous field of economic possibility across a diversity of local places—Gibson-Graham’s “geography of ubiquity.” This presence and resistance, however, constitute more than mere negation of the dominant model. Peasants persist because peasant economies are sustained and adapted over time as a set of alternative sociospatial practices. Of particular importance are local relationships of exchange among peasant households, whether through farmers’ markets, barter, or reciprocity arrangements. More collectively organized practices also exist, such as direct exchange systems between peasant federations and unions of fishermen or urban industrial workers, as well as community-supported agriculture. The latter links agro-ecological producers with urban consumers that value local, nonstandard, and agro-ecological products. Such patterns of exchange are not necessarily outside the cash economy, but they politicize consumption and reconstruct food exchange as a space of trust, solidarity, and proximity, against the grain of the industrial food complex and globalized circuits of capital accumulation. The political significance of such relations comes into focus when considered alongside food sovereignty movement leaders’ explicit rejection of export-oriented agriculture and peasant integration into commodity chains.

We defined ourselves immediately as being an organization against that capitalist and patriarchal [agro-export] model . . . truly, the agricultural policies that there were during the period of the Concertación, and now even worse, were destined precisely to reduce the role of peasants. . . . They gave you credit; they bought your produce; and if the dollar went down you were out of luck, which is what happened for example with those compañeros [fellow peasants] in the VIII Region with the famous “fattening of the tulips.”3 (ML03, 25 June 2013)
In this way, the peasant economy is sustained as part of a conscious strategy in response to the pressures to integrate with the export economy and the production systems associated with it.

The network of curadoras embodies an even more evidently noncapitalist set of exchange relations, based on principles of social solidarity. Participants of the network regularly meet to exchange seeds in rituals called trafkintu, where each curadora shares small amounts of seed with her peers. The term trafkintu is borrowed from rituals of exchange practiced by the Mapuche indigenous people of the region and represents a key dimension of ANAMURI’s vision for an intercultural network. The trafkintu can be read not only as a performance of solidarity between individuals and organizations but also as an expression of the embodied relationships between human and nonhuman agency that lie at the heart of seed-saving practice. Seed saving and exchange is an agro-ecological response to agro-business’s control over the genetic material of agricultural crops, epitomized in the invention of “terminator” seeds, genetically modified to grow plants whose own seeds are sterile. In this context, what is especially interesting about the spatial dissemination of seed diversity throughout the socio-political networks of the curadoras is that it mitigates the risk of displacement or disappearance felt both by peasant farmers and by the plants on whose generative capacities they depend.

The sociospatial practices of the curadoras are of particular importance but should be understood in relation to a broader set of agro-ecological practices, particularly in the way such practices embody an alternative epistemological model. Agro-ecology combines aspects of local peasant knowledge with scientific knowledge gleaned largely by NGOs through transnational circuits of innovation and exchange around nonindustrial and organic agricultural technologies. Just as the trafkintus distribute genetic diversity across localities, agro-ecological knowledge is shared horizontally across transnational circuits of the social movement—an alter-globalizing model of dissemination directly contrary to the hierarchical concentration of knowledge production by agro-business. The horizontal extension of agro-ecological knowledge also avoids the homogenization of agricultural practice that is so characteristic to agro-industry.4 As knowledge flows through networks both regionally and internationally, peasants experiment with and adapt agro-ecological technologies to the specificities of their local ecosystems. In this way, the epistemological practice of agro-ecology is horizontal but not flat. The result is a diverse topology of knowledge and practice, in which the heterogeneity of place-based livelihoods is a reflection not of inward-looking localism but rather of numerous interplace and interorganizational engagements and affinities.

Food sovereignty links the sociospatial practices of agro-ecology to another suite of discourses and practices related to food consumption. At the level of the peasant household, participation in intensified agro-ecological production is also about conserving and celebrating a relationship with diverse and healthy food in the face of the homogenization of diets via global commodity chains and supermarkets. One research participant referred to this as follows:

If the industry for example decides “let’s not make any more tomatoes, no more peppers, no more carrots,” then what are we going to be left with? . . . We are accustomed to the buena mesa (plentiful table). I call it the buena mesa when we can serve ourselves everything, when nothing is lacking, all the vegetables, isn’t that right? (CS05, 25 September 2013)

More importantly, the role of women in the agro-ecological movement provides bridges among garden, kitchen, and peasant identity. Just as heirloom seeds are rescued and diffused across the region, traditional recipes are also experiencing resurgence, transmitting the enjoined agencies of soil, climate, seeds, and peasant producers into place-based experiences of food. This cultural dimension to food sovereignty is fundamental, not only because it conserves local diversity in the embodied socioecological act of eating but also because it provides a basis for new relationships between rural producers and urban consumers. Along these lines, the Arca del Gusto (Ark of Taste) initiative, started in 2012, links Chilean peasants with the global slow food movement and exemplifies agro-ecological and food sovereignty practices in this dimension. With its origins in the Biobío region, but a reach that extends to other parts of the country, the Arca del Gusto brings together organizations like ANAMURI, producers, and academics to raise the profile of traditional peasant foods, fomenting culinary tourism and promoting local flavors through festivals and popular markets.

Conclusions: New Agri-Food Territories?

The agri-business complex survives and grows by averaging risk across a hierarchically scaled and
vertically integrated network of individually vulnerable localities. In this sense, it rests on a certain territorial logic that generates a “reserve army” of places. Agro-ecological practices and related food sovereignty movements present a diametrically opposed territorialization of the local, seeking to increase the resilience of individual places through a horizontally integrated network of producers and consumers. In other words, these competing food systems rely on very specific spatial practices focused on the way particular places are connected into broader assemblages of socioecological relations.

Perhaps what remains to be emphasized is that places themselves do not preexist the relations into which they become enfolded but rather must be conceived as “sites of negotiation” (Massey 2004, 7; see also Jessop, Brenner, and Jones 2008). They are not passively integrated into the agri-business complex, nor do they map seamlessly onto an alternate agro-ecological landscape. Rather, place-based struggles in the name of peasant livelihoods and food sovereignty are always part of intraplace contention over the shape of rural economies. At the same time, it must be emphasized that if we accept Gibson-Graham’s (1996, 2006) assertion about economic heterogeneity, such contention need not be conceived as zero-sum. Both within and across places in Chile’s southern agricultural landscape, an agro-ecological network can and does coexist with a hegemonic agro-industrial complex.

In this light, what does it mean to describe the Biobío’s food sovereignty movement in the language of alternate economies or alter-globalization? This question raises issues from three different angles. First, given that the peasant producers who participated in this study must work against the grain of government policies, dominant political–economic relations, and pervasive cultural practices around food, their survival alongside the dominant agro-industrial model is far from guaranteed. In the same vein, asserting the possibility of coexistence does not erase the question of relative importance: Viable alternatives should be capable of growing and spreading. Second, we recognize that other observers might dispute our assertion that peasant agricultural economies can be considered alternative even when they continue to operate through forms of market exchange. Such a critique might be especially troubling to our thesis if the money that circulates in local economies is significantly derived from incomes in the mainstream economy, a dependence that is likely to increase as producers deepen their connection with urban consumers. Finally, we should not lose sight of the fact that certain places and actors are more represented than others in the movements we describe. In particular, the low participation of Mapuche women in ANA-MURI calls out for further inquiry. These are some of the challenges that form an agenda for future research, but they also mark the horizon of debates among civil society and community leaders in the agro-ecology and food sovereignty movements of Chile’s Biobío region.

Funding

The research, and also the collaboration between the authors, was funded by Fondecyt Initiation grant 11110020.

Notes

1. We use CS to refer to the interviewees who are curadoras de semillas, members of the seed saving network. We use I after the main coding to indicate when the interviewee is indigenous. All original recordings were in Spanish, with translation by the authors.
2. We use ML to refer to the interviewees who are movement leaders.
3. The fattening of the tulips refers to a state-sponsored projected to encourage peasant farmers to participate in the commercial bulb industry, where they would purchase seed bulbs and care for them until they were large enough for commercial sale.
4. Here it is important to set aside the certified organics sector. Certification is of limited importance to peasant producers due both to cost and administrative and technical requirements. At the same time it is also rejected for political reasons, precisely because it represents a top-down flow of knowledge and a loss of farmer autonomy.

References

Altieri, M. 2009. Agroecología, pequeñas fincas y soberanía alimentaria [Agroecology, small farms and food sovereignty]. Ecología Política 38:25–35.
Andrée, P., J. Ayres, M. J. Bosia, and M. J. Massicotte, eds. 2014. Globalization and food sovereignty: Global and local change in the new politics of food. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Araghi, F. 2000. The great enclosure of our times: Peasants and the agrarian question at the end of the twentieth century. In Hungry for profit: The agribusiness threat to farmers, food, and the environment, ed. F. H. Buttel, F.
Magdoff, and J. B. Foster. 145–60. New York: Monthly Review Press.

Christopherson, S., H. Garretsen, and R. Martin. 2008. The world is not flat: Putting globalization in its place. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 1 (3): 343–49.

Cid Aguayo, B. E. 2007. Frozen fates: The risky rationalization of a Chilean frozen vegetable company. Latin American Perspectives 34 (6): 40–51.
———. 2011. Between conventionalization and civic agriculture: Emerging trends in the Chilean agroecological movement. Food Systems and Community Development 1 (3): 53–66.

Clapp, R. A. 1998. Regions of refuge and the agrarian question: Peasant agriculture and plantation of forestry in Chilean Araucania. World Development 26 (4): 571–89.

Echenique, J., and N. Rolando. 1991. Tierras de parceleros ¿Dónde están? [Lands of smallholders, where are they?]. Santiago, Chile: Agraria.

Escobar, A. 2001. Culture sits in places: Reflections on globalism and subaltern strategies of localization. Political Geography 20 (2): 139–74.
———. 2008. Territories of difference: Place, movements, life, redes. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Friedman, T. 2005. The world is flat: A brief history of the twenty-first century. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Friedmann, H. 1995. Food politics: New dangers, new possibilities. In Food and agrarian orders in the world economy, ed. P. McMichael, 15–33. Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Gibson-Graham, J. K. 1996. The end of capitalism (as we knew it): A feminist critique of political economy. Cambridge, UK: Blackwell.
———. 2003. An ethics of the local. Rethinking Marxism 15 (1): 49–74.
———. 2006. A postcapitalist politics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Gibson-Graham, J. K., J. Cameron, and T. Healy. 2013. Take back the economy: An ethical guide for transforming our communities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Glover, D., and K. Kusterer. 1990. Small farmers, big business. New York: St. Martin’s.

Gómez, S., and J. Echenique. 1988. La agricultura Chilena, las dos caras de la modernización [Chilean agriculture, the two faces of modernization]. Quito, Ecuador: FLACSO.

Goodman, D., and M. Redcliff. 1991. Refashioning nature: Food, ecology and culture. London and New York: Routledge.

Goodman, D., B. Sorj, and J. Wilkinson. 1987. From farming to biotechnology: A theory of agro-industrial development. New York: Blackwell.

Grossman, L. 1998. The political ecology of bananas: Contract farming, peasants, and agrarian change in the eastern Caribbean. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Gutiérrez Escobar, L. M. 2011. El proyecto de soberanía alimentaria: Construyendo otras economías para el buen vivir [The project of food sovereignty: Constructing other economies for living well]. Revista Otra Economía 5 (8): 59–72.

Healy, S. 2009. Alternative economies. In The international encyclopedia of human geography, ed. N. Thrift and R. Kitchin, 338–44. Oxford, UK: Elsevier.

Healy, S., and J. Graham. 2008. Building community economies: A postcapitalist project of sustainable development. In Economic representations: Academic and everyday, ed. D. Ruccio, 291–314. London and New York: Routledge.

Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas (National Statistics Institute). 2007. Censo agropecuario [Agricultural census]. Santiago: Government of Chile.

Jessop, B., N. Brenner, and M. Jones. 2008. Theorizing socio-spatial relations. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 26 (3): 389–401.

Massey, D. 2004. Geographies of responsibility. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography 86 (1): 5–18.

McMichael, P. 2005. Global development and the corporate food regime. Research in Rural Sociology and Development 11:265–99.

Miller, E. 2013. Community economy: Ontology, ethics, and politics for radically democratic economic organizing. Rethinking Marxism 25 (4): 518–33.

Moore, A. 2008. Rethinking scale as a geographical category: From analysis to practice. Progress in Human Geography 32 (2): 203–25.

Neumann, R. P. 2009. Political ecology: Theorizing scale. Progress in Human Geography 33 (3): 398–406.

NVivo10. 2012. Melbourne: QSR International.

Ortega-Cerdá, M., and M. Rivera-Ferre. 2010. Indicadores internacionales de soberanía alimentaria: Nuevas herramientas para una nueva agricultura [International indicators of food sovereignty: New tools for a new agriculture]. Revista Iberoamericana De Economía Ecológica 14:53–77.

Round, J., C. C. Williams, and P. Rodgers. 2008. Everyday tactics and spaces of power: The role of informal economies in post-Soviet Ukraine. Social & Cultural Geography 9 (2): 171–85.

Sevilla Guzmán, E. 2006. Agroecología y agricultura ecológica: Hacia una “re” construcción de la soberanía alimentaria [Agroecology and ecological agriculture: Towards a “re” construction of food sovereignty]. Agroecología 1 (1): 7–18.

Sheppard, E., and H. Leitner. 2010. Quo vadis neoliberalism? The remaking of global capitalist governance after the Washington consensus. Geoforum 41 (2): 185–94.

Tsing, A. L. 2005. Friction: An ethnography of global connection. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Warning, M., and N. Key. 2002. The social performance and distributional consequences of contract farming: An equilibrium analysis of the Arachide de Bouche program in Senegal. World Development 30 (2): 255–63.

White, R. J., and C. C. Williams. 2012. The pervasive nature of heterodox economic spaces at a time of neoliberal crisis: Towards a “postneoliberal” anarchist future. Antipode 44 (5): 1625–44.

Whitson, R. 2007. Hidden struggles: Spaces of power and resistance in informal work in urban Argentina. Environment and Planning A 39 (12): 2916–34.
Williams, C. C. 2005. A commodified world? Mapping the limits of capitalism. London: Zed.
Williams, C., S. Nadin, P. Rodgers, and J. Round. 2012. Rethinking the nature of community economies: Some lessons from post-Soviet Ukraine. Community Development Journal 47 (2): 216–31.

Wittman, H. 2009. Reworking the metabolic rift: La Vía Campesina, agrarian citizenship, and food sovereignty. Journal of Peasant Studies 36 (4): 805–26.
Wittman, H., A. A. Desmarais, and N. Wiebe, eds. 2010. Food sovereignty: Reconnecting food, nature and community. Halifax, NS: Fernwood and FoodFirst Books.

Correspondence: Departamento de Sociología y Antropología, Universidad de Concepción, Barrio Universitario, Concepción, Chile, e-mail: beatriccid@udec.cl (Cid Aguayo); Department of Global Studies, Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, ON N2L 3C5, Canada, e-mail: alatta@wlu.ca (Latta).