Making Ecology Developmental: China’s Environmental Sciences and Green Modernization in Global Context

Jesse Rodenbiker

To cite this article: Jesse Rodenbiker (2021): Making Ecology Developmental: China’s Environmental Sciences and Green Modernization in Global Context, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2020.1863766

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2020.1863766

Published online: 19 Mar 2021.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 129

View related articles

View Crossmark data
Making Ecology Developmental: China’s Environmental Sciences and Green Modernization in Global Context

Jesse Rodenbiker
Department of Natural Resources and the Environment, Cornell University

Although the science of ecology is often understood in antimodernizing terms, this article shows how ecology in China has become a means to articulate green modernization and sustainable development. As scholars predominantly focus on the policy rhetoric surrounding China’s national modernization and sustainable development program called “ecological civilization building,” the origins of how ecology came to take on developmental meanings remain obscure. This article highlights moments of global exchange and knowledge production by Chinese Marxists, earth systems scientists, and economists that produced eco-developmental logics. These logics define an interventionist role for the state, frame urbanization as moral progress, and refashion the role of the peasantry from the revolutionary vanguard to a backward social force impeding modernization. Ecological sciences in China, therefore, lay an epistemological foundation for legitimizing state-led technocratic practices of socioenvironmental engineering and naturalizing social inequalities between “urban” and “rural” people. In highlighting Chinese scientists’ agency in producing knowledge, this article counters diffusionist accounts of science as singular systematically organized branches of knowledge that emanate from the West. Instead, I demonstrate how ecology is contingent on the historical and political conditions through which it takes on meaning. In the context of China, ecology has become integral to environmental governance, state formation, and uneven relations of power. Key Words: China, ecological civilization, ecology, modernization, science and technology studies.

China is vigorously making ecological endeavors … to foster a new pattern of modernization featuring harmony between man and nature.

—Xi Jinping, at the Paris Climate Accord (2015)

Urbanization is both the carrier and driving force of China’s economic development and social progress. Its benefits are significant and sustainable in the process of social and economic transformation and ecological civilization construction.

—Pan (2013a, 90)

China’s green modernization campaign—commonly referred to as ecological civilization building (shengtai wenming jianshe)—is capacious in scope and character. The phrase is used in official state development plans to discuss urbanization, renewable industries, agricultural modernization, social progress, and spiritual development. Ecological civilization building encompasses many meanings, evinced by the 2012 constitutional amendment that reads, “The Development of Ecological Civilization should be integrated into all aspects and the whole process of economic development, political development, cultural development, and social development” (Hu 2012). Such broad statements, originating in the upper echelons of the Chinese Communist Party, signal the cornucopian scope of a “new human relationship with nature.” This political story in turn permeates popular media and green policy prescriptions (Jun 2007; Zhang 2013).

Popular media accounts surrounding ecological civilization building suggest that the concept emerged in 2007 in a famous speech by Hu Jintao during the 17th National Party Congress (Zhang and Wan 2013). Hu proclaimed the importance of “building an ecological civilization” by modeling growth and consumption, modeling energy and resource use, and protecting the environment (“Ecological Civilization” 2007). Scholars of ecological modernization echo this narrative by framing ecological civilization building as a “green alternative” to “industrial civilizations” of the West (L. Zhang, Mol, and Sonnenfeld 2007; Pan 2013a; Wan 2013; Zhang and Wan 2013; Weng et al. 2015). Other work highlights important moments
when ecological civilization building was written into central state policy, government documents, and political rhetoric (Geall and Ely 2018). Consistent throughout extant scholarship is the framing of ecological civilization building as a departure from both the Western industrial development model and China’s post-1978 development boom, which prized gross domestic product growth over environmental protection. These approaches overlook the roles that scientific knowledge production plays in shaping developmental logics of ecological modernization and uneven relations of power.

In this article, I ask these questions: How was this particular way of understanding modernity and sustainable development historically produced? What are the implications of this ecological modernist vision for socioenvironmental organization and state power? I address these questions by historicizing the emergence of eco-developmental logics embedded in the writings, global engagements, and scientific work of key Chinese scientists. Ecology, in China, has come to be understood both as a form of science and developmental attainment. That is, ecology connotes not only a science of relations between organisms and physical environments but also a desired future state that can be realized through socioeconomic-environmental engineering. China’s environmental scientists and state representatives frame national development as a series of progressive stages of improvement that entail the state to be actively involved in urbanizing the rural population as the logical path to building an ecological and civilized future. The practical effects of these logics produce an array of population control mechanisms and green developmental practices, many of which unevenly displace rural populations through state-led projects coded as improvement (Chan and Zhang 1999; Xun and Bao 2007; Yeh 2009, 2013; Pow 2018; Rodenbiker 2019, 2020). The aim of this article is to demonstrate how the production of scientific knowledge became embroiled in exclusionary technocratic polices central to China’s ecological modernization and state power. To do so, I present and discuss core themes of twentieth- and early twenty-first-century Chinese environmental thought.

I begin my analysis with the coining of the Chinese term ecology, a word with roots in Japanese botany, before turning to the writing of early Marxist figure Li Dazhao, who was central in bringing notions of malleable social forces from Marxist thought into China during the Republican period (1912–1949). Li reformulated Marx’s theories of political change within the Chinese context by claiming that China’s peasantry would be the revolutionary vanguard. This notion proved central to Mao Zedong’s efforts to harness power and form the People’s Republic of China in 1949. I then turn to ecological Marxists of the early reform era, such as Wang Jin, Renmin University professor of Marxist-Leninist thought, who contributed to overturning Li’s assertion through his readings of North American political economists. Crystallizing a new scientific understanding emerging during the reform era, which became central to Chinese Marxism, Wang held the peasantry to be a backward social force holding China back from green developmental modernity. Simultaneously in the 1980s, new totalizing approaches to socioenvironmental management emerged from prominent earth systems scientist Ma Shijun and his student Wang Rusong. They coined the social–economy–ecological complex systems theory, which introduced systems science approaches—such as socioenvironmental modeling and functional land zoning—to China’s sustainable development. Finally, I examine the work of ecological economists, such as Ye Qianji and Pan Jiahua, key figures in refashioning industrial ecology models for China’s agricultural modernization, thereby popularizing rationales for an interventionist state. Many of the elite scientists I discuss served as state representatives on the environment. Those who did not were influential to state leaders. Each was among the first to articulate enduring developmental logics in ecological terms that have become part of contemporary state sustainable development projects. Embedded within these social and natural forms of ecological sciences are rationales for state-led social and environmental engineering that animate China’s ecological civilization building programs.

Situating Ecology

The Chinese term ecology is a neologism that traveled from Japan to China through the work of late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century botanist Miyoshi Manabu (1861–1939), who coined the Japanese term ecology (seitaiigaku). This term came to China through Meiji-era texts written by Miyoshi. Miyoshi is also credited with associating ecology with landscape aesthetics. Ueda (2015)
argued that seitai-kankyo, a Japanese term connoting ecological environment, and the analogous Chinese term shengtai huanjing are distinct from the English ecology and the German Ökologie. Ecology in China has taken on meanings from biology, botany, and engineering that traverse valences of morality, aesthetics, and environmental controllability. Ecology came to be expressed in two ways in Chinese. Ecology, as shengtai huanjing, is a four-character set connoting ecology and environment. The other is shengtai. Both mean ecology, but the former connotes ecological conditions and environments interdependent with human activities. The latter connotes the science of ecology (shengtaixue) and relations between biotic and abiotic entities. Highlighting discrepancies between the meanings of ecology across contexts is a starting point toward recognizing that ecology is a contingent form of knowledge, a situated universal that emerges through particular historical conjunctures.

In a highly influential work, Haraway (1988) argued that knowledge formations are relational and that knowledge is conditioned by the context in which it emerges. Drawing on this insight, I argue that ecology, like any science, is a situated way of knowing that comes into being through historical practices of exchange, writing, collective experimentation, interpretation, and claims making. Because ecology emerged in the United States as a science of complexity to undermine modernist claims about environmental management,1 Western environmental historians have tended to frame ecology as posing a challenge to modernist thought.2 In China, however, ecology provides the epistemological groundwork for modernist narratives about ecological civilization building and sustainable development. In the vein of Williams (1980), who argued that forms of nature are always the product of social and historical context, I assert that ecological sciences in China have their own history of formation steeped in global exchanges.3

Scholars of ecology across national contexts have demonstrated how scientific knowledge, often considered to be universal and emanating from Global North to Global South or West to East, is produced through global exchanges and localized meaning-making practices (Lewis 2004; Hathaway 2013; Lowe 2013). For instance, in considering the global circulation of environmental movements, Hathaway (2013) drew on the Chinese metaphor of winds (feng) to argue that knowledge circulates globally in contingent and multidirectional ways. For Hathaway, when ideas enter new geographic spheres, they are remade with new meanings contingent on local contexts, which generates new scientific innovations and practices. A key insight from his work is that there is continual movement between the localization and universalizability of knowledge. Hathaway conceptualizes the content and meanings of scientific knowledge to be coterminous across geographical spaces, however. In contrast, I contend that a plurality of meanings exist under a given scientific knowledge signifier and that uneven power relations permeate the process of knowledge production and forms of knowledge. Ecology emerges from a multiplicity of actions, actors, places, and claims within localized contexts shaped by uneven global relations of power.

This conceptualization of ecological knowledge formation more closely aligns with those of Lewis (2004) and Lowe (2013), who emphasized that processes of global knowledge formation are inseparable from power relations. Lewis’s (2004) study of biodiversity conservation in India debunked diffusionist, unidirectional cultural imperialist, and globalization models of how ideas circulate. For Lewis, what constituted ecology was not merely a local instantiation of a global idea or process (Appadurai 1996) but assemblages of powers mediated by cross-cultural exchanges of scientific practices, research agendas, and flows of ideas. Analogously, Lowe’s (2013) study of biodiversity conservation in Indonesia illustrated how ideas of ecology emerged through interactions between local Togean people, Indonesian scientists, European-American scientists, and development institutions—stratified through perduring colonial legacies. Lowe’s work brought attention to how objects of knowledge and their associations shift over time. Shifting meanings, in turn, shape the subjects of knowledge and uneven subject positionalities. Ecological knowledges therefore shape relations of power.

China’s central government articulates sustainable national development and ecological modernization as ecological civilization building—officially written into the Chinese Communist Party constitution in 2012. Such phenomena reflect crucial ways in which the articulation of ecology and state power in China are intertwined. The history of how they became intertwined is rooted in China’s global exchanges
across ecological Marxism, earth systems science, and ecological economics. Historically situating the emergence of ecology in China reveals a particular instance of how sustainability sciences take on meanings. This calls into question how sustainability and ecology are conceptualized, how they function, and whom they serve (Sze 2018). It also reveals ecology as a situated form of knowing with particular logics that detail roles and positionality for the state and society. As I show, these logics frame the Chinese peasantry as a backward force in need of improvement through urbanization and the state as technical manager of ecological modernization.

Scholars of ecological modernity trace two strands: one cornucopian in scope, described as techno-optimistic, and the other Keynesian insofar as it stresses the need for a strong regulatory state (Muldavin 2007). Northern and Eastern European variants hold that a strong civil society, corporate responsibility, and new industries will generate technological advances that accompany industrialization to remedy environmentally degrading aspects of green transition (Hajer 1995; Buttel 2000). In contrast, Muldavin (2007) considered China’s approach to ecological modernity as a Keynesian variant—a highly interventionist state with strong regulatory power. This variant entails ecological modernization as a state-led political project (Buttel 2000). Attention to the developmental logics underlying ecological modernization is crucial to identifying how ecology bolsters state power and legitimacy. In this vein, the Chinese Academy of Sciences has officially labeled China’s ecological modernization drive as the “second modernization.” Their report discussed how Chinese society has moved through “primitive” civilization, up through industrial civilization, and is now becoming a “knowledge” civilization through technically managing and improving ecology. According to the report, obtaining this form of “eco-rationality” is the highest level of development (L. Zhang, Mol, and Sonnenfeld 2007, 661–62). Development narratives such as this are key to framing ecological civilization building as a historical apex.

In what follows I discuss the historical emergence of ecodevelopmental logics that define “right relationships” with nature through state interventions. These interventions are narrativized as bringing about civilizational progress by modernizing a backward peasantry through urbanization.

Underlying my discussion is the understanding that subjectivities form through relations of knowledge and power.4 By way of analogy, the contemporary moment in China wherein ecology serves to bolster state power resembles how U.S. ethnologists theorized the nature of indigenous savagery as a scientific reality to justify violent “civilizing” missions of Western expansion.5 In place of ethnologists, China’s natural and social scientists produce ecodevelopmental logics that underlie hegemonic narratives of civilizational progress and sustainable development. The injustices perpetuated through dichotomous tropes of “civilized” as outside of and in control of nature, embodied in the state technocrat and modern urbanite, largely fall on the “uncivilized” peasantry who have come to be understood as the population to be improved upon through ecology.6 Tracing how ecology in China has come to take on these meanings is a step toward undoing the claims on nature made in the name of ecological civilization building.

From Vanguard to Vagrant: Contrapuntal Roles of China’s Peasantry

This section illustrates how the role of the peasantry transformed from the revolutionary vanguard, articulated through the work of Li Dazhao to a backward social force impeding modernization. These contrasting theorizations of the peasantry within Chinese Marxism emerged through two ruptures. First, Li’s work remade Marxian notions of class struggle, which held the urban proletariat to be the key motor of revolutionary change. In a departure from this common reading of Marx,7 Li argued that the Chinese peasantry would be the social force for class leveling and revolution. The second moment of rupture came in the early reform era when Chinese intellectuals, including self-proclaimed ecological Marxists, overturned Li’s thesis and argued that the peasantry was a backward social force impeding modernization.

During the Republican period (1912–1949), struggles over the meaning of science were as far ranging as the claims of what science could do for the country (Shen 2014). Li Dazhao cofounded the Communist Party of China with Chen Duxiu on 1 July 1921. For Li, the science of Marxism held promise to remake the country. Born into a peasant family in Hebei Province, Li studied political economy
at Waseda University in Japan from 1914 to 1916. He returned to China to become one of the preeminent scholars and leading intellectuals of the New Culture Movement and the May Fourth Movement. Through his writings he laid foundations for Chinese Marxist theories of historical change. When Li became professor of economy and head librarian at Peking University in 1920, he employed a penniless peasant named Mao Zedong as a library clerk. Mao joined Li’s Marxist reading group. Li’s ideas on the role of the peasantry in revolution became central to Mao’s political vision that led the Chinese Communist Party to power.

Li was an early advocate for the peasantry as the source of political revolution. Li developed his perspectives on revolution and Marxism through global engagements with Marxists, the French and Russian revolutions, and Enlightenment European writers. Through reflecting on global cases and writings, Li came to view China as latent with surplus energy for sociopolitical transformation. Inspired by Trotsky’s ideas of permanent revolution,8 Li viewed backwardness as a harbinger of political change. In A Comparison of the French and Russian Revolutions D. Li (1918) wrote:

From the point of view of the history of civilizations, any particular national civilization has its period of flourishing and its period of decline. The countries of Europe, like France and England, have reached a period of maturity in civilization. They no longer have the strength to advance any further. … Because of isolation, Russia’s progress in civilization was comparatively slow with respect to the other nations of Europe, and just because of its comparative slowness, in the evolution of civilization, there existed surplus energy (yuli) for development (suoyi shangyou xiangshang fazhan zhi yuli).9

This excerpt indicates how Li understood potential for historical transformation to derive from social and economic backwardness. It also indicates how his ideas of historical change were linear and progressive and operate through the mobilization of social energies or forces. When the Chinese Communist Party was established, Li considered China’s revolutionary potential to be lodged within the body politic of the peasantry.

As an early interpreter of Marxism and visionary for the Chinese Communist Party, Li considered the aim of socialist writing and theory to inspire and transform historical conditions. In his essays My Marxist Views (D. Li 1919) and The Essentials of Historical Study (D. Li 1924), Li argued that members of each generation make their own futures through harnessing social energies. Li’s notions of historical transformation were informed by his engagement with the European Scientific Revolution. The European Enlightenment era brought about notions of anthropogenic historiography wherein human agents are the drivers of historical change. This theorization of historical change was developed by universalist historians, such as Nicolas de Condorcet, Henri de Saint-Simon, and Auguste Comte,10 who Li argued were foundational to Marxist philosophy and therefore the scientific basis of socialism.11 Li’s intellectual exchange with Marxist historiography echoes the principle that human interactions with the material environment drive historical transformation. Li was an iconoclast, also departing from the Confucian historiographical tradition, which looked back toward exemplary persons and actions for models to create social order. His work laid epistemological foundations for Mao’s revolutionary class leveling projects, in which the peasantry figured as the revolutionary vanguard, capable of forging a new nation.12

Mao came to power, in part, due to his ability to mobilize the peasantry, which he viewed as a crucial source of revolutionary potential dialectically situated between class differences and material interests (Mao 1927, 1956). Under Mao’s reign the peasantry continued, at least rhetorically, to hold elevated positions within official state ideology as the vanguard of the party (Walder 2015), despite the fact that China’s socialist command economy pricing system deflated the value of agricultural products while artificially raising the value of industrial goods produced in urban areas, which materially repressed rural people (Selden 1993). This changed when the Maoist period ended and Deng Xiaoping came into power as the face of China’s party-state leadership. Deng instituted postsocialist reforms in the early 1980s, and he signaled a shift in state approaches to science and ideology by advocating for “scientific development.”

The politics of regime change and socioeconomic reform precipitated ideological struggles over the role of peasantry. As Chinese socialism began to open up to global capitalism, the Maoist celebration of the peasant vanguard became untenable. Theoretical repositioning of the role of the peasant emerged
from two interrelated necessities. The first was the need to retheorize state-led socialism, as it went through market reforms in the languages and theories of science and modernity. This was necessary for the party-state to portray political continuity with socialist predecessors. Second, with postsocialist socioeconomic transitions including the decollectivization of land, introduction of a household responsibility system that individualized production, and massive infusions of state funding into the rural economy, the new reality of the peasant as an entrepreneurial farmer became logically inconsistent with the notion of the peasantry as a source of revolutionary potential. To explain marketization processes and growing inequalities that emerged through integration with capitalist market forces, the figure of the peasant required new rationalization. Even though divergent positions emerged among China’s intellectual elites critical of orthodox Maoist views, the predominant mode of argumentation held that the peasantry represented a backward social group prone to populist politics emblematic of the failures of a totalitarian state (Day 2013).13 According to China’s reform-era intellectual elites, the peasantry, much like the nation, was in desperate need of modernization. As a social group, the peasantry became framed as a backward population in need of qualitative improvement initiated by state technocrats.

The reorientation of “Chinese socialism” and Marxist categories occurred simultaneously with an intellectual shift to systems science thinking. Through global engagements with ecological thought, reform-era political economists reimagined the Chinese peasantry as a regressive and backward social force holding China back from modernization, which became framed as ecological civilization. A February 1985 article titled “The Way to Cultivate Individual Ecological Civilization Under Conditions of Mature Socialism” (zai chengshu shehuizhuyi tiaojian xia peiyang geren shengtai wenming de tujing), published in the Guangming Daily, is one of the earliest Chinese publications to use the phrase “ecological civilization” (S. Zhang 1985). This article summarized a conference on scientific Marxism at Moscow University that discussed ecological civilization as a way of remaking socialism. The article claims that ecological civilization is a conjoining of Marxist-Leninist science and ecological sciences that will restore the degraded relationship between humans and nature. This process involves transforming the holistic makeup of all individuals to develop harmoniously with the earth (meige ren zhenzheng quanmian, xie di fazhan). Subsequent work throughout the 1980s and 1990s details how ecological civilization can be cultivated through technocratically orchestrating industrial modernity.14

The 1986 article “Ecological Marxism and Ecological Socialism,” written by Renmin University Professor of Marxist-Leninist Thought Wang Jin, crystallized new roles of the peasantry and the state (J. Wang 1986). Wang elaborated a vision for China’s ecological Marxism through references to two movements in the industrialized West. One is scholarly works by North Atlantic political economists. The other is the establishment of green parties in Western Europe. Wang suggested that China look to political and scholarly movements in the West to remake its socialist system as a form of ecological socialism.

In laying out an argument for ecological Marxism in China, Wang discussed how an ecological consciousness (shengtai yishi) emerged in the industrialized capitalist West during the late 1960s. He historicized this shift in global environmental awareness and a shift toward ecological Marxism through Boulding’s (1953) The Organizational Revolution, Agger’s (1979) writing on Western Marxism, Leiss’s (1976) critique of the commodity production glut in The Limits of Satisfaction, and Schumacher’s (1975) economic argument that “small is beautiful.” Although not explicitly ecological Marxist in the Western codex,15 Wang drew on these works in laying out an argument for an ecological Marxist vision of revolutionizing technical production and moral ideals in China.

Wang emphasized how the contradictions of early Western capitalism are quite different from industrialization in China. For Wang, in the early industrial period globally, it seemed as if the Earth’s resources were inexhaustible. In contrast, political economists of the 1950s through the 1970s pointed to the limitations of resources and demanded an appropriate response. They proposed radically remaking production and consumption to create equilibrium between the resources available and human need. Remaking consumption within industrial capitalism, for Wang, entailed reorganizing labor through new technologies and redirecting attention away from production—the focus of much of Western Marxism—to “alienated consumption” including the role of capital in shaping desires and consumption patterns (J. Wang 1986).
In a reversion of Maoist Marxism, Wang praised green intellectuals as the emergent force of industrialized capitalist nations. In referring to “ecological socialism,” he lauded the Green parties emerging in Germany, Finland, and Belgium during the 1980s, as well as the Federal German Green Party in popularizing an ecological consciousness during the 1960s (J. Wang 1986). What Wang calls an ecological socialist model, however, has more in common with Malthus than Marx because it articulates a vision of population control that closely resembles China’s population control measures, in place since 1979. Wang advocated for strict population and resource control, as well as the notion of creating an equilibrium between economic growth and environmental protection. He discussed this as bringing about steady-state economics. Although steady-state economics is often discussed as a national economy that does not fluctuate in size, Wang framed the steady-state economy as a national economy that cannot exceed the limits of natural resources.16 He called this the “steady-state socialist economic model” (wentai de shehui zhuyi jingji moshi; J. Wang 1986).

The notion of creating ecological balance or an equilibrium between economic growth and environmental protection, discussed in Wang’s article as a key facet of the steady-state socialist economic model, became a central feature of China’s state vision for ecological civilization building. In contrast with the socialist-era legacy, Wang argued that the source of sociopolitical transformation lies with elite scientists rather than the peasantry. He described the people who should take part in redirecting technology as intellectuals (zhishifenzi); for example, professors, lawyers, and doctors. Wang’s articulation of ecological Marxism is critical of North Atlantic political economists for not accounting for the role of the state in remaking social relations. In contrast, Wang held that strong state power and intervention are necessary to bring about the socialist steady-state economy. Without state intervention, he suggested, it would be impossible to reorganize society.

What came to be called ecological Marxism in China rationalized the peasantry as a population that needs to be improved on by the state. The global exchanges of Chinese elites, such as Wang, forged the notion that society can be progressively transformed through harnessing social forces lodged in the rural population. This alternative theorization of the peasantry became a central feature of China’s ecological modernist vision. This version of Marxist science coupled with systems science supported a particular ecological modernist vision of organizing state and society. This materializes through systems science practices of socioenvironmental modeling, functional land zoning, and measuring carrying capacity, which I discuss in the following sections.

Systems Science Techniques of Progress: Sustainable Development, Socioenvironmental Modeling, and Functional Land Zoning

This section examines the work of earth systems scientists Ma Shijun, Wang Rusong, and Ouyang Zhiyun, who laid the foundation for and administer systems science approaches to sustainable development now ubiquitous across China. They articulated a moral vision of ecological modernization and sustainable development through systems science approaches to socioenvironmental management.

The ecologist Ma Shijun was shaped by and shaped global scientific exchanges that defined sustainability on national and global scales. After matriculating from the University of Minnesota in 1950 with a study of moth larvae control, he returned to China in 1952. During the reform era, he rose through the ranks to become a national-level leader and state representative on environmental affairs. From the late 1970s, in the wake of the Great Leap Forward, he began publishing on sustainability and sustainable development. He first began writing on “continual regeneration potential” (chiyongxu de zaisheng chuanti), then “continuing development” (chixu fazhan), and eventually “continuous development” (kechixu fazhan). In the post–Brundtland Commission era, Ma’s continuous development (kechixu fazhan) came to be translated as sustainable development. Ma served on the Brundtland Commission, as a member of the United Nations World Commission on the Environment, and was one of the principal authors of Our Common Future issued in 1987 (Brundtland 1987). The work became a touchstone for defining sustainability globally for decades.

Ma’s theorization of the “social–economic–ecological system” (shehui jingji shengtai xitong) approach, published before the Brundtland Report Our Common Future, provided direction for China’s
ecological modernization programs. Notions of ecological balance and rules by which ecosystems function rose to prominence in part due to S. Ma’s work. In the 1981 article The Function of Ecological Rules in Environmental Management, Ma defined key concepts of sustainable development in China. He detailed the structure of ecosystem functioning as an integral whole called the “social–economic–ecological system” (S. Ma 1981). In this work, Ma conceived of human progress and civilizational transformation through interactions within an integrated ecological, social, and economic complex system. Within his teleological narration, humans began as “primitive” (yuanshi) beings who maintained their material lives through struggling with nature. As humans developed scientific technologies, society progressed through stages of development in a linear fashion tending toward modern (jindai) humanity. Modern development, though, Ma suggested, has also brought about ecosystem disequilibrium. Disequilibrium, for Ma, emerges from monopoly capitalists’ ignorance of human dependence on the natural environment and their predatory approach to natural resource use (S. Ma 1981). Ma advocated for a new relationship with nature through socialist environmental planning based in earth systems science.

For Ma, modern socialism requires restructuring relationships between socioeconomic organization and the natural world. Bringing about this new stage of “scientifically based” socialism, Ma argued, requires adopting systems science principles to manage natural resources and industry, which will maximize production and generate a harmonious relationship (xietao guanxi) between humans and nature (S. Ma 1981). This entails optimizing ecosystem functionality and maximizing the production and circulation efficiency of energy and material goods in the industrial production process through functional land zoning and subsystem modeling.17 Ma held that a complex systems structure (fuhe xitong jiegou) could be achieved through a coordinated systems approach encompassing industrial production, natural functions, and biophysical metabolic effects. He contended that systems scientists can create a holistic network of circulation that optimizes the material metabolism of materials, waste (feiwu), and energy (nengliang) by coordinating “open” natural systems (ziran kaifangxi) and human-made “closed” systems (renqong gongchengde bihuant xitong) of industrial production (S. Ma 1981).

Central to this schema are coordinated functional zones with built environments for human habitation (juminqu), surrounded by agricultural production areas (nongye shengchanqu), industrial production areas (gongye shengchanqu), water storage areas, and natural ecosystem areas (shengtai xitongqu). Each functional zone within the integrated whole has its own distinct, yet integrated, material metabolism to supplement subsystem functionality (buchong zuoyong; S. Ma 1981). Ma advocated for systems modeling to determine how to manage the relationship between functional zones.

Ma’s systems science approaches, particularly systems modeling and functional land zoning, proliferated in conjunction with his positions as a state advisor and leader of scientific organizations. At the time The Function of Ecological Rules in Environmental Management was published, S. Ma (1981) was working in the Chinese Academy of Sciences. He later became chairman of the Chinese Ecological Society and then advisor for the State Council Environmental Protection Commission. He served on multiple national and international boards from the late 1970s up to his passing in 1991. Ma’s ideas remain prominent in China’s environmental sciences and came to be articulated in relation to urban environmental management through his student Wang Rusong.

Wang Rusong brought earth systems science thinking to the management of urban environments. Ma Shijun and Wang Rusong jointly published The Social–Economic–Natural Complex System (S. Ma and Wang 1984). This article reiterates the social–economic–ecological system concept, discussed in S. Ma’s (1981) article, in relation to agrarian and urban environments. The social, economic, and, in this iteration, natural (ziran) were described as part of an interlinked system, within which no parts are totally separate. In this work, the authors advocated for coordinated systems management of urban environments. They argued that, to optimally manage complex systems, scientists must consider environmental problems as having multiple forms of causation. They demanded recognition of the multiple relational feedbacks in complex systems, which can be stabilized through systems science managerial techniques. Ma and Wang’s work reduced complex interactions to mathematical formulae in an effort to model and optimize landscape functions. They claimed that once functional equilibrium is obtained, development will be continuous or sustainable.
In their policy recommendations, the authors argued that it is necessary to build satellite cities and new areas around larger cities that integrate economic and ecological attractions (tīgāo xìngqū de shèngtài xìnyǐnli; S. Ma and Wang 1984). As a leading urban ecologist and public scholar in China, Wang promoted eco-city development from the 1990s through the mid- to early 2000s. He served as the president of China’s Ecological Society. From the early 1990s he served as the director of the Department of Systems Ecology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. China’s central state adopted environmental modeling, building satellite cities, and functional land zoning as key components of city management during the 1990s and early 2000s.

Systems scientist Ouyang Zhiyun obtained his PhD in 1994 under the tutelage of Wang Rusong and Ma Shijun at the Chinese Academy of Sciences and is currently the lead scientist managing China’s national functional land zoning. R. S. Wang and Ouyang’s (2012) article “Social–Economic–Natural Complex Ecological Systems and Sustainable Development” reprises the vision for totalizing environmental management through principles of ecology. In their description of environmental management, they emphasized improving on the environment by using engineering technologies that model nature (mònì zìrán de yì men gōngchéng jìshù). Through modeling nature, they suggested, humans can cultivate moral character (xiushényangxing) and create an ecology that is pleasing to the eye (yishen yuemu) in ways that can help society come to realize the aesthetics of nature (gànwù tiāngōng de yíměnzhírén méixué). Ecology in this work additionally connotes the condition of an ideal state of overall harmony between humans and the environment (“hexie huo lixiáng zhùzhuāngtài de xìngróngcì, biǎoshí shēngmíng hé huánjiāng guànxiān yì zhōng zhèngtì”; R. S. Wang and Ouyang [2012], 338). R. S. Wang and Ouyang (2012) argued that systems theories should be applied to urban and rural construction through ecological planning, ecological engineering, and ecological management.

These ecodevelopmental logics, shaped by Ma Shijun, Wang Rusong, and Ouyang Zhiyun’s articulation of earth systems science, provided direction for state environmental management from the 1980s onward. In the 1980s, ecological construction models were introduced at various government administrative levels (R. S. Wang and Ouyang 2012). During the 1990s, ecosystem engineering principles coupled with administrative planning led to demarcations of “ecological cities,” “ecological provinces,” and “ecological counties,” which served as models of ecological construction (R. S. Wang and Ouyang 2012, 342). In the 2000s a wide array of ecological demarcations began to span administrative levels from villages and municipalities to provinces (Zhao 2011; Lü et al. 2013; Rodenbiker 2020). Parceling cities and land into planned functional areas is a central feature of systems scientists’ environmental management legacy. Functional land zoning became a prominent feature of China’s state scientific approaches to sustainable land management nationwide (Fan and Li 2009) and remains so during the Xi Jinping era (Rodenbiker 2020). Currently, Ouyang Zhiyun is the director of the Research Center of Eco-Environmental Sciences in the Chinese Academy of Sciences and director of the State Key Laboratory of Urban and Regional Ecology. He is spearheading China’s national ecosystem assessment programs (Ouyang et al. 2016) and China’s central government efforts to institute national functional ecological zoning and redlining programs across the country (China Council for International Cooperation on Environment and Development 2014).18

These scientists narrate ecodevelopmental logics underlying systems science approaches to environmental management as moral techniques of progress. First, their work highlights the human as part of nature and the environment, yet in control of nature through technical management. They therefore advocate for technoscientific control of sociornatural systems. Second, they characterize ecology through an aesthetic mode as both inherent in nature, yet also a quality that can be introduced through human intervention. Ecology, in the latter sense, is conceptualized as essentially malleable—both a source and site of beauty—introduced through managerial techniques such as landscape design for ecological functionality.19 The third logic points toward a future state of attaining ecological balance, which justifies technomanagerial practices with the expectation of achieving balance between humans and nature. This logic holds that ecological engineering through environmental modeling and functional land zoning will transform agricultural society into ecological society.

Embedded within these systems science logics is a teleological notion of progress toward an ecological
Figure 1. Wang Rusong’s graphic of teleological progression. Wang contended that traditional agriculture (bottom left) will become ecological society (top right) through sustainable development (expressed through the upward diagonal line). The middle steps are petroleum agriculture, ecological agriculture, and ecological industry (R. S. Wang 1999, 53).

society, which Wang Rusong discussed as the highest stage of civilization (R. S. Wang 1999). Figure 1, from Wang, illustrates this teleological logic through an arrow connoting sustainable development underlying progressive steps from a society characterized by traditional agriculture to ecological society.

Ecological Economic Rationales for an Interventionist State: Industrializing Agriculture, Managing Carrying Capacity, and the Peasantry

This section draws on the work of Ye Qianji and Pan Jiahua to illustrate ecological economic rationales for state intervention in socioenvironmental management. Through drawing on industrial ecology and ecological economic approaches that quantify material flows and production processes, these scientists hold the peasantry as a source of environmental degradation and the technical management of agriculture and population as keys to restoring ecological balance. Contrary to the claim that ecological economics originated in Sweden in 1982 (Røpke 2004), Shi (2002) argued that Ma Shijun (noted earlier) and economist Xu Dixin formally proposed “ecological economics” as a field of knowledge at a Beijing conference in September 1980.20 Ecological economists developed human–natural systems models alongside systems scientists, thereby conceiving of nature as a set of integrated material flows that can be measured, assigned values, and managed (Gregson et al. 2015).

Ye Qianji was among the earliest agricultural economists to draw on the language of ecological civilization in relation to agriculture (Q. J. Ye 1987, 1988). Ye studied agricultural economics at Cornell University from 1936 to 1938 and later served as a Food and Agriculture Organization visiting scholar in the Tennessee basin. He returned to China advocating a new mode of agricultural production through technical socioenvironmental management (Q. J. Ye 1982, 1987, 1988). In his premier work Ecological Agriculture: The Future of Agriculture, Q. J. Ye (1988) argued that engineering society and the environment to balance economic and ecological feedbacks could bring about a higher stage of development and labor organization. Drawing on his background in agricultural economics and a litany of European-American industrial ecologists, Ye promoted integrated management through what he called ecological agriculture (shengtai nongye), which entailed the modernization of agriculture through rational technocratically engineered industrialization comprehensively designed and spatially managed (Q. J. Ye 1987). He argued that ecological agriculture could be brought about through the regulation of the “population–land–commodity cycle” (renkou-tudi-shangpin liangxingxuanhuan; Q. J. Ye 1987, 4–5). He expressed this idea through cyclical models, which detailed positive and negative feedbacks between population control and quality, commodity production and flows of capital, rational land use, and ecological functions (see Figure 2).

In discussing this model, Q. J. Ye (1987) claimed that “only when population quality (suzhi) and size have stabilized will humanity be able to rationally develop and use land to create a rational structure of industrial production” (5). This claim is directed toward the role of scientists in socioenvironmental management and to the peasantry, which within China’s reform-era discourse has come to embody a “low quality” population that perpetuates inefficient and polluting agricultural practices (Anagnost 2004; Kipnis 2006; Schneider 2015).21 Ye described this rational management as an intensification of efficiency in the use of energy, labor, capital, and technology, which will be mutually beneficial (xiaoyi) to
Figure 2. Population–land–commodity cycle model, from Q. J. Ye (1987). This graphic expresses positive and negative feedbacks between (from upper left to the right) “total population, rational land use and development, ecological functions, pollution and soil erosion, investment, commodity production, population quality, family planning (far left), and industrial structure (center).”

ecology, economy, and society. Obtaining this level of efficiency entails dissolving the peasantry and instituting state-led socioenvironmental management. Ye’s position as a state scientist during the reform era contributed to the popularization of these ideas. The underlying logics of socioenvironmental controllability are perpetuated through the work of ecological economists who promulgate techniques for measuring carrying capacities.

One of the most prominent of these ecological economists is Pan Jiahua, who received his PhD in economics from Cambridge University and is presently professor of economics and the director of the Institute for Urban and Environmental Studies in the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, as well as vice president of the Chinese Society of Ecological Economics. He advises the National Ministry of Environmental Protection and was an author on multiple Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change working group assessment reports. He advocates for ecological urbanization and ecological agriculture through managing carrying capacity (2013b). Pan (2013b) wrote, “The principle of ecological civilization is that we should show respect for nature and live in accord with its laws. … To conform with nature, we need to observe the rigid constraints of ecological capacity” (159). Nature in this iteration has “rigid” quantifiable properties, thus suggesting static, unchanging features. Despite important critiques of the flaws of carrying capacity,22 coordinated urban–rural planning through the measurement of carrying capacity rose to prominence during the 2000s and became a key feature in state land management strategies.23 Moreover, Pan suggested managing carrying capacities is a civilizational project, thereby contributing to elite scientists’ narrations of modernization as civilizational progress.

Echoing the environmental scientists noted earlier, Pan (2013a, Pan 2013b) represented ecological modernization as a departure from primitive, agrarian, and industrial civilization. Pan (2013a) wrote, “Ecological civilization is a new development stage of human society … after primitive civilization, agricultural civilization, and industrial civilization” (40, italics added). In this temporal narrative, the peasantry, a relic of agrarian civilization, inhabits a preindustrial mode of existence. Pan (2013a) asserted this in claims that “ecological civilization in the modern age is no longer the passive accommodation of nature [from] over 2000 years ago but harmony between human and nature based on modern science and technology” (37–38). In this quote, agrarian civilization is characterized as passive in contrast to an active ecological civilization. This dichotomous trope of active and passive natures reflects a cultural othering that frames the peasantry as backward and bolsters state-led technoscientific interventions. The peasantry, for Pan, is outside modernity and therefore in need of scientific improvements to be included and thereby transformed.

Claims that the peasantry is not capable of rational land management are common refrains in contemporary discussions of ecological civilization building. For example, in discussing grazers in the Ningxia region, Pan suggested that no matter where peasants go, “each locality’s natural resources are inadequate to support its population; wherever these people go, extra capacity will be needed” (Pan 2013a, 160). Here Pan framed rural people as incapable of rationally maintaining land and suggested that “extra capacity” will be required. In addition to this claim being logically incompatible with neo-Malthusian notions of carrying capacity that hold an intrinsic limit or threshold of support for a given ecosystem, Pan made the assumption that peasant herding and farming practices are monolithic and static across contexts. This rationale suggests that rural people will act the same across localities and can thus be accordingly modeled like any “natural” feature of the region. According to this logic, wherever peasants go, the carrying capacity of the region will be violated and more capacity will be needed, thereby causing systemic imbalance. Claims that rural people degrade land, cause pollution, and
violate carrying capacity abound. These assertions are rarely supported by place-based scientific field research.24 Yet, these rationales underlie the ecodevelopmental logic that small-scale disaggregated agricultural production causes ecological imbalance, which requires rebalancing through technical management.

The logics discussed here through the work of Ye Qianji and Pan Jiahua permeate China’s state socio-environmental planning practices and modernization programs. Additionally, these logics do important discursive work by framing the peasantry as needing rational oversight from scientists and state planners. Accordingly, moving toward ecological civilization entails state-led scientific industrialization of agriculture and modernization of the rural population through urbanization. During Pan’s tenure, China’s development plans for urbanizing the peasantry became framed as a process of ecological civilization building. This shift was evident in the 18th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party, which called for an increase in the urban population from 50 percent to 60 percent, effectively calling for the urbanization of 100 million rural people. Implicit within this vision and explicit in the government plans that promote measuring regional carrying capacities is the position that state-led socioenvironmental engineering will solve environmental problems, maximize production, and bring a backward peasantry in sync with ecological modernity.

Conclusion

This article opened with a quote from Xi Jinping, who, at the Paris Climate Accord, articulated a global vision of ecological modernization with China at the helm. The Trump-era retreat of the United States from key leadership roles in international assemblies surrounding environment, development, and climate change created a vacuum in global leadership. China is filling this role. In the present moment, ecology is central to China’s state articulation of global environmental leadership, as well as national green modernization.

With growing protests surrounding environmental pollution in China (Zhong and Hwang 2016), reinforcing the image of a strong government that will effectively ameliorate environmental crises is a strategic facet of party-state legitimacy. In the realm of global environmental diplomacy, scientists and diplomats frame China as a global leader in green development and the endeavor to build an ecological civilization as a global project. This is evinced by dialogues across international platforms including the United Nations Environment Program on Building an Ecological Civilization (Hansen, Li, and Svarverud 2018) and the 2021 United Nations Biodiversity Conference titled “Ecological Civilization: Building a Shared Future for All Life on Earth.” Ecodevelopmental logics therefore resonate across global and national scales. Like all forms of scientific knowledge production, ecology takes on different meanings across contexts shaped through global processes of scientific exchange.

In detailing key moments when ecology took on developmental meanings in China, I illustrate how ecology is a relationally situated form of knowledge emergent from localized contexts of global engagement. Detailing the contributions of key Chinese scientists, I decenter ecology and sustainability as singular and bounded forms of scientific knowledge originating in the West. Instead, global dialogues across Marxism, earth systems science, and ecological economics produced ecodevelopmental logics central to contemporary China’s ecological modernization platform. Although the tendency might be to celebrate such global exchanges, this article shows how they are integral to expressions and constitutions of state power and central in naturalizing social inequalities. Prominent in this account were logics regarding the role of the state and the peasantry in socioenvironmental management. The first entailed the transformation of Maoist theories of the peasantry as the vanguard of revolution into a backward force in need of modernization. The second logic framed the state and state scientists as the rational planners and technicians of green modernization.

State scientists were central in making ecology developmental. According to the logics they produced, achieving ecological balance is a civilizational goal that can only come to fruition through state-led scientific intervention. Ecological civilization, therefore, is both a future state of developmental attainment and an ongoing process of state-led improvement toward that developmental end. According to this vision, attaining this future developmental moment requires totalizing socioenvironmental control. Ecological civilization building thereby is a moral, technomanagerial, aesthetic, and temporal narrative of progress within which rural
people are imagined as becoming modern urban subjects and rational economic actors through state improvements on ecology. This scientific articulation has deep roots in China’s history of sustainable development. From the notion of malleable social energies latent in populations to the systems science notion of continuous development, scientific imaginaries of sustainable development play a central role in projecting a future state of attainment wherein scientific interventions will create an ecological society with a steady-state economy and ecological equilibrium. Although ecologists have argued for decades that environmental stability and ecological equilibrium never exist, not even in nature (Zimmerer 1994), much rests on the power of this sustainable development narrative—not least of which is the legitimacy of China’s party-state, its role in a rapidly changing international arena of environmental politics, and the differential roles of Chinese citizens in urban and agrarian modernization.

These ecodevelopmental logics are consequential for the material realities of everyday life in China and the future of ecology globally. Ecodevelopmental logics justify state techniques of socioenvironmental engineering, such as functional land zoning, managing ecological carrying capacity, agricultural industrialization, and urbanizing of the peasantry—as social group framed as antithetical to ecological civilization. China’s national modernization plan calls for an increase in the urban population from 50 to 75 percent en route to becoming a fully modern ecological civilization by 2050. In practice, many projects of ecological modernization and ecological urbanization bolster state control while unevenly displacing rural people and ethnic minorities (Xun 2012; Yeh 2013; Ong 2014; J. Ye 2015; Zhou 2015; Guldin 2016; Chen, Zinda, and Yeh 2017; Rodenbiker 2019). Ecological state formations materialize globally through ecodevelopmental logics that inform international environmental policies and practices. Ecological states materialize locally through governing entities within China that territorialize rural land and bolster state power over resources through projects of ecological protection (Rodenbiker 2020). Yet, current discussions within China’s state circles surrounding the modernization–urbanization drive routinely foreclose alternative development agendas (Q. F. Zhang and Donaldson 2008; Guldin 2016; Day and Schneider 2018), thereby materially and discursively reproducing social inequalities. Historicizing how ecology became developmental is a crucial step in rethinking national socioenvironmental planning and policies. At a global level, ecodevelopmental logics matter as China takes increasingly prominent roles in United Nations sustainability councils and global environmental governance. Uncritical celebrations of ecological civilization, particularly by Western scholars, not only obscure the realities of ecologically justified dispossession and uneven relations of power but also pave the way for such logics to animate environmental planning and policies around the world—with potentially devastating trajectories for global ecologies.

Acknowledgments

This article has been some time in the making. I presented an early version in 2016 at the American Association of Geographers Conference in San Francisco, and another version in 2017 at Sichuan University’s School of Public Administration. In 2019, I presented portions of this article as part of the Nordic Geographer’s Sustainable Geography-Geography of Sustainability Conference at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. Finally, I presented material for this article in 2020 at the University of Pittsburgh’s Asian Studies Center as part of the “Ecological Civilization and Chinese Studies” workshop. I thank discussants and participants in these events for their comments, especially Corey Byrnes, Runqiu Liu, Janet Sturgeon, Brooke Wilmsen, and Emily Yeh. I am grateful to You-tien Hsing, Jake Kosek, Andrea Marston, Nancy Peluso, and Michael Watts for constructive comments on earlier versions of this article. Finally, I thank anonymous reviewers and the managing editor Kendra Strauss for their insightful comments.

Funding

The research and writing for this article were supported by the Cornell Atkinson Center for Sustainability, Fulbright-Hays DDRA, Social Science Research Council, Chiang-Ching Kuo Foundation, Institute of International Studies, University of California Berkeley Center for Chinese Studies, and the Confucius China Studies Program.

Notes

1. See Odum (1959).
2. See Kingsland (1985) and Hutchinson (1978). Although ecology emerged in the West as an explicit critique of modernity, ecological sciences are often mobilized in support of development projects.
3. For additional work on how global exchange shapes ways of knowing, see Tagliacozzo, Siu, and Perdue (2015) and Culp, U, and Yeh (2016).
4. See Foucault, Rabinow, and Rose (2003), particularly, “The Subject and Power” (126–44).
5. For an example of this kind of ethnological account, see Morgan (1877).
6. For works on the politics of improvement, see Magubane (2003), T. Li (2007), and Yeh (2013). For works on reform-era roles of China’s peasantry see Yeh (2013), Schneider (2015), and Chen, Zinda, and Yeh (2017).
7. Marx ([1867] 2001) is often discussed as a Eurocentric unilinear thinker who advocated for sociopolitical revolution through the urban proletariat. In contrast with this reading, the work of Anderson (2002, 2016) engaged Marx’s 1872 French edition of Das Kapital (as opposed to the 1867 version), the 1882 Russian edition of the Communist Manifesto (Marx 1882), Gundrisse (Marx [1939] 2005), journalistic writings, and unpublished notebooks to make the case that Marx was an adroit global thinker on varieties of human social and historical development that include race, ethnicity, and nationalisms. It is of particular relevance to this article that within the 1882 Russian edition of the Communist Manifesto Marx highlighted communal villages of Russia as a potential source of socialist development, which is analogous to Li Dazhaos position.
8. See Trotsky ([1930] 2008; [1931] 2010). Trotsky’s notion of “permanent revolution” held that countries’ development trajectories depended on national class dynamics in the context of global capitalism. This was later reinterpreted by Mao Zedong during the Cultural Revolution as continual internal revolution headed by “red guard” youth (see Yang 2016).
9. The translation of yuli as surplus energy noted in this text aligns with the translation by Meisner (1967, 65), although the term also connotes the power, ability, or capacity for social development. In other parts of the text when discussing nations’ social transformation, Li used the term shi, which could also be rendered as force or power.
10. See, for instance, Condorcet ([1795] 1955).
11. See D. Li (1919, 1924) and Meisner (1967, 158–61).
12. For a firsthand village account of class leveling practices, see Hinton (1997). For a historical overview, see Moise (2013).
13. For an analysis of the different positions and schools of thought within China’s reform-era intelligentsia, see Day (2013).
14. Writings on ecological civilization building began to emerge during the mid-1980s. They have grown exponentially since. Z. Wang (2012) enumerated the increasing volume of writings on ecological Marxism in China. Wang noted that during the decade of 1991 through 2000 there were forty-five academic peer-reviewed journal articles on the topic of ecological Marxism, whereas from 2000 to 2010, the number was nearly 600.
15. Western academics were writing and publishing works that developed an ecological Marxist project nearly simultaneous with Wang’s writing. The Western academic tradition of ecological Marxism, however, has a distinct historical lineage and categories of analysis from those that appeared in China’s early writings on ecological Marxism. For influential works in the Western tradition see O’Connor (1988), Foster (2000), and Moore (2015).
16. Wang attributed steady-state economics to John Stuart Mill (1806–1873), Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations, and other political economists. Wang interpreted the steady state as a way of stabilizing national economic production, such that there is a balance between national resource extraction and production. This contrasts with neoclassical economists’ readings of Adam Smith who advocate national economies as endless machines of growth. See Arrighi (2007).
17. When earth systems scientists of the reform era discuss energy, they primarily use nengliang, which connotes energy in the sense of the power derived from the utilization of a resource, a by-product of a relational biochemical or biophysical action or reaction, or stored potential.
18. For examples of how functional land zoning, ecological redlining, and green building are being implemented and with what effects, see Pow and Neo (2015), Zhou (2015), Pow (2018), and Rodenbiker (2019, 2020).
19. Whereas aesthetic facets of early ecology in the United States emerged in relation to Southwest desert and riparian landscapes (Sayre 2010), in contemporary China ecological aesthetics are integral to environmental governance as shown through ecocity constructions (Pow 2018), urban brownfield restorations (Rodenbiker 2017), and urban–rural environmental planning projects that integrate “pristine” nature aesthetics with functional land zoning.
20. For accounts regarding circular economy and socioenvironmental modeling in other national contexts, see Geng and Dobertsein (2008), Yuan et al. (2008), and Su et al. (2013).
21. Ye used zhiliang and suzhi interchangeably within his writing to express “quality.” During the 1980s population quality began to appear in state documents and elite discourses surrounding and a new regime of value embodied in persons within a population. Population quality expressed through suzhi became predominant in the latter half of the 1980s.
22. Carrying capacity has been critiqued for being idealistic and immeasurable at all scales, for assuming that highly dynamic environmental qualities are static, as well as for the difficulties in determining veracity of data across scales given
changing environmental conditions (Sayre 2008). Identifying stable in-patch dynamics at any scale has proven untenable.

23. See Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (2016).

24. For an account of grazing practices in western China and the state of scientific field studies, see Yeh (2009).

ORCID

Jesse Rodenbiker http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6889-4958

References

Agger, B. 1979. Western Marxism, an introduction: Classical and contemporary sources. Santa Monica, CA: Goodyear.

Anagnost, A. 2004. The corporeal politics of quality (Suzhi). Public Culture 16 (2):189–208. doi: 10.1215/08993263-16-2-189.

Anderson, K. B. 2002. Marx’s late writings on non-Western and precapitalist societies and gender. Rethinking Marxism 14 (4):84–96. doi: 10.1080/089935690212331340971.

Anderson, K. B. 2016. Marx at the margins: On nationalism, ethnicity, and non-western societies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Appadurai, A. 1996. Modernity at large: Cultural dimensions of globalization (Vol. 1). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Arrighi, G. 2007. Adam Smith in Beijing: Lineages of the twenty-first century. London: Verso Trade.

Boulding, K. E. 1953. The organizational revolution: A study in the ethics of economic organization. New York: Harper.

Brundtland, G. H. 1987. Our common future—Call for action. Environmental Conservation 14 (4):291–94. doi: 10.1017/S0376892900016805.

Buttel, F. H. 2000. Ecological modernization as social theory. Geoforum 31 (1):57–65.

Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. 2016. The 13th Five-Year Plan: For economic and social development of the People’s Republic of China. Accessed June 1, 2018. http://en.ndrc.gov.cn/newsrelease/2,01,612/P020161207645765233498.pdf.

Chan, K., and L. Zhang. 1999. The Hukou system and rural–urban migration in China: Processes and changes. The China Quarterly 160:818–55. doi: 10.1017/S0305741000001351.

Chen, J.-C., J. A. Zinda, and E. T. Yeh. 2017. Recasting the rural: State, society and environment in contemporary China. GeoForum 78:83–88. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2016.03.014.

China Council for International Cooperation on Environment and Development. 2014. Institutional innovation of eco-environmental redlining: Special policy study report. https://www.iisd.org/sites/default/files/publications/CCICED/conservation/2015/institutionalinnovation-of-eco-environmetal-redlining.pdf.

Condorcet, A. [1795] 1955. Sketch for a historical picture of the progress of the human mind, trans. J. Barraclough. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

Culp, R. J., E. U., and W.-H. Yeh, eds. 2016. Knowledge acts in modern China: Ideas, institutions, and identities. Berkeley: Institute of East Asian Studies, University of California, Berkeley.

Day, A. F. 2013. The peasant in postsocialist China: History, politics, and capitalism. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Day, A. F., and M. Schneider. 2018. The end of alternatives? Capitalist transformation, rural activism and the politics of possibility in China. The Journal of Peasant Studies 45 (7):1221–46. doi: 10.1080/03066150.2017.1386179.

Ecological civilization. 2007. China Daily. Accessed June 26, 2018. http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/opinion/2007/10/24/content_6201964.htm.

Fan, J., and P. Li. 2009. The scientific foundation of major function oriented zoning in China. Journal of Geographical Sciences 19 (5):515–31. doi: 10.1007/s11442-009-0515-0.

Foster, J. B. 2000. Marx’s ecology: Materialism and nature. New York: NYU Press.

Foucault, M., P. Rabinow, and N. S. Rose. 2003. The essential Foucault: Selections from essential works of Foucault, 1954–1984. New York: New Press.

Geall, S., and A. Ely. 2018. Narratives and pathways towards an ecological civilization in contemporary China. The China Quarterly 236:1175–96. doi: 10.1017/S0305741018001315.

Geng, Y., and B. Doberstein. 2008. Developing the circular economy in China: Challenges and opportunities for achieving ‘leapfrog development’. The International Journal of Sustainable Development & World Ecology 15 (3):231–39.

Gregson, N., M. Crang, S. Fuller, and H. Holmes. 2015. Interrogating the circular economy: The moral economy of resource recovery in the EU. Economy and Society 44 (2):218–43. doi: 10.1080/03085147.2015.1013353.

Gulding, G. E. 2016. Farewell to peasant China: Rural urbanization and social change in the late twentieth century. London and New York: Routledge.

Hajer, M. A. 1995. The politics of environmental discourse: Ecological modernization and the policy process. New York: Oxford University Press.

Hansen, M. H., H. Li, and R. Svarverud. 2018. Ecological civilization: Interpreting the Chinese past, projecting the global future. Global Environmental Change 53:195–203. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.09.014.

Haraway, D. 1988. Situated knowledges: The science question in feminism and the privilege of partial perspective. Feminist Studies 14 (3):575–99. doi: 10.2307/3178066.

Hathaway, M. J. 2013. Environmental winds: Making the global in southwest China. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Hinton, W. 1997. Fanshen: A documentary of revolution in a Chinese village. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Hu, J. T. 2012. Report to the 18th National People’s Congress. http://www.china.org.cn/china/18th_cpc_congress/201211/16/content_27137540.htm.

Hutchinson, G. E. 1978. An introduction to population ecology. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Jun, M. 2007. Ecological civilization is the way forward. Chinadialogue.net, October 31. Accessed November 19, 2017. https://www.chinadialogue.net/article/1440-Ecological-civilisation-is-the-way-forward.

Kingsland, S. E. 1985. Modelling nature. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kipnis, A. 2006. Suzhi: A keyword approach. The China Quarterly 186:295–313. doi: 10.1017/S0305741006000166.

Leiss, W. 1976. The limits to satisfaction: An essay on the problem of needs and commodities. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Lewis, M. 2004. Inventing global ecology: Tracking the biodiversity ideal in India 1947–1997. Athens: Ohio University Press.

Li, D. 1918. Fa E Gemingzhi Bijaoguan [A comparison of French and Russian Revolutions]. Yanzhi, July 1. https://www.marxists.org/chinese/lidazhao/marxist-org-chinese-lee-19180701.htm.

Li, D. 1919. Wo de Makesi Zuyiguan [My Marxist views]. Xinxignian 6.5:521–37; 6.6:612–24.

Li, D. 1924. Shi Xue Yaoan [The essentials of historical study]. Shanghai: Shangwu Yinshu Kuan.

Li, T. 2007. The will to improve: Governmentality, development, and the practice of politics. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Lowe, C. 2013. Wild profusion: Biodiversity conservation in an Indonesian archipelago. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Lü, Y., Z. Ma, L. Zhang, B. Fu, and G. Gao. 2013. Redlines for the greening of China. Environmental Science & Policy 33:346–53. doi: 10.1016/j.envsci.2013.05.007.

Ma, S. 1981. Shengtai guili zai huanjingguanlizhong de zuoyong—zhankou lianhai xian dai huanjing guanli de fazhan chushi [The function of ecological rules in environmental management - On developing trends in modern environmental management]. Acta Scientiae Circumstantiae Huanjing Kexue xuebao 1:011.

Ma, S., and R. S. Wang. 1984. The social-economic-natural complex ecosystem. Acta Ecologica Sinica 4 (1):1–9.

Magubane, Z. 2003. Simians, savages, skulls and sex: Science and colonial militarism in 19th century South Africa. In Race, nature and the politics of difference, ed. D. Moore, J. Kosek, and A. Pandian. Durham and London: Duke University Press.

Mao, Z. D. 1927. Report on an investigation of the peasant movement in Hunan. Selected Works of Mao Zedong 1:23–59.

Mao, Z. D. 1956. Analysis of the classes in Chinese society. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press.

Marx, K. [1867] 2001. Capital: A critique of political economy. London: Penguin

Marx, K. 1882. Preface to the Russian edition of the Communist manifesto. In The portable Karl Marx, 1983, ed. E. Kamenka, 556–57. New York: Penguin Books.

Marx, K. [1939] 2005. Grundrisse: Foundations of the critique of political economy. New York: Vintage.

Meisner, M. J. 1967. Li Ta-chao and the origins of Chinese Marxism. New York: Atheneum.

Moise, E. E. 2013. Modern China. London and New York: Routledge.

Moore, J. 2015. Capitalism in the web of life: Ecology and the accumulation of capital. London: Verso.

Morgan, L. H. 1877. Ancient society; or, researches in the lines of human progress from savagery, through barbarism to civilization. Chicago: H. Holt.

Muldavin, J. 2007. The politics of transition: Critical political ecology, classical economics, and ecological modernization theory in China. In The political geography handbook, ed. K. Cox, M. Lowe, and J. Robinson, 247–62. London: Sage.

O’Connor, J. 1988. Capitalism, nature, socialism a theoretical introduction. Capitalism Nature Socialism 1 (1):11–38. doi: 10.1080/10455758809358356.

Odum, E. P. 1959. Fundamentals of ecology. Philadelphia: Saunders.

Ong, L. H. 2014. State-led urbanization in China: Skyscrapers, land revenue and “concentrated villages.” The China Quarterly 217:162–79. doi: 10.1017/S030574101400010.

Ouyang, Z., H. Zheng, Y. Xiao, S. Polasky, J. Liu, W. Xu, Q. Wang, et al. 2016. Improvements in ecosystem services from investments in natural capital. Science 352 (6292):1455–59. doi: 10.1126/science.aaf2295.

Pan, J. 2013a. China’s environmental governing and ecological civilization. Berlin: Springer.

Pan, J. 2013b. Ensuring ecological security by adapting to carrying capacity. Social Sciences in China 34 (4):154–61. 10.1080/02529203.2013.849094.

Pow, C. P. 2018. Building a harmonious society through greening: Ecological civilization and aesthetic governmentality in China. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 108 (3):864–83. doi: 10.1080/24694452.2017.1373626.

Pow, C. P., and H. Neo. 2015. Modelling green urbanism in China. Area 47 (2):132–40. doi: 10.1111/area.12128.

Rodenbiker, J. 2017. Superscribing sustainability: The production of China’s urban waterscapes. UPLanD-Journal of Urban Planning, Landscape & Environmental Design 2 (3):71–86.

Rodenbiker, J. 2019. Uneven incorporation: Volumetric transitions in peri-urban China’s conservation zones. Geoforum 104:234–43. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2019.05.002.

Rodenbiker, J. 2020. Urban ecological enclosures: Conservation planning, peri-urban displacement, and local state formations in China. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 44 (4):691–710. doi: 10.1111/1468-2427.12913.

Røpke, I. 2004. The early history of modern ecological economics. Ecological Economics 50 (3–4):293–314. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2004.02.012.

Sayre, N. F. 2008. The genesis, history, and limits of carrying capacity. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 98 (1):120–34. doi: 10.1080/00045600701734356.
Sayre, N. F. 2010. Climax and “original capacity”: The science and aesthetics of ecological restoration in the Southwestern USA. Ecological Restoration 28 (1):23–31.

Schneider, M. 2015. What, then, is a Chinese peasant? Nongmin discourses and agroindustrialization in contemporary China. Agriculture and Human Values 32 (2):331–46. doi: 10.1007/s10460-014-9559-6.

Schumacher, E. F. 1975. Small is beautiful: Economics as if people mattered. New York: Harper & Row.

Selden, M. 1993. The political economy of Chinese development. London: ME Sharpe.

Shen, G. Y. 2014. Unearthing the nation: Modern geology and nationalism in republican China. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Shi, T. 2002. Ecological economics in China: Origins, dilemmas and prospects. Ecological Economics 41 (1):5–20. doi: 10.1016/S0921-8009(02)00025-3.

Su, B., A. Heshmati, Y. Geng, and X. Yu. 2013. A review of the circular economy in China: Moving from rhetoric to implementation. Journal of Cleaner Production 42:215–27. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.11.020.

Sze, J., ed. 2018. Sustainability: Approaches to environmental justice and social power. New York: NYU Press.

Tagliacozzo, E., H. F. Siu, and P. C. Perdue, eds. 2015. Asia inside out. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Trotsky, L. [1930] 2008. History of the Russian revolution. Chicago: Haymarket Books.

Trotsky, L. [1931] 2010. The permanent revolution & results and prospects. Seattle: Red Letter Press.

Ueda, M. 2015. The history of ecological environment: Ideas derived from Chinese research. In Economic history of energy and environment, ed. S. Sugiyama, 69–83. Tokyo: Springer.

Walder, A. G. 2015. China under Mao: A revolution derailed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Wan, J. 2013. The philosophical wisdom and action implications of “Beautiful China.” Social Sciences in China 34 (4):143–53. 10.1080/02529203.2013.849093.

Wang, J. 1986. Ecological Marxism and ecological socialism. Shengtaixue makesizhuyi he shentiahezhuihuizi [Teaching and Research Jiaoxueyuyanjiu] 6:39–44.

Wang, R. S. 1999. From agricultural civilization to ecological civilization: Ecological methods for sustainable rural development in transition. Journal of Humanities 6:53–59.

Wang, R. S., and Z. Y. Ouyang. 2012. Shehuijingshi-ziran fuhe shengtaixitong yu kechuxifazhan [Social–economic–natural complex ecological systems and sustainable development]. Paper presented at the 20 Years of Sustainable Development Symposium, 337–45. doi: 10.3969/j.issn.1000-3045.2012.03.012.

Wang, Z. 2012. Ecological Marxism in China. Monthly Review 63 (9):36. doi: 10.14452/MR-063-09-2012-02_3.

Weng, X., Z. Dong, Q. Wu, and Y. Qin. 2015. China’s path to a green economy: Decoding China’s green economy concepts and policies. London: International Institute for Environment and Development.

Williams, R. 1980. Problems in materialism and culture: Selected essays. London: Verso.

Xi, J. P. 2015. Full text of President Xi Jinping’s Speech at the Opening Ceremony of the Paris Climate Summit, November 30, 2015. Accessed January 5, 2016. https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/world/XiattendsParisclimateconference/2015-12/01/content_22592469.htm

Xun, L. 2012. Disorder of nature: Ecology, power, and morality in a pastoral community of Inner Mongolia. Beijing: Social Science Academic Press.

Xun, L., and Z. Bao. 2007. Environmental policies based on government mobilization and their local implementation: A sociological analysis of ecological migration at S Banner in Inner Mongolia. Social Sciences in China 5:114–28.

Yang, G. 2016. The red guard generation and political activism in China. New York: Columbia University Press.

Ye, J. 2015. Land transfer and the pursuit of agricultural modernization in China. Journal of Agrarian Change 15 (3):314–37. doi: 10.1111/joac.12117.

Ye, Q. J. 1982. Ecological agriculture: Agricultural economic issues. Shengtainongye. Issues in Agricultural Economy Nongyejingjiewenti. (11):3–10.

Ye, Q. J. 1987. A preliminary study of the strategy of the development of eco-agriculture in China. Shengtai nongye fazhanhe zhanlue wenti. Journal of Southwest Agricultural University. Xinan nongye daxuexuebao. 9 (1):1–8.

Ye, Q. J. 1988. Ecological agriculture: The future of agriculture. Chongqing, China: Chongqing chubanshe.

Yeh, E. T. 2009. Greening western China: A critical view. Geoforum 40 (5):884–94. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2009.06.004.

Yeh, E. T. 2013. The politics of conservation in contemporary rural China. Journal of Peasant Studies 40 (6):1165–88. doi: 10.1080/03066150.2013.859575.

Yuan, Z., J. Bi, and Y. Moriguchi. 2008. The circular economy: A new development strategy in China. Journal of Industrial Ecology 10 (1–2):4–8. doi: 10.1162/108819806775545321.

Zhang, G. 2013. Vigorously promoting ecological progress to build a beautiful China. Qushi, Organ of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China 6 (2):5–26.

Zhang, L., A. P. J. Mol, and D. A. Sonnenfeld. 2007. The interpretation of ecological modernisation in China. Environmental Politics 16 (4):659–68. doi: 10.1080/09644010701419170.

Zhang, Q. F., and J. A. Donaldson. 2008. The rise of agrarian capitalism with Chinese characteristics: Agricultural modernization, agribusiness and collective land rights. The China Journal 60:25–47. doi: 10.1086/tcji.60.20647987.

Zhang, S. 1985. Ways of training individual ecological civilization under mature socialist conditions. Moscow: Scientific Communism.

Zhang, X. H., and Y. Wan. 2013. Essentials of the construction of an ecological civilization. Social Sciences in China 34 (4):180–92. doi: 10.1080/02529203.2013.1696849098.

Zhao, J. 2011. Towards sustainable cities in China: Analysis and assessment of some Chinese cities in 2008. New York: Springer Science & Business Media.

Zhong, Y., and W. Hwang. 2016. Pollution, institutions and street protests in urban China. Journal of Contemporary China 25 (98):216–32. doi: 10.1080/10670564.2015.1075719.
Zhou, Y. 2015. State power and environmental initiatives in China: Analyzing China’s green building program through an ecological modernization perspective. Geoforum 61:1–12. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2015.02.002.

Zimmerer, K. S. 1994. Human geography and the “new ecology”: The prospect and promise of integration. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 84 (1):108–25. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8306.1994.tb01731.x.

JESSE RODENBIKER is an Atkinson Postdoctoral Fellow in Sustainability in the Department of Natural Resources and the Environment at Cornell University, Ithaca NY 14853. E-mail: rodenbiker@cornell.edu. He is concurrently a Visiting Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography at Rutgers University. His research interests include critical environmental science and sustainability studies, urban political ecology, political economy of development, environmental justice, and global China.