Centaur VGI: A Hybrid Human–Machine Approach to Address Global Inequalities in Map Coverage

Jonathan J. Huck, Chris Perkins, Billy T. Haworth, Emmanuel B. Moro & Mahesh Nirmalan

To cite this article: Jonathan J. Huck, Chris Perkins, Billy T. Haworth, Emmanuel B. Moro & Mahesh Nirmalan (2020): Centaur VGI: A Hybrid Human–Machine Approach to Address Global Inequalities in Map Coverage, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2020.1768822

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2020.1768822
Centaur VGI: A Hybrid Human–Machine Approach to Address Global Inequalities in Map Coverage

Jonathan J. Huck,* Chris Perkins,* Billy T. Haworth,* Emmanuel B. Moro,‡ and Mahesh Nirmalan*

*MCGIS, Department of Geography, The University of Manchester
†MCGIS, Humanitarian and Conflict Response Institute, The University of Manchester
‡Faculty of Medicine, Gulu University
*Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester

Despite advances in mapping technologies and spatial data capabilities, global mapping inequalities are not declining. Inequalities in the coverage, quality, and currency of mapping persist, with significant gaps in remote and rural parts of the Global South. These regions, representing some of the most economically and resource-disadvantaged societies in the world, need high-quality mapping to aid in the delivery of essential services, such as health care, in response to severe challenges such as poverty, conflict, and global climate change. Volunteered geographic information (VGI) has shown potential as a solution to mapping inequalities. Contributions have largely been made in urban areas or in response to acute emergencies (e.g., earthquakes or floods), however, leaving rural regions that suffer from chronic humanitarian crises undermapped. An alternative solution is needed that harnesses the power of volunteer mapping more effectively to address regions in most need. Machine learning holds promise. In this article we propose centaur VGI, a hybrid system that combines the spatial cognitive abilities of human volunteers with the speed and efficiency of a machine. We argue that centaur VGI can contribute to mitigating some of the political and technological factors that produce inequalities in VGI mapping coverage and do so in the context of a case study in Acholi, northern Uganda, an inadequately mapped region in which the authors have been working since 2017 to provide outreach health care services to victims of major limb loss during conflict. Key Words: humanitarian mapping, machine learning, mapping inequalities, OpenStreetMap, VGI.

Inequalities in the coverage, quality, and currency of mapping persist, with significant gaps in remote and rural parts of the Global South that suffer from ongoing chronic humanitarian crises. These areas in particular could benefit significantly were they able to implement national spatial data infrastructures (SDIs) in support of the UN 2030 Sustainable Development Goals. Scott and Rajabifard (2017), though, recognize that many developing nations currently “continue to face problems of poor data quality, lack of timely data and a lack of interoperability between different sources of data” (64). Mapping is rarely explicitly discussed in policy fora but is fundamental for SDIs. Nor do these areas attract the same level of attention from humanitarian mapping volunteers as those with more acute emergencies (e.g., a serious disease outbreak or a significant natural hazard leading to a disaster or humanitarian crisis).

It has been suggested that volunteered geographic information (VGI1; Goodchild 2007) might offer a potential solution for these kinds of regions. There are significant concerns, however, from official sources regarding data quality, ownership, and knock-on impacts on professional employment in the mapping sector (Olteanu-Raimond et al. 2017), and there is no guarantee that a given feature will ever be mapped (Hagenauer and Helbich 2012). In addition, practical issues relating to volunteer motivation and the pragmatic combination of technologies have hindered widespread adoption of VGI for addressing mapping inequalities. Machine learning (ML)2 has already been widely deployed to automate aspects of the mapping process, in particular in the field of extracting features from remotely sensed image data (Zhu et al. 2017). To date, however, advances in this area have focused on conceptual or technical challenges, instead of offering practical solutions
that might be widely appropriate for rectifying inequalities in mapping.

In this article we argue that VGI and ML might profitably be brought together to address motivational and practical issues in the mapping of remote rural areas of the Global South and develop the notion of centaur VGI in support of this argument. In technology, the term centaur describes a hybrid human–machine approach to accomplishing a task (Thompson 2013). The term originated from centaur chess, a variation of the game in which grand masters collaborate with a machine to exploit the benefits of human intuition and the speed of computer players. This produces a synergy, whereby the result is better than what could be achieved by each agent working separately (Thompson 2013). We present an argument for the adoption of centaur VGI as a strategy to combine the object recognition and spatial cognitive skills of people with the speed and efficiency of a machine. We argue that such an approach could contribute to reducing some of the political and technological factors that together lead to inequalities in mapping coverage in many parts of the world. We describe a conceptual model for the development of this kind of system and situate this against case evidence from the Acholi subregion of Uganda.

Global Inequalities in Mapping

Over the years, several attempts have been made to quantify variations in mapping at different scales, including analyses at an international level (e.g., Perkins 1987; Parry and Perkins 2000), regional level (e.g., Böhme 1991), and more detailed and multi-method surveys of individual countries (e.g., Radcliffe 2009). Variations in map coverage across the world have received particular attention from technical and official reviews, and professional bodies have vested interests in charting progress in their fields. International comparative metrics have been produced documenting an apparently inexorable advance in mapping (see, e.g., Konecny, Breitkopf, and Radtke 2016). The International Cartographic Association and the United Nations Committee of Experts on Global Geospatial Information Management (UN-GGIM) have undertaken periodic surveys on global map coverage, based on self-reporting from each individual country (Konecny, Breitkopf, and Radtke 2016). These surveys suggest a gradual improvement and reduction in inequalities, with more of the globe covered at larger scales as scientific enterprise progresses. Such approaches require countries to return responses to surveys and to provide robust and honest answers, however. In the case of the UN-GGIM study published by Konecny, Breitkopf, and Radtke (2016), for example, only 115 of the 193 UN member states (or regions thereof) responded to the survey (59.6 percent), with the remaining national data (40.4 percent) assembled from a selection of other sources including map dealers, libraries, and personal correspondence. Many of the more than 40 percent of countries who did not respond to the survey are located in the Global South (Figure 1). This implies that reported increases in mapping coverage since 1986 made by Konecny, Breitkopf, and Radtke (2016) might be biased toward mapping activity in the developed world and that true global figures are likely to be lower.

Other methodologies deployed in more nuanced, detailed, and narrative accounts confirm the politics that underpin and limit progress and are grounded in the appreciation that mapping inevitably reflects society. Mapping requires resources to compile and produce and, as such, all else being equal, richer areas or nation-states are likely able to create and maintain a greater diversity of more current mapping, compiled and maintained to greater accuracy and delivered through professionally staffed institutions (Parry and Perkins 2000). There are also likely to be significant variations within nations that are hidden in aggregated national values, whereby urban areas are best mapped and rural areas have the most out-of-date coverage and the least detailed mapping (Haklay 2010), particularly in the Global South (Chen et al. 2019). Mapping also takes time to develop and, as such, the history of cartography continues to influence contemporary provision. Colonial mapping specifications are likely to continue to affect contemporary practice, even half a century after the end of empire (Akerman 2017), and technological changes offering apparently global solutions in practice are also strongly influenced by local factors. The widespread diffusion of Google Maps and similar products on smartphones, for example, offers an apparently comprehensive global coverage, but access to smartphones and mobile infrastructure varies greatly (Chinn and Fairlie 2006), and the content and quality of the maps themselves vary substantially from place to place.
Figure 1. Countries that did not respond to the survey published by Konecny, Breitkopf, and Radtke (2016). Source: Background data from Natural Earth (2020) (https://www.naturalearthdata.com).

Simple indexes of topographic coverage have additional flaws beyond their methodological practice, such as a failure to chart the full diversity of mapping. Parry and Perkins (2000) highlighted the fact that many different agencies are involved in mapping in addition to national mapping agencies and that mapping has historically been published in genres, of which topographic mapping has probably been most significant. Coverage will vary for each, but once again the rural Global South is likely to be worst mapped. Technological change has also frequently disassembled the previously unified topographic map with data themes identified to encourage standardized practice for the dissemination of data through SDI (Scott and Rajabifard 2017). Once again, coverage is likely to vary, with digital mapping of the Global South being less frequent, less available, and less fit for purpose than in richer societies.

A further issue with coverage as a metric lies with the availability of maps. The existence of a map does not necessarily mean that it is accessible, either because authoritative national mapping is regarded as a political device and might be restricted, because maps are too expensive for many members of the population, or simply because there are not sufficient outlets at which maps can be acquired. In Russia, China, and most parts of Asia and the Middle East, for example, states limit who can acquire mapping, and even available maps are likely to leave some sites off their publicly published coverage when these are deemed sensitive (e.g., military bases or critical national infrastructure; see Perkins and Dodge 2009). A final problem with coverage stems from the limited way in which such indexes deal with temporality. Even in Western Europe and North America, many national government mapping agencies have neither the funding nor the mandate to keep their mapping databases current within specified time frames. Public budgets for topographic mapping are declining or nonexistent in many jurisdictions in the Global South (Coleman, Georgiadou, and Labonte 2009) and, as a consequence, mapping from the colonial era might be the only available topographic coverage in many regions.

So despite the optimistic trends in overall coverage charted in the Status of World Mapping database, maps of countries in the Global South are often inferior in coverage, quality, and availability and frequently well beyond the limits of their useful life. In practice, global coverage of authoritative topographic mapping is probably growing far more slowly than is estimated and could even be reducing in some regions. It is notable that the UN-GGIM
five- to ten-year vision frames the use of geospatial information toward the achievement of the UN Sustainable Development Goals but makes no attempt to address the lack of mapping coverage in the Global South. Instead, it favors topics such as data standards or data interoperability (Norris 2015). It does, however, acknowledge that “many of the critical issues where geospatial information can assist are found in developing nations” (Norris 2015, 31) and also refers to the lack of high-quality mapping in Africa specifically, stating that “the lack of consistent up-to-date base mapping … across Africa remains a challenge” (Norris 2015, 7). Nevertheless, no solutions or action plans are posited in the document. It is for this reason that VGI has grown in popularity in areas for which up-to-date mapping is not otherwise available. The following section describes the development and academic context of VGI, before providing an overview of the challenges that are limiting the growth of VGI mapping coverage in many of the undermapped parts of the world.

Volunteered Geographical Information

Despite a growing body of research into VGI in the past decade, its definition remains somewhat nebulous, encompassing a wide variety of data types and modes of volunteering (Craglia, Ostermann, and Spinsanti 2012) and an even wider range of activities, practices, and motivations (Haklay 2013). A number of typologies of VGI have been developed, the most frequently cited of which focuses on the distinction between explicit or implicit volunteering and geographic information (Craglia, Ostermann, and Spinsanti 2012). Here, we refer only to VGI that can be considered as both explicitly volunteered and explicitly geographical, the archetypical example of which is the user-generated content of OpenStreetMap (OSM). OSM was originally intended as a response to the strict licensing associated with national mapping agencies such as the Ordnance Survey and the then-emergent Web mapping services (e.g., Google Maps) but has increasingly come to be used in humanitarian mapping over the past decade (Anderson, Sarkar, and Palen 2019).

Traditional research agendas for VGI have emphasized the data and individual contributors, with early publications discussing the implications of VGI for science (e.g., Gartner, Bennett, and Morita 2007; Goodchild 2007) and society (e.g., Obermeyer 2007) and the motivations of individuals to participate (e.g., Coleman, Georgiadou, and Labonte 2009). More recent research, however, has sought to advance understanding of the concept of VGI by viewing it as a complex social practice, rather than merely data production (Haworth 2018). In this context, VGI has implications for society and geography far beyond the opportunities presented by a network of individual observers or distributed data contributors (Haworth 2018). Nevertheless, two research themes have predominated, the first of which lies in the application of VGI in the management of disasters (e.g., Crutcher and Zook 2009; Zook et al. 2010; Haworth and Bruce 2015; Granell and Ostermann 2016; Haworth 2016, 2018). OSM and other VGI platforms have been increasingly used in the past decade to support humanitarian and disaster relief efforts, providing emergency responders with information about where those in the greatest need are located and how to deliver assistance (Zook et al. 2010). Given the immediate need for reliable maps in humanitarian and disaster scenarios, peer-produced mapping allows a greater number of maps to be produced in a shorter period of time, permitting scarce resources (e.g., volunteers located in-country) to be diverted to tasks that cannot as easily be undertaken by distributed networks of remote volunteers (Zook et al. 2010). Prominent examples of the use of VGI in disaster relief include the use of Google Earth in the response to Hurricane Katrina in the United States in 2005 (Crutcher and Zook 2009) and the use of OpenStreetMap in response to the magnitude 7.0 earthquake that struck Haiti (2010), Typhoon Yolanda (2013), the Ebola crisis (2014), and the Nepal earthquake (2015; Zook et al. 2010; Anderson, Sarkar, and Palen 2019).

The second theme concerns the evaluation of VGI data quality (e.g., Elwood 2008; Flanagin and Metzger 2008; Haklay 2010; Zielstra and Zipf 2010; Goodchild and Li 2012; Senaratne et al. 2017), typically by comparison with existing authoritative data sets. Research has framed data quality as “a crucial question about the efficacy of VGI activities and the value of outputs for a range of applications” (Haklay 2010, 315) and as a “key concern” for VGI to emergency management (Haworth 2016, 194). It is interesting that, even though VGI had already become an important source of maps for a variety of humanitarian purposes (Haworth and Bruce 2015), Sui, Goodchild, and Elwood (2013) suggested that
“information is usually the least available where it is most needed” (6). In recent years in the Darfur crisis in northern Sudan (2006), the aftermath of the Haiti earthquake (2010), and the BP Deepwater Horizon explosion in the Gulf of Mexico (2010), for example, no detailed mapping was available to support relief efforts (Sui, Goodchild, and Elwood 2013). Indeed, more obscure, remote, and unknown features are less likely to be mapped in OSM, except perhaps when a disaster generates prominence in international media, creating an impetus for voluntary mapping. This is an important issue, because the vast majority of unmapped areas can typically be expected to be remote and rural areas, typically with sparse populations and little or no access to the Internet. Haiti, for example, as one of the world’s poorest countries, had simply not created demand for mapping, resulting in a lack of adequate coverage in standard mapping platforms (Zook et al. 2010). This issue is compounded, because a lack of initial data prevents further mapping through the effect of map seeding, in which data coverage and quality are more likely to improve in areas where some data already exist (Anderson, Sarkar, and Palen 2019).

The result of this is that VGI exhibits patterns of inequality in mapping coverage similar to those already identified in authoritative sources of mapping. Studies of the spatial distribution of VGI posted by Google Maps users, for example, demonstrate inequality at global and local scales, comprising an overrepresentation of higher income places and popular tourist destinations and an underrepresentation of lower income places (Crutcher and Zook 2009; Elwood 2010; Zook et al. 2010). Similarly, Graham and Zook (2011) identified that Louisville, Kentucky, had 50 percent more content in OSM than the entire country of Iraq and that the Tokyo metropolitan region had three times as much content as the entire content of Africa. Even around London, Haklay (2010) found that rural areas had larger positional errors than more urban locations.

The digital divide reinforces these patterns of inequality in mapping coverage (Chinn and Fairlie 2006; Hagenauer and Helbich 2012). This inequality in access to digital services stems from different levels of access to electricity, computing equipment, mobile devices, and Internet connections, as well as the necessary time and skills to use them effectively (Haworth 2016). The digital divide has been identified as a major limitation to the uptake of VGI (Haworth 2018), and inequalities in VGI coverage across the surface of the Earth mirror the inequalities just charted in the case of authoritative topographic mapping. OSM, for example, has acquired a “strikingly comprehensive” data set on large parts of the developed world, although other parts of the world (predominantly those in the Global South) are underrepresented (Elwood, Goodchild, and Sui 2012, 576). The exclusion and underrepresentation of information from and about people and places can result in the exclusion of their needs and priorities from policy and decision making, resource allocation, and service provision (Elwood 2008). It is also important to consider the converse of exclusion: people and parts of the world that can participate, gaining increased benefits and potentially widening existing divides (Haworth 2018).

These research concerns about inequalities in data access are interesting because, since the emergence of Web mapping around 2005, researchers have increasingly considered VGI as a viable alternative to the authoritative maps produced by national mapping agencies. Nevertheless, Konecny, Breitkopf, and Radtke (2016) only acknowledged it with a single bullet point, stating that, although it had been “enthusiastically promoted” in most parts of the world, “it must be integrated into authoritative mapping to guarantee quality control” (34). In fact, even national mapping agencies in the Global North, who are best placed to incorporate VGI into their authoritative production systems, have so far largely failed to exploit the opportunity (Coleman 2013). This is in part because of employment fears from staff, legal issues relating to crowdsourced data and its ownership, and the long-term sustainability of the data source (Olteanu-Raimond et al. 2017). This lack of uptake also reflects concerns over data quality, and stems from social issues related to volunteer motivation and pragmatic configurations of technology in practice. It is to these issues that we now turn.

Motivations for VGI Contributors

A primary challenge for addressing mapping inequalities is that maps have always only been published for themes and places where demand justifies production costs (Elwood, Goodchild, and Sui 2012). Although VGI reduces costs in comparison to traditional practices for national mapping
agencies, costs are not completely removed. In addition to the time and equipment cost for volunteers (e.g., computer, Internet connection, Global Positioning System receiver, mobile phone, or printer), organizations require substantial resources to be able to use VGI effectively, with data management being one of the key challenges (Haworth 2016). The existence of well-supported, high-capacity platforms such as OSM and the flourishing set of open source software projects surrounding it mean that VGI approaches to mapping can be deployed more easily than ever before. Nevertheless, VGI mapping remains limited to the locations and features that volunteers want to map.

It is therefore important to understand what motivates people to contribute data to VGI platforms such as OSM (Flanagin and Metzger 2008; Goodchild and Li 2012). Coleman, Georgiadou, and Labonte (2009) proposed a list of eight potential motivations: altruism, interest, intellectual stimulation, protection or enhancement of a personal investment, social reward, enhanced personal reputation, self-expression, and pride of place (where place refers to the location being mapped). Zook et al. (2010) proposed a simpler list: the desire to gain social capital, the desire to gain technical knowledge, and the desire to gain a rewarding educational experience, as well as the inaccessibility and cost of alternative sources of data and simply the desire to “fill in the blank spaces” on the map (see also Goodchild 2007; Sui, Goodchild, and Elwood 2013). In either case, these motivations could be conflated as either egocentric or allocentric: driven by personal benefits or by more altruistic factors, respectively. There has been little research into the relative influence of these different motivations, but the patterns in quality and completeness described earlier (cf. Haklay 2010; Zielstra and Zipf 2010) indicate that people largely only map places that they care about in an egocentric fashion, such as their own neighborhood or a favored holiday destination, or those that are identified by some emotive and allocentric influence, such as mapping in response to a disaster as part of relief efforts. It follows, therefore, that it is unlikely that volunteers will be as easily motivated to undertake extensive mapping of remote and unknown regions that are not experiencing well-publicized acute humanitarian crises. We suggest that a solution to generating map coverage for such regions might then lie in the development of technical approaches to VGI that are more appropriate for rural and remote regions, focusing upon the egocentric motivations such as intellectual stimulation or desire to gain technical knowledge, rather than simply attempting to motivate existing mappers to shift attention to such regions.

Much of the VGI coverage in remote and rural parts of the Global South relates to mapping in support of organized responses to acute humanitarian crises in very specific locations, leading to the production of high-quality mapping over quite small and normally urban areas to support a particular purpose, such as the mapping of the world’s largest slum: Kibera in Nairobi (Hagen 2010). Organizations such as the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team and Missing Maps are undoubtedly improving map data for disaster response and preparedness, but remote and sparsely populated regions experiencing longer term chronic issues are unlikely to become priorities in their task lists and lack the emotive drivers necessary to mobilize large numbers of volunteers. Furthermore, the workflow for some such organizations is often designed to focus on specific crises (e.g., a disease outbreak) and can be spatially limited, meaning that complete regional mapping is unlikely to be achieved through such efforts. For example, the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team mapped the town of Lira in Uganda in great detail in 2014 as a preparatory measure in case of future humanitarian need. Even at the time of writing (five years later), the bounding box around their project is clearly visible on the map, demonstrating an almost total lack of further mapping activity in the area (Figure 2). Although the addition of this information to the map is beneficial, the contrast between the urban detail and the surrounding rural areas serves to highlight one of the chief difficulties associated with volunteer mapping at the regional or national scale: Local-scale mapping can often be achieved with great levels of success, but deploying the same techniques over a larger area remains a challenge.

This challenge can be addressed either through increasing levels of motivation (and by extension the number of volunteer hours available for mapping) or by improving the efficiency and efficacy of existing volunteers through technological means, so that more mapping can be achieved per volunteer hour without a reduction in quality. We suggest that the latter might be achieved by adopting centaur approaches to VGI production.
Figure 2. OpenStreetMap highway (road and footpath) data around the town of Lira, north Uganda. The square outline of the digitization exercise can clearly be seen. Source: Highway data © 2019 OpenStreetMap contributors (2019).

Integrating VGI and Machine Learning

Although VGI provides an invaluable resource for many humanitarian applications, further consideration needs to be given to how it might address persistent inequalities in global mapping coverage. ML has been one of the most successful areas of computer science research in recent decades, with applications in a wide variety of fields (Gillies et al. 2016). Although it remains difficult for nonexperts to use (Gillies et al. 2016), the emergence of increasingly high-level ML platforms such as Google TensorFlow is rapidly lowering barriers to entry, resulting in the application of ML techniques to a wide variety of problems in almost all fields of research (Jordan and Mitchell 2015). From a mapping perspective, one of the clearest applications of ML techniques is feature recognition in remotely sensed imagery. A typical system is conceptually relatively straightforward:

1. A training set of data is created in which features such as roads, footpaths, or buildings in imagery data are manually identified and labeled.
2. The training set is used to train an algorithm, which learns how to recognize the labeled features using statistical analysis.
3. The trained algorithm is then used to search for the same statistical patterns in new imagery and identify new features.

A comprehensive review of the literature relating to the classification of images for mapping is beyond the scope of this article and can be found elsewhere (e.g., Zhu et al. 2017). Rather, we argue here for the integration of ML with human activities, as against replacement of the human activities with the machine, which has been a more traditional goal in ML research.

It is widely acknowledged that OSM constitutes an extremely valuable yet relatively underexploited source of training data for geographical applications in ML (Chen and Zipf 2017; Herfort and Zipf 2018). The automated detection of features such as buildings, roads, or settlements in satellite imagery using ML approaches and VGI training data has been addressed several times in the literature (e.g., Hagenauer and Helbich 2012; Herfort and Zipf 2018; Herfort et al. 2019; Li, Herfort, and Zipf 2019), including in rural African settings (e.g., Chen and Zipf 2017; Chen et al. 2019). Attempts have also been made to integrate ML into OSM workflows; for example, by presenting a comparison of the number of buildings in the OSM database at a given location with estimated “on the ground”
building counts generated using ML feature detection (e.g., Disaster Ninja 2019; OSM Analytics 2019). Such tools are highly useful for directing volunteers toward locations that require mapping and also reiterate the lack of mapping data available in many parts of the Global South, but little work has been carried out into how ML might be used to directly enhance crowdsourced data sets (Herfort and Zipf 2018). A move in this direction has recently been made by Facebook’s mapwith.ai platform (Map with AI 2019), although this is focused on acute humanitarian response and is therefore only currently available in a limited number of countries. Nevertheless, investment such as this by large commercial organizations such as Facebook, alongside other major investments in the improvement of international map coverage by organizations such as Amazon, Apple, and Microsoft (Anderson, Sarkar, and Palen 2019), serves to illustrate the value of these maps both from a humanitarian and commercial perspective.

Despite a rapid growth in academic literature attempting to link OSM and ML in recent years (Yuan et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019; Herfort et al. 2019; Li, Herfort, and Zipf 2019; Vargas-Muñoz et al. 2019), it is notable that almost all of this reported research focuses on the evaluation of different approaches (in terms of accuracy, precision, or other quality metrics) rather than devising practical systems for delivering data. Notably, none of them report an upload of resulting data sets into OSM, which is likely to be due at least in part to the fact that bulk importing into OSM is carefully regulated by the community (OpenStreetMap 2019b) and that gaining approval for such imports can be challenging (Anderson, Sarkar, and Palen 2019). OSM community attitudes toward bulk imports and automated edits can be negative and cautious (OpenStreetMap 2019b, 2019c, 2019e), with vocal minorities in the OSM community appearing to strongly oppose the use of such approaches. Although there certainly have been many instances of successful data uploads over the duration of the project (Anderson, Sarkar, and Palen 2019), OSM also maintains an online list of data imports that have been or will be deleted (OpenStreetMap 2019d), and the threat exists that imports of data might be deleted and user accounts blocked if the upload falls afoul of OSM community guidelines (OpenStreetMap 2019b). Increasing interest in the use of ML among some of the key organizations affiliated with the OSM community (e.g., Smith 2018; Herfort et al. 2019) might lead to increased uptake, but balancing the requirement for high-quality data, some community members’ views for how OSM data should be collected, and the realities of ML means that it is unlikely that we will see a significant uptake in wholly machine-generated map features in the near future. Rather, it is expected that these technologies will continue to be applied to quality control and focus on the improvement of data within existing OSM coverage or identifying areas that require manual mapping by volunteers.

There is room, however, for alternative, complementary approaches to integrating ML into OSM digitization workflows. In the next section, we propose such an alternative by elaborating on the idea of centaur VGI and show how such an approach can help the benefits of ML to be realized, without the need to replace volunteers or the standard OSM editors and workflow but ensuring that mapping efficiency is increased while still meeting the expectations of the OSM community.

Centaur VGI

The apparent tension between the desire of computer scientists to automatically detect features and the resistance of the OSM community to accept automated edits reveals a possible middle ground: a centaur VGI approach whereby the classification accuracy and common sense of manual human input can be combined with the speed of the machine to enable more efficient volunteer mapping, also delivering a system that is compatible with the ethos of OSM. This centaur VGI workflow is summarized as follows:

1. Computer searches satellite imagery for previously unmapped feature.
2. Computer proposes geometry for feature.
    a. Volunteer approves, edits, or rejects geometry.
    b. Computer incorporates edits and rejections into the training set to improve performance.
3. Computer proposes classification for feature.
    a. Volunteer approves or edits classification.
    b. Computer incorporates edits into the training set to improve performance.
4. Volunteer submits edits to OpenStreetMap.

This kind of centaur-based approach can integrate seamlessly into existing editors such as the OSM iD editor (OpenStreetMap 2019a) or JOSM (2019)
software. It removes the need for users to search for features by providing in-editor suggestions that can be accepted, modified, or rejected before submission to the OSM database. Edits and rejections are fed back to the training set to improve the performance of the classification algorithm. Such an approach permits the human volunteer to concentrate on the classification and verification of the data, and more onerous, frustrating, and time-consuming tasks such as searching for features across sparsely populated rural areas and tracing around the edges of features can be machine based, resulting in a more productive experience for volunteers and increasing potential for greater volumes of data to be collected per volunteer hour. Crucially, although the machine proposes a geometry for each feature, it is the human volunteer who accepts, edits, or rejects it. This is important because, although ML techniques show promising results in feature detection, analyzing and ensuring the quality of the resulting data remains a “huge challenge” (Herfort et al. 2019, 1801).

Centaur VGI is akin to approaches identified in the literature as interactive machine learning (iML) or human-in-the-loop, where human domain experts are considered indispensable elements in the data processing pipeline (Holzinger 2016). Such approaches are well suited to VGI, because they are intended for situations when human operators are able to undertake a task with great reliability but without being able to explain their rules explicitly (Holzinger 2016). Centaur VGI might therefore be considered a more human-focused version of iML in which people remain in control of every single feature that is digitized, being aided or augmented rather than replaced by the machine. This dual approach fulfills the requirements of the OSM community and maintains quality, also increasing speed and efficiency of volunteers working in remote unmapped parts of the world. Centaur approaches have been deployed in fields as disparate as professional chess, stock market trading, warfare, medical imaging, and baseball scouting (Holzinger 2016; Domingues 2017). There is clear potential for such approaches to be applied to the rural, unmapped regions of the Global South and for those maps to be used for a wide variety of humanitarian, medical, infrastructure, and service applications.

Centaur approaches to mapping could also potentially contribute to active learning and further improve the performance of the human–computer team. Active learning (AL) is a variant of ML in which the machine is able to select features for digitization that can be incorporated into the training set. In this scenario, the volunteer takes on the role of the oracle (in the ML parlance; cf. Settles 2009; Holzinger 2016; Bernard et al. 2018 ) as well as the mapper, generating map data while providing optimized training material to the machine to increase the quality of future suggestions that it will make. AL is intended to minimize the required size of training sets by allowing the machine to ask questions, just as a human learner would (Yang et al. 2018). AL approaches have been deployed with great success in the literature and to many different areas of application (Yang et al. 2018) and are already being used to aid feature classification in remote sensing (Patra and Bruzzone 2011; Stumpf et al. 2014; Liu, Zhang, and Eom 2017; Yang et al. 2018).

The literature identifies a wide variety of different approaches to the selection of features for AL that the classification algorithm finds difficult to classify with low levels of uncertainty. Asking a human to classify such a feature and incorporating the result into the training set teaches the algorithm what to do in such a case and therefore improves the classification of subsequent features. Uncertainty in a training set typically arises when there is conflicting evidence about the class to which a feature should belong (conflicting evidence uncertainty) or when there is insufficient evidence to be sure about the class a feature should belong to (insufficient evidence uncertainty; Sharma and Bilgic 2017). AL techniques have been shown to be beneficial for both forms of uncertainty but particularly for the former (Sharma and Bilgic 2017). There are various approaches to the selection of the best features to query in AL, but common approaches can be summarized as query by committee, where multiple classifiers are used to classify an image and the samples with the greatest level of disagreement are selected; max-margin sampling, where samples with the greatest levels of uncertainty in the classification algorithm are selected; and max-entropy sampling, where probabilistic modeling is used to determine values for uncertainty, and those with the highest values are selected (Du et al. 2017).

AL approaches also have additional advantages when applied to VGI (and OSM in particular). They aid human understanding of how the algorithm works; volunteer mappers are better able to
Figure 3. Maps displaying (A) the location of Uganda in Africa and (B) the location of the Acholi subregion in Uganda.

understand how the machine works because of the interaction with it (Gillies et al. 2016; Holzinger 2016; Yang et al. 2018) and even contribute in an overt and meaningful way to its success, rather than merely relying on the machine to do the work. For volunteers, these benefits can constitute egocentric motivations for participation, which could be more powerful than allocentric motivations in the case of regions with few points of interest and little media presence, thus increasing the likelihood that such a location might be mapped. With respect to the OSM community, the volunteer remains the primary actor for mapping, which might make the approach more acceptable to those parts of the community who are less content for ML techniques to be incorporated into feature digitization. We conclude by showing how such a system might be realized in the context of our work in Acholi, Uganda.

Research Context: Mapping Acholi, Uganda

Although the arguments we present in this article are framed in the context of global topographic mapping, they have primarily been formulated in the context of the authors' ongoing research and humanitarian activity in the Acholi subregion of northern Uganda (Figure 3). This area was the focal point of a brutal conflict arising from an insurgency by Joseph Kony's Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), which lasted for almost two decades, during which atrocities were committed on a regular basis, including the kidnapping and enslavement of young children, severe mutilation, and the internal displacement of 90 percent of the population (Vinci 2005). The period between 1986 and 2005 is generally accepted as the duration of the conflict (Lamwaka 2016), but its legacy, including injuries from landmines placed in villages and fields, continues to this day. Acts of mutilation by the LRA contributed to the prevalence of disabilities in the region and were intended to be highly visible and symbolic. Mutilation was used to control the population (Vinci 2005): Ears and lips, for example, were cut off as a signal to beware of informing on the LRA, whereas bicycle riders had their legs cut off to inhibit communication among the local population (Vinci 2005). Our research primarily comprised undertaking the first prevalence study of disability in
Figure 4. Excerpt of Sheet 23/2 (Pajule) of the Directorate of Overseas Surveys 1:50,000 map of northern Uganda, published in 1968 Directorate of Overseas Surveys (1968).

the region with a particular focus on major limb loss, followed by the design and implementation of an orthopedic outreach service to provide prosthetic limbs and associated care for victims in the region (Okello et al. 2019). Needless to say, it is impossible to conduct a robust prevalence study or to implement comprehensive orthopedic outreach clinics without access to large-scale current maps of the Acholi subregion.

Uganda did respond to the Status of World Mapping questionnaire and was classified accordingly as being mapped with 100 percent coverage at the 1:50,000 scale (Konecny, Breitkopf, and Radtke 2016). Although there is a complete series of maps of Uganda produced at the 1:50,000 scale3 (see Figure 4), an examination of the map sheets themselves reveals that they were released between 1958 and 1969 by the British Directorate of Overseas Surveys (formerly the Directorate of Colonial Surveys), whose remit was to provide a central survey and mapping organization for British colonies and protectorates. These maps were based on aerial imagery and field surveys collected between 1948 and 1961, while Uganda was still a British colony. Responsibility for the production of these maps currently lies with the Uganda Surveys and Mapping Department in the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development. In common with other national mapping agencies in the East African region, only limited progress has been made in updating topographic mapping coverage, which remains analogue in form (Baariu, Mulaku, and Siriba 2019). Although Japanese and French aid has enabled some of the sheets to be updated using SPOT satellite imagery in 1998, 2003, and 2007, this activity has been limited in scope, with only 104 of the 317 sheet series revised (32.8 percent of the series), almost all of which are around the capital city of Kampala in south Uganda and in the West Nile region in the northwest. Only a single sheet has been updated in the Acholi subregion (Sheet 15/1; Palabek 2007), and on inspection the
Figure 5. OpenStreetMap mapping activity (buildings above, roads below) in the Acholi subregion. Source: OSM Analytics (2019). OSM = OpenStreetMap.

update appears limited, comprising only the addition of two small areas of woodland.

Topographic maps of the majority of Uganda are therefore long out of date, a condition that is exacerbated in the Acholi subregion by nearly wholesale displacement of the population during the conflict, exponential population growth, and the impermanent nature of buildings and infrastructure, largely comprising unsurfaced roads and clay huts with thatched roofs. As a result, these maps are only useful today for locating major routes and population centers that they connect. Accordingly, it is reasonable to argue that these maps are no longer authoritative and that Uganda should no longer be classed as having 100 percent map coverage at this scale by the UN-GGIM Status of World Mapping report.

The lack of current maps of Acholi made the production of a rigorous sampling strategy impossible and the design of a comprehensive outreach model for the orthopedic clinic extremely challenging. The twenty-year conflict had received little international media coverage and occurred prior to the widespread uptake of VGI among humanitarian agencies, and the region is predominantly very rural with few points of interest, so the vast majority of northern Uganda was poorly mapped in VGI databases such as OSM. For these reasons, we began a VGI mapping campaign using OSM that engages schools, youth groups, students, private companies, and members of the public to generate map data for the region. In accordance with standard OSM practice, mapping activities are also led by volunteers in country as much as possible, with data produced as part of this project being ground truthed and improved through the addition of additional features and attributes by a team of volunteers based at Gulu University, using Portable OpenStreetMap systems (POSM 2019).

The design of the project meant that we are not able to precisely quantify our contribution to the OSM database, although an inspection of OSM contributions in the region since we began in July 2017 clearly illustrates a substantial increase in coverage during this period (Figure 5). This increase includes the activities of our project, as well as some independent mapping activity from other groups and individuals and ten projects organized by the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team mapping large refugee camps in the region. Nevertheless, according to OSM Analytics (2019), at the time of writing, known usernames used exclusively for the project account for 24 percent of building mapping and 53 percent of road mapping in the Acholi subregion.

The workflow for the project is similar to that of other VGI mapping organizations, such as the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team, and is illustrated in Figure 6. From the perspective of a volunteer mapper, the process is managed by a bespoke Web site (Figure 7; Huckathon 2019) that provides volunteers with areas of interest based on project priorities (which in turn are primarily dictated by the needs of the clinic operation). This is analogous to task managers used to manage digitization projects by the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team (HOT 2019) but focuses on a much larger area than these projects. Once assigned an area by the task manager, volunteers are asked to compare high-resolution satellite imagery against the OSM map and indicate whether there are currently features missing. If so, the volunteer can choose to start mapping, at which point he or she is directed to the OSM iD editor (Figure 6, Step 1). Volunteer edits are uploaded to OSM and flagged in the task manager to be
Typical Map Production Workflow

Step 1: Digitisation
Volunteer assigned area to map   Search for Features   Digitise Feature   Assign Properties to Features   Submit Edits to OSM   Mark Area as Complete

Step 2: Remote Validation
Volunteer assigned area to validate   Validate Feature Geometry   Validate Feature Properties   Submit Edits to OSM   Mark Area as Complete

Step 3: Local Validation
POSM sent to local team   Validate Feature Geometry   Add Feature Properties   Add Missing Features

Step 4: Post Production
Return POSM to UK   Submit Edits to OSM   Paper & Digital Maps Produced

Principal Technology
Task Manager
OSM iD Editor
POSM
Manual Process

Figure 6. Typical four-step workflow for volunteered geographic information map production in this project. Note: OSM = OpenStreetMap; POSM = Portable OpenStreetMap.

Compare the map to the satellite image. If anything is missing it needs mapping! We are particularly interested in huts, paths and roads.

Start Mapping Now!   Not Sure, Skip!   No Mapping Needed!

Figure 7. Screenshot of an early version of the Huckathon software used by the project to systematically search for features to be mapped.
A: 'Traditional' VGI Workflow

Search Imagery for Features → Identify Feature Geometry → Digitise Feature → Assign Properties to Features → Submit Edit to OSM

B: Centaur VGI Workflow

Search Imagery for Features → Identify Feature → Propose Geometry → Propose Properties → Accept / Edit / Reject → Submit Edit to OSM

Incorporate edits and rejects into training set

Human
Machine

Figure 8. (A) The “traditional” OpenStreetMap feature creation workflow. (B) The alternative centaur volunteered geographic information workflow (cf. Figure 5, Step 1). VGI = volunteered geographic information.

validated by an experienced member of the team (Figure 6, Step 2). Following this, data are periodically uploaded to POSM servers, which are transported to Gulu University in the Acholi subregion. A team of trained volunteers then uses the POSM to produce paper maps of the areas, which are taken into the field and manually edited with a pencil before being uploaded and digitized. Local mappers use this opportunity to validate features and add additional information such as place names, road names, and building uses, as well as features that cannot easily be mapped using satellite imagery, such as boreholes (Figure 6, Step 3). The POSM is then returned to the project team in the United Kingdom, who uploads edits to OSM using the POSM Replay software and produce updated paper and digital maps for use by researchers and the staff of the mobile orthopedic clinic (Figure 6, Step 4).

Despite the relative success of this project (and others like it), it is clear that there are still major challenges to be addressed if our goal of a complete map of the region is to be achieved. The most significant is that Acholi is predominantly very rural with few points of interest, so attracting and motivating volunteers is difficult, and mapping features can be laborious and demoralizing. Addressing challenges such as this can be approached either by increasing motivation (e.g., through campaigning, normally as part of a response to a humanitarian crisis) or by increasing the efficiency of each volunteer. Despite the success of our project to date, the former solution remains challenging for an area such as Acholi. Our strategy has therefore deployed centaur VGI techniques to augment the digitization step in the workflow. Figure 8 compares our workflow to more traditional VGI approaches.

Digitization (Figure 6, Step 1) can be made more efficient by automating the most time-consuming parts of the process but leaving decisions to human volunteers. Benefits of such an approach include increasing the speed of the digitization per feature (fewer steps for the human to undertake), increasing the quality of the overall data set (fewer clicks per feature reduces the potential for volunteer fatigue, whereas human approval catches machine errors or inaccuracies), and increasing egocentric motivation through active learning (volunteers can see how their feedback is improving automated aspects of the process relating to their own mapping and that of future volunteers). This is likely to provide intellectual stimulation beyond that which can be achieved through simple manual digitization. We suggest that it is important that the process is as transparent as possible and that users need to view statistics not
only on how many features they have mapped but also the impact of their feedback on the machine through illustrative graphics built into the editing interface.

This article is intended as an argument and intellectual justification for centaur VGI approaches as a potential solution to VGI mapping inequalities in remote and rural regions of the Global South that might also be compatible with the requirements of the OSM community (which prevent more traditional ML applications from widespread usage). We therefore seek to define the principles and benefits of such a system, rather than to demonstrate or evaluate a particular instance of a system. This is because a centaur VGI platform could use any combination of classification models, location and types of features to target, map editor (including the option to develop a new one), and approach to feature selection for AL (including the option not to employ AL at all). The specific satellite imagery data set that is used introduces further challenges, including variable age of imagery in the same scene, cloud coverage, and resolution limiting the size of feature that can be mapped. The properties and success of any such system will therefore necessarily depend on all of these variables, alongside the age, demographics, education level, and experience of the volunteers that take part. As such, the evaluation of specific applications cannot provide a comprehensive reflection of the qualities, benefits, and limitations of the concept as a whole.

Nevertheless, for the purposes of illustration, we provide a simple example of centaur VGI produced with the intention of identifying huts in image tiles. This exemplar was developed using open source software including Label Maker (Development Seed 2019) for the production of a training set and the Google TensorFlow Object Detection application programming interface (Google 2019) for object detection. Query selection for AL was achieved using max-margin sampling based on the uncertainties reported by the object detection algorithm, with detected features with a reported confidence <75 percent used for this purpose. The use of this system and its components are illustrated in Figure 9, which demonstrates the flow of data through a centaur VGI system with standard (blue) and AL (red) variants demonstrated for features with high and low confidence, respectively. Circular hut geometries are generated from the bounding box of the identified feature. The simple interface permits the human volunteer to assess the feature, edit it using the two white handles (one to adjust the position of the feature and one to adjust the radius), and then accept or reject the feature using buttons in the top right of the screen.

This system is intended to demonstrate the principle of centaur VGI; detailed quantitative evaluations of specific implementations are beyond the scope of this article and will be dealt with elsewhere. Projects will have their own priorities in terms of feature types and areas of interest, but approaches such as this have the potential to improve mapping coverage in the parts of the world where coverage is poor, particularly for features that are small in size and numerous in the landscape, making them repetitive to digitize using traditional approaches.

Conclusions

Zook et al. (2010) suggested that that there will always be people and communities that are “left off the map” and that it is important to be aware of these geographical inequalities and ensure that the technologically disconnected are not denied crucial services. Our arguments in this article have sought to advance understanding of global inequalities in topographical mapping coverage and to propose an approach to reducing those inequalities through a combination of emergent ML technologies and VGI. To this end, we have presented an argument for centaur VGI as an approach to VGI production that is particularly well suited to the creation of map data for remote, rural, sparsely populated parts of the world that are unlikely to attract sufficient attention from volunteer mappers. Our approach attempts to increase the quality and coverage of data produced in each volunteer hour by developing a hybrid human–machine system to produce synergistic benefits in which the result is superior to its component parts. We have started to test these ideas in case research in the Acholi subregion of northern Uganda and have presented a simple illustrative implementation of a centaur VGI deployment. Future development of this research will comprise a comprehensive quantitative analysis of centaur VGI applications, exploring the extent and nature of improvements in volunteer efficiency and quality in the context of a variety of applications, models, interfaces, and volunteer groups.
High Confidence Features (Standard ML)        Low Confidence Features (Active Learning)

Training and Feature Detection

Geometry Generation

User Interface

Figure 9. Demonstration interface for a centaur volunteered geographic information system (high confidence features in blue and active learning for low confidence features in red). Note: ML = machine learning. Source: Background satellite imagery © 2019 Google.
This work complements existing practices in OSM. Existing VGI practices are well established and effective for most parts of the Global North, as well as in response to acute humanitarian crises in many parts of the Global South. This work is therefore intended to focus on remote and rural areas in the Global South that do not suffer with acute humanitarian issues or experience crises that receive international media coverage or organizational prioritization, leaving them unlikely to be targeted by sufficient volunteers. Nevertheless, although these approaches were designed to target areas that are otherwise often overlooked in VGI programs, they might also have applications in the humanitarian response mapping for areas undergoing acute crises and in many other areas of VGI production.

The arguments presented in this research have been formulated during an ongoing humanitarian research project in the Acholi subregion of Uganda. Aided by maps produced using a variety of approaches to VGI, including mapathons, local mapping on the ground, and early experiments in the centaur VGI approaches, we have successfully delivered the first prevalence study for major limb loss in the region (Okello et al. 2019), an orthopedic workshop staffed with a team of prosthetists and orthopedic surgeons, a mobile orthopedic outreach clinic that travels out to communities to provide care and prosthetic limbs free of charge to victims. Future research will include the continuation of these services, the further development and empirical evaluation of the ideas presented in this article, and the exploration of other ways in which resulting maps could be used in the planning and provision of care, services, infrastructure, and humanitarian aid. We are hopeful that the ideas in this article will contribute to increased mapping coverage and data quality within the Acholi subregion and elsewhere in the world. It is our vision that the resulting maps will facilitate continued action by local people, governments, nongovernmental organizations, and researchers, to help improve health service provision and other vital services such as access to safe drinking water, food, transport, and employment.

Acknowledgments

We thank Donna Sherman and Nick Scarle for their invaluable help in locating and digitizing colonial maps of Uganda, the Huckathon team for enabling the mapathons to take place, and the SEED Social Responsibility team at the University of Manchester for their support. We gratefully acknowledge the host of authors of the various open source software projects (referenced throughout this article) on which this project relies. Most of all, we thank the Acholi people for their kindness, generosity, and friendship.

Funding

This work was supported by the AHRC/MRC GCRF Global Public Health Scheme under Grant AH/R005796/1 and a UKRI GCRF Global Impact Accelerator Grant.

ORCID

Jonathan J. Huck http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4295-3646
Chris Perkins http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6679-4603
Billy T. Haworth http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4191-9502

Notes

1. Volunteered geographic information refers to the widespread voluntary engagement of private citizens in the creation of online geographic information through technologies such as crowdsourced mapping, Web 2.0 and social media, Global Positioning System, and smartphones (Haworth 2016).
2. Machine learning refers to computer systems that are capable of developing their own algorithms to solve complex problems (e.g., identifying features in imagery) by analyzing input data (e.g., satellite imagery) and desired result (e.g., predefined features) for a given problem. This contrasts with traditional computing approaches, where the algorithm is provided to the computer to derive results from input data (Dominques 2017).
3. A complete set of the maps is available in the Map Collection at the University of Manchester. A digital “slippy map” version covering the Acholi subregion is available at http://huckg.is/uganda50k.

References

Akerman, J. R. 2017. Decolonizing the map: Cartography from colony to nation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Anderson, J., D. Sarkar, and L. Palen. 2019. Corporate editors in the evolving landscape of OpenStreetMap.
ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 8 (5):232. doi: 10.3390/ijgi8050232.
Baariu, S. N., G. C. Mulaku, and D. N. Siriba. 2019. State of cartographic services among the East African community member states. Journal of Geographic Information Systems 11 (1):56–65. doi: 10.4236/jgis.2019.111005.
Bernard, J., M. Hutter, M. Zeppelzauer, D. Fellner, and M. Sedlmair. 2018. Comparing visual-interactive labeling with active learning: An experimental study. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 24 (1):298–308. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2017.2744818.
Böhme, R. 1991. Inventory of world topographic mapping. Vol. 2: South America, Central America and Africa. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Chen, J., Y. Zhou, A. Zipf, and H. Fan. 2019. Deep learning from multiple crowds: A case study of humanitarian mapping. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 57 (3):1713–22. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2018.2868748.
Chen, J., and A. Zipf. 2017. DeepVGI: Deep learning with volunteered geographic information. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web Companion, ed. R. Barrett and R. Cummings, 771–72. Canton of Geneva, Switzerland: International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.
Chinn, M. D., and R. W. Fairlie. 2006. The determinants of the global digital divide: A cross-country analysis of computer and internet penetration. Oxford Economic Papers 59 (1):16–44. doi: 10.1093/oep/gpl024.
Coleman, D. J. 2013. Potential contributions and challenges of VGI for conventional topographic base-mapping programs. In Crowdsourcing geographic knowledge, 245–63. New York: Springer.
Coleman, D., Y. Georgiadou, and J. Labonte. 2009. Volunteered geographic information: The nature and motivation of producers. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research 4:332–58.
Craglia, M., F. Ostermann, and L. Spinsanti. 2012. Digital Earth from vision to practice: Making sense of citizen-generated content. International Journal of Digital Earth 5 (5):398–416. doi: 10.1080/17538947.2012.712273.
Crutcher, M., and M. Zook. 2009. Placemarks and water-lines: Racialized cyberscapes in post-Katrina Google Earth. Geoforum 40 (4):523–34. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2009.01.003.
Development Seed. 2019. SkyNet—Machine learning for satellite imagery. Accessed January 16, 2019. https://developmentseed.org/projects/skynet/.
Directorate of Overseas Surveys (1968). Sheet 23/2 (Pajule). Southampton, Ordnance Survey.
Disaster Ninja. 2019. Disaster Ninja. Accessed October 15, 2019. http://disaster.ninja.
Domíngues, P. 2017. The master algorithm: How the quest for the ultimate learning machine will remake our world. London: Penguin.
Du, B., Z. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, W. Liu, J. Shen, and D. Tao. 2017. Exploring representativeness and informativeness for active learning. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 47 (1):14–26. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2015.2496974.
Elwood, S. 2008. Volunteered geographic information: Future research directions motivated by critical, participatory, and feminist GIS. GeoJournal 72 (3–4):173–83. doi: 10.1007/s10708-008-9186-0.
Elwood, S. 2010. Geographic information science: Emerging research on the societal implications of the geospatial web. Progress in Human Geography 34 (3):349–57. doi: 10.1177/0309132509340711.
Elwood, S., M. F. Goodchild, and D. Z. Sui. 2012. Researching volunteered geographic information: Spatial data, geographic research, and new social practice. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102 (3):571–90. doi: 10.1080/00045008.2011.595657.
Flanagin, A. J., and M. J. Metzger. 2008. The credibility of volunteered geographic information. GeoJournal 72 (3–4):137–48. doi: 10.1007/s10708-008-9188-y.
Gartner, G., D. A. Bennett, and T. Morita. 2007. Towards ubiquitous cartography. Cartography and Geographic Information Science 34 (4):247–57. doi: 10.1559/152304007782382963.
Gillies, M., R. Fiebrink, A. Tanaka, J. Garcia, F. Bevilacqua, A. Heloir, F. Nunnari, W. Mackay, S. Amershi, and B. Lee. 2016. Human-centred machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ed. J. Kaye and A. Druin, 3558–65. New York: ACM. doi: 10.1145/2851581.2856492.
Goodchild, M. F. 2007. Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal 69 (4):211–21. doi: 10.1007/s10708-007-9111-y.
Goodchild, M. F., and L. Li. 2012. Assuring the quality of volunteered geographic information. Spatial Statistics 1:110–20. doi: 10.1016/j.spasta.2012.03.002.
Google. 2019. Tensorflow. Accessed October 15, 2019. https://www.tensorflow.org/about/.
Graham, M., and M. Zook. 2011. Visualizing global cyberscapes: Mapping user-generated placemarks. Journal of Urban Technology 18 (1):115–32. doi: 10.1080/10630732.2011.578412.
Granell, C., and F. O. Ostermann. 2016. Beyond data collection: Objectives and methods of research using VGI and geo-social media for disaster management. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 59:231–43. doi: 10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2016.01.006.
Hagen, E. 2010. Putting Nairobi’s slums on the map. Development Outreach 12 (1):41–43. doi: 10.1596/1020-797X_12_1_41.
Hagenauer, J., and M. Helbich. 2012. Mining urban land-use patterns from volunteered geographic information by means of genetic algorithms and artificial neural networks. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 26 (6):963–82. doi: 10.1080/13658816.2011.619501.
Haklay, M. (2013). Citizen science and volunteered geographic information: Overview and typology of participation. Crowdsourcing geographic knowledge, Springer: 105–122.
Haklay, M. 2010. How good is volunteered geographical information? A comparative study of OpenStreetMap and Ordnance Survey datasets. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 37 (4):315–322. doi: 10.1068/b35097.

Haworth, B. T. 2016. Emergency management perspectives on volunteered geographic information: Opportunities, challenges and change. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 57:189–98. doi: 10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2016.02.009.

Haworth, B. T. 2018. Implications of volunteered geographic information for disaster management and GIScience: A more complex world of volunteered geography. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 108 (1):226–40. doi: 10.1080/24694452.2017.1321979.

Haworth, B. T., and E. Bruce. 2015. A review of volunteered geographic information for disaster management. Geography Compass 9 (5):237–50. doi: 10.1111/gec3.12213.

Herfort, B., M. Eckle, and J. P. de Albuquerque. 2016. Being specific about geographic information crowdsourcing: A typology and analysis of the Missing Maps Project in South Kivu. In Proceedings of the ISCRAM 2016 Conference, ed. A. Tapia, P. Antunes, V. A. Banuls, K. Moore, and J. Porto. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.

Herfort, B., H. Li, S. Fendrich, S. Lautenbach, and A. Zipf. 2019. Mapping human settlements with higher accuracy and less volunteer efforts by combining crowdsourcing and deep learning. Remote Sensing 11 (15):1799. doi: 10.3390/rs11151799.

Herfort, B., and A. Zipf. 2018. Enhancing crowdsourced classification on human settlements utilizing logistic regression aggregation and intrinsic context factors. In Geospatial technologies for all: Short papers, posters and poster abstracts of the 21th AGILE Conference on Geographic Information Science, ed. A. Mansourian, P. Pilesjö, L. Harrie, and R. von Lammeren. Lund University, Lund, Sweden, June 12-15. https://agile-online.org/conference/proceedings/proceedings-2018

Holzinger, A. 2016. Interactive machine learning for health informatics: When do we need the human-in-the-loop? Brain Informatics 3 (2):119–31. doi: 10.1007/s40708-016-0042-6.

Huck, J. (2018). Uganda. http://huckig.is/uganda50k. Accessed June 15, 2020.

Huckathon. 2019. Community mapping Uganda. Accessed October 15, 2019. http://huckathon.org.

Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team. 2019. Tasking Manager. Accessed October 15, 2019. https://tasks.hotosm.org/contribute.

Jordan, M. I., and T. M. Mitchell. 2015. Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects. Science 349 (6245):255–60. doi: 10.1126/science.aad8415.

JOSM. 2019. JOSM. Accessed October 15, 2019. https://josm.openstreetmap.de.

Konecny, G., U. Breitkopf, and A. Radtke. 2016. The status of topographic mapping in the world: A UNGGIM-ISPRS project 2012–2015. ISPRS—International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences XL1-B4 (2016). doi: 10.5194/isprsarchives-XL1-B4-737-2016.

Lamwaka. 2016. The raging storm: A reporter’s inside account of the Northern Uganda War 1986–2005. Kampala, Uganda: Fountain.

Li, H., B. Herfort, and A. Zipf. 2019. Estimating OpenStreetMap missing built-up areas using pre-trained deep neural networks. In Geospatial technologies for local and regional development: Short papers, posters and poster abstracts of the 22nd AGILE Conference on Geographic Information Science, ed. P. Kyriakidis, D. Hadjimitsis, D. Skarlatos, and A. Mansourian. Cyprus University of Technology, Limassol, Cyprus, June 17-20. https://agile-online.org/conference/proceedings.

Liu, P., H. Zhang, and K. B. Eom. 2017. Active deep learning for classification of hyperspectral images. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 10 (2):712–24. doi: 10.1109/JSTARS.2016.2598859.

Map with AI. 2019. Using AI to map the world. Accessed December 10, 2019. https://mapwith.ai.

Natural Earth (2020). Natural Earth. https://www.natural-earthdata.com. Accessed June 15, 2020.

Norris, J. 2015. Future trends in geospatial information management: The five to ten year vision. Southampton, UK: Ordnance Survey.

Obermeyer, N. 2007. Thoughts on volunteered (geo)-slavery. In NGCIA and Vespucci workshop on volunteered geographical information, ed. M. F. Goodchild and R. Gupta, 13-14. Santa Barbara, CA: The National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis.

Okello, T. R., S. M. Magada, P. Atim, D. Ezati, A. Campion, E. B. Moro, J. Huck, G. Byrne, A. Redmond, and M. Nirmalan. 2019. Major limb loss (MLL): An overview of etiology, outcomes, experiences and challenges faced by amputees and service providers in the post-conflict period in northern Uganda. Journal of Global Health Reports 3:1–10. doi: 10.29392/jogh.3.e2019028.

Olteanu-Raimond, A. M., G. Hart, G. M. Foody, G. Touya, T. Kellenberger, and D. Demetriou. 2017. The scale of VGI in map production: A perspective on European national mapping agencies. Transactions in GIS 21 (1):74–90. doi: 10.1111/tgis.12189.

OpenStreetMap. 2019a. tD. Accessed October 15, 2019. https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/ID.

OpenStreetMap. 2019b. Import guidelines. Accessed October 15, 2019. https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Import/Guidelines.

OpenStreetMap. 2019c. Imports [Mailing list] archives. Accessed October 15, 2019. https://lists.openstreetmap.org/pipermail/imports/.

OpenStreetMap. 2019d. Imports slated for deletion. Accessed October 15, 2019. https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Import/Catalogue#Imports slated_for_deletion.

OpenStreetMap. 2019e. What’s the problem with mechanical edits? Accessed October 15, 2019. https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/What%27s_the_problem_with_mechanical_edits%3F.
OpenStreetMap Analytics. 2019. OpenStreetMap Analytics. Accessed October 15, 2019. https://osm-analytics.org/gaps.

Parry, B., and C. Perkins. 2000. World mapping today. 2nd ed. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

Patra, S., and L. Bruzzone. 2011. A fast cluster-assumption based active-learning technique for classification of remote sensing images. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 49 (5):1617–26. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2010.2083673.

Perkins, C. 1987. Map acquisition. In World mapping today, ed. R. B. P. Parry and C. Perkins, 15–26. London: Butterworths.

Perkins, C., and M. Dodge. 2009. Satellite imagery and the spectacle of secret spaces. Geoforum 40 (4):546–60. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2009.04.012.

POSM. 2019. Portable OpenStreetMap. Accessed October 15, 2019. https://github.com/posm/posm.

Radcliffe, S. A. 2009. National maps, digitalisation and neoliberal cartographies: Transforming nation-state practices and symbols in postcolonial Ecuador. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 34 (4):426–44. doi: 10.1111/j.1475-5661.2009.00359.x.

Scott, G., and A. Rajabifard. 2017. Sustainable development and geospatial information: A strategic framework for integrating a global policy agenda into national geospatial capabilities. Geo-Spatial Information Science 20 (2):59–76. doi: 10.1080/10095020.2017.1325594.

Senaratne, H., A. Mobasher, A. L. Ali, C. Capineri, and M. Haklay. 2017. A review of volunteered geographic information quality assessment methods. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 31 (1):139–67. doi: 10.1080/13658816.2016.1189556.

Settles, B. 2009. Active learning literature survey. Madison: University of Wisconsin–Madison Department of Computer Sciences.

Sharma, M., and M. Bilgic. 2017. Evidence-based uncertainty sampling for active learning. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 31 (1):164–202. doi: 10.1007/s10618-016-0460-3.

Smith, N. 2018. Integrating machine learning into the Tasking Manager: Notes on a direction. Washington, DC: Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team.

Stumpf, A., N. Lachiche, J.-P. Malet, N. Kerle, and A. Puissant. 2014. Active learning in the spatial domain for remote sensing image classification. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 52 (5):2492–507. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2013.2262052.

Sui, D., M. Goodchild, and S. Elwood. 2013. Volunteered geographic information, the exaflood, and the growing digital divide. In Crowdsourcing geographic knowledge, ed. D. Sui, M. Goodchild, and S. Elwood, 1–12. Berlin: Springer.

Thompson, C. 2013. Smarter than you think: How technology is changing our minds for the better. London: William Collins.

Vargas-Muñoz, J. E., S. Lobry, A. X. Falcão, and D. Tuia. 2019. Correcting rural building annotations in OpenStreetMap using convolutional neural networks. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 147:283–93. doi: 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2018.11.010.

Vinci, A. 2005. The strategic use of fear by the Lord’s Resistance Army. Small Wars & Insurgencies 16 (3):360–81. doi: 10.1080/09592310500221336.

Yang, L., A. MacEachren, P. Mitra, and T. Onorati. 2018. Visually-enabled active deep learning for (geo) text and image classification: A review. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 7 (2):65. doi: 10.3390/ijgi7020065.

Yuan, J., P. K. Roy Chowdhury, J. McKee, H. L. Yang, J. Weaver, and B. Bhaduri. 2018. Exploiting deep learning and volunteered geographic information for mapping buildings in Kano, Nigeria. Scientific Data 5:180217. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2018.217.

Zhu, X. X., D. Tuia, L. Mou, G.-S. Xia, L. Zhang, F. Xu, and F. Fraundorfer. 2017. Deep learning in remote sensing: A comprehensive review and list of resources. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine 5 (4):8–36. doi: 10.1109/MGRS.2017.2762307.

Zielstra, D., and A. Zipf. 2010. A comparative study of proprietary geodata and volunteered geographic information for Germany. Paper presented at 13th AGILE International Conference on Geographic Information Science, Guimaraes, Portugal, May 11-14.

Zook, M., M. Graham, T. Shelton, and S. Gorman. 2010. Volunteered geographic information and crowdsourcing disaster relief: A case study of the Haitian earthquake. World Medical & Health Policy 2 (2):6–33. doi: 10.2202/1948-4682.1069.

JONATHAN J. HUCK is a Lecturer in Geographical Information Science in the Department of Geography at the University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK. E-mail: jonathan.huck@manchester.ac.uk. He is also Honorary Professor of Geographical Information Science at Gulu University, Uganda. He is interested in the application of maps and emergent technologies to geographical problems, particularly in the areas of health and conflict. In 2017 he founded Community Mapping Uganda (http://communitymapping.co.uk) to produce maps and provide map-based humanitarian services in northern Uganda.

CHRIS PERKINS is an Honorary Reader in Geography at the University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK. E-mail: chris.perkins@manchester.ac.uk. He has taught at Manchester since 1998, having previously run the university’s map libraries. His research interests lie at the interface between mapping technologies and social and cultural practices, with ongoing research into performative aspects of contemporary mapping behavior, an interest in sensory mapping, and an emerging interest in play.

BILLY T. HAWORTH is a Lecturer in Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and Disaster Management in the Humanitarian and Conflict Response Institute (HCRI) at the
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK. E-mail: billy.haworth@manchester.ac.uk. He teaches international disaster management and critical studies of GIS. His research interests include critical GIScience, participatory mapping, marginality and vulnerability, volunteered geographic information, citizen science, queer geographies, graffiti, and spatial knowledge production.

EMMANUEL B. MORO is an Associate Professor of Surgery and Former Dean of the Faculty of Medicine at Gulu University, Gulu, Uganda. E-mail: drebmoro@gmail.com. He is a Fellow of the College of Surgeons of East, Central and Southern Africa. He is interested in social transformation through educational and health research and innovations.

MAHESH NIRMALAN is Vice Dean for Social Responsibility and Public Engagement and Professor of Medical Education and Training in the Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health at the University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK. E-mail: mahesh.nirmalan@manchester.ac.uk He is also Honorary Professor of Post Conflict Studies at Gulu University, Uganda. He is interested in healthcare research and delivery in post-conflict and low-resource settings.