Everyday Encounters with Activist Scholarship

Rebecca Maria Torres

To cite this article: Rebecca Maria Torres (2019) Everyday Encounters with Activist Scholarship, The Professional Geographer, 71:1, 161-166, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2018.1453184

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2018.1453184

Published online: 08 May 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 87

View Crossmark data
FOCUS: THE NEED FOR PUBLIC INTELLECTUALS IN THE TRUMP ERA: STRATEGIES FOR COMMUNICATION, ENGAGEMENT, AND ADVOCACY

Everyday Encounters with Activist Scholarship

Rebecca Maria Torres
The University of Texas–Austin

In light of the grave challenges ahead under the Trump administration and the rise of right-wing populism in the West, it is critical that geographers across subdisciplines embrace activist and engaged scholarship. Opportunities for such engagement often emerge organically in our everyday lives at the intersection between personal interests, ethics and commitments, and nascent research agendas. In this article, I share two experiences with community-engaged and activist research: (1) establishing the Los Puente Spanish–English dual-language immersion program in partnership with a low-income rural North Carolina public school system and (2) collaborating on the Building Austin, Building Injustice participatory action research project with a community-based workers center to document and lobby for improvements to construction workers’ conditions in Austin, Texas. Through a situated and positioned personal account, I seek to not only provide two examples of activist research but also illustrate the diversity of encounters and how they can emerge in unlikely places and outside conventional “activist” arenas. In conclusion, I draw on lessons learned through these experiences to reflect on the various challenges and opportunities for activist scholarship within geography in the future. Key Words: activist scholarship, community engagement, immigration, Latino, participatory action research (PAR).

有鉴于特朗普政府执政下预期的重大变迁，以及西方右翼民粹主义的兴起，跨越各个次领域的地理学者必须拥抱行动主义与参与式学术研究。此般参与机会，经常有机地在我们的个人兴趣、伦理与承诺，以及晚近研究议程交错中的日常生活中浮现。我于本文中分享社区参与和行动主义研究的两则经验: (1) 与位于低收入、乡村地区的北卡罗来纳公立学校系统建立西班牙文—英文的沉浸式双语教学搭桥计画, 以及 (2) 参与一个以社区为基础的工人中心的“打造奥斯汀，打造非正义”之参与式行动研究计画，以纪录并游说德州奥斯汀建筑工人处境的改善。通过情境化且关系化的个人说明，我不仅寻求提供两个行动主义研究的经验，同时描述际遇的多样性，以及它们如何可能在意想不到的地方以及传统的“行动”场域之外浮现。我于结论中，运用在这些经验中习得的教训，反思地理学行动主义学术研究未来的各种挑战与机会。关键词：行动主义学术, 社区参与, 移民, 拉丁裔, 参与式行动研究 (PAR)。

A la luz de los graves desafíos que restan bajo la administración Trump y el surgimiento del populismo de extrema derecha en Occidente, es crítico que los geógrafos a través de las subdisciplinas abracen una erudición activista y comprometida. Las oportunidades para tal compromiso emergen a menudo orgánicamente en nuestras vidas cotidianas en la intersección entre los intereses personales, la ética y los compromisos, y las nacientes agendas de investigación. En este artículo, comparto dos experiencias de investigación activista y de compromiso comunitario: (1) establecer el programa de inmersión de idioma dual español-inglés de Los Puente en asociación con el sistema escolar público de las zonas rurales de ingreso bajo en Carolina del Norte, y (2) colaborar en el proyecto investigativo de acción participativa del Building Injustice, Building Austin, con un centro de trabajadores de base comunitaria para documentar y presionar en pro del mejoramiento de las condiciones de los trabajadores de la construcción en Austin, Texas. Por medio de un relato personal situado y posicionado, busco no solo suministrar dos ejemplos de investigación activista, sino también ilustrar la diversidad de encuentros y la manera como estos emergen en lugares inesperados y fuera de los escenarios “activistas” convencionales. En conclusión, me baso en las lecciones aprendidas en estas experiencias para reflexionar sobre los varios retos y oportunidades de erudición activista que pueden anticiparse en geografía en el futuro. Palabras clave: erudición activista, compromiso comunitario, inmigración, latinos, investigación de acción participativa (PAR).

In recent years, there has been growing recognition of the need for scholars to partner with local communities in co-production of knowledge; the power and value of activist research; and the responsibility of the academy to channel resources in support of social, economic, environmental, and human rights issues. In the United States and Europe, we are witnessing the rise of right-wing populism based on politics of fear and exclusion and undergirded by racism, xenophobia, and romanticized past “greatness” lost. This trend presents global
challenges to social justice that have no recent precedents. In the United States, the Trump presidency poses threats to immigrants and refugees; minorities; women; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer community members; education; science; health care; the environment; and virtually all aspects of life. It is in this context of attacks on Muslims and Latinos; removing protections for refugees and migrants; denial of climate science and withdrawal from the Paris Accord; divestment from social programs; dismantling of the Environmental Protection Agency; slashing funding for and protection of national parks, forests, and wildlife sanctuaries; and gutting long-standing foreign aid programs—a short list within a plethora of regressive policies—that activist and engaged research is more critical than ever. We need an activist turn in geography that spans across traditional subdisciplines (human, physical, and GISciences) to use our research and teaching to fight the battles ahead and to support those community members, advocates, activists, scientists, and others who are in the trenches and those under attack.

Geographical scholarship has a long-standing commitment to social justice grounded in radical and critical geographies, feminist geography, public scholarship, critical praxis, action-oriented research, and participatory approaches, among others. Geographers have not only participated in critical reflections and debates around engaged scholarship but produced creative, grounded, and action-based professional and personal initiatives that benefit society (to reference only a few: Gibson-Graham 2006; Gilmore 2008; Mitchell 2008; Sletto 2013). In the face of increasing human rights violations, suppression of free speech, attacks on the sciences, and multiple forms of oppression under the Trump administration, it is critical we learn from these, and the multitude of other experiences with activist and engaged research, to build strategies of resistance and better alternative futures.

One of the pioneers legitimizing activist research in the academy, Hale (2001) provided this preliminary definition: “A way to better understand the root causes of inequality, oppression, violence, and human suffering,” carried out in collaboration with people “subject to these conditions” (13) and used to transform conditions. He acknowledged, however, the limited utility of delimiting fixed boundaries around the concept. It is not my intention, in this article, to debate what does or does not constitute activist research. Rather, this is a time for inclusivity and to embrace a broad conception of activist scholarship that expands beyond the confines of human geography or, more specifically, political geography, to include all scholars committed to grounded engagement with real problems to make the world a better place. Activist scholarship must extend beyond the narrow confines of work focused on “activists” or necessarily conducted by scholars who wear the label activists in the traditional sense of the word.

In this article, I share two of my experiences with community-engaged and activist research: (1) establishing the Los Puente (“Bridges”) Spanish–English dual-language immersion program in partnership with a low-income rural North Carolina public school system and (2) collaborating on a participatory action research (PAR) project with a community-based workers center to document construction workers’ conditions in Austin, Texas, and to lobby for protections. I present these experiences as personal narratives because my motivations and involvement were rooted in individual politics, ethics, desires, and dissatisfaction with conventional ivory tower academia. This permits a more situated account revealing my positionality and is consistent with a feminist research ethic that seeks greater accountability and reflexivity, while acknowledging power differentials and partial knowledge. By sharing these experiences I hope not only to convey further examples of activist research but also to illustrate the diversity of engaged scholarship and the organic ways openings emerge in unlikely circumstances outside of conventional activist arenas. In conclusion, I draw on lessons learned through these experiences to reflect on the various challenges and opportunities for activist research within geography in the future.

Personal Encounters with Community Engaged and Activist Research

From early in my career I was committed to bridging gaps between on-the-ground praxis and academia I experienced on returning to graduate school after working with a rural development nongovernmental organization (NGO) in Peru for two years. I was an ambivalent academic, sharing the concerns expressed to me now by many of my graduate students: I feared that I would spend my career studying people, their suffering, and their problems without actually contributing toward improving circumstances. Initially I identified more as a community practitioner or applied scholar than an activist, but I came to learn that those labels, although unfair, for many connoted a noncritical, atheoretical, and top-down approach. This did not reflect my positionality or my commitment to conduct critical, policy-relevant, theoretically informed empirical research that would benefit vulnerable people. Encountering activist scholars and their work proved to be critical in my academic formation and in finding a middle space to occupy. Although still not free of anxiety, frustration, and ethical dilemmas surrounding my research, in activist and engaged scholarship I found a path to which to aspire. Throughout my career I was fortunate to have the opportunity to participate in various forms of activist and engaged work through research, teaching, fundraising, service, and volunteering. Often these opportunities emerged progressively at the intersection of personal interests and commitments and nascent research agendas. Next I narrate two experiences that contrast significantly with respect to inception, my role, political agenda, and outcomes.
Constructing Bridges across Language, Culture, and Race and Ethnicity in the Rural South

During the late 1990s following fieldwork in Mexico, I found myself living in the rural South while writing my dissertation and caring for my newborn son and five-year-old daughter. We moved to eastern North Carolina, with one of the highest concentrations of hog, turkey, and chicken concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs) in the world, because my spouse was an environmental engineer working on the region’s severe agricultural pollution problems. The proliferation of factory farming in the region was built on Latino labor recruitment that contributed to accelerating growth of Latino settlement, which exceeded 1,000 percent in some parts of the state during the 1990s. North Carolina was one of the Latino migration new destination states (Torres, Popke, and Hapke 2006) where traditionally biracial communities such as mine were experiencing rapid sociodemographic transformations.

When I arrived to Greene County I was struck by how highly segregated the community remained and I was acutely aware of my outsider position as a politically liberal Latina who had grown up in the Midwest. Yet, given my middle-class status, high level of education, and tenure-track position at the main regional university (East Carolina University [ECU]), I was frequently consulted by community organizations and leaders regarding new immigration. In particular, public grade school teachers where my daughter was enrolled approached me to interpret for students and parents, as well as to serve on the English Learner (EL; formerly English as a Second Language) committee. The under-resourced rural school system struggled with recruiting bilingual teachers and providing EL services. This was reflected in the glaring achievement gap between white, African American, and Latino children.

After joining the faculty of ECU in 2001, and having witnessed firsthand the profound ethnic, racial, social, and political transformations unfolding around me, it was a logical step to initiate new research on Latino migration to the South. In my new colleagues Holly Hapke and Jeff Popke I found enthusiastic and intellectually stimulating collaborators. With an eye to writing a grant for seed funding, I approached the county school system for information on the Latino children and families they were serving. What ensued was a lively discussion about how to better meet the needs of EL children and families. I left the meeting agreeing to write a funding proposal for preliminary research with Latino families and also to establish a dual-language immersion program in Greene County Public Schools. Fortunately, my colleagues were supportive of a partnership with the school system and integrating a real-world component into our project.

Much to our surprise, the school system and ECU were granted $65,000 by the Z. Smith Reynolds Foundation to commence a study of Latino families in the region and to establish the first kindergarten classes for Los Puentes in fall 2003. As a parent I was thrilled to realize that my now five-year-old son would enroll in the first cohort. As a program founder, scholar, and parent, I was heavily involved assisting teachers and administrators with program design, visiting model schools, tapping into ECU expert faculty and resources, grant writing, developing a Web site, recruiting the first cohort, and disseminating information. In 2004, graduate students in my Rural Development Practicum service learning course wrote a grant proposal with the school system, funded by the Braitmeyer Foundation for $35,000, for dual-language immersion teacher training, expansion, and student teachers. Simultaneously, my colleagues and I gained access through the school to invite study participants for interviews and a survey on their experiences as Latino immigrants (Torres, Popke, and Hapke 2006). This access later extended to a study of undocumented teenagers’ aspirations for higher education (Torres and Wicks-Ashun 2014).

Although a discussion of the dual-language immersion model is beyond the scope of this article, it is important to recognize the radical nature of such a program in a conservative Southern rural school system. Los Puentes adopted a model in which classrooms of 50 percent native Spanish speakers (primarily from Mexico) and 50 percent native English speakers (whites and African Americans) split school time and learning equally between Spanish and English. This represents a shift from viewing EL students as a problem to be fixed to viewing them as assets as language experts enriching classrooms.

Los Puentes is now a highly successful program entering its fifteenth year. Several hundred children have passed through the program, not only obtaining proficiency in both languages but performing better on all standardized measures compared to English-only classroom students. The third dual-language immersion program in North Carolina at its inception (and the only rural school), Los Puentes has served as a model for more than 100 programs throughout the state. The program has received several awards, including being named by the governor a Global Communicators School District in 2006.

Despite its success, Los Puentes faced several challenges. The learning curve for dual-language immersion instruction was steep and required radical restructuring of classrooms with teachers willing to innovate. They struggled to recruit bilingual teachers and resorted to international exchange teachers. Although this significantly increased the diversity of faculty, given exchange program time restrictions it meant constant turnover and training. There were also challenges rationalizing the differences between cultures and pace of the school system and the university. Teachers were dismayed at how slow faculty were to produce tangible results and limited in providing practical classroom strategies. These are just a few of the many challenges that had to be overcome.

Los Puentes remains one of the most rewarding experiences in my life, but my participation also
brought personal challenges. As is common with many community-engaged projects, I spent a tremendous amount of time on activities that did not yield quantifiable academic products. Being on the tenure track, this produced anxiety and involved risk taking regarding professional advancement and job security. At times my involvement with the program felt like an act of defiance or even subversive.

When we implemented Los Puente, I did not consider myself, or the project, as “activist”. We were simply trying to improve conditions for Latino children. There were transformations of interrelationships across class, race, ethnicity, and space, however. For many children, public school was their first meaningful contact with other races and ethnicities; mixing outside of school was rare. With Los Puente students and parents sharing the common goal of second language learning, they were more apt to cross class, racial, and ethnic boundaries within and outside of school. White children who would have left the county for private education remained to enroll in Los Puente, reducing class and racial divides in regional schools. With Latino children as the peer teachers in the Mundo Español (Spanish world), on a daily basis the confidence of formerly marginalized children grew. With the minority Spanish language and culture raised to equal footing with English, it is difficult to imagine children and parents leaving the program after six years without more respect for their Latino neighbors. In retrospect, Los Puente was a Trojan horse for a radical project of challenging entrenched asymmetries and divisions in a place with deep legacies of racism.

Building Austin, Building Injustice: Participatory Action Research with Immigrant Construction Workers

The second experience is an example of a research project carried out by a group of University of Texas at Austin (UT) faculty and students in collaboration with the Proyecto de Defensa Laboral (PDL; Workers Defense Project), a community-based workers center. In 2007, I was a visiting scholar at UT when one of my new colleagues, Rich Heyman, invited me to a meeting with a few faculty and the directors of PDL. The young and dynamic directors (one a UT alumnus) requested help with conducting a study on Austin’s construction working conditions. As a “right to work” state, with little regulation and enforcement, Texas is the deadliest state in the nation for construction workers. PDL sought to document these conditions with rigorous research to make the case for stronger protections for construction workers. The organization raised the funds for the study from a variety of foundation funders, and PDL insisted on full ownership and control of all data to support the organization’s mission. They had a negative past university collaboration and understandably needed to be the public authority experts on the topic and have final say over how the findings were used. Although I was very impressed with the directors, the organization, and their mission, I worried that they would be unable to garner support from the faculty or university. After all, universities are rarely in the business of doing research gratis for organizations without the quid pro quo of publishing results. I doubted that early career faculty would participate given the time demands and pressures to produce academic output.

Fortunately, my reservations were proven wrong. With great skill, acuity, and ability to creatively bootstrap resources, the industrious NGO patiently worked with faculty and students in a flexible, as-needed mode. PDL organized an interdisciplinary faculty advisory committee they worked with to design a thorough and sound methodology to document the labor conditions faced by Austin construction workers. The academic advisors worked closely with the organization to develop the methods and data collection instruments, as well as to conduct data analysis. PDL collaborated with the academic advisory committee on key overarching issues but kept large meetings to a minimum and instead worked individually with faculty in their respective areas of expertise. We wrote and received an external seed grant that supported community–academic partnerships. Faculty integrated study components into their courses as service learning projects; applied for internal funds to support student research assistants; and provided advice on study design, among other contributions. Geographer Nik Theodore from the University of Illinois at Chicago, an expert in day laborers, provided training and technical assistance. The study was truly PAR as PDL membership controlled all aspects ranging from objectives, design, and data collection (often workers paired with students) to dissemination.

The result was one of the most extensive studies to date on the U.S. construction industry. PDL documented the great extent of wage theft, low pay, dangerous conditions, limited benefits, and racialized divisions of labor. Among important breakthroughs resulting from the study was in 2009, when the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) conducted a federal investigation into Texas’s construction industry, leading to a 60 percent increase in construction safety inspections. Due to PDL’s lobbying efforts, in 2010 the Austin City Council passed an ordinance requiring construction industry employers to give employees a ten-minute water and rest break every four hours worked. Since this first study in 2009, PDL has continued to build its expertise in policy-oriented activist research, publishing scaled-up study reports on Texas and the U.S. South. Over the last decade, PDL has grown from a grassroots
regional workers center to a national leader in the fight to improve construction workers’ conditions.

In contrast to Los Puentes, I played a more minor role in Building Austin, Building Injustice and was only one of several other faculty who became deeply involved. This was in part a function of my own personal circumstance moving to a new tenure-track faculty position at UT, but the NGO also drove the project, thus tapping different faculty and resources on their terms. After the policy report was released, we later coauthored an academic article with study results (Torres et al. 2013).

Conclusion

Los Puentes and Building Austin, Building Injustice are successful examples of engaged and activist research although both shared challenges common to activist and engaged scholarship. First, developing the trust necessary for truly reciprocal relationships among activists, community members, and scholars can take considerable time. This can pose a challenge for scholars operating under the increasing productivity demands of the neoliberal university. In other instances, the schism between community and academic cultures, including issues such as turnover time, data exclusivity, publishing mandates, and the like, can lead to misunderstanding and disillusionment. Often scholars find it more feasible—certainly easier—to develop partnerships locally, but this can also lead to blurring the artificial binary of “the field” and “real life” that is fraught with ethical dilemmas. Activist scholarship often necessitates new methodologies and epistemologies that require researchers be open to change, learning, and innovation. Rarely are we trained in activist research, and with each circumstance being contextually specific and complex, there are no road maps. Activist research requires flexibility, relinquishing ownership, being comfortable not being in control, and deferring to community partners.

The encounters with activist research I shared illustrate how opportunities often emerge organically in our everyday lives. Given the challenges ahead under the Trump administration, we should be alert and open to prospects for activism and engagement through our research, teaching, service, volunteering, and everyday living. This is a time for an inclusive and broad conception of activist and engaged research that crosses subdisciplines. It could take many forms, such as partnering with advocacy groups, schools, activist organizations, and grassroots movements; leveraging university resources such as service learning courses, class projects, grants, and student internships to address critical problems; PAR projects; testifying as an expert witness on behalf of vulnerable groups; and disseminating results through lobbying, media, public policy reports, op-eds, and events bringing together multiple stakeholders.

At their core, most scholars undertake activist and engaged research out of an ethic of care and a sense of responsibility for the people, communities, environments, and issues they study. This is often rooted in personal politics and values even if researchers do not self-identify as political activists. There are a number of other arguments for the benefits of activist scholarship for both researchers and collaborators worth noting (although not a comprehensive list). First, the nature of activist research often necessitates that researchers eschew notions of objectivity, instead embracing positionality and situated knowledge, concepts consistent with feminist and other poststructural thought. Although undoubtedly more challenging for scholars from a positivist tradition, this fosters greater accountability, reflexivity, and honesty in the research process, which is inevitably shaped by our embodied subjectivities and life experiences. Also, consistent with feminist praxis, activist research provides an opening for reciprocity and reducing power differentials inherent in researcher–subject relationships. Reciprocity means doing something with and for the people and communities with whom we work and thus moving toward decolonization of the conventional one-sided extractive research process. Activist research requires developing the trust of participants, who are often co-producers of knowledge through participatory approaches. Many times this results in greater access for researchers, thus producing deeper and more robust empirical findings as well as greater potential for theoretical innovation. Richer and more in-depth research results hold greater potential to contribute beneficial public debate, policy, and change. Finally, activist research provides unique training and enrichment opportunities for students, as well as inculcating an ethos of activism for future generations of scholars.

Literature Cited

Gibson-Graham, J. K. 2006. A postcapitalist politics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Gilmore, R. W. 2008. Forgotten places and the seeds of grassroots planning. In Engaging contradictions: Theory, politics, and methods of activist scholarship, ed. C. R. Hale, 31–61. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Hale, C. R. 2001. What is activist research? Social Science Research Council 2 (1–2):13–15.

Mitchell, D. 2008. Confessions of a desk-bound radical. Antipode 40 (3):448–54.

Sletto, B. 2013. Insurgent planning and its interlocutors: Studio pedagogy as unsanctioned practice in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. Journal of Planning Education and Research 33 (2):228–40.

Torres, R. M., R. Heyman, S. Munoz, L. Apgar, E. Timm, C. Tzintzún, C. R. Hale, J. McKiernan-González, S. Speed,
and E. Tang. 2013. Building Austin, building justice: Immigrant construction workers, precarious labor regimes and social citizenship. Geoforum 45:145–55.

Torres, R. M., E. J. Popke, and H. M. Hapke. 2006. The South’s silent bargain: Rural restructuring, Latino labor and the ambiguities of migrant experience. In Latinos in the New South: Transformations of place, ed. H. A. Smith and O. J. Furuseth, 37–67. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.

Torres, R. M., and M. Wicks-Asbun. 2014. Undocumented students’ narratives of liminal citizenship: High aspirations, exclusion, and “in-between” identities. The Professional Geographer 66 (2):195–204.

REBECCA MARIA TORRES is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography and the Environment at The University of Texas, Austin, TX 78701. E-mail: rebecca.torres@austin.utexas.edu. Her research interests include Mexican and Central American migration to the United States, rural restructuring in Latin America, feminist geography, children’s geography, and activist and community-engaged scholarship.