SELF-EMPLOYMENT AND ITS INFLUENCE ON THE VULNERABILITY TO POVERTY OF HOUSEHOLDS IN RURAL VIETNAM—A PANEL DATA ANALYSIS*

FRANZISKA SOHNS and JAVIER REVILLA DIEZ

ABSTRACT. The following paper analyses whether becoming self-employed can help to reduce the vulnerability to poverty of rural households. We use data collected during four survey waves in three rural provinces in Vietnam to calculate region-specific logistic panel regressions. The results show that becoming self-employed increases the likelihood of poor households escaping poverty, but only if they are located in a regional economic environment characterized by an advanced stage of structural change, good infrastructural conditions, and proximity to markets. In less well-developed regions, becoming self-employed is not sufficient to increase the probability of poor households escaping poverty. What matters more is that self-employment is driven by opportunity and not by necessity. However, even opportunity-driven self-employment does not guarantee a reduction of vulnerability to poverty in all regional settings and for all household types. Especially, regional overspecialization in cash-crop production and inequality in access to assets have to be taken into account. In times of declining commodity prices, self-employment entails a risk of business failure in regions that are overspecialized in cash-crop production. For households whose initial investment is high and whose endowment with social and educational assets is low, this can result in increased vulnerability to poverty. Keywords: opportunity-driven self-employment, rural Vietnam, vulnerability to poverty.

In Vietnam, self-employment has grown constantly during the last decades. This shift is the result of the ongoing structural change in Vietnam since the introduction of the economic transformation (Doi Moi) towards a market economy in 1986, which has led to a significant increase in the average monthly income per capita and to a substantial reduction of poverty (General Statistics Office of Vietnam 2012). However, despite this overall positive trend, social and regional inequalities have not been eliminated. On the contrary, economic prosperity has been concentrated mainly in the urban centers of the Southeast (with Ho Chi Minh City) and the Red River Delta (with Hanoi), leaving rural areas behind. Between 2006 and 2010, the Gini coefficient—the standard measure of inequality—rose from 0.374 to 0.427 (World Bank 2016). Furthermore, inequality has become manifested regionally in the share of the population classified as poor in different Vietnamese provinces. As a consequence, the unequal distribution of household access to capital and opportunities in the rural regions persists (McKay 2002). Additionally, rural households are often hit by
external shocks such as weather-related hazards, fluctuation on the input and output markets and individual challenges. The coexistence of these shocks with low asset endowment leads to increased vulnerability to poverty, which then reinforces inequalities (Ellis 2000; Few and Tran 2010; King 2011).

In rural areas of Vietnam, there are few alternatives for adapting to the unstable environment. The structural change is proceeding very slowly and jobs in manufacturing are not evolving as needed. Outmigration to the urban centers is a very common response to this. Several studies show that under such conditions, self-employment can be seen as a chance to expedite structural change by creating new firms, absorbing surplus labor from the agricultural sector, providing innovative intermediate inputs, slowing down rural-urban migration, and boosting productivity and employment (Lanjouw and Lanjouw 2001; Van de Walle and Cratty 2003; Gries and Naudé 2010).

Furthermore, starting a business enables households to expand their assets and become more resilient, because it provides the advantage of flexible decision making and adaptation of business activities, especially in times of uncertainty (McNamara and Weiss 2005; Coad and Tamvada 2008). However, it is questionable whether becoming self-employed in general reduces vulnerability to poverty in all regional settings and for all types of households. On the one hand, households differ with regard to their reasons for starting a business, their ability to run a business successfully and their endowment with educational, natural, financial and social assets. On the other hand, rural areas in emerging markets are not as homogeneous as is often assumed. Very different regional conditions can be found, such as the degree of regional specialization on cash crop production, the quality of infrastructure, the proximity to markets or the degree of industrialization, all of which influence the outcome of households’ self-employment activities (Shaw 2004; Kiiru 2007).

Most of the recent studies that analyze the effects of self-employment adopt a static view, using the poverty status, household income, or consumption as the dependent variable and focusing on the effect of being self-employed rather than becoming self-employed (Fox 2008; Fox and Sohnesen 2012). Other studies, which analyze vulnerability to poverty from a dynamic perspective, do not focus on self-employment, and especially not on the different motivations behind becoming self-employed (Arpino and Aassve 2014; Hoang, Pham, and Ulubasoğlu 2014; Klasen, Lechtenfeld, and Povel 2015). Furthermore, studies that compare the effects of different types of self-employment on the vulnerability to poverty in different regional economic settings in rural areas of Vietnam are scarce. Therefore, we wish to address the research question whether becoming self-employed can help to reduce the vulnerability to poverty of rural households, considering that they exhibit different characteristics and motivations, and are located in different regional settings. Based on a household panel survey conducted in rural areas of three Vietnamese provinces, namely Ha Tinh, Dak Lak, and Thua Thien-Hue, we are able to conduct a comparative
dynamic time series analysis and to contribute to the discussion surrounding the impact of becoming self-employed for rural households in different regional settings of emerging markets.

The next section discusses the theoretical background, while the third section describes the database, the empirical framework, and the methodology used. Following that, the fourth section presents and discusses the empirical results, while the fifth section concludes the paper.

Why Does Self-Employment Matter? — The Impact of Self-Employment on Vulnerability to Poverty from a Theoretical Perspective

The first systematic definition of vulnerability can be traced back to the work of Robert Chambers, who defined vulnerability as consisting of external threats and internal coping capacity (1989). The external side is associated with the intensity of external shocks and stress, and the internal side with the capacity of households to deal with these external events (Bohle 2001). The capacity to cope can be limited by numerous factors linked with individual household characteristics and behaviors (Billing and Madengruber 2007). It is possible to identify groups of vulnerable households by using a panel dataset that tracks the poverty status of households over time. Households that were poor at time t1 and still are poor at time t2 can be defined as “chronically poor”; households that were not poor at time t1 but are poor at time t2 can be defined as “entering poverty.” Both groups can be seen as vulnerable to poverty from a dynamic point of view (Wai-Poi 2013). Furthermore, there are two successful groups of households: those that were poor at time t1 and are no longer poor at time t2, as well as the households that were not poor at time t1 and at time t2. The first group can be defined as “escaping poverty” and second group can be considered “never poor” (Haughton and Khandker 2009; Wai-Poi 2013).

Poverty can be defined and measured in different ways. According to Gary S. Fields, a household can be classified as “extremely poor” if its members are living on less than $1.25 purchasing power parity (PPP) a day, and it can be considered “absolutely poor” if the household members have less than $2.50 (PPP) to live on per day (2014). We define vulnerability to poverty in terms of the probability of falling into poverty and the probability of remaining in poverty using the absolute poverty line.

All actions undertaken by a household to earn a living are part of the livelihood strategy of the household (Fox and Sohnesen 2013). According to Louise Fox, the economic livelihood of a household can be specified by the structure of income sources used for income generation during a period of time (2008). In a broader definition, the livelihood in general includes all assets, theorized as the stock of capital that can be used by households to earn their living, namely human capital, natural capital, financial capital, social capital, and physical capital (Ellis 2000; Bohle 2008). The unequal capabilities of households to accumulate these forms of capital result in unequal endowment with these
assets among households and lead to difficulties in dealing with external shocks. As a consequence, disadvantaged households move into or remain in poverty, which then reinforces inequalities (Ellis 2000; Few and Tran 2010; King 2011). The majority of households in developing countries and emerging markets rely on agricultural income sources (Gindling and Newhouse 2012). In times of uncertain weather and market conditions that come along with high fluctuations of rainfall or world market prices for instance, this one-sidedness can lead to economic vulnerability (McNamara and Weiss 2005). One possible way to reduce vulnerability is to diversify by widening the portfolio of the farm products or integrating off-farm income sources into the livelihood, thereby generating a more stable income and reducing income risks (McNamara and Weiss 2005). The potential to use different income sources and diversify the economic livelihood successfully is influenced by the attributes of the household members, such as the level of education, the health status, or the per capita income (Fox 2008; Duc and Waibel 2009).

In periods of structural change, a significant shift in the domestic market can be seen, creating new opportunities to earn money outside agriculture (Desai 2009). Technological innovation in agricultural production leads to higher labor productivity and income (Fox 2008). This higher income stimulates demand for goods and services outside the agricultural sector. As a result, households respond by setting up businesses to satisfy the increasing demand (Fox 2008). These households are identifying and using the economic opportunities brought about by structural change, and opting for self-employment because they have good ideas, ambitions, business plans, and they prefer autonomy and flexibility (Gindling and Newhouse 2012; Margolis 2014). According to Jürgen Brünjes and Javier Revilla Diez, these opportunity-driven self-employed are more willing to hire nonfamily employees in the future (Brünjes and Revilla Diez 2012). Referring to Sandra Gottschalk, Kathrin Müller, and Michaela Niebert, it can also be assumed that the opportunity-driven self-employed “are more convinced of their business idea than the average firm and consequently dare to take higher risk, [so] initial investments will be larger” (2010, 4). According to Thomas Gindling and David Newhouse, opportunity-driven self-employment only applies to the minority of the self-employed in developing countries and emerging markets, while the majority have to be seen as necessity-driven (2012). Especially in countries hallmarked by an absence of unemployment insurance and social protection, and a lack of employment opportunities, unemployment, and insufficient income from agriculture encourage people to take up self-employment (Fields 2014). Such individuals become self-employed out of necessity and their businesses show limited growth prospects (Gindling and Newhouse 2012). The main difference between these two groups of self-employed persons seems to be their reason for being self-employed. Jürgen Brünjes and Javier Revilla Diez use the motivation behind becoming self-employed to differentiate between opportunity-driven
Regional Settings

Household

external side
shock occurence

internal side
assets
human capital
social capital
natural capital
financial capital

Livelihood strategy
diversity of income sources
different kind of income sources
self-employment
opportunity
necessity

vulnerability to poverty

poor (t2)    non poor (t2)
poor (t1)    chronically poor    moved out of poverty
non poor (t1)    fallen into poor    never poor

Fig. 1—Theoretical framework.

and necessity-driven self-employment (2012). Three motivations were classed as opportunity-driven, namely: previous experience in the relevant kind of business, having seen other successful businesses of that kind, and deducing that this kind of business can be successful. Two motivations are regarded as necessity-driven, namely: unemployment and insufficient income from other sources (Brünjes and Revilla Diez 2012). Opportunity-driven self-employment thus plays an important role in expediting structural change by creating new firms, absorbing surplus labor from the agricultural sector, providing innovative intermediate inputs, and boosting productivity and employment (Gries and Naude 2010). Furthermore, starting a business enables households to expand their assets and become more resilient, because it provides the advantage of flexible decision making and adaptation of business activities, especially in times of uncertainty (McNamara and Weiss 2005; Coad and Tamvada 2008).

However, it is questionable whether becoming self-employed reduces the vulnerability to poverty of households in all regional settings. In rural areas of emerging markets, too, very different regional conditions can be found that can influence the outcome of household’s self-employment activities (Shaw 2004; Kiiru 2007). Particularly, a region’s economic specialization has to be taken into account. Becoming self-employed in a region that is integrated into the world market by being specialized in cash-crop production can be risky in times of declining commodity (Lin 2008). This risk can lead to increasing vulnerability to poverty, especially for households that made a large initial investment in their businesses and do not have enough assets left to cope with the
resulting losses. Moreover, the regional degree of industrialization, the proximity to markets, and the quality of infrastructure are crucial for the potential success of a household’s self-employed activities (Shaw 2004, 1248; Kiiru 2007). It can be assumed that in a very poor area, characterized by an undiversified regional economic structure, low income, a lack of demand, poor infrastructure, and long distances to markets, especially necessity-driven self-employment might be unable to help households to reduce their vulnerability to poverty on a large scale (Shaw 2004) (Figure 1).

DATA, STUDY AREA, EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK, AND METHODOLOGY

Because household surveys collect more indepth information about other family members and about the household in general, more accurate information about informal household enterprises can be gathered from household surveys than from enterprise surveys (Vijverberg Vijverberg 1992; Mead and Liedholm 1998). For this reason, we use a household survey that was conducted repeatedly in 2007, 2008, 2010, and 2013 in the course of the DFG Research Unit FOR 756, entitled “Impact of shocks on the vulnerability to poverty: consequences for development of emerging Southeast Asian economies.” The survey was conducted in close cooperation with the Institute for Policy and Strategy in Agriculture and Rural Development (IPSARD), the Centre of Agricultural Policy (CAP), and the Centre for Rural Development in Central Vietnam (CRD), subordinated to the Hue University of Agriculture and Forestry (HUAF). These institutions not only facilitated the surveys, they also provided necessary inputs in designing and conducting the surveys and interpreting the results. After the questionnaires had been translated and retranslated into Vietnamese, the survey instrument was field-tested in Vietnam and adjustments were made. In each wave, the implementation of the household survey started with a training workshop for the enumerators. The training was intensive, with preparatory plenary sessions, including evening meetings, training in the form of role play, and three field visits during which enumerators conducted household interviews in groups. Enumerators conducted the interviews in each wave.

STUDY AREA

The survey was conducted in three provinces in rural Vietnam: Ha Tinh and Thua Thien-Hue in the north-central coast region, and Dak Lak in the central-highlands region. The survey was also conducted in three provinces in rural Thailand, though these were not analyzed in order to avoid biases due to the differences in the political and economic situations in the two countries. The first survey wave included 2,195 households in Vietnam. After combining the four different waves to form a panel data set, 1,929 households could be identified in each wave and were used as the base sample.

Though all three provinces can be characterized as rural provinces hallmarked by a relatively large share of the population living below the national
poverty line and by uncertain weather conditions, there are regional differences in the economic structure. Dak Lak is characterized by a large share of the rural population being heavily reliant on agricultural activities, as well as by an inflow of poor migrants from other Vietnamese provinces (World Bank 2003). Besides subsistence farming, cash-crop production, especially of coffee, cashew, and pepper, is the main agricultural activity in Dak Lak (Dang 2010). Therefore, Dak Lak is strongly dependent on the world market and commodity price development, resulting in uncertain economic conditions (Agergaard, Fold, and Gough 2010). In contrast to Dak Lak, the regional economies of Ha Tinh and Thua Thien-Hue are not mainly based on agricultural activities and cash-crop
production. Instead, they exhibit a more diversified economic structure and higher industrial production (General Statistics Office of Vietnam 2016). While Ha Tinh was long characterized as a structurally weak province, showing a persistence of poverty, poor job opportunities, less well-developed infrastructure, and out-migration, the structure of the economy has recently started changing (Dang 2010; Vietnam Trade Promotion Agency 2013a; Vietnam Trade Promotion Agency 2013b; Nguyen, Raabe, and Grote 2015). In contrast, in Thua Thien-Hue the structural change has already been ongoing for a longer time, resulting in a smaller share of the agricultural sector and higher industrial production. Unlike Ha Tinh, Thua Thien-Hue benefits from a well-developed infrastructure, a prospering provincial capital, and the proximity to Da Nang — the most important economic center on the central coast of Vietnam (Mal-esky 2002) (Figure 2).

EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK

To operationalize vulnerability to poverty as the dependent variable, the sample was split into two groups: households that were absolutely poor in the previous waves and households that were not absolutely poor in the previous waves. Then two binary variables were generated as dependent variables: remaining in absolute poverty (no=0, yes=1) for the group of poor households, and falling into absolute poverty (no=0; yes=1) for the group of nonpoor households. The poverty calculation is based on the per capita income of the nucleus household members. The household income is calculated for each wave by summing up the income from all income sources used by the nucleus household members. Following Bernd Hardeweg and Hermann Waibel, a household includes the household head and all persons who live in the household for at least 180 days per year (2009). All these persons were defined as nucleus household members (Gloede and Rungruxsirivorn 2013).

The external side of vulnerability is represented by the number of shocks with a high negative impact on the households. The level of impact of a shock is measured using the household’s subjective perceptions on a scale ranging from low to high impact. We split the shocks into individual shocks, natural shocks, and economic shocks in order to compare the influence of different types of shocks. Individual shocks include, for example, illness or the death of a household member, while natural shocks cover, for instance, flooding of agricultural land or droughts. Examples of economic shocks are fluctuation of input or output prices or a strong increase in credit interest rates.

According to Richard J. Culas and Mahen Mahendrarajan, there are different options for measuring income diversity (2005). The simplest one is based on the number of income-generating activities. The weakness of this measurement of income diversity is that “it gives no weight at all to the distribution of the farm’s employment over the activities” (Culas and Mahendrarajan 2005, 6). More accurate measurements would give weight to the distribution of the
external side

shock occurrence per year
number of individual shocks
number of natural shocks
number of economic shocks

internal side

assets
human capital (no=0; yes=1)
primary education
lower secondary education
upper secondary education
tertiary education

social capital (no=0; yes=1)
member of socio-political organisation
belonging to an ethnic minority
natural capital
quantity of usable land in 1.000m²

financial capital
facing credit problems (no=0; yes=1)
per capita income in US$ ppp

economic livelihood
diversity of income sources
number of income sources

different types of income sources (no=0; yes=1)
remittances from absent household members
remittances from relatives and friends
owner-occupied dwelling
land rent
crops
livestock
hunting
wage-employment
self-employment
lending
savings
transfer payments
insurance compensations

opportunity-driven self-employment
average initial investment in US$ ppp
number of non-family employees

Fig. 3—The empirical framework.

farm’s employment, but they cannot be used for negative net income (Duc 2012). Because we have to deal with negative net income for some households whose expenses exceeded their returns in total, the diversity of income sources is parameterized by using the number of income sources involved in a household earning a living. Following Gary S. Field, we define self-employment as households running a formal or informal household enterprise outside of agriculture (2014). To bring the effects of self-employment into focus, a dummy
variable is used to show if a household used self-employment as a source of income. In addition, we use further dummy variables for all other income sources. Because information about the motivation behind being self-employed were only collected in the fourth survey wave, opportunity-driven self-employment had to be parameterized using two instrumental variables. According to the present literature, opportunity-driven self-employment is characterized by a higher initial investment and a larger number of hired nonfamily employees (Brünjes and Revilla Diez 2012; Gottschalk, Müller, and Niefert 2010). After finding significant positive correlations between these instrumental variables and the motivation behind starting up the business, they were used to approximate opportunity-driven self-employment.

The assets of households are used as control variables and are split into human capital, social capital, natural capital, and financial capital. One common way to operationalize human capital is to use the number of years the household head was educated (Minot 2003). As Vietnam features complex options of tertiary educational pathways, however, the calculated number of years of education would not be reliable (World Bank 2008). We therefore split the education of the household head into four categories: primary education, lower secondary education, upper secondary education, and tertiary education, and analyze the effect of these educational levels compared to noneducated household heads.

According to Neil Adger, social capital is important for reducing vulnerability because it allows households to respond collectively to external shocks (2003). Frederick Foxton and Richard Jones argue that social capital can be differentiated into bonding, bridging, and linking social capital (2011). We operationalize social capital using the belonging of at least one household member to an ethnic minority or a social or political organization. Belonging to an ethnic minority can be assumed to increase bonding social capital because of greater trust within the ethnic group. However, these strong ties, which also reduce connections to other ethnic groups, and the ongoing discrimination against minorities in Vietnam, limit bridging social capital (World Bank 2002). In Vietnam, the government continues to play an important role and to possess a great deal of power, especially at the community level (Tran 2003). Belonging to a social or political organization can therefore be assumed to increase linking social capital.

The availability of productive land can be seen as a good proxy for natural capital according to Mathis Wackernagel and colleagues (1999). Accordingly, we operationalize natural capital by the land available to the households.

According to Sharon Danes and others, financial assets include money belonging to the household members as well as credit from financial institutions (2009). Mikkel Barslund and Finn Tarp highlight the fact that access to credit is a key factor for smallholders in rural Vietnam in order to increase their risk-bearing capacity in times of crisis (2007). Problems in gaining access
to credit would hamper the possibility to smooth income and recover from external shocks. We therefore classify households as having credit problems if they had applied for credit in the formal or informal market and were not given the full amount of money applied for at least once between the waves (Barslund and Tarp 2007). By referring to Sharon Danes and others, we use the per capita income in USD to control for the issue that high per capita income lowers the likelihood of falling into poverty and remaining in poverty (2009) (Figure 3).

METHODOLOGY

As mentioned above, the four different survey waves were combined to form a panel dataset. This makes it possible to apply a panel regression approach in order to analyze the effects of the independent variables on vulnerability to poverty. To take advantage of as much information as possible, a pooled regression, a random-effect regression, and a fixed-effect regression are calculated. Because we have to deal with a bivariate independent variable, the assumptions of linear regression as homogeneity of variance and normality of distribution would be violated if a conventional regression model were used. For this reason, a logistic panel regression model was chosen (Giesselmann and Windzio 2012). The advantages of panel data analysis are the differentiation of between and within variation, the possibility to control for unobserved heterogeneity and the extension of the number of cases (Giesselmann and Windzio 2012). Our analyses are based on a strongly balanced short panel dataset. To analyze the time-serial dimension, it is necessary to test for the consistency of the models. If the Hausman test yields an insignificant result, the logistic fixed-effects model and the logistic random-effects model can be seen as consistent. If the likelihood ratio test also produces an insignificant result, the logistic pooled OLS regression does so, too (Giesselmann and Windzio 2012). We use the estimations of the random-effect models, because the Hausman test yields insignificant results in all cases. In the cases where the likelihood ratio test also produces an insignificant result, the effects of the logistic pooled OLS regression are also interpreted.

THE IMPACT OF SELF-EMPLOYMENT ON VULNERABILITY TO POVERTY — EMPIRICAL RESULTS FOR RURAL VIETNAM

Overall, our data show that absolute poverty has declined over time. However, we find regional differences in this poverty reduction. In 2006/2007, Ha Tinh exhibited the largest share of absolutely poor households, at almost 65 percent, while Dak Lak showed the lowest share at 47 percent. By 2012/2013, this distribution had changed fundamentally, with Dak Lak exhibiting the largest share of absolutely poor households, at just under 40 percent. Over time, we observe the strongest poverty reduction in Ha Tinh, while in Dak Lak the share of absolutely poor households has not changed. While we see a constant decline
Fig. 4—Absolutely poor households as percent

in absolute poverty in Thua Thien-Hue, it increased in Dak Lak and Ha Tinh between 2007/2008 and 2009/2010 (Figure 4).

Although the share of absolutely poor households has decreased over time, we see dynamic changes in the poverty status of individual households. Between 2006/2007 and 2007/2008, Thua Thien-Hue exhibited the largest share of households falling back into absolute poverty, at 30.9 percent, and the largest share of households remaining in absolute poverty, at 67.2 percent. At the same time, Ha Tinh exhibited the smallest share of households in both categories. This distribution changed in the following years. While in Thua Thien-Hue the share of households falling into and remaining in absolute poverty decreased constantly, in Dak Lak and Ha Tinh the share of households in both categories increased initially and then decreased. Finally, between 2009/2010 and 2012/2013 Dak Lak showed the largest share of households that were vulnerable to absolute poverty in both categories (Table 1).

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2"> </th>
    <th colspan="2">2006/2007-2007/2008</th>
    <th colspan="2">2007/2008-2009/2010</th>
    <th colspan="2">2009/2010-2012/2013</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>FALLING</th>
    <th>STAYING</th>
    <th>FALLING</th>
    <th>STAYING</th>
    <th>FALLING</th>
    <th>STAYING</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Thua Thien-Hue</td>
    <td>30.89</td>
    <td>67.19</td>
    <td>30.51</td>
    <td>67.17</td>
    <td>22.93</td>
    <td>54.63</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Ha Tinh</td>
    <td>16.30</td>
    <td>52.83</td>
    <td>27.44</td>
    <td>61.69</td>
    <td>21.15</td>
    <td>50.37</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Dak Lak</td>
    <td>22.66</td>
    <td>55.37</td>
    <td>30.30</td>
    <td>69.80</td>
    <td>29.41</td>
    <td>56.46</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source: Own calculations based on DFG-FOR 756 Household Survey 2007-2013
Table 2—Number of shocks per year and household

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2"> </th>
    <th colspan="3">2006/2007</th>
    <th colspan="3">2007/2008</th>
    <th colspan="3">2009/2010</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>HUE*</th>
    <th>HA TINH</th>
    <th>DAK LAK</th>
    <th>HUE*</th>
    <th>HA TINH</th>
    <th>DAK LAK</th>
    <th>HUE*</th>
    <th>HA TINH</th>
    <th>DAK LAK</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>economic shocks</td>
    <td>2.23</td>
    <td>0.92</td>
    <td>0.46</td>
    <td>1.44</td>
    <td>5.84</td>
    <td>7.99</td>
    <td>5.42</td>
    <td>4.76</td>
    <td>5.38</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>natural shocks</td>
    <td>44.34</td>
    <td>57.60</td>
    <td>29.34</td>
    <td>36.52</td>
    <td>27.04</td>
    <td>42.70</td>
    <td>33.65</td>
    <td>37.63</td>
    <td>39.48</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>individual shocks</td>
    <td>19.78</td>
    <td>23.96</td>
    <td>8.29</td>
    <td>23.92</td>
    <td>32.87</td>
    <td>33.64</td>
    <td>34.77</td>
    <td>45.01</td>
    <td>29.34</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Notes: * Thua Thien-Hue
Source: Own calculations based on DFG-FOR 756 Household Survey 2007-2013

Besides regional differences in poverty reduction and in the dynamics of households falling into and staying in poverty, regional and temporal differences in the occurrence of shocks can also be observed. Natural and individual shocks seem to be the most dominant types of shocks. Although economic shocks seem to be less common, the number of this type of shock per household has increased over time, peaking in 2007/2008 for Ha Tinh and Dak Lak, and in 2009/2010 for Thua Thien-Hue (Table 2).

ANALYTICAL RESULTS

Initially, we used the number of income sources to analyze the effect of income diversification on vulnerability to poverty (Table 3). It can be observed that the probability of poor households remaining in absolute poverty is positively correlated with an increasing number of income sources in Ha Tinh and Dak Lak. However, no significant relationship can be found between the number of income sources and the probability of nonpoor households falling into absolute poverty. These results are surprising because they contradict the hypothesis that a diverse income structure is related to lower vulnerability to poverty (McNamara and Weiss 2005). We calculated a second model to control for diversity by using the different income sources involved in a household earning a living to verify the robustness of the other regression results. There, the significance and the signs of the regression coefficients differ only marginally from the first models. This finding can be seen as evidence that the regression results are robust.

To take into account the fact that households that are located in the same province are influenced by the same regional economic factors, we calculate province-specific panel regressions to compare the effects of the independent variables in these provinces (Table 4).

With regard to external shocks, we can see that poor households faced by an increasing number of natural shocks exhibit an increasing probability of remaining in absolute poverty in all three provinces. In Dak Lak and Thua Thien-Hue, a higher number of natural shocks also raises the probability of nonpoor households falling into absolute poverty. In contrast, an increasing number of economic shocks increases the probability of nonpoor households falling into absolute poverty only in Ha Tinh.
<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2"> </th>
    <th colspan="3">STAYING IN ABSOLUTE POVERTY</th>
    <th colspan="3">FALLING INTO ABSOLUTE POVERTY</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>HUE<sup>1</sup></th>
    <th>HA TINH</th>
    <th>DAK LAK</th>
    <th>HUE<sup>1</sup></th>
    <th>HA TINH</th>
    <th>DAK LAK</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>shocks</td>
    <td>individual shocks per year</td>
    <td>-0.1250</td>
    <td>-0.1372</td>
    <td>0.4917*</td>
    <td>-0.0927</td>
    <td>0.4014</td>
    <td>0.0947</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>natural shocks per year</td>
    <td>0.6229***</td>
    <td>0.4493***</td>
    <td>0.5057**</td>
    <td>0.5990***</td>
    <td>-0.8765</td>
    <td>0.8134***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>economic shocks per year</td>
    <td>-0.4260</td>
    <td>-0.3820</td>
    <td>-0.8392</td>
    <td>0.3041</td>
    <td>1.4209**</td>
    <td>0.2038</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>economic</td>
    <td>number of income sources</td>
    <td>-0.0847</td>
    <td>0.1720**</td>
    <td>0.2614***</td>
    <td>0.0232</td>
    <td>0.0096</td>
    <td>-0.0032</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>livelihood</td>
    <td>self-employment</td>
    <td>-0.2084</td>
    <td>-0.2216</td>
    <td>-0.3259</td>
    <td>-0.1807</td>
    <td>-0.2758</td>
    <td>-0.5275***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>average initial investment</td>
    <td>-0.0003**</td>
    <td>-0.0003*</td>
    <td>-0.0003</td>
    <td>-0.00002</td>
    <td>-5.83e-06</td>
    <td>0.00006***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>number of non-family-employees</td>
    <td>-0.6081**</td>
    <td>-0.4580</td>
    <td>0.6834</td>
    <td>-0.4985</td>
    <td>0.0289</td>
    <td>0.1006</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Assets/Control Variables</td>
    <td>member of socio-political organisation</td>
    <td>-0.2221</td>
    <td>-0.1499</td>
    <td>-0.2543</td>
    <td>0.3392</td>
    <td>0.3665</td>
    <td>-0.1344</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>ethnic minority</td>
    <td>1.0995***</td>
    <td>0.6511</td>
    <td>0.7643***</td>
    <td>1.2707***</td>
    <td>-0.3135</td>
    <td>0.2601</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>quantity of used land</td>
    <td>-0.0039</td>
    <td>-0.1256</td>
    <td>-0.2869***</td>
    <td>-0.0003</td>
    <td>0.1177</td>
    <td>-0.1321**</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>credit problems</td>
    <td>0.3690</td>
    <td>0.0677</td>
    <td>-0.3531</td>
    <td>0.0805</td>
    <td>0.0309</td>
    <td>-0.2049</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>primary education</td>
    <td>0.0120</td>
    <td>-0.5063</td>
    <td>-0.2369</td>
    <td>-0.5017*</td>
    <td>-0.9716</td>
    <td>-0.4605*</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>lower secondary education</td>
    <td>-0.3272</td>
    <td>-1.2784***</td>
    <td>-0.2058</td>
    <td>-1.2380***</td>
    <td>-1.6334**</td>
    <td>-0.9448***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>upper secondary education</td>
    <td>-0.7294**</td>
    <td>-0.9861**</td>
    <td>-0.8320**</td>
    <td>-0.5291</td>
    <td>-1.9755***</td>
    <td>-1.0122***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>tertiary education</td>
    <td>-1.7790***</td>
    <td>-1.9689***</td>
    <td>-1.6007</td>
    <td>-1.9484***</td>
    <td>-3.9632***</td>
    <td>-2.1641***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>income in US $ ppp</td>
    <td>-0.0007</td>
    <td>-0.0135***</td>
    <td>-0.0039*</td>
    <td>-0.0017**</td>
    <td>-0.0038***</td>
    <td>-0.0028***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>_cons</td>
    <td>3.2028</td>
    <td>45.2443</td>
    <td>12.1699</td>
    <td>5.1480</td>
    <td>13.1684</td>
    <td>98.136</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>rho</td>
    <td>5.81e-06</td>
    <td>0.2524</td>
    <td>0.1927</td>
    <td>0.0870</td>
    <td>0.2375</td>
    <td>4.67e-06</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Prob>=chibar<sup>2</sup> (likelihood-ratio-test)</td>
    <td>0.4970</td>
    <td>0.0000</td>
    <td>0.0080</td>
    <td>0.1790</td>
    <td>0.0180</td>
    <td>0.4950</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Prob>chi<sup>2</sup> (hausman-test)</td>
    <td>0.5992</td>
    <td>0.7446</td>
    <td>0.0558</td>
    <td>0.2756</td>
    <td>1.0000</td>
    <td>0.0853</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>n</td>
    <td>1026</td>
    <td>953</td>
    <td>837</td>
    <td>855</td>
    <td>1000</td>
    <td>1116</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Notes: <sup>1</sup>Thua Thien-Hue
* significant at 1% level (p < 0.01)
** significant at 5% level (p < 0.05)
* significant at 1% level (p < 0.1)
Source: Own calculations based on DFG-FOR 756 Household Survey 2007-2013
Table 4—Province-Specific Regression Models — Different Income Sources

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2"> </th>
    <th colspan="3">STAYING IN ABSOLUTE POVERTY</th>
    <th colspan="3">FALLING INTO ABSOLUTE POVERTY</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>HUE<sup>1</sup></th>
    <th>HA TINH</th>
    <th>DAK LAK</th>
    <th>HUE<sup>1</sup></th>
    <th>HA TINH</th>
    <th>DAK LAK</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>shocks</td>
    <td>individual shocks per year</td>
    <td>-0.0987</td>
    <td>-0.1218</td>
    <td>0.3533</td>
    <td>-0.0381</td>
    <td>0.3960</td>
    <td>0.0838</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="5">economic livelihood</td>
    <td>natural shocks per year</td>
    <td>0.6014***</td>
    <td>0.4521***</td>
    <td>0.6383***</td>
    <td>0.6075***</td>
    <td>-0.0449</td>
    <td>0.7985***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>economic shocks per year</td>
    <td>-0.2382</td>
    <td>-0.4429</td>
    <td>-1.0294</td>
    <td>-0.0308</td>
    <td>1.5374**</td>
    <td>0.1897</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>remittances from absent hh-members</td>
    <td>-0.7625***</td>
    <td>-0.0838</td>
    <td>0.1845</td>
    <td>-0.3402</td>
    <td>-0.3999</td>
    <td>-0.0405</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>remittances from friends and relatives</td>
    <td>0.2150</td>
    <td>0.1817</td>
    <td>0.5454*</td>
    <td>0.0025</td>
    <td>0.1641</td>
    <td>-0.0914</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>owner-occupied dwelling</td>
    <td>omitted</td>
    <td>-0.3686</td>
    <td>-0.3305</td>
    <td>omitted</td>
    <td>omitted</td>
    <td>-1.3625</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>land rent</td>
    <td>-0.1220</td>
    <td>0.3458</td>
    <td>-1.2192</td>
    <td>-0.0421</td>
    <td>1.5074</td>
    <td>0.7245</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>crop production</td>
    <td>0.1498</td>
    <td>0.5541</td>
    <td>-0.4213</td>
    <td>0.0339</td>
    <td>-0.1764</td>
    <td>-0.2533</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>livestock</td>
    <td>-0.0463</td>
    <td>-0.0781</td>
    <td>-0.1081</td>
    <td>-0.0231</td>
    <td>0.7171</td>
    <td>-0.0194</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>hunting</td>
    <td>-0.3586***</td>
    <td>0.2973</td>
    <td>0.3973*</td>
    <td>0.1727</td>
    <td>0.4522**</td>
    <td>0.1201</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>wage-employment</td>
    <td>0.2944*</td>
    <td>0.1636</td>
    <td>0.4510**</td>
    <td>0.0519</td>
    <td>0.1220</td>
    <td>-0.2474</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>self-employment</td>
    <td>-0.3202*</td>
    <td>-0.1021</td>
    <td>-0.1100</td>
    <td>-0.1589</td>
    <td>-0.2074</td>
    <td>-0.6152***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>lending</td>
    <td>omitted</td>
    <td>omitted</td>
    <td>omitted</td>
    <td>omitted</td>
    <td>-0.6172</td>
    <td>-0.5716</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>savings</td>
    <td>-0.9832</td>
    <td>0.0165</td>
    <td>0.1666</td>
    <td>0.0428</td>
    <td>-0.3527</td>
    <td>-0.2039</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>transfer payments</td>
    <td>-0.2397</td>
    <td>0.2469</td>
    <td>0.4941**</td>
    <td>0.0096</td>
    <td>-0.4058**</td>
    <td>0.2218</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>insurance compensations</td>
    <td>-0.0602</td>
    <td>0.0298</td>
    <td>-0.6098</td>
    <td>0.0422</td>
    <td>0.04185</td>
    <td>0.0608</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>average initial investment</td>
    <td>-0.0003**</td>
    <td>-0.0003*</td>
    <td>-0.0003</td>
    <td>-0.00001</td>
    <td>-0.000006</td>
    <td>0.0001***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>number of non-family-employees</td>
    <td>-0.5271**</td>
    <td>-0.4032</td>
    <td>0.5713</td>
    <td>-0.4769</td>
    <td>0.0218</td>
    <td>0.1192</td>
  </tr>
</table>

(continued)
<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Assets/Control Variables</th>
    <th colspan="3">STAYING IN ABSOLUTE POVERTY</th>
    <th colspan="3">FALLING INTO ABSOLUTE POVERTY</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>HUE<sup>1</sup></th>
    <th>HA TINH</th>
    <th>DAK LAK</th>
    <th>HUE<sup>1</sup></th>
    <th>HA TINH</th>
    <th>DAK LAK</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>member of socio-political organisation</td>
    <td>-0.2250</td>
    <td>-0.1698</td>
    <td>-0.2034</td>
    <td>0.3044</td>
    <td>0.4538</td>
    <td>-0.0978</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>ethnic minority</td>
    <td>1.2055***</td>
    <td>0.7603</td>
    <td>0.7516***</td>
    <td>1.0596***</td>
    <td>-0.3611</td>
    <td>0.2406</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>quantity of used land</td>
    <td>-0.0031</td>
    <td>-0.1072</td>
    <td>-0.2045**</td>
    <td>-0.0006</td>
    <td>0.0767</td>
    <td>-0.1437**</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>credit problems</td>
    <td>0.4564</td>
    <td>0.0632</td>
    <td>-0.3820</td>
    <td>0.0680</td>
    <td>0.1630</td>
    <td>-0.1890</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>primary education</td>
    <td>-0.0944</td>
    <td>-0.4235</td>
    <td>-0.2087</td>
    <td>-0.4684*</td>
    <td>-1.1233</td>
    <td>-0.4288*</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>lower secondary education</td>
    <td>-0.4994**</td>
    <td>-1.1918***</td>
    <td>-0.1307</td>
    <td>-1.1688***</td>
    <td>-1.8262**</td>
    <td>-0.8895***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>upper secondary education</td>
    <td>-0.9337***</td>
    <td>-0.8850*</td>
    <td>-0.8263**</td>
    <td>-0.4983</td>
    <td>-2.1752***</td>
    <td>-0.9675***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>tertiary education</td>
    <td>-1.9804***</td>
    <td>-1.8929***</td>
    <td>-1.6018</td>
    <td>-1.8736***</td>
    <td>-4.1999***</td>
    <td>-2.0399***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>income in US $ ppp</td>
    <td>-0.0015</td>
    <td>-0.0133***</td>
    <td>-0.0038*</td>
    <td>-0.0017**</td>
    <td>-0.0035***</td>
    <td>-0.0029***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>cons</td>
    <td>5.8260</td>
    <td>449.897</td>
    <td>13.0899</td>
    <td>5.2737</td>
    <td>11.5952</td>
    <td>11.6584</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>rho</td>
    <td>0.000005</td>
    <td>0.2197</td>
    <td>0.1960</td>
    <td>0.0761</td>
    <td>0.2576</td>
    <td>0.000001</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Prot>=chibar<sup>2</sup> (likelihood-ratio-test)</td>
    <td>0.4960</td>
    <td>0.0010</td>
    <td>0.0100</td>
    <td>0.2200</td>
    <td>0.0130</td>
    <td>0.4970</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Prob>chi<sup>2</sup> (hausman-test)</td>
    <td>0.1272</td>
    <td>0.3080</td>
    <td>0.9509</td>
    <td>0.1916</td>
    <td>1.0000</td>
    <td>0.2488</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>n</td>
    <td>1025</td>
    <td>951</td>
    <td>835</td>
    <td>853</td>
    <td>999</td>
    <td>1116</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Notes: *Thua Thien-Hue
*** significant at 1% level (p < 0.01)
** significant at 5% level (p < 0.05)
* significant at 1% level (p < 0.1)
Source: Own calculations based on DFG-FOR 756 Household Survey 2007-2013
Concerning the different income sources, we observe that different types of income sources have different effects in different regional settings. In Thua Thien-Hue, poor households that start receiving remittances from absent household members, take up hunting, or become self-employed show a lower probability of remaining in absolute poverty than households that do not use these income sources. Furthermore, poor households that take up wage employment show an increasing likelihood of remaining in absolute poverty. In contrast, the types of income sources do not have a significant effect on the probability of nonpoor households falling into absolute poverty. In Ha Tinh, we cannot find any significant effect of different income sources on the probability of poor households remaining in absolute poverty. However, nonpoor households that take up hunting show a greater likelihood of falling into absolute poverty. In Dak Lak, poor households that start receiving remittances from friends or relatives, take up hunting or wage employment, or start receiving transfer payments show an increasing probability of staying in absolute poverty. In contrast, nonpoor households that become self-employed show a decreasing probability of falling into absolute poverty.

With regard to opportunity-driven self-employment, we find evidence that poor households with a higher initial investment or a larger number of non-family employees have a lower probability of remaining in absolute poverty in Thua Thien-Hue. However, we cannot find any significant effects on the probability of nonpoor households falling into absolute poverty. In Ha Tinh, a larger initial investment also reduces the probability of poor households remaining in absolute poverty. In contrast, no significant effect on the probability of nonpoor households falling into poverty can be found. In Dak Lak, a larger initial investment is not found to have any significant effect on the probability of poor households remaining in poverty. Moreover, we observe that households with higher initial investment show an increased likelihood of falling back into absolute poverty in Dak Lak.

Regarding the household’s endowment with assets, we find evidence that human capital, measured by the education level of the household head, lowers the probability of staying in and falling into absolute poverty in all provinces. Furthermore, belonging to an ethnic minority, which is associated with low levels of bridging social capital, increases the probability of remaining in absolute poverty in Thua Thien-Hue and the probability of staying in and falling into absolute poverty in Dak Lak. Natural capital, represented by the amount of usable land, reduces the probability of staying in and falling into absolute poverty in Dak Lak. Moreover, the per capita income, which represents financial capital, lowers the probability of staying in and falling into poverty in almost every province.

DISCUSSION

By comparing the different provinces, similarities and differences in the effects of the independent variables on vulnerability to poverty become visible. What
all the provinces have in common is that an increasing number of natural shocks raise the probability of a household staying in or falling into poverty. This can be put down to a constantly high relevance of agricultural activities for households in rural areas of Vietnam, which are vulnerable to uncertain weather conditions and to the repeated occurrence of natural shocks in our research area (McNamara and Weiss 2005; Makoka 2008; Ahmed and others 2011; Tran 2015).

With regard to economic shocks, it is interesting to see that an increasing number of this type of shock raises the probability of nonpoor households falling into poverty only in Ha Tinh. This can be explained by the connection of Ha Tinh to regions that were directly affected by the aftermath of the global financial crisis, which hit the Vietnamese economy in the form of falling export earnings, less FDI activity, and a drop in commercial lending (Lin 2008; World Bank 2010). In contrast to Thua Thien-Hue and Dak Lak, Ha Tinh shows a relatively large share of households with members working as migrant workers in the economic centers of the northern provinces, the capital city of Hanoi and other Asian countries, where they are often employed in crisis-sensitive sectors such as construction, electronics, and the mechanical sector (Nguyen, Raabe, and Grote 2015). While sending household members to the economic centers as migrant workers is generally associated with income growth and moving out of poverty (Nguyen, Raabe, and Grote 2015), in times of economic slowdowns, migrant workers in crisis-sensitive sectors in the economic centers risk losing their jobs, especially if they are employed on contracts that are easily terminated, which then increases the vulnerability to poverty of the rural households as was seen in the aftermath of the Asian Crisis in the late 1990s (Fallon and Lucas 2002).

Becoming self-employed influences vulnerability to poverty in all the provinces analyzed, but in different ways. In Thua Thien-Hue, becoming self-employed increases the probability of escaping poverty. This effect can be detected for both necessity-driven and opportunity-driven self-employment. In Ha Tinh, only becoming self-employed driven by opportunity increases the probability of escaping poverty, while becoming self-employed driven by necessity has no significant effect on the likelihood of escaping poverty. In Dak Lak, neither necessity-driven nor opportunity-driven self-employment has any significant effect on the probability of escaping poverty. This seems to indicate that not only becoming self-employed out of opportunity but also doing so out of necessity can help households to escape poverty if they are located in a regional economic environment characterized by an advanced stage of structural change, a diverse economic structure, high demand, good infrastructural conditions, and proximity to markets, as we see in Thua Thien-Hue. In a regional economy that is less well developed but beginning to catch up, like Ha Tin, becoming self-employed in anticipation of finding opportunities in the markets seems to be of importance in escaping poverty. Economic opportunities arise in regions that are catching up, and households that are able to
recognize and use these opportunities can benefit. In contrast, in a highly agricultural and poorer regional economic environment, such as Dak Lak, neither becoming necessity-driven nor becoming opportunity-driven self-employment helps households out of poverty, probably because of a lack of demand and long distances to markets.

It seems that becoming self-employed can help nonpoor households to stay out of poverty as long as they do not invest a large amount of money at the beginning of their venture, in Dak Lak. As this finding is quite unexpected, a closer look at the regional economy of Dak Lak is needed. The regional economy of Dak Lak is dominated by coffee production, which is characterized by large investments, extensive cultivation of land, and highly fluctuating world market prices (Agergaard, Fold, and Gough 2010). Our data show that in Dak Lak, coffee is the second most important agricultural product after rice, with a total production of 856.6 tons. In contrast, coffee production can be seen as negligible in Thua Thien-Hue and does not exist at all in Ha Tinh. Consequently, unlike Ha Tinh and Thua Thien-Hue, Dak Lak was hit by an economic slowdown triggered by declining coffee prices in late 2008 when the coffee price fell to just under US$1 per pound after having risen to nearly US $1.70 per pound in early 2007 (Trading Economics 2015). Our data show that nonpoor households that owned businesses with a high initial investment in 2007/2008 had a higher probability of falling into poverty by 2009/2010. In Dak Lak, business activities are often related to the processing and trading of coffee, which entails a risk of business failure when world market prices decline. By spending a large amount of money on starting such a business, the risk of falling back into poverty increases if the business fails, especially if the money was borrowed or all of the household’s savings were used for the business start-up, leaving the household without enough remaining assets to cope with the resulting losses. It therefore comes as no surprise that a large initial investment increases the probability of nonpoor households falling into poverty in Dak Lak during times of declining coffee prices.

CONCLUSIONS

Our research question was whether becoming self-employed can help to reduce the vulnerability to poverty of rural households, considering that they exhibit different characteristics and motivations, and are located in different regional settings. On the basis of the results above, we can answer this question as follows: becoming self-employed can reduce the vulnerability to poverty of poor rural households by increasing their probability of escaping poverty, but only if they are located in a regional economic environment that is characterized by ongoing structural change and offers economic opportunities for successful self-employment. In very poor regions based on agriculture, self-employment does not help households to escape poverty. Moreover, a large amount of initial investment at the beginning of the venture even increases the probability of
nonpoor households falling into poverty if they are located in an overspecialized and risky market and commodity prices decline.

Besides these aspects, it must also be taken into account that becoming self-employed, whether driven by necessity or opportunity, is not sufficient to reduce the vulnerability to poverty of all types of households in rural Vietnam. As we have shown, the different household capabilities to accumulate assets play a decisive role for vulnerability to poverty. Households with low education levels, belonging to an ethnic minority, or operating on low incomes will have problems escaping and staying out of poverty even if they are using self-employment, which then reinforces inequality.

POLICY IMPLICATIONS

We found evidence that the effect of becoming self-employed is context-specific and depends on the regional economic circumstances. It is therefore very important to take the particular regional economic circumstances into account in order to deduce accurate statements and policy recommendations. Nonetheless, we discovered that especially opportunity-driven self-employment increases the probability of poor households escaping poverty in regions characterized by ongoing structural change and economic opportunities. Promoting self-employment could therefore be a way to further reduce vulnerability to poverty in these provinces.

Furthermore, teaching programs, such as the Start and Improve Your Business Program, which foster the entrepreneurial skills of potential entrepreneurs by teaching them how to discover, assess, and implement possible opportunities in the regional market and training owners of small and microbusinesses how to improve the performance of their businesses (Goppers and Cuong 2007), could be extended to rural areas. Currently, the teaching centers are located in the provincial capitals of Thua Thien-Hue, Ha Tinh, and Dak Lak and are not accessible to and affordable for poor households living far from the provincial capitals (Xuan 2016). By providing local, specialized, and affordable teaching programs in addition to those already in existence, the business skills of poor rural households could be fostered, too. In order to avoid misinvestment and overspecialization in risky markets, these programs should also provide information about the risks of self-employment as well as the price trends in world markets that are related to the regional self-employment activities.

Since opportunity-driven self-employment is characterized by large initial investment, facilitating access to microcredit could be a suitable policy action, especially against the background that financial constraints are the major obstacle preventing households from becoming self-employed (GEM 2013). The work of the Vietnam Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development and the nonprofit Viet Nam Bank for Social Policies, which provide subsidized credit for the rural poor, can therefore be seen as crucial (Laurenceson and Nghiem 2005).
Furthermore, the different household capabilities to accumulate assets play a decisive role for vulnerability to poverty. A regionally unequal distribution of assets can lead to increasing vulnerability to poverty and consequently to growing regional inequality. In order to reduce vulnerability to poverty in rural areas of Vietnam it can therefore be seen as essential to establish equal living conditions, especially in terms of education, and to eradicate discrimination against ethnic minorities.

Moreover, it is necessary to improve infrastructure and to foster further structural change in rural regions with a strong agricultural base by strengthening industrial development in order to create a regional economic environment that allows households to successfully use self-employment as a way out of poverty.

LIMITATION OF THE ANALYSIS AND FURTHER RESEARCH NEEDS

The results presented in this paper show that vulnerability to poverty is a complex issue. We have demonstrated that there are considerable differences between regions, so self-employment can have different effects in different regions. Further research is therefore needed that integrates regional determinants into the analysis by using a multilevel approach to ascertain the effects of different regional economic circumstances.

It is also necessary to point out that our panel data set only covers a limited time frame of eight years represented by four points in time. We thus had to deal with a short panel that shows little variation over time. In order to analyze the time-serial dimension in more detail, a longer time frame is needed for further research. As it was not possible to conduct the survey annually, we have to deal with a time span of two years between waves three and four. It may therefore not be possible to measure short-term effects on vulnerability to poverty.

In addition, it must be mentioned that we had to use instrumental variables in order to estimate the effects of opportunity-driven self-employment, because direct data about opportunity-driven self-employment were only available for the last survey wave. Further research should use a variable directly representing opportunity-driven self-employment, instead of using instrumental variables. The reason for becoming self-employed could be one possibility.

REFERENCES

Adger, W. N. 2003. Social Capital, Collective Action, and Adaptation to Climate Change. Economic Geography 79 (4): 387–404.
Agergaard, J., N. Fold, and K. V. Gough. 2010. Rural-Urban Dynamics: Livelihoods, Mobility and Markets in African and Asian Frontiers. London: Routledge.
Ahmed, S. A., N. S. Diffenbaugh, T. W. Hertel, D. B. Lobell, N. Ramankutty, and Others. 2011. Climate Volatility and Poverty Vulnerability in Tanzania. Global Environmental Change 21 (1): 46–55.
Arpino, B., and A. Aassve. 2014. The Role of Villages in Households’ Poverty Exit: Evidence from a Multilevel Model for Rural Vietnam. Qual Quant 48 (4): 2175–2189.
Barslund, M., and F. Tarp. 2007. Formal and Informal Rural Credit in Four Provinces of Vietnam. University of Copenhagen, Denmark: Department of Economics (07-07).
Billing, P., and U. Madengruber. 2007. Overcoming the Black Hole: Outline for a Quantitative Model to Compare Coping Capacity across Countries. In Measuring Vulnerability to Natural Hazards: Towards Disaster Resilient Societies, edited by J. Birkmann, 403–414. Tokyo: United Nations University Press.
Birkmann, J., ed. 2007. Measuring Vulnerability to Natural Hazards. Towards Disaster Resilient Societies. Tokyo: United Nations University Press.
Bohle, H.-G. 2001. Vulnerability and Criticality: Perspectives from Social Geography. IHDP Update 2/2001. Newsletter of the International Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental Change: 1–7.
———. 2008. Leben mit Risiko - Resilienze als neues Paradigma für die Risikowelten von morgen. Naturrisiken und Sozialkatastrophen, edited by C. Felgentreff and T. Glade, 435–442. Berlin, Germany: Spektrum Akademischer Verlag.
Brünjes, J., and J. Revilla Diez. 2012. Opportunity Entrepreneurs—Potential Drivers of Non-Farm Growth in Rural Vietnam? Working Papers on Innovation and Space 1. Marburg, Germany: Philipps Universität Marburg.
Chambers, R. 1989. Editorial Introduction: Vulnerability, Coping and Policy. IDS Bulletin 20 (2): 1–7.
Coad, A., and J. P. Tamvada 2008. The Growth and Decline of Small Firms in Developing Countries. Papers on Economics and Evolution 8: 2008-08.
Culas, R. J., and M. Mahendrarajah. 2005. Causes of Diversification in Agriculture over Time: Evidence from Norwegian Farming Sector. 11th International Congress of the European Association of Agricultural Economists, Annals… Copenhagen: EAAE.
Danes, S. M., K. Stafford, G. Haynes, and S. S. Amarapurkar. 2009. Family Capital of Family Firms: Bridging Human, Social, and Financial Capital. Family Business Review.
Dang, H. L. 2010. Wirtschaftlicher Strukturwandel und außerlandwirtschaftliche Beschäftigung in Vietnam. Hannoversche Geographische Arbeiten 60, Hannover.
Desai, S. 2009. Measuring Entrepreneurship in Developing Countries. Helsinki, Finland: United Nations University, World Institute for Development Economics Research.
Duc, T. P. 2012. Vulnerability to Poverty in Rural Vietnam. Data Collection Issues, Coping Strategies and Crisis Events. PhD diss., Leibniz Universität Hannover.
———, and H. Waibel. 2009. Diversification in Land and Labor Allocation in Response to Shocks among Small-Scale Farmers in Central Vietnam. Paper presented at the 49th Annual Conference of German Association of Agricultural Economists, Kiel, 30 September – 02 October.
Ellis, F. 2000. Rural Livelihoods and Diversity in Developing Countries. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
Fallon, P. R., and R. E. B. Lucas. 2002. The Impact of Financial Crises on Labor Markets, Household Incomes, and Poverty: A Review of Evidence. The World Bank Research Observer 17 (1): 21–45.
Felgentreff, C., and T. Glade, eds. 2008. Naturrisiken und Sozialkatastrophen. Berlin: Spektrum Akademischer Verlag.
Few, R., and P. G. Tran. 2010. Climatic Hazards, Health Risk and Response in Vietnam: Case Studies on Social Dimensions of Vulnerability. Global Environmental Change 20 (3): 529–538.
Fields, G. S. 2014 Self-Employment and Poverty in Developing Countries: Helping the Self-Employed Earn More for the Work They Do. IZA World of Labor: 1–10.
Fox, L. 2008. Beating the Odds: Sustaining Inclusion in Mozambique’s Growing Economy. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
———, and T. P. Sohnesen. 2012. Household Enterprises in Sub-Saharan Africa: Why They Matter for Growth, Jobs, and Livelihoods. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
———, and ———. 2013. Household Enterprises in Mozambique: Key to Poverty Reduction but Not on the Development Agenda?. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Foxton, F., and R. Jones. 2011. Social Capital Indicators Review. London: Office for National Statistics.
GEM [Global Entrepreneurship Monitor]. 2013. Viet Nam Report 2013. Hanoi, Vietnam: Viet Nam Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
General Statistics Office of Vietnam. 2012. Results of the Viet Nam Household Living Standards Survey 2012. Hanoi, Vietnam: GSO.
General Statistics Office of Vietnam. 2016. Statistics. [https://www.gso.gov.vn/Default_en.aspx?tabid=766]
Giesselmann, M., and M. Windzio. 2012a. Panelmodelle für binäre abhängige Variablen: logistische Regression. Regressionsmodelle zur Analyse von Paneldaten, edited by M. Giesselmann und M. Windzio, 127–181. Wiesbaden, Germany: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
———., and ———., eds. 2012b. Regressionsmodelle zur Analyse von Paneldaten. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
Gindling, T., and D. Newhouse. 2012. Self-Employment in the Developing World. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Gloede, O., and O. Rungruxsirivorn. 2013. Local Financial Development and Household Welfare: Microevidence from Thai Households. Emerging Markets Finance and Trade 49 (4): 22–45.
Goppers, K., and M. T. Cuong. 2007. Business Training for Entrepreneurs in Vietnam: An Evaluation of the Sida-Supported Start and Improve Your Business (SIYB) Project. Stockholm, Sweden: Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency.
Gottschalk, S., K. Muller, and M. Niefer. 2010. Entry Strategies, Founder’s Human Capital and Start-Up Size. International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Small Business 11 (4): 403–423.
Gries, T., and W. Naudé. 2010. Entrepreneurship and Structural Economic Transformation. Small Business Economics 34 (1): 13–29.
Hardeweg, B., and H. Waibel. 2009. Collecting Data to Measure Vulnerability to Poverty: An Overview. Workshop of Research Unit 756: 22–26.
Haughton, J. H., and S. R. Khankar. 2009. Handbook on Poverty and Inequality. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Hoang, T., C. Pham, and M. A. Ulubasoglu. 2014. Non-Farm Activity, Household Expenditure, and Poverty Reduction in Rural Vietnam: 2002–2008. World Development 64:554–568.
Kiiru, J. M. 2007. Microfinance, Entrepreneurship and Rural Development: Empirical Evidence from Makueni District, Kenya. Paper delivered at the Global Poverty Research Group (GPRG) Conference, Oxford University, Oxford, U.K., 18 March.
King, B. 2011. Spatialising Livelihoods: Resource Access and Livelihood Spaces in South Africa. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 36 (2): 297–313.
Klasen, S., T. Lechtenfeld, and F. Povel. 2015. A Feminization of Vulnerability? Female Headship, Poverty, and Vulnerability in Thailand and Vietnam. World Development 71: 36–53.
Laurenceson J., H. S. Nghiem. 2005. The Nature of NGO Microfinance in Vietnam and Stakeholder’s Perceptions of Effectiveness. Discussion Paper (3). Queensland, New Zealand: School of Economics, University of Queensland.
Lin, J. Y. 2008. The Impact of the Financial Crisis on Developing Countries. Korea Development Institute 31.
Lanjouw, J. O., and P. Lanjouw. 2001. The Rural Non-Farm Sector: Issues and Evidence from Developing Countries. Agricultural Economics 26 (1): 1–23.
Makoka, D. 2008. The Impact of Drought on Household Vulnerability: The Case of Rural Malawi. Bonn, Germany: University of Bonn, Centre for Development Research.
Malesky, E. 2002. Study of Foreign Direct Investment Environment in Ha Tinh Province. PhD diss., Duke University.
Margolis, D. N. 2014. By Choice and by Necessity: Entrepreneurship and Self-Employment in the Developing World. The European Journal of Development Research 26 (4): 419–436.
McKay, A. 2002. Defining and Measuring Inequality. Briefing Paper 1. Nottingham, U.K.: Overseas Development Institute, University of Nottingham.
McNamara, K., and C. Weiss. 2005. Farm Household Income and On-and-Off Farm Diversification. Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics 37: 37–48.
Mead, D., and C. Liedholm. 1998. The dynamics of micro and small enterprises in developing countries. World Development 26 (1): 61–74.
Minot, N. 2003. Income Diversification and Poverty Reduction in the Northern Uplands of Vietnam. Annual Meeting of the American Agricultural Economic Association, Montreal.
Nguyen, L. D., K. Raabe, and U. Grote. 2015. Rural-Urban Migration, Household Vulnerability, and Welfare in Vietnam. World Development 71: 79–93.
Shaw, J. 2004. Microenterprise Occupation and Poverty Reduction in Microfinance Programs: Evidence from Sri Lanka. World Development 32 (7): 1247–1264.

Trading Economics. 2015. Coffee 1972–2015. [http://www.tradingeconomics.com/commodity/coffee].

Tran, D. 2003. The Farm Economy in Vietnam. Hanoi, Vietnam: The Gioi Publishers.

Tran, V. 2015. Household’s Coping Strategies and Recoveries from Shocks in Vietnam. The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 56:15–29.

Van de Walle, D., and D. Cratty. 2003. Is the Emerging Nonfarm Market Economy the Route Out of Poverty in Vietnam? Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

Vietnam Trade Promotion Agency. 2013a. Economic Growth Achievement in Thua Thien Hue. [http://www.vietrade.gov.vn/en/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=2028:economic-growth-achievement-in-thua-thien-hue&catid=325:brief-introduction&Itemid=361].

Vietnam Trade Promotion Agency. 2013b. State of Ha Tinh Socio-Economic Development. [http://www.vietrade.gov.vn/en/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=2066:state-of-ha-tinh-socio-economic-development-in-2006-2010-part-1&catid=325:brief-introduction&Itemid=361]

Vijverberg, W. 1992. Measuring Income from Family Enterprises with Household Surveys. Small Business Economics 4 (4): 287–305.

Wackernagel, M., L. Onisto, P. Bello, A. C. Linares, I. S. L. Falfán, and Others. 1999. National natural capital accounting with the ecological footprint concept. Ecological Economics 29 (3): 375–390.

Wai-Poi, M. 2013. Measuring Vulnerability to Poverty. Asia Policy Forum 2013. Jakarta, Indonesia: The World Bank.

World Bank. 2002. Ethnic Minority Development in Vietnam: A Socioeconomic Perspective. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

World Bank. 2003. Participatory Poverty and Governance Assessment: Dak Lak Province. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

World Bank. 2008. Vietnam: Higher Education and Skills for Growth. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

World Bank. 2010. How Deep Was the Impact of the Economic Crisis in Vietnam? A Focus on the Informal Sector in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

World Bank. 2016. Indicators: GINI Index (World Bank Estimate). [http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI].

Xuan, T. N. 2016. Start and Improve your Business Program: Location of Teaching Centers. E-mail message to Franziska Sohns. 29 February.