Annals of the Association of American Geographers
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

Authorizing the “Natives”: Governmentality, Dispossession, and the Contradictions of Rule in Colonial Zambia
Tomas Frederiksen
a School of Environment, Education and Development, University of Manchester
Published online: 12 Sep 2014.

To cite this article: Tomas Frederiksen (2014) Authorizing the “Natives”: Governmentality, Dispossession, and the Contradictions of Rule in Colonial Zambia, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 104:6, 1273-1290, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2014.944453

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2014.944453

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions
Authorizing the “Natives”: Governmentality, Dispossession, and the Contradictions of Rule in Colonial Zambia

Tomas Frederiksen

School of Environment, Education and Development, University of Manchester

British colonial rule in Africa in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries straddled a contradiction between promoting radical social transformation and maintaining political order. This article explores the relationship between changing techniques of rule and the stability of rule; in particular, the proletarianization and dispossession of African populations and production of an extractive economy in colonial Zambia. The 1920s saw the transition from charter rule by the British South Africa Company to the Colonial Office and the end of widespread rural unrest. Using archival and secondary sources, two key interventions marked a new mode of governing and spatial reorganization of power are examined: indirect rule through Native authorities and the constitution of Native reserves. These interventions sought to rework the political landscape and align relations between men and things in ways that furthered the aims of both extractive capitalism and colonial rule. The consequences and limitations of these new forms of intervention are examined by bringing together Marxist ideas of dispossession and the contradictions of colonial rule and Foucault’s work on governmental power. In the final sections, a wider set of relations and processes beyond the state that worked to produce economic forms of subjectivity are explored, before arguing that the hallmark of techniques of rule that became widespread in British colonial sub-Saharan Africa is that they stabilized dispossession and worked to resolve central contradictions of colonial rule. Key Words: colonialism, dispossession, governmentality, power, Zambia.

十九世纪及二十世纪初，英国在非洲的殖民，横跨促进种族社会变革和维繫政治秩序之间的矛盾。本文探讨演变的治理技术和治理的稳定性之间的关係; 特别是在赞比亚殖民地中，非洲人口的无产阶级化和掠夺，以及榨取型经济的产生。1920 年代见证了从英国南非公司的特许治理到殖民政府的变迁，以及广泛的农村反抗的终结。本文运用档案及二手资源，检视两个标示新的治理模式与权力的空间重构的关键介入：藉由原住民统领者进行间接统治，以及成立原住民保护区。这些介入，企图以同时推进榨取型资本主义和殖民统治两大目标之方式，重构政治地景以及人与物的排列关係。本文透过共同带入马克思主义有关掠夺和殖民统治的矛盾之概念，以及傅柯对于治理权力的研究，检视这些新形态的介入所造成的结果和限制。本文将在最后的段落中，探讨生产主体性的经济形式的一系列超乎国家层级的广泛关係及过程，随后并主张，在撒哈拉以南非洲的英国殖民地中普遍的统治技术之特徵，是它们稳定了掠夺，并解决了殖民统治的核心矛盾。殖民主义，掠夺，治理术，权力，赞比亚。

El manejo colonial británico en África a finales del siglo XIX y comienzos del XX hacía malabares para enfrentar la contradicción entre promover una radical transformación social y mantener el orden político. Este artículo explora la relación existente entre las cambiantes técnicas de gobernar y la estabilidad de las normas; en particular, la proletarización y desposesión de las poblaciones africanas y la producción de una economía extractiva en la Zambia colonial. En los años 1920 concurrieron la transición de la normatividad institucionalizada de la Compañía Británica del África del Sur a la Oficina Colonial, y el final de la agitación rural generalizada. A través de archivos y fuentes secundarias, se examinan dos intervenciones claves que marcan un nuevo modo de gobernar y la organización espacial del poder: el gobierno indirecto a través de autoridades nativas y la constitución de reservas nativas. Con estas intervenciones se buscaba rediseñar el paisaje político y alinear relaciones entre hombres y cosas por medios que fortalecieran los propósitos tanto del capitalismo extractivo como del gobierno colonial. Las consecuencias y limitaciones de estas nuevas formas de intervención son examinadas a la luz de ideas marxistas sobre la desposesión y las contradicciones del gobierno colonial, conjuntamente con el trabajo de Foucault sobre el poder gubernamental. En las secciones finales se explora un conjunto de relaciones y procesos de mayor amplitud más allá del estado, que fueron instrumentales para producir formas económicas de subjetividad, antes de argumentar que el distintivo de técnicas de gobierno—que se extendieron por todo el ámbito colonial británico
For British colonial authorities in sub-Saharan Africa, rule was a particularly challenging exercise in managing contradictions and difference. With violence aimed at producing peace, traditions overhauled for stability, and relocations enforced to produce stable tenure, the aims, techniques, and results of British rule in sub-Saharan Africa were riddled with paradox. Comaroff (1998) described this as “the essential paradox of colonial governance: its capacity to be ordered yet incoherent, rational yet absurd, violent yet impotent; to elicit compliance and contestation, discipline and defiance, subjection and insurrection. Sometimes all at once” (340).

The central paradox faced by colonial rulers of sub-Saharan Africa in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries was that they sought radical social change while maintaining order, to stimulate ambitious individualism while preserving communal values (Berman and Lonsdale 1992; Berry 1992). To be successful, colonial enterprises required cheap labor and the basic trappings of a market economy—capitalist relations of wage labor, a cash economy, and exclusive property rights. The introduction and intensification of extractive forms of capitalism saw widespread dispossession and political instability that was a constant threat to the success of both commercial enterprises and colonial rule, which depended on political and social stability.1 The success or failure of colonial rule in achieving its aims depended on its ability to manage these contradictions, an ability that was deeply related to the techniques and institutions deployed. The better these techniques resolved these tensions and contradictions and managed diverse populations, the more stable colonial rule was.

In this article, I explore the relationship between the techniques and stability of rule through an examination of the changing modes of colonial administration in sub-Saharan Africa.2 In particular, I examine the proletarianization and dispossession of African populations and production of an extractive economy in Northern Rhodesia across the transition from charter rule by the British South Africa Company (BSAC) to the Colonial Office in Northern Rhodesia in 1924.3 The 1920s saw the end of widespread rural unrest in Northern Rhodesia and the introduction of decades of comparative rural peace and associated commercial expansion.4 In this pivotal decade, new institutions and political structures realigned the exercise of power and reshaped the political landscape of Northern Rhodesia, providing a window into the political and economic conditions under which the dispossession associated with the introduction and intensification of capitalist relations could be politically stabilized. This was not a given. In the next section I situate the new forms of intervention introduced by the Colonial Office in the 1920s in a discussion of Marxist ideas of dispossession, proletarianization, the contradictions of colonial rule, and Foucault’s work on governmentality. I describe the BSAC’s attempts at rule through coercion before examining two key interventions that bear the mark of this new mode of governing and spatial reorganization of power: indirect rule through Native authorities and the constitution of Native reserves. These policies all sought to achieve three ends: Enhance the welfare of the population, entrench the relations of capitalism, and facilitate the process of rule through producing new forms of subjectivity. I then examine the consequences of these policies in Northern Rhodesia and the limits of colonial power. In the final sections I explore a wider set of relations and processes beyond the state that worked to produce economic forms of subjectivity before considering the ways in which different techniques of colonial power stabilized dispossession and worked to resolve central contradictions of colonial rule. Understanding the processes and relations that stabilize dispossession offers wider insights into the nature of colonial rule in sub-Saharan Africa and, I would argue, the stabilization of contemporary processes of dispossession.

Colonial Rule, Dispossession, and Governmentality

A key aim of colonial rule in Northern Rhodesia, and elsewhere on the continent, was the production of a steady stream of labor for European enterprise. In Northern Rhodesia this focused on labor for the mines. For the BSAC, as we shall see, it took the form of forced entry of people into capitalist wage relations through disrupting previous modes of production. This process is instantly recognizable to Marxist scholars as a relatively straightforward case of primitive accumulation or accumulation by dispossession (Harvey 2003; Glassman 2006). Capitalism requires for its functioning the creation of a working class, a proletariat (Marx
1990). This proletariat is initially produced through “brute force,” which alienates producers from the means of production—dispossessing people of their land and other productive assets—and thus forcing them to sell their labor to survive (Marx 1990, 915). Perelman (2001) argued that this process has two blades: “The first blade served to undermine the ability of the people to provide for themselves. The other blade was a system of stern measures required to keep people from finding alternative survival strategies outside of the system of waged labour” (7–8).

Study of this process in colonial Africa has a long tradition, with many Marxist scholars examining this new working class, its formation, and its struggles with European capitalists (Van Onselen 1976; Perrings 1979; Parpart 1983; Crisp 1984). Yet, the coercive edge of primitive accumulation that cleaves societies along capitalist lines rarely cuts the tethers to previous economic and social forms at first strike. Coercive taxation was a blunt-edged knife, for much as colonial officials imagined there might be, there was no linear relationship among taxation, wage labor, and labor migration (Henderson 1975). Force alone is not enough to construct and stabilize capitalist relations and produced resistance that had to be managed if accumulation and rule was to continue.

Many studies of alien rule in sub-Saharan Africa fail fully to problematize this tension (e.g., Van Onselen 1976; Vail 1977; Perrings 1979; Macpherson 1981; Parpart 1983; Luchembe 1992; Mamdani 1996). For most of the Marxist studies previously mentioned, and others from across the continent, coercion was enough to secure domination. If resistance was to be managed, then it was secured through violence and buying off local elites to work as proxies for the colonial state (e.g., Mamdani 1996). There is truth to this account, but it is a limited analysis that denies “colonized people any history but that of oppression, any ambiguity to the ways they might confront and appropriate the intrusions of colonizers” and is thus fundamentally unsatisfactory (Cooper 1994, 1542).

More recently, a series of studies have attempted to understand colonial rule beyond its violent means and economic aims, frequently by drawing on the work of Foucault. In these studies, the cultural and discursive aspects of colonial power are often emphasized with attention drawn to the organizing role of modernizing colonial power and the ways in which it produced and maintained categories of life, behavior, and meaning, particularly the racial boundaries on which it was founded (Said 1978; Mitchell 1990; Comaroff 1998; Hindess 2001; Helliwell and Hindess 2002). This near-exclusive focus on image, text, and ideology has been roundly critiqued as an equally unsatisfactory account, providing greater insight into the mind-set of the colonizers than the actual practices and effects of colonial rule (Scott 1995; Comaroff 1998; Harris 2004). Although Foucault’s work on governmentality (discussed later) has been taken up widely, it has, until recently, only intermittently been used to analyze techniques of colonial rule and rarely those of colonial Africa (Scott 1995; Bonneuil 2000; Redfield 2005; Li 2007). Scott’s (1995) pioneering work on colonial governmentality, although schematic and focusing on Sri Lanka, usefully highlights the changing governmental rationalities and its shift toward disciplinary techniques of power. Redfield (2005) consciously attempts to export Foucault to “the Tropics” but, conversely, focuses on the usefulness of the metaphor of the Panopticon in penal colonies. Vaughan (1991), too, explicitly set out to explore the limitations of Foucault’s ideas of biopower in a non-European setting, making great use of his concepts to explore the production of colonial subjectivities through a medical discourse and practices of biomedicine, concluding that the colonial knowledge and power regime is fundamentally different from that described by Foucault. In these studies, like many inspired by Foucault, questions of political economy, space, and the efficacy of different techniques of power all take a back seat despite their centrality to Foucault’s thinking.5

Accounts of colonial rule in sub-Saharan Africa that both engage with political economy concerns and draw on poststructural notions of subjectivity and discourse are even scarcer (Stoler and Cooper 1997; Comaroff 1998). One standout study that does is Mamdani’s (1996) Citizen and Subject, but here although the racialized nature of rule and its relations to the political economic demands of colonialism are at the fore, Mamdani locates the totality of power within a bifurcated state apparatus and has a near exclusive emphasis on the use of coercive power by the colonial authorities. Further, studies that choose to use Foucault’s understandings of subjectivity to understand the production of colonial subjects focus on their production as racialized political subjects (Vaughan 1991; Stoler 1995; Mamdani 1996; Stoler and Cooper 1997). This, I would argue, often generates an analysis that highlights the coercive and restrictive elements of colonial power. Colonial subjectivities were clearly political and racial, but they were also economic. Understanding racialized colonial subjects also as economic offers greater insight into the enabling, less coercive aspects
of colonial power, aspects that were very important indeed.

A small but growing stream of research by geographers around ideas of colonial governmentality and biopolitics frequently manages to engage with both questions of discourse and political economy and ground these in a discussion of space. The focus here varies, and each study draws on Foucault’s work to emphasize different aspects of the arts of governance and the exercise of power in colonial contexts. Central to all of these projects is an understanding that Foucault’s unapologetically Eurocentric work cannot be simply exported to other contexts without modification (Duncan 2007; Legg 2007). For Hannah (2000), the emphasis is on “unambiguously national” (9) level discursive tools for understanding and administering populations and territory in North America, whereas for Yeoh (1996) and Legg (2007), the production and contestation of urban space (as a distinctive project) in Asia are the focus of enquiry.6 For all of these, the idea of governmentality as producing economic as well and political and racial subjects is present but of secondary interest. Harris (2002) used ideas of governmentality to understand the production of “native space” in colonial Canada, focusing on the legal production of colonial subjects and space in a context of scarce land rather than labor. Duncan (2007) examined the explicitly economic topic of implantation of extractive tea plantations in rural Sri Lanka, challenging the urban focus of previous studies, but in his choice of scale and topic focused once more on the coercive aspects of capitalism, an “authoritative governmentality,” as he termed it. As we shall see, colonial governmentality varied markedly over time and space, with the institutional and geographic context of sub-Saharan Africa producing a very different picture (Legg 2007).

In this article I draw on Foucault’s work on governmentality and the art of government to understand the links among the stability of colonial rule, its techniques of power, and the political economy of colonialism in sub-Saharan Africa. I first turn to Foucault’s concept of governmentality as an initial explanation before drawing on more recent analyses of governmentality, economic subjectivity, and power in the later discussion. As I am using Foucault’s work as a provocation rather than a template and there is no “single, consistent definition of governmentality” (Foucault used the term to mean multiple things himself), I do not intend to offer a full account of Foucault’s thinking here but, rather, draw attention to facets relevant to the following discussion of colonial rule (Walters 2012, 38).7 Foucault developed his most well-known theories of rule through studies exploring the changes in states and institutions in Europe since the Enlightenment period. In these, Foucault identified a movement from sovereign forms of power with direct, immediate, and highly visible methods of coercion, violence, and obstruction (which he saw as the power deployed by feudal monarchies) to more efficient liberal government, which emphasized techniques of power that are subtle, pervasive, granularizing, and heterogeneous (which he saw as the forms used by modern states since the late eighteenth century; Foucault 1991a, 2003). With this shift in forms of rule, there is a shift in the aims, targets, and techniques of power to efficiently optimizing relations that create “the right disposition of things” producing increased welfare for the subjects of power: “the population” (Foucault 1991b, 93; see also Foucault 2007). Governmental rule sought to reshape the conditions of life and change the rules of how individuals and populations conduct their lives (famously described as working on the “conduct of conduct”8), to realign social—and socioenvironmental—relations to produce self-regulating, self-improving subjects through more efficient disciplinary techniques of power, shaped by what Li (2007) called the will to improve. These techniques of power are “radically heterogeneous” (Foucault 2003, 36), but there are three facets worth highlighting here: First, they are techniques of power that work to both close down options and possibilities but also enable and encourage certain aptitudes, behaviors, and ways of thinking—seeking to shape the desires of subjects. Second, key techniques for producing new behaviors of self-regulation and desired aptitudes include not only coercion but also surveillance and education. Third, many of these techniques of power are decentralized and individualizing, producing the effects of power through multiple, small, and dispersed actions and outcomes (Foucault 2003; Dean 2010). The mechanisms that produce the effect of power, then, are found in a complex apparatus that produces an alignment of institutions, processes, and forces—termed dispositifs. Not only did the shift to greater, although not exclusive, emphasis on disciplinary techniques of power reshape political space; it was important for governing economic space, too, in two ways: its granularizing, individualizing effects and, through working on self-regulating subjects, its efficiency. For Foucault, exclusively monarchical forms of power hindered the functioning of capitalism by being “excessively onerous” and fundamentally
predatory, operating as an “economic subtraction” and obstacle (Foucault 2007, 159). Second, these forms of power were “very discontinuous . . . the mesh of the net was too large, an almost infinite number of things, elements, conducts and processes escaped the control of power” (Foucault 2007, 158). Thus, modern capitalism and government are understood to be “completely bound up with” multiple dispersed forms of power focused on optimizing the relations between “men and things” within a given political rationality (Foucault 2008, 67). Foucault’s work allows this analysis to engage with the multiple arts of governance and relations of power required to produce and stabilize new forms of colonial subjectivity and economic activity. Broadening the lens of techniques of power brings into focus the ways in which colonial authorities and, importantly, wider structures, worked to enable the expansion and stabilization of relations of capitalism in the colonial context by enabling certain forms of behaviors as much as they sought to constrain others.

In the next section I elaborate the failings of the BSAC’s strategy of relying primarily on coercive techniques of power before moving to focus on two interventions introduced by the Colonial Office after 1924 that bear the hallmark of governmental modes of rule—Native authorities and Native reserves policies. The subsequent sections explore these interventions before discussing the limits to colonial power. In the final sections I set these state-led interventions within the context of a wider array of actors and powers seeking to reshape Africans as modern economic subjects before, using more recent analyses of rule and the spatiality of power to reflect on the effectiveness of different techniques of power in stabilizing colonial rule in sub-Saharan Africa.

British South Africa Company Rule in Northern Rhodesia

As Northern Rhodesia entered the 1920s, after three decades of colonial rule, British supremacy was precarious. The approach of the BSAC, which had administered colonial rule under Royal Charter since 1890, had been unflinchingly extractive. Adopting a two-pronged strategy to produce wage laborers, the company had imposed a hut tax across the territory and curtailed those economic activities that offered an alternative to Africans beyond wage labor (Hall 1965; Meebelo 1971). Africans, however, did not rush to take up wage labor in European enterprises, preferring instead to rely on their own farming and industry9 to produce tax revenues, as well as widely resisting and evading the imposition of the hut tax. The BSAC’s response was frequently a violent one, seizing assets and disrupting production in the hope of producing a flow of cheap labor that would enable settler enterprises to thrive (Macpherson 1981). The use of demonstrative forms of punishment such as hut burnings and punitive raids—often termed “demonstrations” in official records—formed a central plank of the imposition of British rule. On the Copperbelt, the first British administrator at Ndola acquired a reputation for the brutal use of force and with it the local nickname “Chirapula” which roughly translates as “the flogger” (Siegel 1988, 69) or “he who beats hard” (Stephenson 1937, 190). Thus the character of early British rule in Northern Rhodesia was often one of brutal subjugation, as tax defaulters saw their huts burnt, cattle seized, or wives kidnapped until taxes were paid (Rotberg 1965).

The BSAC’s rush to turn Charterland into a successful extractive economy using violent means rapidly produced a series of political and environmental crises. Attempts to disrupt African agricultural production led to malnutrition, famine, a serious threat of upheaval, and a rapid policy reversal (Macpherson 1981; Berry 1992). Attempts to impose a hut tax gave rise to mass migration or evasion as, with seven-foot grass surrounding villages in certain areas, or simply distance from centers of administration, evading the tax collectors was simply a matter of spotting their approach in time (Macpherson 1981). Attempts to directly and forcefully subordinate African political structures to BSAC demands only succeeded in undermining the authority of these structures and reducing the influence they held with local populaces as a “willingness to co-operate with imperialist forces often produced a crisis of authority” for African leaders (Isaacman and Isaacman 1977, 42; see also Hailey 1938).

By the end of BSAC rule, industrial growth was faltering, and practices of taxation and coerced dispossession both failed to provide a reliable supply of cheap African labor and produced a backlash (Perrings 1979). Rule was incomplete, highly resented, and widely evaded, and the threat of uprising was ever-present (Macpherson 1981). One official investigating disturbances and a growing religious rebellion movement in 1919 saw the instability and alienation colonial rule was generating:

As one listened to the pleas and evidence which showed that the old words, obedience to elders, headmen and
Chiefs, obedience to the Boma,10 had lost their meaning, we realized the delicate and fragile nature of our hold over these people and at times we saw the abyss opening. (McDonnell cited in Fields 1982, 353)

This was only the most recent uprising and discontent and by the early 1920s BSAC rule was seen to be inadequate in both the United Kingdom and Northern Rhodesia (Gann 1969; Henderson 1975). BSAC rule had failed to encourage substantive economic development in Northern Rhodesia and a lack of revenue and investment meant there was scarce evidence of the purported benefits of the British colonial presence. The brutality of BSAC rule brought resistance and criticism in the United Kingdom, with those arguing against the Charter describing its record as “written in blood” (Thomson 1898, 10). Violent dispossession proved a rocky path to achieving colonial goals and, following a continent-wide pattern of colonial policy debates swinging against chartered companies in the 1920s, Northern Rhodesia saw direct Colonial Office control of territories and “indirect rule” of its peoples (Gann 1969).

Producing Political Subjects: Native Authorities and Native Reserves

As the Colonial Office took over in 1924, it was keen to mark a difference of approach to that of the BSAC and launch a new era of development in Northern Rhodesia. Among those anxious to mark the change was the newly appointed governor, Herbert Stanley. Conscious of the simmering resentment toward British rule, Stanley took a tour of the country to deliver the message of a new era of rule to African leaders (National Archives of Zambia [NAZ] ZA 1/9/59/1/2). These meetings were carefully choreographed political theater, with Stanley appearing before African leaders resplendent in a bright white dress uniform to proclaim a new agenda of governance (Ranger 1980). There was to be a new relationship between the governors and the governed, he announced. With this relationship came both rights and responsibilities. The rulers took on the aim of improving the well-being of the population. In response, the ruled should seek to improve themselves and their own welfare. These new political subjects were constituted from a conception of freedom that rested on self-improvement and industrious use of natural resources. The tones of Foucault’s governmental rule here are strong.

In the course of the coming years, the type and scope of intervention by colonial administrators into Africans’ lives changed (Rhodes House Oxford [RH] Mss Afr. S.2111). Revenue from the growing mining industry more than doubled the state budget in the late 1920s, and colonial administrators set about using these resources to “civilize” and “develop” the Africans of Northern Rhodesia. New departments deployed legions of new administrators and experts across Northern Rhodesia (National Archives, Kew [NA] CO 799/2). A key objective of British administrators was to produce African subjects with modern habits of progress by inculcating certain forms of economic, ecological, and political rationality. As Government Secretary Logan (1939) argued, they aimed to “help the Africans build up and maintain a healthy mind and a healthy body” (55) and “encourage them to think out schemes for their own improvement” (53). Two policies formed the central thrust of this new mode of engagement: Native authorities and Native reserves.

In the eyes of the Colonial Office, the BSAC’s approach to rule had undermined tribal cohesion and left the tribes “in a very disorganised state” (Secretary for Native Affairs, cited in Chanock 1985, 112). They sought to rectify this by introducing new policies and techniques for engaging with the African populace. Central to this was the introduction of indirect rule, which provided a two-tiered structure in which black and white rulers worked in separate but interdependent spheres, to replace the previous policy, which was now termed direct rule. Indirect rule was the most recent manifestation of a wider policy of colonial rule gaining vogue after the 1857 Sepoy Mutiny in India, but “it was in colonial Africa . . . that Indirect Rule reached its zenith in terms of the breadth of application, institutional articulation, and theoretical elaboration,” particularly following Lord Lugard’s then recent experiences in Nigeria (Mantena 2010, 173; see also Robinson 1990; Mamdani 1996).11 Through the Native Authorities legislation of 1929, the British administration codified the relationship between the colonial legal system and the existing customary legal system, transferring to African rulers many of the tasks of the colonial state, in ways that they believed would preserve traditional political structures and empower them to govern “those matters which are to them the most important attributes of rule” (Lugard 1965, 197; NAZ SEC 2/378). For Lugard, this meant the sphere of native law and custom and the constitution of Native courts. These courts gave African leaders the power to make arrests, try (mainly civil) cases, and levy fines and punishments (including
beatings, forced labor, and prison sentences). Customary law was allowed to prevail as long as it did not undermine British supremacy and was not “repugnant to natural justice or morality” (NA CO 743/3, Ordinance 32 of 1929, 4).

This reconstitution and extension of chiefly authority was not without conditions. It went hand in hand with a thoroughgoing hierarchical reorganization and rationalization of chiefly powers (Logan 1939).12 Groups were amalgamated and structured into clear hierarchies set out by the colonial authorities. After detailed discussion and examination, a three-tier system of chiefs was established (NAZ KSN 1/3/1/3). To recognize and symbolize this new, more efficient, standardized system of chiefly rule, black staves were handed out. Paramount chiefs were given the longest staves surmounted by a silver Rhodesian lion and lesser chiefs sequentially shorter staffs surmounted by a silver sphere (NAZ KSN 1/3/1/3). This time Governor Maxwell took to the road to present them to the chiefs, asking that they “show their appreciation of this act of recognition by acting rightly towards all their people . . . [and] learn to be just and fair to everyone and not to judge according to personal likes and dislikes” (NAZ KSN 1/3/1/3, minutes of Native Indaba held at Ndola Boma 6 July 1928, 6). The Native authorities system directly sought to inculcate African leaders with the habits of good governance: With restructuring and new powers came the burden of expectations of rational political rule based on impartiality, respect, and equality of treatment and a signification of domains of rule.

A key vehicle for these new habits of governance were Native courts, which were seen as a key way of curbing the corrosive effect of capitalist relations on tribal discipline and boosting the authority African leaders had over their subjects. With the power to hold court, try cases, and impose punishments among their subjects, African leaders were encouraged to “learn to be just and fair” (Chipungu 1992a). A key technique here was increased surveillance by colonial officials, who regularly visited to check court records and observe the working of the courts (NAZ SEC 2/378). Court clerks were trained in “writing, reading, case recording, personal conduct and general running of Native Authority affairs” at the Chilambamba training center (Chipungu 1992a, 59). Throughout all of this, an emphasis was laid not only on inculcating concepts of justice but also on “cleanliness, punctuality and personal conduct” (Chipungu 1992a, 59). S. F. Moore (1992) described parallel efforts in neighboring colonial Tanzania as “an almost evangelical effort to insert ideas and ways of knowing as much as it was a labor of making and keeping an organizational structure in order” (15). The British Colonial Office sought to generate institutions of rule that would produce the desired self-regulating and gradually modernizing political subjects that internalized these new legal norms, and with it the desired political stability. The key tools here were not coercion, bribery, and dictatorial command but markedly more educational and disciplinary in nature.

Colonial administrators saw the Native authorities policy as a success from the beginning. After just one year it had appeared to strengthen African political institutions and spread new governmental rationalities among African leaders and their people: “The attitude of the natives towards the Chiefs has notably improved since the inception of Indirect Rule” through “the exercise of integrity, common-sense and sympathetic but firm discipline” (NA CO 799/7, 8). The Native Affairs Secretary praised how African leaders had “shown a sense of responsibility and integrity almost beyond belief,” citing two (unnamed) chiefs who had gone as far as to fine themselves for transgressions (NA CO 799/7, 7). All around, evidence was seen of a wholesome return to stable rural life under the control of newly empowered and responsible African leaders (NA CO 799/7, CO 799/9, CO 799/11, CO 799/12).

For the newly amalgamated and structured systems of indirect rule to function efficiently, and to reduce interracial conflict by freeing space for European settlers to establish farms, the Native reserves were to be constituted on their own lands. As they came into being in the late 1920s and early 1930s, these reserves gave clear spatial expression to the Native authorities (NA CO 795/17/1). Where previously there had been general areas in which Africans were encouraged to settle, there was now a detailed formal demarcation of thirty-seven territories for around 525,000 people across the country (approximately 50 percent of the total population) over which Native authorities held dominion (NA CO 795/17/2). The Native reserves were often designed to overlap with areas that were already occupied by Africans, but around half involved relocations. Native authorities were established as petty monarchies, complete with territorial limits, courts, and advisory councils, intended to be a way of politically easing the transition into European socioeconomic relations (Chanock 1985).

On the Native reserves, Africans became the targets for development interventions. Centrally, the Native reserves were seen as key to developing more efficient and rational habits of agriculture among Africans.
Having worked to undermine local agricultural production previously, colonial authorities now endeavored to rebuild it along more rational lines. One obstacle to the development of agriculture identified by the colonial authorities was the “feeling of insecurity of tenure” Africans held (NA CO 799/2, 3). With no obvious sense of the irony involved, colonial officials saw compulsory relocation to Native reserves as the solution to this problem. The space of the reserves was rationalized as water experts were drafted in to provide wells, dams, and irrigation and train Africans in techniques and habits of water management and conservation (NA CO 799/7, CO 799/9). Further projects sought to modernize agricultural methods among reserve populations (NA CO 795/28/2, CO 795/68/8, CO 795/32/11). Where the BSAC had banned traditional swidden agricultural methods, the Colonial Office deployed European agricultural experts to educate Africans on new crops, crop rotation methods, and irrigation schemes to “check, in time, those wasteful methods” Africans had hitherto used (CO 799/2, 3).

The language of decentralization and delegation of powers obscured a situation in which the colonial state’s powers were extended and gained increased traction in the African populace. First, with the increased powers for Native authorities came increased supervision and training by British administrators to shape the conduct of African subjects. The conduct of the reconstituted Native authorities was carefully watched and managed by growing administrative staff funded by increasing revenue flows from the mining industry. While proclaiming the new policy a success in 1931, the Native Secretary also conceded “the need for constant touring is very real” (NA CO 799/9, 7). Increased autonomy came with increased intervention and surveillance under the watchful eye of Native commissioners and other officials whose regular visits monitored the behavior of African leaders, their court records, and their progress in adopting the habits and norms of self-improving rulers. Second, the newly empowered Native authorities gave less scope for the evasion of colonial demands by Africans. The newly rationalized and “empowered” African leaders were better able to read and understand the realm of rural African life than Britons and a number, enjoying their new powers, used them to maintain order and develop their reserves along lines the British intended (CA CO 799/7, 6; NAZ ZA 1/9/18/52; see also Meebelo 1971; Datta 1976; Gordon 2001). Seeing scope to increase their own agency, some African leaders sought to use alliance with the British to their advantage and gain supremacy over old rivals with Paramount Chiefs Chitimukulu, of the Bemba, and Mkanda, of the Chewa, going so far as to ask for British uniforms to match their staves (NAZ ZA 1/9/59/1/2; see also NAZ ZA 1/9/59/1/1; Ranger 1969; Meebelo 1971).

The Native authorities and Native reserves system worked to produce more fully contained and constrained racialized political subjects who were then targets for improvement and encouraged to transition toward becoming modern economic subjects. I return to this process of producing economic subjectivity after discussing the consequences of these policies, how the mechanics of indirect rule gave some scope for African leaders to resist colonial impositions and the limits of the colonial state’s power in the next section.

Native Reserves, Dispossession, and the Limits of Alien Rule

Rationalization and efficiency for colonial authorities came at a painful price for Africans in Northern Rhodesia. The system of Native reserves and Native authorities failed to improve the well-being of Africans and largely undermined it, proving effective tools of dispossession. Most important, the reserves were too small. Complaints around the size of the new areas began almost immediately but were dismissed because they conflicted with the opinion of “an agriculturist of wide experience” who believed that the reserves could support populations of three times the size (NA CO 799/12, 12). Population densities on the reserves varied but were generally much higher than in the surrounding country. In 1933 the average population density across the territory was 4.7 people per square mile (NA CO 799/12). On the reserves, the lowest was 6.89 people per square mile (The Railway) and the highest 38.7 (North Charterland; NA, CO 799/9). With relatively low soil fertilities in many parts of the country, the ability to shift cultivation sites around every five years with long fallow periods was central to many African agricultural systems (H. L. Moore and Vaughan 1994). Constrained to small areas with acute water shortages and unable to move as soil fertilities declined, the Native reserves were disastrous for African agriculture, forcing many to seek alternate livelihoods (NA CO 795/68/8; see also Meebelo 1971; Vail 1977; Musambachime 1992). Further, as Africans were dislocated from their previous areas where they had worked to control the tsetse fly, they were forced into new areas where the fly was prevalent and with it the diseases (e.g., sleeping sickness) it carried.13 This was particularly marked on the
North Charterland reserves (near Petauke) where, in the decade following relocation to the reserves, deaths and migration led the population to decrease by 54 percent (Vail 1977; Musambachime 1992). As the railway came to be the economic and administrative backbone of Northern Rhodesia, being moved away from its path placed Africans at a great economic disadvantage. Cut off from their markets, and with decreasing yields, reserve populations found it increasingly difficult to pay their taxes (NAZ KSN 1/3/1/3, minutes of Native Indaba held at Ndola Boma 6 July 1928; see also Siegel 1989; H. L. Moore and Vaughan 1994). This same distance from the railway stifled early mining efforts in Northern Rhodesia (Gann 1969). It did little more for African agriculture, no matter how well it was rationalized. The reserves effectively became little more than “overcrowded labour reserves” for the mines and white farmers (Grotpeiter, Siegel, and Pletcher 1998, 323). They produced an outflux of Africans from rural areas. With this outflux, the labor requirements of European enterprise were finally met and the Copperbelt proceeded to grow rapidly in the coming decades.

The negative consequences of British policy gave impetus for resistance by African leaders. Colonial domination was not all encompassing and, for the duration of British rule in Northern Rhodesia, African leaders “were never straightforward incarnations of colonial policy,” frequently undermining it (Ranger 1969, 318). Documenting this is difficult.14 Resistant leaders and groups often appear in the official archival record labeled as backward, lazy, and ignorant (Siegel 1989). The Secretary for Native Affairs was forced to list increasing numbers of these “ignorant” leaders as the years progressed and their recalcitrance could no longer be ascribed to the recentness of the policy (NA CO 799/7, CO 799/9). There was also a fair amount of local negotiation and compromise. If African leaders totally acquiesced to colonial demands or transmitted them uncritically, they were often unseated. This was the experience of Nkamba, who was considered satisfactory by British administrators, a view not shared by those he ruled, who attacked and drove him from their village (NAZ KSN 1/3/1/3; see also Meebelo 1971; Luchembe 1992). Chipungu (1992a) used oral testimony to argue that “Native Authorities tended to collect less controversial taxes, levies and fines and ignored the most resented types, in a bid to strike a balance between state revenue demands and protesting rural masses” (51).15

Where many African leaders took on board the language of rationality and good governance and deployed it in negotiations with colonial authorities, this could be as much a performance of compliance as an expression of a changed sense of how rule should be conducted. In one example of this, Government Secretary Logan (1939) cited an occasion when

A District Officer on tour expressed a wish to listen to the hearing of a case. A case was promptly brought on and tried at considerable length to its final conclusion by the Native Court. It turned out, however, that this was a repeat performance as the case had already been tried. (53)

Making the new court system work along desired lines was a struggle for the colonial authorities. There was a marked reluctance to prosecute those flouting the most unpopular rules, such as the dog tax or those relating to natural resource use (NAZ SEC 2/378; see also Chipungu 1992a). A key site of struggle was the documentary record where, on inspection, court records were often not up to scratch and went missing. As S. F. Moore (1992) pointed out, “a certain degree of studied carelessness could serve local interests by systematically frustrating surveillance” (28). Administrators faced the same struggle effecting surveillance in Northern Rhodesia (NAZ SEC 2/378).

Further, despite a growth in the number of administrative officials, the application of rule was still highly uneven, impeded by the resources of the state and the physical geography of Northern Rhodesia. The demands of covering the costs of administration from a very low revenue base necessitated a situation where colonial presence was a “thin white line” in the central African bush with “large areas subject only to token administration by lonely District Officers” (Clapham 2001, 15; see also Kirk-Greene 1980). Those groups furthest away from the centers of colonial administration or in difficult-to-access areas, such as those who lived in the Lake Bangawelu marshes, were best placed to evade its demands (Macpherson 1981). For Lunda groups, distance from the district office and a canny engagement with British administrators enabled their leaders to refashion chiefly authority, in many ways increasing its strength (Gordon 2001). Much as the scope and scale of state intervention increased as the resources of the colonial state grew, its presence was still very “thin.” It is telling that the annual census figures in the Native Affairs reports include clauses that many of the figures are estimates. In most provinces, only 60 percent of villages could be visited in any one year (NA CO 799/9).

The arrival of the Colonial Office in 1924 represented a shift in the techniques of power used in rule
Figure 1. Map of Native reserves in 1937. Source: Based on Map 467 from the National Archives of Zambia Digitized Maps and Images Collection. (Color figure available online.)

but not in the process of proletarianization that was transforming the Northern Rhodesian economic and political landscape. What the new techniques of rule achieved, even as they consciously and unconsciously proved remarkably effective tools of dispossession, was stabilized rule. Compliance was acquired by the Colonial Office, not through violence but, rather, through disciplinary techniques of surveillance, education, and incentives for cooperation. Mamdani (1996) missed this point when he described a near exclusively coercive “decentralised despotism,” of African leaders under the cosh of British rule (51). It is through a diversified, less emphatically coercive portfolio of techniques of power that the native question of stabilizing alien rule and the labor question of a steady flow of African labor for the Northern Rhodesian Copperbelt were both, for a while, answered. For many African leaders, the new powers were welcome and they were willing to compromise to maintain them, limiting resistance to posturing in meetings and foot-dragging on the most resented aspects of colonial rule.16 Although uneven, the net result was an increased degree of compliance with colonial demands and remarkable political stability in rural Northern Rhodesia in the coming decades.17 These new technologies of rule helped transform political unrest that had threatened to destabilize BSAC rule into background rumblings until resistance flared in riots in the late 1930s on the newly urbanizing Copperbelt (Hall 1965; Meebelo 1971). It is telling that a leading response of colonial authorities to these riots was to work to increase the presence of Native authorities in the Copperbelt towns (Kalusa 2011). The Native
reserves and authorities were key tools in the arsenal of the British administration in producing new forms of racialized political subjectivity. They were, however, only one part of a broader dispositif realigning social relations to produce economically rational habits and behaviors in Africans. The next section explores how these wider complexes of power, many of which reached beyond the state, produced racialized economic subjects through dispersed tools for influencing behavior such as education programs and market relations.

Unruly Economic Subjects

The Native reserves were intended to produce racialized political subjects managed by carefully controlled and enabled African political leaders. They also sought to produce racialized economic subjects who would behave in economically rational ways both on and off the reserves. The aim was “a constant flow to and from the villages so that . . . the ideology of African tribal life is not overthrown but is enabled to improve itself through its contact with European ideas” (Logan 1939, 58). Rationality here was for entrepreneurially minded Africans to cycle through alternately taking up wage labor in European employment and then investing their earnings in their own smallholdings. In a national scheme, an optimized flow of people, ideas, and capital among the centers of industrial production (predominantly the Copperbelt) and rural reserves leading to wider development was planned.

Rational economic behaviors had been promoted since the beginning of British intervention in Northern Rhodesia. The lure of luxuries and their associated social status was a key incentive for behaviors from the beginning of the BSAC presence in Northern Rhodesia. The original treaties signed in the early 1890s were exchanged for gifts of cloth and other luxuries (Gann 1969). In introducing a cash economy, the British held up as an ideal the right of the individual for self-advancement through industry (NAZ KSN 1/3/1/3, minutes of Native Indaba held at Ndola Boma 6 July 1928). Colonial officials were not alone in stimulating this new rationality of progress and self-improvement: Missionaries, too, played an important role. One group set up a chain of trading stations—the African Lakes Company—before any colonial officials had arrived in the region with the stated aim of encouraging Africans away from the slave and ivory trades (Grotpeiter, Siegel, and Pletcher 1998). Missionaries were also the primary means of education in Northern Rhodesia for decades (Logan 1939). Across the continent, they held up the potential benefits of progress under capitalism and deliberately set about encouraging more rational and civilized practices among their local populations (Comaroff 1998). Of Northern Rhodesia, Fields (1982) described

Mission Christianity, by deliberate plan, corroded African village life. Its Gospel included such tangibles as Lancashire cotton, cash crops, red-brick houses, Western medicine, tombstones, books, and money. The intangibles pertained not only to Christianity’s transcendent God, but also to individualism, formal schooling, the nuclear family, middle-class values and virtues, skilled trades, and ambition. (96)

The relations of the market were themselves a dispersed disciplinary mechanism for producing individualized modern entrepreneurial economic subjects, a dispositif that realigned the relationship between men and things and reshaped the conditions of life in Northern Rhodesia serving “double duty as a vehicle of extraction and a vehicle for imparting . . . habits” (Li 2007, 20). Capitalism, as a dispersed organization of relations of power, became increasingly pervasive and created a series of objective demands and immanent imperatives that called for specific responses: a new mode of social regulation and rationality that necessitated new forms of behavior; new entrepreneurial habits of industry if one is to survive, succeed, or get ahead (Mitchell 1990; Walker et al. 2008). New ways of gaining influence were opened up, and “new order[s] of social power” came into being (Scott 1995, 210). Those willing to sell their labor for cash could quickly find themselves in the possession of assets that surpassed those of their tribal leaders (NAZ KSN 1/3/1/3, minutes of Native Indaba held at Mkushi Boma 9 June 1928; minutes of Native Indaba held at Ndola Boma 6 July 1928). Africans proved themselves exemplary entrepreneurs, across the territory finding niches in the colonial economy in which to carve out a living, particularly as the copper boom began. The success of the fishing industry supplying the Copperbelt led to there being more than 200 bicycles on Chilubi island in the Bangweulu swamp by 1931, with African-owned village stores opening across the territory in the same decade (Seleti 1992; H. L. Moore and Vaughan 1994). It is telling that colonial authorities felt the need repeatedly to intervene to curtail African economic behavior, from banning African stores in towns in 1909 to acting against those Africans who were successful enough to set up chains of stores (NA CO 795/68/8; Seleti
1992).18 As time progressed, capitalist relations became more entrenched and beyond the control of the colonial state.

As had the BSAC, the Colonial Office sat astride a contradiction. Capitalist relations often engendered behaviors the administrators sought, but they could undermine the social stability equally desired. Colonial officials looked on aghast as the rise of economic individualism they had labored to engender actively undermined the political structures they sought to bolster. In 1929 the Secretary for Native Affairs described how “As natives become more travelled and more enlightened they naturally tend to become more independent and detribalised . . . the attitude of trustful deference to Chiefs and Elders which was formerly so noticeable is declining” (NA CO 799/5, 5).

Political stability was understood to rely on social cohesion, tradition, and respect for African leaders. The relations of market exchange punished and rewarded individuals, undermining previous institutions of economic and labor exchange. Where economic activity previously existed within complex moral economies often organized on a village level with tributes paid to other groups and leaders collectively, taxation and wages singled out individuals and households (Meebelo 1971; Berman and Lonsdale 1992). They opened up the possibility for rapid social advancement outside of the domain of established political structures. Combined with population outfluxes from the Native reserves, this led to increasingly stable urban populations gathering on the Copperbelt and detribalization as larger groups of Africans saw themselves as outside of the domain of Native authorities.19 Although a ready supply of free laborers on their doorsteps—termed labor stabilization—was useful for the mines, it was undesirable for the colonial authorities. The political instability and numerous social ills associated with large groups of unemployed young men made the colonial authorities deeply uneasy (NA CO 799/12; NAZ SEC 1/1296). The colonial authorities had attempted to achieve an optimal flow of economically rational people to and from the mines but based in politically stable reserves. Instead, what they produced was a “disturbing mobility” of Africans as the reserves saw an outflux of people and populations shifted to, and between, urban areas (Ferguson 1999, 39).

Through progressively alienating Africans from their environment and encouraging them to become individualistic economic actors, the unity and cohesion required for political stability was undermined. The colonial authorities then sought to keep Africans in one of two systems of political control: Native authorities or European employment. The optimized flow of people from reserves to the mines and back again was a pipe dream. Rural political stability was created but at the cost of famine and social upheavals that found expression in sporadic violent riots on the Copperbelt (Gann 1969). As economic depression struck in the early 1930s, conditions on the Native reserves only further declined. No sooner had the reserves been established than their development budgets were slashed as government revenue collapsed. The reserves were, by dint of distance to markets, disease, and population density, condemned to grinding rural poverty and depopulation. A decade after the establishment of the Native authorities took place, new structures of political engagement sought to lance the boil of political tension growing on the railway and Copperbelt in a cycle that continued until (and arguably beyond) independence (Hall 1965). The increasing intensification of capitalist relations in the coming decades met with resistance, undermining political stability and requiring the formation of new political structures and practices for engaging and containing the African populace (Frederiksen 2010). The pattern produced, then, was one that oscillated between crises and new rounds of political engagement.

Space, Discourse, and the Management of Difference

In this section I wish to return to the opening contention: Colonial rule was fundamentally an exercise in the management of particularly stark contradiction and difference.20 Three aspects of this stand out in this case: the importance of understanding complexes of power spatially; the discursive, performative dimensions of colonial power; and the management of contradictions and difference.

Fundamentally, the Colonial Office introduced a spatial reorganization of power in Northern Rhodesia and the failures and successes of colonial power here can be understood through an attention to its spatiality.21 The different modalities of power that sustain subject formation are spatially uneven in their reach, with some more reliant on proximity than others (Allen 2003). The geographical dispersion of Africans ensured that techniques of power that relied on proximity—such as resource-consuming military force and coercion—were only of limited value in maintaining control. Low population densities and a recalcitrant physical geography
shaped the political formations that could and would work and part of the solution in Northern Rhodesia was to create pockets of increased population density both in the BSAC and Colonial Office period. It was only when the political landscape was reorganized through revitalized Native authorities on defined Native reserves that colonial authority was able to gain greater traction in rural Northern Rhodesia. These political units, although effectively cut off from urban agricultural markets, were smaller and more fully engaged by empowered traditional leaders who maintained political stability in rural areas as much for their own benefit as that of the colonial authorities. Conversely, those modalities of power that traverse space most easily but are also based more on individual choice were most far-reaching. Where prevention, obstruction, and extraction did not directly yield the desired results, education, encouragement, and the pull of the benefits of wage labor helped provide incentives in which economically rational Africans were rewarded. This changing focus of rule to the conduct of conduct helped to produce the economically rational subject that both the mining companies and the colonial authorities desired. The result, however, was an uneven terrain of colonial power in Northern Rhodesia. As Agrawal (2005) reminded us, subject formation is a fundamentally indeterminate process with unpredictable outcomes, as the colonial authorities discovered to their cost when mobile entrepreneurial Africans began settling in large numbers on the Copperbelt outside of the territorially bounded rural system of Native authorities and challenging the structures of colonial rule.

Discursive and performative strategies of rule were central to the shifting complex of coercive and disciplinary powers of Colonial Office rule. The discursive apparatus of colonial capitalism was wrapped in a paternalist ideology of improvement (Ranger 1980; Robinson 1990). The British colonial authorities and their African subjects were equally keenly aware that the exercise of authority was in no small part a performance. From governors insisting on appearing in full dress uniform to address African leaders to the handing out of tiered staves, the performance of rule was understood to be a core part of giving it legitimacy and easing the exercise of power. That this was riddled with contradiction and sometimes highlighted its injustices seems to only have been a secondary concern of colonial authorities. As with the BSAC’s reliance on coercion, the discursive effort by the Colonial Office to produce new forms of political and economic subjectivity undermined the foundations of colonial rule. Colonial Office rule was predicated on a paternalist claim to improvement; in contemporary terms, Native authorities and Native reserves were development projects and these ideas of development could “be turned around from a structure of depoliticization into a claim for entitlements” (Stoler and Cooper 1997, 35). If the state gains legitimacy through a development project, as the Colonial Office sought to do, then it, too, is constrained by these processes. To be avowedly unsuccessful by your own criteria opens tensions, ruptures in the project of colonial authority (Li 1999). The Colonial Office might have changed the conduct of conduct in Northern Rhodesia to produce new forms of subjectivity, but in so doing they established ideals against which their own performance, and those of African elites, could legitimately be judged; they changed their own conduct and opened new points for popular leverage and challenge. On a fundamental level, governments, as much as their populations, have defined roles in and can be constrained by governmental ideologies of betterment. The ideological fabric of rule can only be stretched so far.

Techniques of colonial power then, flourished or faltered by their ability to manage contradiction and difference and were themselves contradictory. The production and maintenance of racial difference was a central preoccupation for colonial administrations, and without this difference their raison d’être was exposed as a fallacy (Stoler and Cooper 1997; Comaroff 1998). The techniques of power that became the hallmark of British colonial presence across the continent all effectively, or at least more effectively than the tried alternatives, served the production of difference and management of diversity.22 Three examples of this have been examined: indirect rule, the Native courts, and dispersed, enabling forms of power. First, by devolving power to multiple leaders, indirect rule enabled the management of diversity. The different groups occupying Northern Rhodesia when the British arrived were characterized by their diversity in traditions, languages, and political structures. Devolution, although not rendering these differences moot, significantly reduced the friction this produced for the exercise of rule. Second, the Native courts system, as Mamdani (1996) cogently argued, served to create a bifurcated state with a racially divided legal system. Africans became enmeshed in a particular form of legalistic political control apportioned along racial lines. The universalizing language of law gave remarkable coherence to state action, conveyed legitimacy, and at the same time contained a diversity of practice within a kaleidoscope of customary laws. Third, the shift from a reliance on coercion to
dispersed mechanisms of power enabled colonial power to better traverse distance and work more thoroughly through existing social relations. These dispersed techniques of power, like the devolved Native authorities, managed the diversity of colonized societies more effectively. Working along the grain of individuals’ desires and intentions through education and techniques of surveillance, a new form of “intimate government” was introduced, “dispersing rule, scattering involvement in government more widely, and encouraging careful reckoning” of new economic, legal, and political logics (Agrawal 2005, 178). Each of these techniques, although clearly contradictory in itself, was more efficient and effective than a reliance on coercion and bribery, produced less visible resistance and helped resolve, for a while, some of the central contradictions of stabilizing dispossession.

Conclusion: Governmentality and the Contradictions of Colonial Power in Sub-Saharan Africa

In Northern Rhodesia, the Native reserves and authorities proved, as part of a diversified portfolio of techniques of power, to be highly effective at managing dispossession. As the production of a stable flow of labor was central to the success of capitalist enterprise in colonial Zambia, the BSAC worked hard to produce a scarcity that Africans could only fill through wage labor. Taxation, bribery, and violence proved clumsy tools for producing the required flow of labor and destabilized rule. The Colonial Office’s recognition and systematization of African political structures, combined with a shift to multiple, dispersed techniques of power, proved key in stabilizing alien rule. The technologies of the Native authorities and Native reserves sought to produce rational economic subjects, systematize and stabilize rural political and social structures, and align these structures to enable rule and incorporate Africans further into these systems of rule. The conditions of life in Northern Rhodesia were systematically reworked with disastrous consequences for African well-being. Although not always effective in achieving their aims, cumulatively these efforts stabilized and entrenched, for a few important decades, both imperial rule and relations of capitalism. Dispersed governmental techniques of rule enabled a fundamentally extractive political economic structure to be embedded in the colonial landscape, but many of the dynamics of colonial rule were both large in impact and unpredictable in nature and thus fundamentally unstable.

Foucault’s conceptions of governmentality are useful here. By broadening the lens of power beyond both the state and coercion, we can examine subject formation and consider the wider dispositifs reshaping colonial societies both enabling as well as constraining certain practices, attitudes, and behaviors. Many analyses of colonial rule in sub-Saharan Africa have focused on the state and traditional political structures as the actors of colonial power and on African subjects as constrained ethnic, racial, and political subjects (e.g., Mamdani 1996). A central drive of colonial power both in and beyond the state was to produce economic subjects who were encouraged to adopt new habits, practices, and dispositions, implicating them within the system that engineered their initial dispossession. The techniques of power used were not exclusively those of domination and coercion with a dash of bribery; they fundamentally relied on subtle, dispersed techniques of enabling and encouraging that were often subject to negotiation by African subjects. My argument here is not that disciplinary and other forms of power entirely replaced coercion.23 Coercion was fundamental to colonial rule, and the specter of violence hovered over almost all of its expressions, but the utility of force was limited. As the BSAC experience demonstrates, near-exclusive reliance on violence as a technique of power failed to achieve the desired results. Governmentalizing techniques of late colonial rule were better suited to reconcile the contradictions of rule, in particular to reconcile the consequences of dispossession with the requirements of political stability, than previous modes of rule.

The aim here is not to show how neat a fit Northern Rhodesia is to Foucault’s genealogy of governmentality. The aim has been to use Foucault’s insights about the ways in which state power was exercised to advance our understanding of colonial rule and then extend this by disentangling the effectiveness of different techniques of power. It seems natural that governmentality applied in colonial Africa should not be a direct replica of governmentality applied in European nation states. The heavy cloth of Foucault’s encompassing European governmental state fits only loosely on the thinly resourced state apparatus in Africa. Its targets and forms of knowledge were different; its geographical, social, and historical context different; and its means and resources different (Vaughan 1991). Here, then, sensitivity to the spatiality of different forms of colonial power is useful. With much of sub-Saharan Africa sparsely populated,
the thinly resourced colonial state and its colonial enforcers could not expect to enwrap its subjects entirely. Heterogeneous forms of power, with distinct spatialities, were necessary to enable economic activity, particularly extractive economic activity—the foundations of the colonial encounter throughout much of sub-Saharan Africa. Similar experiences of limited impact through coercion compared with more widespread and lasting change through new forms of economic subjectivity can be seen across the continent (Morrison 1976; Berman and Lonsdale 1992; Cooper 1994). Further, the discursive apparatus of colonial power was key in legitimating its actions but the trusteeship of the European governmental state produced unexpected outcomes in the African context: Once the genie of developmental paternalism was out of the bottle there was no obvious way to put it back, and colonial rulers and subjects both had to live with and adapt to the consequences. Finally, I have sought to show how colonial governmentality was fundamentally a project of managing contradiction and difference and those techniques of power that best managed and worked with this produced the most stability of rule. In this seeking and balancing of trade-offs the liberal governmentality of the colonial periphery matched that of the metropolitan core, but the contradictions it sought to straddle were arguably more profound (Walters 2012). In all of its expressions, colonial rule was at once precarious and stable due to the complex interplay between the unpredictability of subject formation and the effects of different techniques of rule within a fundamentally destabilizing structural project of transforming colonial societies. This wider political economy of the colonial enterprise shaped both rulers and subjects, enabling and constraining them in specific ways and framing the conditions of possibility of governance. Neither authorizing the Natives nor any other techniques of power ever proved able to overcome the contradictions of British colonial rule in the long term.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Gavin Bridge, Noel Castree, Scott Prudham, Matt Himley, Leah Horowitz, Dan Brockington, and Phil Woodhouse for their helpful and insightful comments on the earlier versions of this article and ten anonymous reviewers for their feedback and comments on later drafts. Graham Bowden of the Cartographic Unit at the School of Environment and Development, University of Manchester, created the modern, clear, and attractive map included in this article.

Funding

The research presented and preparation of this article was generously supported by a Marie Curie International Reintegration Grant from the European Commission awarded to Dr. Gavin Bridge, a Government of Canada Commonwealth Postdoctoral Research Fellowship, and a British Academy Postdoctoral Fellowship.

Notes

1. Burdened with expectations of fiscal self-sufficiency, the colonial state’s success depended largely on revenues from extractive commercial enterprises (Berman and Lonsdale 1992).
2. The colonial name for Zambia.
3. This article draws on research conducted at the British National Archives (Kew), Rhodes House (Oxford), the Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Materials (London), London School of Economics, the National Archives of Zambia (Lusaka), and the archives of Zambia Consolidate Copper Mines—Investment Holdings (Ndola) between 2007 and 2009 and in the summer of 2012.
4. This was also a transformative decade for the mining industry in Northern Rhodesia (Frederiksen 2013).
5. Vaughan’s work should be partially excepted from this critique, as it is very sensitive to the limitations of colonial power.
6. There are undoubtedly further studies of colonial biopolitics that could be mentioned here, but to my knowledge they all share the weaknesses described in the literature here—an emphasis on the coercive to the exclusion of other forms of power and little interest in the forms of economic subjectivity that I would argue were central (along with political and racial forms of subjectivity) to the colonial enterprise (Legg 2007).
7. This approach is one endorsed by many leading thinkers in governmentality studies—that governmentality was never a complete theory and should be treated as a toolkit lest it become “dogma or a mere social science methodology” (Dean 2010, 2; see also Vaughan 1991; Redfield 2005; Walters 2012). For comprehensive reviews of Foucault’s thoughts on governmentality, see recent books by Walters (2012) and Dean (2010). For recent reviews of work in geography on ideas of biopolitics (with much overlap with ideas of governmentality), see Rutherford and Rutherford (2013a, 2013b) and the collection by Crampton and Elden (2007).
8. More accurately, conduire des conduites (see Crampton 2007).
9. For example, some Bemba groups maintained an effective trade in salt, enabling them to pay their taxes without working for Europeans (Luchembe 1992).
10. Government office.
11. This is not to say that the policy was implemented in the same way with the same intentions across time and space; even within the Northern Rhodesian colonial administration, there were conflicting wishes and designs for the policy (Datta 1976; Mantena 2010).
12. A range of political groupings were marginalized in this rationalization, including “age groups, clans, women’s groups, . . . [and] religious groups” (Mamdani 2005, 6).
13. This exact complaint was registered in 1932 but dismissed by the colonial authorities (NA, Departmental Reports 1932, NA)
14. The National Archives of Zambia and the ZCCMIH Archives have suffered losses and some sources used by earlier scholars no longer exist. In the absence of unmediated African voices, three approaches are taken—an emphasis on sources that use oral history (Meebelo 1971; Macpherson 1981; Chipungu 1992b), an emphasis on sources that include African voices (e.g., meeting minutes and testimony to inquiries), and an emphasis on contemporary colonial sources that actively sought to represent African interests (e.g., missionaries).
15. Dog and gun licenses were most bitterly resisted, with chiefs such as Uwenuka being reprimanded for their “poor” efforts at collecting this tax by the Mazabuka District Officer (Chipungu 1992a, 57).
16. African elites contested impositions that affected their own scope for rule more heatedly than they did those that affected their populace (NAZ ZA 1/9/59/1/2).
17. Further delegation of powers to the Native authorities followed in the coming decades, including the formation of Native treasuries (NA CO 799/15).
18. By the 1940s and 1950s, some Africans, such as Luka Bomba, had accumulated sufficient capital to own fleets of buses and trucks (Seleti 1992).
19. The patterns of migration and growth of urban populations around the mines is a much-studied facet of Copperbelt history (e.g., Ferguson 1999).
20. Although, as Walters (2012) contended, “trade offs are an intrinsic feature . . . of liberal governmentality” (35), I would argue that the challenges of managing these were particularly acute in colonial governance with its limited resources and population resistant to alien rule (Foucault 2008).
21. I deal with this argument at greater length in Frederiksen (2010).
22. Here I am interested in the techniques used for managing diversity. An exploration of the philosophical tensions between differentiation and the universalism of liberalism in nineteenth-century colonialism can be found in Helliwell and Hindess (2002) and Hindess (2001).
23. Instead I take Gidwani’s (2001) argument that coercive practices, or the threat of them, play an important role in sustaining disciplinary power.

References

Agrawal, A. 2005. Environmentality: Technologies of government and the making of subjects. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Allen, J. 2003. Lost geographies of power. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Berman, B., and J. Lonsdale. 1992. Unhappy valley: Conflict in Kenya & Africa. Book One. State and class. London: James Currey.

Berry, S. 1992. Hegemony on a shoestring: Indirect rule and access to agricultural land. Africa: Journal of the International African Institute 62:327–55.

Bonneuil, C. 2000. Development as experiment: Science and state building in late colonial and postcolonial Africa, 1930–1970. Osiris 15:258–81.

Chanock, M. 1985. Law, custom, and social order: The colonial experience in Malawi and Zambia. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Chipungu, S. N. 1992a. African leadership under indirect rule in colonial Zambia. In Guardians in their time: Experiences of Zambians under colonial rule, 1890–1964, ed. S. N. Chipungu, 50–73. London: Macmillan.

———. 1992b. Guardians in their time: Experiences of Zambians under colonial rule, 1890–1964. London: Macmillan.

Clapham, C. 2001. Rethinking African states. African Security Review 10:6–16.

Comaroff, J. L. 1998. Reflections on the colonial state, in South Africa and elsewhere: Factions, fragments, facts and fictions. Social Identities 4:321–61.

Cooper, F. 1994. Conflict and connection: Rethinking colonial African history. The American Historical Review 99:1516–45.

Crampton, J. W. 2007. Key term: Conduct of conduct. Foucault Blog.

Crampton, J. W., and S. Elden. 2007. Space, knowledge and power: Foucault and geography. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.

Crisp, J. 1984. Mineworkers in Ghana: The story of an African working glass. Ghanaian miners’ struggles, 1870–1980. London: Zed.

Datta, K. 1976. The policy of indirect rule in Northern Rhodesia (Zambia) 1924–53. PhD thesis, School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, London, UK.

Dean, M. 2010. Governmentality: Power and rule in modern society. London: Sage.

Duncan, J. S. 2007. In the shadows of the tropics: Climate, race and biopower in nineteenth century Ceylon. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.

Ferguson, J. 1999. Expectations of modernity: Myths and meanings of urban life on the Zambian Copperbelt. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Fields, K. E. 1982. Charismatic religion as popular protest: The ordinary and the extraordinary in social movements. Theory and Society 11:321–61.

Foucault, M. 1991a. Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.

———. 1991b. Governmentality. In The Foucault effect: Studies in governmentality. With two lectures by and an interview with Michel Foucault, ed. G. Burchell, C. Gordon, and P. Miller, 87–104. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

———. 2003. Society must be defended: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1975–76. London: Allen Lane, Penguin.

———. 2007. The meshes of power. In Space, knowledge and power: Foucault and geography, ed. J. W. Crampton and S. Elden, 153–62. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
———. 2008. The birth of biopolitics lectures at the Collège de France, 1978–79. London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Frederiksen, T. 2010. Unearthing rule—Mining, power and the political ecology of extraction in colonial Zambia. PhD thesis, School of Environment and Development, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

———. 2013. Seeing the Copperbelt: Science, mining and colonial power in Northern Rhodesia. Geoforum 44:271–81.

Gann, L. H. 1969. A history of Northern Rhodesia: Early days to 1953. New York: Humanities Press.

Gidwani, V. 2001. The cultural logic of work: Explaining labour deployment and piece-rate contracts in Matar Taluka, Gujarat—Parts 1 and 2. Journal of Development Studies 38:57–108.

Glassman, J. 2006. Primitive accumulation, accumulation by dispossession, accumulation by “extra-economic” means. Progress in Human Geography 30:608–25.

Gordon, D. 2001. Owners of the land and Lunda Lords: Colonial chiefs in the borderlands of Northern Rhodesia and the Belgian Congo. International Journal of African Historical Studies 34:315–38.

Grottoptier, J. J., B. V. Siegel, and J. Pletcher. 1998. Historical dictionary of Zambia. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow.

Hailey, L. 1938. An African survey: A study of problems arising in Africa south of the Sahara. London: Oxford University Press.

Hall, R. S. 1965. Zambia. London: Pall Mall Press.

Hannah, M. G. 2000. Governmentality and the mastery of territory in nineteenth-century America. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Harris, C. 2002. Making native space: Colonialism, resistance and reserves in British Columbia. Vancouver, BC, Canada: University of British Columbia Press.

———. 2004. How did colonialism dispossess? Comments from an edge of empire. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94:165–82.

Harvey, D. 2003. The new imperialism. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Helliwell, C., and B. Hindess. 2002. The empire of uniformity and the government of subject peoples. Cultural Values 6:139–52.

Henderson, I. 1975. Labour and politics in Northern Rhodesia, 1900–1953: A study in the limits to colonial power. Edinburgh, UK: University of Edinburgh.

Hindess, B. 2001. The liberal government of unfreedom. Alternatives: Global, Local, Political 26:93–111.

Isaacman, A., and B. Isaacman. 1977. Resistance and collaboration in southern and central Africa, c. 1850–1920. The International Journal of African Historical Studies 10:31–62.

Kalusa, W. T. 2011. Death, Christianity and African miners: Contesting indirect rule on the Zambian copperbelt. International Journal of African Historical Studies 44:89–112.

Kirk-Greene, A. H. M. 1980. The thin white line: The size of the British colonial service in Africa. African Affairs 79:25–44.

Legg, S. 2007. Spaces of colonialism: Delhi’s urban governments. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Li, T. M. 1999. Compromising power: Development, culture, and rule in Indonesia. Cultural Anthropology 14:295–322.

———. 2007. The will to improve: Governmentality, development, and the practice of politics. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Logan, W. M. 1939. Native administration in Northern Rhodesia. Race Relations 6:50–59.

Luchembe, C. 1992. Ethnic stereotypes, violence and labour in early colonial Zambia, 1889–1924. In Guardians in their time: Experiences of Zambians under colonial rule, 1890–1964, ed. S. N. Chipungu, 30–49. London: Macmillan.

Lugard, F. J. D. 1965. The dual mandate in British tropical Africa. London: Cass.

Macpherson, F. 1981. Anatomy of a conquest: The British occupation of Zambia, 1884–1924. Harlow, UK: Longman.

Mamdani, M. 1996. Citizen and subject: Contemporary Africa and the legacy of late colonialism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

———. 2005. Political identity, citizenship and ethnicity in post-colonial Africa. Paper presented at the New Frontiers of Social Policy: Development in a Globalizing World Conference, Arusha, Tanzania.

Mantena, K. 2010. Alibis of empire: Henry Maine and the ends of liberal imperialism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Marx, K. 1990. Capital: A critique of political economy. Vol. 1. London: Penguin.

Meebelo, H. S. 1971. Reaction to colonialism: A prelude to the politics of independence in Northern Zambia 1893–1939. Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press.

Mitchell, T. 1990. Everyday metaphors of power. Theory and Society 19:545–77.

Moore, H. L., and M. Vaughan. 1994. Cutting down trees: Gender, nutrition, and agricultural change in the Northern Province of Zambia, 1890–1990. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Moore, S. F. 1992. Treating law as knowledge: Telling colonial officers what to say to Africans about running “their own” native courts. Law & Society Review 26:11–46.

Morrison, J. 1976. Jos Plateau societies: Internal change and external influence. Idaban, Nigeria: University of Idaban.

Musambachime, M. C. 1992. Colonialism and the environment in Zambia, 1890–1964. In Guardians in their time: Experiences of Zambians under colonial rule, 1890–1964, ed. S. N. Chipungu, 8–29. London: Macmillan.

Parpart, J. L. 1983. Labor and capital on the African Copperbelt. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Perelman, M. 2001. The secret history of primitive accumulation and classical political economy. The Commoner 2:1–22.

Perrings, C. 1979. Black mineworkers in central Africa: Industrial strategies and the evolution of an African proletariat in the copperbelt, 1911–41. London: Heinemann.

Ranger, T. 1969. African reactions to the imposition of colonial rule in East and Central Africa. In Colonialism in Africa: Vol. 1. The history and politics of colonialism 1870–1914, ed. L. H. Gann and P. Duignan, 293–324. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1980. Making Northern Rhodesia imperial: Variations on a royal theme, 1924–1938. African Affairs 79:349–73.
Redfield, P. 2005. Foucault in the tropics: Displacing the panopticon. In Anthropologies of modernity: Foucault, governmentality, and life politics, ed. J. X. Inda, 288. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.

Robinson, J. 1990. A perfect system of control? State power and native locations in South-Africa. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 8:135–62.

Rotberg, R. I. 1965. The rise of nationalism in Central Africa: The making of Malawi and Zambia, 1873–1964. London: Oxford University Press.

Rutherford, P., and S. Rutherford. 2013a. The confusions and exuberances of biopolitics. Geography Compass 7: 412–22.

———. 2013b. Geography and biopolitics. Geography Compass 7:423–34.

Said, E. W. 1978. Orientalism. London and New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Scott, D. 1995. Colonial governmentality. Social Text 43:191–220.

Seleti, Y. N. 1992. Entrepreneurship in colonial Zambia. In Guardians in their time: Experiences of Zambians under colonial rule, 1890–1964, ed. S. N. Chipungu, 147–79. London: Macmillan.

Siegel, B. 1988. Bomas, missions, and mines; The making of centers on the Zambian Copperbelt. African Studies Review 31:61–84.

———. 1989. The “wild” and “lazy” Lamba: Ethnic stereotypes on the central African Copperbelt. In The creation of tribalism in southern Africa, ed. L. Vail, 350–72. London: James Currey.

Stephenson, J. E. 1937. Chirapula’s tale; A bye-way in African history. London: Geoffrey Bles.

Stoler, A. L. 1995. Race and the education of desire: Foucault’s history of sexuality and the colonial order of things. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Stoler, A. L., and F. Cooper. 1997. Between metropole and colony: Rethinking a research agenda. In Tensions of empire: Colonial cultures in a bourgeois world, ed. F. Cooper and A. L. Stoler, xii. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Thomson, H. C. 1898. Rhodesia and its government. London: Smith, Elder.

Vail, L. 1977. Ecology and history: The example of eastern Zambia. Journal of Southern African Studies 3:129–55.

Van Onselen, C. 1976. Chibaro: African mine labour in Southern Rhodesia, 1900–1933. London: Pluto Press.

Vaughan, M. 1991. Curing their ills: Colonial power and African illness. Cambridge, UK: Polity.

Walker, M., S. M. Roberts, J. P. Jones III, and O. Fröhling. 2008. Neoliberal development through technical assistance: Constructing communities of entrepreneurial subjects in Oaxaca, Mexico. Geoforum 39:527–42.

Walters, W. 2012. Governmentality: Critical encounters. London and New York: Routledge.

Yeoh, B. S. A. 1996. Contesting space: Power relations and the urban built environment in colonial Singapore. Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: Oxford University Press.

Archival Sources
National Archives, Kew (NA). CO 743/3 Northern Rhodesia proclamations 1927–1929.
———. CO 795/17/1 Native Reserves Commission Report Volume 1 1926.
———. CO 795/17/2 Native Reserves Commission Report Volume 2 1926.
———. CO 795/28/2 Crown Lands and Native Reserves, Regulations 1929–1930.
———. CO 795/32/11 Colonial Development Fund, Agricultural development on Native Reserves application 1929.
———. CO 795/68/8 Native affairs, Conference at Victoria Falls 1934.
———. CO 799/2 Northern Rhodesia Annual Departmental Reports 1925–1926.
53. Native Affairs p.5 (508), Departmental Reports 1929, NA
———. CO 799/5 Northern Rhodesia Annual Departmental Reports 1929.
———. CO 799/7 Northern Rhodesia Annual Departmental Reports 1930.
———. CO 799/9 Northern Rhodesia Annual Departmental Reports 1931.
———. CO 799/11 Northern Rhodesia Annual Departmental Reports 1932.
———. CO 799/12 Northern Rhodesia Annual Departmental Reports 1933.
———. CO 799/15 Northern Rhodesia Annual Departmental Reports 1936.
———. CO 879/113 Correspondence 1913.
———. FO 881/7046 AFRICA: Memo. Northern Rhodesia. Administration (Mr. H. Farnall) 1898.
National Archives of Zambia, Lusaka (NAZ). KSN 1/3/1/3 Ndola Correspondence, Native Affairs general 1926–1928.
———. NE A1/4/3/5 Mining claims and prospects north of the Zambezi 1902–1908.
———. SEC 1/1296 Administration of native labour 1931–1936.
———. SEC 2/378 Native Courts Powers and Organisation 1929–1936.
———. ZA 1/9/18/52 Tribal Areas, Effect of Exodus of Men to Work 1931.
———. ZA 1/9/59/1/1 Indabas with His Excellency The Governor 1928–1931.
———. ZA 1/9/59/1/2 Indabas with His Excellency The Governor 1925–1933.
———. ZA 1/9/59/2 Indabas with Secretary for Native Affairs 1924–1933.
Rhodes House, Oxford (RH). Mss Afr. S.2111 Hudson Interview with Kirk-Greene 1961.