The Professional Geographer
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

The Growth of Ranchettes in La Plata County, Colorado, 1988-2008
John Harner a & Bradley Benz a
a University of Colorado , Colorado Springs
Published online: 29 May 2012.

To cite this article: John Harner & Bradley Benz (2013) The Growth of Ranchettes in La Plata County, Colorado, 1988-2008, The Professional Geographer, 65:2, 329-344, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2012.681584

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1080/00330124.2012.681584

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions
The Growth of Ranchettes in La Plata County, Colorado, 1988–2008*

John Harner and Bradley Benz
University of Colorado, Colorado Springs

Ranchettes are low-density, rural parcels typically from thirty-five to seventy acres that have proliferated across the Rocky Mountain West. They consume large amounts of land and increase fragmentation, leading to potentially negative impacts on the ecology and cultural identity of local places. Although many anecdotal accounts decry the rise in ranchettes, few studies measure their prevalence or spatial patterns. We use archival and contemporary land ownership data to measure ranchette development in La Plata County, Colorado, an amenity-rich county popular for recreation, retirement, and ranchettes. Results show continual yet slowing growth across the decades with patterns of growth spreading in a contagious effect around initial nodes of development. Key Words: exurbia, land use, natural amenities, New West, ranchettes.

小型牧场是低密度的，通常包括三十五到七十亩的农村地块，它们正在跨洛基山以西的地方增生。它们消耗大量的土地并使碎片地块增加，导致对局部地方的生态和文化认同的潜在的负面影响。虽然许多个案研究报告批评小型牧场的崛起，很少有研究测量其普遍性或空间格局。我们使用档案和当代的土地所有权数据来检测小型牧场在科罗拉多州拉普拉塔河县的发展，该县是一个市容丰富的，以休闲娱乐，退休，和小型牧场流行而闻名的县。结果表明，在过去几十年，小型牧场有一个持续但是放缓的增长，在发展的初始节点周围呈传染性效应的蔓延式增长模式。关键词：远郊，土地利用，自然设施，新西部，小型牧场。

Los ranchetes son parcelas rurales de baja densidad, con extensiones típicas de entre treinta y cinco y setenta acres, que proliferan a través del oeste de las Montañas Rocallosas. En conjunto afectan a grandes extensiones de tierra e incrementan la fragmentación, lo cual puede conducir a impactos potencialmente negativos sobre la ecología y la identidad cultural de los lugares locales. Aunque numerosos registros anecdóticos censuran la aparición de los ranchetes, muy pocos estudios se ocupan de medir su prevalencia o sus patrones espaciales. Utilizamos datos de archivo e información contemporánea sobre propiedad para medir el desarrollo de los ranchetes en el condado de La Plata, Colorado, un espacio rico en comodidades populares para la recreación, el retiro por jubilación y los ranchetes. Los resultados muestran un crecimiento continuo aunque decreciente durante décadas, con patrones de crecimiento que se extienden con efecto contagioso a partir de nodos iniciales de desarrollo. Palabras clave: trans-suburbano, uso del suelo, comodidades naturales, Nuevo Oeste, ranchetes.

The rapid population growth of the Rocky Mountain West over the past few decades has attracted much attention to land use change and land conservation policies and practices (Wright 1993; Travis 2007). One dominant conceptual framework has been the social and spatial changes associated with the transformation from an extractive economy based on natural resources to a recreational economy based on natural amenities or what is popularly coined the “Old West” versus the “New West” (Riebsame 1997). Scholars and popular media have investigated conflicts that come when a new demographic—one that is often relatively affluent, urban-based, more liberal, and even seasonal—mixes with traditional

*The authors wish to thank the Colorado Department of Local Affairs, Robbie Overfield of the La Plata County Planning Department for his initial reactions and review, Christian Stoddard for his geographic information systems expertise, and Lacey Benz for her patience. We also were helped with suggestions from colleagues David Havlick, Tom Huber, the late Curt Poulton, and three anonymous reviewers. Any errors remain our own.
ranchers, miners, farmers, and rural residents (Starrs 2002; Larsen et al. 2007). Such change has led to growing income inequalities (Shumway and Otterstrom 2001), housing challenges for low- versus high-income residents (Gober, McHugh, and Leclerc 1993), difficulties providing urban services (Coupal and Seidl 2003), differing perceptions about wilderness and conservation (Smith and Krannich 2000), increased threats to housing from wildfires (Theobald and Romme 2007), and other land use conflicts (Jackson and Kuhlklen 2006). One principal concern is with increased land fragmentation that comes from changing patterns of residential development and what this means for the local ecology and place identity.

Concerns about landscape and land use change in Colorado spawn primarily from increased population growth. During the high-growth 1990s there was much preoccupation with urban sprawl. Although that immediate concern has diminished somewhat with the economic downturn in the twenty-first century, an ongoing concern has been sprawl across rural regions, particularly with low-density rural and exurban development. This phenomenon presents a serious impact to the land base (Theobald 2005). Central to land use change has been the proliferation of ranchettes, or rural housing typically occupying a minimum of thirty-five acres per lot (Theobald 2001). These “mini-ranches” are not full-time, functional ranches but rather often are occupied seasonally as second homes or as hobby ranches. The nonprofit group Environment Colorado calls the rural sprawl of ranchettes “the next frontier” in the state’s growth debate: “If Colorado designed a perfect plan to minimize urban sprawl, we would still have this huge looming monster of 35-acre development. It’s the sleeping giant of growth problems in Colorado” (Olinger 2003, A1). Anecdotal case studies in the popular media suggest that ranchettes have spread across the Mountain West quickly during the last two decades (Travis 2007).

In spite of the popular media’s attention to this new form of growth, few studies have clearly delineated the degree to which rural ranchette development is transforming and fragmenting the landscape: “Despite pervasive exurban development in the United States (US) over the last several decades, a lack of relatively precise data has hindered basic research, including classification of the types of emerging exurban settlement patterns” (Clark et al. 2009, 178). The purpose of this study is to begin to address that deficiency. We compile a case study of historical land ownership data at three time intervals across a twenty-year span to measure temporal and spatial change of ranchette distribution in La Plata County, Colorado, a classic amenity-rich county nestled against the San Juan Mountains. This measurement and interpretation of changing land ownership patterns contributes toward understanding and planning for rural settlement in the Rocky Mountain West.

Ranchettes and Rural Development in the Rocky Mountain West

After a century of rural to urban migration, a major settlement trend in the United States in the latter part of the twentieth century was unprecedented migration from the city to the country, or counterurbanization (Johnson and Beale 1995; Manson and Groop 2000). Between 1990 and 2000, exurban populations grew more than twice as fast as nearby metropolitan areas (Berube et al. 2006). This trend was driven in part by growing affluence and structural changes to a postindustrial economy, increasingly footloose industries and occupations, and active retirement lifestyles but also by attraction to natural beauty and outdoor recreational opportunities and amenity-induced migration (Smutny 2002). From the 1960s to the 1990s, counties across the United States with national parks and federally designated wilderness areas grew as much as three times faster than all others (Rudzitis 1996). The U.S. Department of Agriculture developed a Natural Amenity Scale that standardizes the sum of natural amenities in regions across the United States (McGranahan 1999). Between 1970 and 1996, population growth correlated strongly with a higher Natural Amenity Scale score and the Mountain West set itself apart with the highest average scores (McGranahan 1999). In a departure from conventional beliefs that people follow jobs into a new region, Carruthers and Vias (2005) found that people move to amenity-rich areas of the West first and jobs then follow. This implies that quality of life considerations and planning that preserves natural amenities are needed to maintain a sustainable economic model for the region.
Much of the landscape developed in the rural, amenity-rich West has occurred in the form of ranchettes, but exactly what is a ranchette? The diminutive -ette suggests a small ranch. Ranchettes typically occupy parcels too small for viable cattle ranching and predominantly serve as private retreats for the wealthy. Research has found that high incomes contribute to lower density settlement patterns in the exurban West (Carruthers and Vias 2005). Theobald (2001) stated that ranchettes typically have one housing unit per thirty-five to forty-five acres, but the lot size can vary greatly, especially as state and local land use ordinances and regulations differ. Whatever those ordinances might be, ranchettes are often just large enough to escape subdivision regulation.

The term ranchette frequently is used interchangeably with exurbia. An exurb is generally thought of as a discrete subdivision located far enough beyond the frontier of suburban development that it will not be engulfed by the expanding city within the foreseeable future (Patel 1980). Exurbs usually are functionally tied to the nearby urban area and remain within its commuting zone (Berube et al. 2006; Clark et al. 2009); Leinwand et al. (2010) found that 80 percent of exurban land use was within twenty-five minutes of a city or town. But whereas exurbs can be any housing at densities from one-acre lots up to small ranches, much ranchette development occurs as dispersed, isolated housing in an otherwise rural landscape. Clark et al. (2009) recognized that amenity-driven development, which largely drives ranchette construction, is not necessarily urban dependent and is likely found outside of urban commuter sheds. Whereas many settlers in exurbia commute to urban areas to work, ranchette owners most likely maintain less frequent urban contacts, using cities mainly for high-order functions such as financial services, sporting or cultural events, and access to airports. Travis (2007) distinguished three types of nonmetropolitan development in the West: exurbs, resort zones, and the gentrified range. This typology helps us understand development types and patterns in the nonurban West, but it still does not neatly encapsulate ranchettes because they can occur in all three of these development types. In general, ranchettes span the exurban–rangeland interface and form a key part of Travis’s exurbs and gentrified range.

A fundamental driver for ranchette size in Colorado was Colorado Senate Bill 35, which took effect 1 September 1972, laid out in Colorado Revised Statute (CRS) 30-28-101(10)(b) (Colorado Committee on Legal Resources 2009). This statute mandates that each county adopt and enforce its own individual codes to regulate the processes of subdividing and developing land. County codes in Colorado vary widely, but they typically include regulation of easements, hazards, legal parcels, open space, natural resources, roadways, storm water management, sewage, trails, water use, and utilities. The key provision to this statute is that not all unincorporated land within each county is affected—parcels of thirty-five acres or more are exempt from regulations that apply to all other housing developments; hence the popularity of parcels that exceed this magic number. An important corollary is that the Colorado Department of Water Resources has a well exemption permit for properties of thirty-five acres or larger, meaning that owners of these parcels are free to drill wells without regulation, even in critical areas with depleting aquifers. Ranchette owners who develop their land will still build water, sewage, utility, and transportation infrastructures to suit their needs, but the code exemption allows them to do so on their own terms and in their own time frame, rather than conforming to county specifications and rules.

Why the Colorado General Assembly set the minimum parcel size to thirty-five acres is not exactly clear. It has been suggested that the thirty-five-acre threshold was imposed to actually discourage dispersed land conversion in more remote rural areas and instead to encourage development to take place around village-like nodes on smaller parcels (Collins and Mika 2002). It is also likely to have been chosen to encourage continued ranching and agricultural use on the Public Lands Survey System quarter-quarter sections, which are about forty acres and often form the boundaries of rural parcels. Thus, the overall intent of the Assembly might have been to keep these larger parcels rural. The limit might have also come from perceptions of the appropriate area needed for effective functioning of water wells and septic systems on each lot (Travis 2007).

Clark et al. (2009) found that factors that contribute to increasing exurbanization also
lead to greater contiguity and concentration of settlement patterns, suggesting that initial isolated and dispersed exurban settlements over time evolve into more contiguous and dense clusters. Weiler and Theobald (2003) also found that contemporary settlement “pioneers” in the rural West lead the way to further growth, because pioneers pay premiums for initial infrastructure costs but followers benefit from marginal reductions in those costs. The subsequent private costs decrease, but the cumulative effect of many private decisions to develop the rural landscape eventually damages the overall public good and social benefits. These findings were further confirmed by Leinwand et al. (2010), who found that exurban residential development between 1995 and 2005 was most likely to occur where road infrastructure already existed.

Whether concentrated in nodes or more widely dispersed, exurbia, and ranchettes in particular, consumes considerable land. In 2000, U.S. exurban development occupied seven times as much land as urban and suburban development, and land consumption outpaced population growth by 25 percent between 1980 and 2000 (Theobald 2005). Furthermore, exurban land use has an ecological impact six times larger than its actual physical footprint (Leinwand et al. 2010). A research project at the Center for the American West projects a near doubling of acres in exurban development (one housing unit per ten to forty acres) in Colorado between 2000 and 2020 (Travis et al. 2005). Residential development in isolated rural regions and at the exurban–wildland interface is particularly dynamic (Theobald 2004). In a case study of the East River Valley in Colorado, a rural mountainous region between Gunnison and Crested Butte, zero ranchettes existed in 1974; 700 acres of ranchettes emerged by 1984; 7,000 in 1994; and within just three more years, ranchettes claimed 27,700 acres, over forty-three square miles (Theobald 1995). As would be expected, private valley lands near ski resorts are prized for ranchettes, as are any parcels that border national forests or are located along streams and rivers (Travis 2007). Residential development is particularly attracted to lands proximate to those administered by the U.S. Forest Service over other public land agencies (Leinwand et al. 2010).

The effect of ranchettes in the Mountain West is high fragmentation of the rural landscape into a mosaic of much smaller parcels than occurs with large functioning ranches. Although fragmentation is not always visually apparent because many ranchette parcels remain undeveloped and leased for grazing (i.e., parcel ownership is not the same as land use), ownership fragmentation creates a diverse mosaic of stewardship ethics with a potentially high impact on the regional ecology (Starrs 2002; Travis 2007).

The changes associated with ranchette development have sparked much criticism as trophy homes fill the landscape. Demand has elevated property values that hinder affordable housing. Teachers, police, and blue-collar workers find it increasingly difficult to live in amenity towns and often are forced to commute from neighboring counties and towns. Providing services to the low-density development is inefficient and costly to county governments, and many paradoxes are created by new residents who simultaneously seek scenic views and protection of the natural amenities yet demand unfettered freedom to build on their own lands and extend utility infrastructure and road networks across the landscape (Smutny 2002; Walker, Marvin, and Fortmann 2003). The changes have left many longtime residents of rural regions, most of whom make a living through agriculture, feeling that both their future and their cultural link to the frontier past are threatened (Clifford 1995; Smith and Krannich 2000; Starrs 2002; Walker, Marvin, and Fortmann 2003).

Such conflicts cannot be resolved easily, certainly not in this study. We merely wish to use empirical data to measure the changing spatial patterns of the ranchette phenomenon. A baseline measure of land use change is one step toward understanding effects on the overall ecology, landscape, and cultural character of a region. Analyzing land ownership patterns and trends is also a necessary precursor toward developing sound policy and management practices.

Agricultural Land Change in Colorado

In Colorado, thirty-five acres is the lower limit for parcels that are exempt from county subdivision regulations, so we use this as the
lower limit of our ranchette definition. We define the upper limit of ranchettes as twice that size, parcels of 69.9 acres or less, so that one ranchette parcel cannot subdivide into two new ranchettes. These parameters apply for Colorado only; other states have statutes that can cause this definition to vary. We recognize that much low-density, exurban development takes place on parcels smaller than thirty-five acres, but we limit our analysis to ranchettes only, not all of exurbia.

Data from the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Census of Agriculture are a first resource to measure land fragmentation in Colorado. Because nearly all ranchettes are created by subdividing rural ranchland, we use data for “Land in Farms” (which includes ranches) from the agricultural census. For comparison purposes, we classify the counties of Colorado into four types: the plains of eastern Colorado, the front range urbanized areas,1 the mountains, and the mix—those counties with mountainous characteristics that also contain wide open vistas, intermontane plateaus and basins, and diverse landforms (Figure 1).

The census data show that the average farm size peaked for all county types except the Plains in the mid-1970s and then declined precipitously (Figure 2). Only in the Plains did this trend not occur, yet even there sizes peaked in the early 1990s and have since declined somewhat. These trends reflect increasing fragmentation and subdivision of large ranching and agricultural parcels with the advent of exurban development, including ranchette and second-home lots. Smaller parcel sizes that remain classified as farms reflect ranchettes, smaller functioning ranches and farms, and land subdivided but not yet developed into residential land uses.

Because the mountain, mix, and front range county types are of most interest for ranchette development, we aggregate those three county types into one category, which we call mountainous, and see that farms between ten and fifty acres (the range that includes most ranchette parcels) outpaced all other size ranges in total numbers and average annual rates of growth post-1974 (Figure 3). Parcels between 50 and 180 acres (a range that also contains our definition of ranchettes) had the second highest numbers, whereas those over 1,000 acres (rural) were in the only category of decline. Parcels of one to ten acres also saw rapid growth. These exurban agricultural parcels could be smaller versions of ranchettes that maintain some grazing and farming or future suburban subdivisions not yet developed.

These changes in agricultural parcels have economic implications. By and large, ranchette parcels are hobby farms and ranches, but
Figure 2  Average farm size by county type, 1920–2007. Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture (1920–2007).

continued agricultural status yields the owners a very large tax break. Land assessed as agriculture is assessed about one tenth the taxes of property categorized as residential.

When the assessed value remains so low yet agricultural production also declines, counties incur increased costs as more services are demanded as revenues simultaneously decrease.

Figure 3  Farm sizes in mountainous counties (front range, mountain, and mix), 1920–2007. Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture (1920–2007).
Figure 4  La Plata County farms between 1–180 acres, 1920–2007, with mountainous county averages for 1–180 acre range shown for comparison. Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture (1920–2007).

Fiscal difficulties result from ranchette growth. There is ample grumbling in the Colorado legislature about wealthy estates with phony agricultural status, yet it remains difficult for assessors to “prove” fraud and enforce code change. Tax breaks for agricultural land began in 1982 and the criteria to apply were relaxed in 1997, but recently stricter criteria to obtain agricultural status were approved in 2011 in an effort to address the problem (Osher 2011).

Case Study: La Plata County

La Plata County, Colorado, population 51,334 in 2010 (U.S. Census Bureau 2011), has experienced steep growth and in-migration during the past few decades. It is home to the city of Durango, an ex-smelter town now replete with a quaint downtown entertainment district, a small college, and the Durango–Silverton tourist steam train. The Animas River runs through town, luring whitewater rafters and fly fishermen, and nearby is a ski resort, a smaller ski hill for locals, hot springs, and Mesa Verde National Park. The county also contains parts of the San Juan and La Plata Mountains (among the most scenic and wild in all of Colorado), the San Juan National Forest, and the Weminuche Wilderness Area (the largest in Colorado). Extensive tribal lands of the Ute Mountain and Southern Utes also contribute to a rural feel with wide open space. Just over 59 percent of the total county land area is federal, state, or local public land (Colorado State University 2010). In short, it has most everything New West settlers look for and has been gentrified and developed at a rapid rate since the 1980s, particularly with parcels of three acres and above (Wright 1993).2 The county estimates that 22 percent of its housing units are seasonally occupied second homes (La Plata County 2011). As large ranches subdivide, the number of agricultural parcels has risen sharply in the past decade, particularly in the ten- to fifty-acre size range (Figure 4) but in both larger and smaller sizes as well.

La Plata County has a land use code that regulates subdivisions and other developments, but converting unincorporated land into a ranchette is largely unconstrained by county governmental oversight. The county can offset losses inherent in low-density residential land
use in part through tax revenue from the extensive natural gas industry operating in the region. Not only do extraction companies fill county coffers and give generously to the community externally of tax revenue but they also provide an understated benefit through development and maintenance of a vast rural road network that reduces county maintenance costs. These roads provide access to potential ranchette parcels and help shape settlement patterns.

The La Plata County Clerk and Recorder’s Office maintains high-quality archival maps with land ownership information for 1988 and 1998. Our data collection took place in 2008, an interval exactly ten years past the last archival map, and data for 2008 were available from online county geographic information system (GIS) layers. These archival data and the thorough GIS database for 2008 land records provided means to map land use change at three ten-year intervals across two decades. In the archives there typically is a map for each township in the county. The large-scale maps show the thirty-six one-square-mile sections, and each section is further subdivided into four quarter sections. La Plata County has a total of sixty-eight townships, 1,827 sections, and 6,552 mapped quarter sections, but excluding public lands leaves 3,541\(^3\) quarter sections with private land that we use for our analysis. For areas with high parcel densities, individual section maps exist with a note on the smaller scale township map to reference these more detailed section maps.

Because there are more than 30,000 parcels in the county, and they continually change with sale and subdivision, we could not map all individual parcels across our three time intervals. Instead, we used a GIS database of quarter-section boundaries as our unit of analysis. Our methodology was to manually identify every ranchette-sized parcel (thirty-five to seventy acres) on the archival maps (parcel acreages are listed on the maps) and assign its acreage to the quarter section it lay within. Any ranchette parcel listed as a mining claim or owned by a government, municipality, or Indian tribe was excluded. Although this measurement aggregates parcel data into larger units, the area of a typical quarter section is only two to four times the area of a typical ranchette, so this method still provides fine spatial detail and, importantly, the unit boundaries remain constant across the three time periods.

Because of the classic geographical problem of mismatched spatial units, aggregating parcel acreages for ranchettes into quarter sections required some approximation and estimation. When a ranchette parcel was split between more than one quarter section, we did not precisely measure the percentage of the parcel in each overlapping quarter section and partition the allocation. Instead, we allocated the ranchette parcel into the quarter section of maximum overlap (analogous to a nearest neighbor resampling method). Occasionally too many ranchette parcels were assigned to one quarter section so that the ranchette acreage exceeded the quarter section total. In that event, the excess acreage above the quarter section total was assigned to the adjacent quarter section with the lowest ranchette acreage. The final step was to calculate percentage ranchette for each county quarter section. The end results account for all ranchette parcels and acreage and fulfill our goal of showing spatial and temporal patterns of change.

One disadvantage in using parcel data as a measure of ranchette development is that perceptions of fragmentation are more sensitive to structural improvements like housing on the landscape rather than simply in land ownership. In the rural Mountain West many rural and ex-rural parcels remain vacant.\(^4\) Some ranchette parcels might never be improved and others might be absorbed into or combined with an adjacent rural parcel.\(^5\) Therefore, our quarter-section maps showing the percentage in ranchettes accurately reflect ownership fragmentation and the resulting high variation in land use and conservation ethics but might overstate the visual impact of fragmentation. Unfortunately, a true measure of fragmentation is nearly impossible—this would require mapping every barrier or ecological break on the landscape, from fences to transmission lines to irrigation ditches and other features. One might find that the physical fragmentation of the landscape is equally as high with few property owners who build such features as with many smaller parcel owners who merely subdivide ownership but modify the landscape minimally.
Table 1  Ranchettes

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Ranchettes</th>
    <th>1988</th>
    <th>1998</th>
    <th>2008</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Total numbers</td>
    <td>1,561</td>
    <td>2,204</td>
    <td>2,610</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Change from previous decade</td>
    <td>NA</td>
    <td>+643</td>
    <td>+406</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Percentage change from previous decade</td>
    <td>NA</td>
    <td>41.2</td>
    <td>18.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Acreage</td>
    <td>64,449</td>
    <td>89,989</td>
    <td>106,445</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Change from previous decade</td>
    <td>NA</td>
    <td>+25,540</td>
    <td>+16,456</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Percentage change from previous decade</td>
    <td>NA</td>
    <td>39.6</td>
    <td>18.2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mean size (acres)</td>
    <td>41.3</td>
    <td>40.8</td>
    <td>40.8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Median size (acres)</td>
    <td>40.0</td>
    <td>39.9</td>
    <td>39.6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Number between 35 and 35.9 acres (%)</td>
    <td>276 (17.7)</td>
    <td>557 (25.3)</td>
    <td>743 (28.5)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Number between 36 and 38.9 acres (%)</td>
    <td>286 (18.3)</td>
    <td>370 (16.8)</td>
    <td>458 (17.5)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Number between 39 and 40.9 acres (%)</td>
    <td>625 (40.0)</td>
    <td>782 (35.5)</td>
    <td>812 (31.1)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Number between 41 and 69.9 acres (%)</td>
    <td>374 (23.9)</td>
    <td>495 (22.5)</td>
    <td>597 (22.9)</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Results

In 2008, there were 2,610 ranchettes in La Plata County, covering over 106,000 acres. Between 1988 and 1998, total numbers of ranchettes increased by 41 percent, and their acreage increased by 40 percent (Table 1). Between 1998 and 2008, both number and acreage increased by another 18 percent, so growth was more rapid in the first decade than in the second. The number of ranchettes increased by 67 percent across the twenty-year span, and acreage increased by 65 percent. Overall between 1988 and 2008 1,638 new ranchettes were created and 589 existing ranchettes were removed (either further subdivided or reincorporated into larger rural parcels), for a net gain of 1,049 ranchettes. Researchers at the Natural Resource Ecology Laboratory at Colorado State University have collected county acreages of all private land, including land protected through land trusts, nongovernmental organizations, or other means—private lands that will never be developed into ranchettes (Colorado State University 2010). According to their data, La Plata County had 443,929 acres of private, nonprotected land in 2008. Using that number, our data show that 24.5 percent of La Plata’s private, nonprotected land was occupied by ranchettes in 2008. Assuming that the amount of private land was relatively stable across our two decades, then ranchettes occupied 14.5 percent of nonprotected private land in 1988 and 20.3 percent by 1998.

There was essentially no change in the median size of private unincorporated ranchettes in La Plata County from 1988 to 2008 (about forty acres) or in the mean size (about forty-one acres; Table 1). Clearly, the majority of ranchette parcels are close to the thirty-five-acre low end of our range, and smaller parcels have increased over time. The data show a shift in the size distribution of ranchette parcels, where the percentage of total ranchettes in the thirty-five- to thirty-six-acre range has increased, whereas percentages in larger acreage ranges have generally decreased, especially for those from thirty-nine to forty-one acres.

Although the median size of ranchettes is stable or slightly decreasing, they still occupy an enormous amount of land. According to the La Plata County 2008 land ownership database, for all private parcels smaller than thirty-five acres (nonranchettes), the median size was 1.28 acres. The ratio of median ranchette parcel to median nonranchette parcel is 39.6/1.28 = 30.9, so ranchettes consume about thirty-one times more land per unit than other residential housing.

In 1988, ranchettes were already widely dispersed and were found in many of the privately owned quarter sections (Figure 5). Just over 37 percent of all county quarter sections with private lands (\( n = 3,541 \)) contained ranchettes in 2008 (Table 2), up from 33.4 percent in 1998 and 25.7 percent in 1988. Whereas 55.1 percent of those quarter sections containing ranchettes in 1988 contained only one, this percentage decreased to 44.8 percent by 2008. The percentage of quarter sections with three or four ranchettes increased the greatest across the two decades, indicating that lands once subdivided into ranchettes attract further subdivisions on adjacent lands.
Figure 5  Quarter section percentage in ranchettes, 1988. (Color figure available online.)

Because more private, unincorporated land was available for conversion in earlier years, the distribution patterns of initial ranchette conversion likely reflect the most desired locations. Their distribution shows some well-defined pockets of higher ranchette concentrations. To the west of Durango, many ranchettes are adjacent to state and national public lands containing the La Plata Mountains. Others aggregate around the small settlement of Hesperus.

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Quarter sections</th>
    <th>1988</th>
    <th>1998</th>
    <th>2008</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Number with ranchettes</td>
    <td>910</td>
    <td>1,182</td>
    <td>1,329</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Change from previous decade</td>
    <td>NA</td>
    <td>+272</td>
    <td>+147</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Percentage change from previous decade</td>
    <td>NA</td>
    <td>29.9</td>
    <td>12.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Percentage of total county quarter sections with ranchettes (\( n = 6,552 \))</td>
    <td>13.8</td>
    <td>18.0</td>
    <td>20.3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Percentage of nonpublic land quarter sections with ranchettes (\( n = 3,541 \))</td>
    <td>25.7</td>
    <td>33.4</td>
    <td>37.5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mean number of ranchettes in those quarter sections containing a ranchette</td>
    <td>1.72</td>
    <td>1.86</td>
    <td>1.96</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>With 1 ranchette (%)<br>501 (55.1)</td>
    <td>567 (48.0)</td>
    <td>595 (44.8)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>With 2 ranchettes (%)<br>239 (26.3)</td>
    <td>331 (28.0)</td>
    <td>371 (27.9)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>With 3 ranchettes (%)<br>100 (11.0)</td>
    <td>165 (14.0)</td>
    <td>195 (14.7)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>With 4 ranchettes (%)<br>69 (7.6)</td>
    <td>114 (9.6)</td>
    <td>163 (12.3)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>With > 4 ranchettes<sup>a</sup> (%)<br>1 (0.1)</td>
    <td>5 (0.4)</td>
    <td>5 (0.4)</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<sup>a</sup>Some quarter sections were greater than 160 acres, so they could contain more than four ranchettes.
Figure 6  Quarter section percentage in ranchettes, 1998. (Color figure available online.)

There are numerous ranchettes to the southwest of Durango in agricultural areas along the La Plata River and on the Fort Lewis Mesa, near the village of Kline. Due south of Durango is a concentrated pocket adjacent to the Animas River Valley in canyon and plateau lands that sit as an enclave within the borders of the Southern Ute Indian Reservation. To the east there are many smaller nodes near the towns of Bayfield and Ignacio, but most are interspersed in lands between the Los Pinos and Florida rivers flowing south out of the San Juan Mountains. Finally, pockets fill in prestigious enclaves of private lands that nestle within National Forest Lands along the Animas River valley to the north of Durango and to the northeast around the Lemon and Vallecito reservoirs.

In general, ranchettes are broadly scattered throughout all private, mostly rural land. The least dense area of settlement is the far west of the county.

By 1998 ranchette density had spread out from the nodes that existed in 1988 in a contagious diffusion effect (Figure 6). The decade from 1988 to 1998 saw the most rapid growth of ranchettes. Quarter sections containing only one ranchette declined to 48 percent, meaning that quarter sections with existing ranchettes saw further subdivision as neighbors were formed. The highly desirable lands in the Animas Valley to the north filled in rapidly, and density seemed to grow around Durango in a ring of five to ten miles—just close enough to have easy access to urban
Figure 7  Quarter section percentage in ranchettes, 2008. (Color figure available online.)

amenities, yet distant enough to maintain rural qualities.

The contagious diffusion effect continued into 2008 (Figure 7). Quarter sections containing only one ranchette again declined, to just under 45 percent, and existing nodes of ranchettes increased in density and number. The prevalent trend we see, then, is that existing conditions create more of the same—lands already subdivided into ranchettes tend to beget more in adjacent areas in patterns that grow outward from early conversions. Some new areas first appear, particularly in the far west that was previously devoid of ranchette subdivision.

We calculate change in percentage ranchette from 1988 to 2008 (simply the 2008 percentage minus the 1988 percentage) to show areas of increasing and decreasing ranchette development across the two decades (Figure 8). Although some quarter sections saw net declines in the percentage ranchette as these parcels were either further subdivided or absorbed into larger ranchland, the overall pattern is of enormous growth, spreading throughout most of the private lands in La Plata County. Numerous nodes on choice locations show quarter sections in 100 percent ranchette properties, and areas with the most dense rural road network are highly developed, particularly southeast and southwest of Durango. Growth tends to avoid areas of intense oil and natural gas activity. Although no private lands in the county are immune, part of the more remote and dry western region is the only noticeable void.
Figure 8  Change in percentage ranchette, 1988–2008. (Color figure available online.)

Measures of change in the land use and land cover fragmentation would be helpful indicators of ecological change, but unfortunately our data do not lend themselves to clear analysis. Because we do not record individual parcel boundaries or other landscape breaks and barriers, we cannot accurately calculate landscape metrics such as perimeters or corridors. If we select all quarter sections that have any ranchettes, however, the number of patches (isolated or contiguous clusters of quarter sections) decreased from 141 in 1988 to 103 in 1998 and 91 in 2008. During those intervals, the number of isolated quarter sections (those where all adjacent quarter sections had no ranchettes) decreased from ninety-one to fifty-four to forty-three. In general, more contiguous, compact, and dense patterns have a reduced ecological impact (Theobald 2005), so the decreasing number of patches alone would indicate less fragmentation in rural La Plata County. These results only occur, however, because more of the landscape is converting into ranchettes and the newer properties tend to aggregate around existing parcels. The overall effect is undoubtedly increased fragmentation as more parcels are created, more acreage is converted, and the number of ranchettes per quarter section increases.

Rather than focus on some numerical fragmentation score, more important are the ecological effects of fragmentation. To gauge this in some manner, we measured whether ranchette subdivision was more prevalent near
public lands and river corridors, both sensitive ecological spaces. Surprisingly, mean number and percentage in ranchettes were lower for all years in quarter sections near public lands than for the county private lands overall. Although the public lands held by the Bureau of Land Management and the Bureau of Indian Affairs might be less attractive than the those in the U.S. Forest Service, we found the same pattern when selecting only quarter sections adjacent to the San Juan National Forest. Furthermore, private quarter sections adjacent to river corridors had negligible differences in the mean percentage in ranchettes or mean number of ranchettes compared to private land quarter sections overall. Although certainly the visual patterns show the popularity for ranchettes on coveted lands such as the Animas River corridor north of Durango, both of these results contradict predominant wisdom about the preference for land adjacent to these natural amenities and also indicate that increased fragmentation might not be disproportionately affecting ecologically sensitive spaces.

One clear change is a decline in agricultural lands in production. One quarter of private land in the county is already in ranchettes, and when we include urban land, 40.3 percent of the potential ranching and agricultural land has been removed from agriculture. Some ranching persists on ranchettes—the 2008 county GIS database lists 1,108 of the 2,610 ranchette parcels (43 percent) classified as agricultural land—but the relatively small size of these parcels creates diseconomies of scale that hinder a viable ranching business.

Conclusion

La Plata County has seen continual growth in ranchette properties measured at three points in time across two ten-year intervals, although the phenomenon appears to be slowing down in the latter decade. This is likely because the best lands were taken first and property values have increased so that any further development is increasingly expensive. Although the market might not have reached complete saturation, there appear to be diminishing returns on ranchette conversion. Our results could also be driven by increasing subdivision into parcels smaller than thirty-five acres, so that although subdivision into ranchettes might be slowing, exurban development overall likely continues at a fast pace.

The rural road network appears to contribute to ranchette development by facilitating accessibility. A fairly dense road network has led to ranchettes dispersed across most of the private lands in the county, a pattern found elsewhere (Clark et al. 2009; Leinwand et al. 2010). Yet although ranchettes are widely dispersed, over the two decades it appears that existing patterns determine future trends: Ranchette growth spreads with a contagious diffusion effect around initial nodes into consolidated patches of development, again confirming results found in previous research (Weiler and Theobald 2003; Clark et al. 2009).

The ecological implications of these landscape changes are unclear. For one, ranchette development on lands adjacent to ecologically sensitive river corridors and national forests has occurred at a lesser pace than for private lands overall, a seeming contradiction to patterns found in other amenity-rich western towns (Theobald 2004, 2005; Travis 2007; Leinwand et al. 2010). Second, we cannot accurately measure landscape fragmentation using our data. Although undoubtedly increased fragmentation has occurred with the growth in the number of ranchette parcels, prior land uses such as ranching might well have divided the landscape into fields and pastures with fences, ditches, and barns that equal the degree of fragmentation found with newer ranchette subdivision. Furthermore, even if we could accurately measure fragmentation, debate continues as to whether fewer ranches with more cattle are ecologically better or worse than more ranchettes with fewer cattle (Gosnell and Travis 2005). Despite the overall increase in number of new parcels and acreage in ranchettes, some have minimal ecological impact. Others, however, heavily alter local ecology by permitting increased sizes of deer and elk herds or through absentee leasing of land that lacks the oversight of local stewards (Haggerty and Travis 2006). Finally, even with increased land ownership fragmentation, certain species tend to thrive in a fragmented landscape that creates more patches and borders between woodlands and open spaces, whereas others are negatively affected. Native specialist species tend to
diminish, whereas human adapted species increase in areas of increasing housing and human density. Effects of fragmentation are specific to individual species and stewardship ethics, making generalizations difficult.

We can conclude that much of the “New” West is not so new. La Plata County has a firmly established retirement and recreation ethic, similar to many other places in the Rocky Mountain West. Many immigrants attracted to this lifestyle live in the urban and suburban settings, and now about one quarter of all rural parcels are also owned by this demographic. An inevitable cultural impact for these changes is a decline of the traditional ranching and agricultural lifestyle. Exurban development in general has profoundly transformed formerly rural settings, and rachettes in dispersed locations are a key component of this transformation.

Notes

1 Broomfield and Denver Counties were excluded because their farmland is negligible.
2 The Colorado Division of Water Resources and the San Juan Basin Health Department have minimum lot size requirements for well and septic systems that drive these smaller parcel sizes and encourage development of three acres or larger.
3 Not all of these quarter sections with private lands would be available for rachette development. Some lands are held in conservation trusts or by public agencies but do not show up in our GIS database, and others are isolated parcels inside of public lands that cannot be accessed.
4 In fact, those interested can look at parcel data superimposed on aerial imagery to see that many, if not most, of the rachette parcels in La Plata County are undeveloped. See http://arcims.laplatco.us/laplatawebsite/
5 For 2008, data are available for the numbers of parcels vacant, but we have no such information for the earlier years.

Literature Cited

Berube, A., A. Singer, J. H. Wilson, and W. H. Frey. 2006. Finding exurbia: America’s fast-growing communities at the metropolitan fringe. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

Carruthers, J. I., and A. C. Vias. 2005. Urban, suburban, and exurban sprawl in the Rocky Mountain West: Evidence from regional adjustment models. Journal of Regional Science 45 (1): 21–48.

Clark, J. K., R. McChesney, D. K. Munroe, and E. G. Irwin. 2009. Spatial characteristics of exurban settlement pattern in the United States. Landscape and Urban Planning 90 (3–4): 178–88.

Clifford, H. 1995. Rancher’s new cash crop will be scenery. High Country News 27 November. http://www.hcn.org/issues/48/1470 (last accessed 23 November 2009).

Collins, C. O., and M. D. Mika. 2002. Cells phones, center pivots, and rural repopulation: Planning implications of the new Ponderosa. In Colorado’s future: Meeting the needs of a changing state, ed. D. Greenwood, 9–16. Colorado Springs, CO: Center for Colorado Policy Studies.

Colorado Committee on Legal Resources. 2009. CO Revised Statutes 30-28-101 (10)(b). Denver: Colorado General Assembly. http://www.michie.com/colorado (last accessed 20 April 2011).

Colorado State University. 2010. Appendix 7: General ownership acres per county. Colorado Ownership Management and Protection Program, National Resource Ecology Laboratory, Fort Collins, CO. http://www.nrel.colostate.edu/projects/comap/samples.html (last accessed 25 January 2011).

Coupl, R., and A. Seidl. 2003. Rural land use and your taxes: The fiscal impact of rural residential development in Colorado. Agricultural and Resource Policy Report 03–03. Fort Collins, CO: Colorado State University.

Gober, P., K. McHugh, and D. Leclerc. 1993. Job-rich but housing-poor: The dilemma of a Western amenity town. The Professional Geographer 45 (1): 12–20.

Gosnell, H., and W. R. Travis. 2005. Ranchland ownership dynamics in the Rocky Mountain West. Rangeland Ecology and Management 58 (2): 191–98.

Haggerty, J. H., and W. R. Travis. 2006. Out of administrative control: Absentee owners, resident elk, and the shifting nature of wildlife management in southwestern Montana. Geoforum 37:816–30.

Jackson, P. L., and R. Kuhlken. 2006. A rediscovered frontier: Land use and resource issues in the new West. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.

Johnson, K. M., and C. L. Beale. 1995. The rural rebound revisited. American Demographics 17:46–49.

La Plata County. 2011. La Plata County comprehensive plan draft. Durango, CO: La Plata County. http://www.laplatacountyplan.com/uploads/LPC-Comp-Plan-Comm-draft1.pdf (last accessed 2 February 2011).

Larsen, S. C., C. Sorenson, D. McDermott, J. Long, and C. Post. 2007. Place perception and social interaction on an exurban landscape in central Colorado. The Professional Geographer 59 (4): 421–33.

Leinwand, I. I. F., D. M. Theobald, J. Mitchell, and R. L. Knight. 2010. Landscape dynamics at the public–private interface: A case study in Colorado. Landscape and Urban Planning 97:182–93.
Manson, G. A., and R. E. Groop. 2000. U.S. intercounty migration in the 1990s: People and income move down the urban hierarchy. The Professional Geographer 52 (3): 493–504.

McGranahan, D. A. 1999. Natural amenities drive rural population change. Agricultural Economic Report No. 781. Economic Research Service, Food and Rural Economics Division, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC.

Olinger, D. 2003. Urban getaways spur rural sprawl: State ranchette exemption begets boom. Denver Post 25 November:A1.

Osher, C. N. 2011. Fertile ground for tax breaks. Denver Post 2 January:A1.

Patel, D. I. 1980. Exurbs: Urban residential developments in the countryside. Washington, DC: University Press of America.

Riebsame, W. R., ed. 1997. Atlas of the new West: Portrait of a changing region. New York: Norton.

Rudzitis, G. 1996. Amenities increasingly draw people to the rural West. Rural Development Perspectives 14 (2): 9–13.

Shumway, J. M., and S. M. Otterstrom. 2001. Spatial patterns of migration and income change in the Mountain West: The dominance of service-based, amenity-rich counties. The Professional Geographer 53 (4): 492–502.

Smith, M. D., and R. S. Krannich. 2000. Culture clash revisited: Newcomer and longer term residents’ attitudes toward land use, development, and environmental issues in rural communities in the Rocky Mountain West. Rural Sociology 65 (3): 396–421.

Smutny, G. 2002. Patterns of growth and change: Depicting the impacts of restructuring in Idaho. The Professional Geographer 54 (3): 438–53.

Starrs, P. D. 2002. Ranching: An old way of life in the new West. In Ranching west of the 100th meridian: Culture, ecology, and economics, ed. R. Knight, W. C. Gilgert, and E. Marston, 3–23. Washington, DC: Island Press.

Theobald, D. M. 1995. Morphology and effects of mountain land use change in Colorado: A multi scale landscape analysis. PhD dissertation, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO.

———. 2001. Land use dynamics beyond the American urban fringe. Geographical Review 91 (3): 544–64.

———. 2004. Placing exurban land-use change in a human modification framework. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 2 (3): 139–44.

———. 2005. Landscape patterns of exurban growth in the USA from 1980 to 2020. Ecology and Society 10 (1): 32–66.

Theobald, D. M., and W. H. Romme. 2007. Expansion of the U.S. wildland–urban interface. Landscape and Urban Planning 83:340–54.

Travis, W. R. 2007. New geographies of the American West. Washington, DC: Island Press.

Travis, W. R., D. Theobald, G. Mixon, and T. Dickinson. 2005. Western futures: A look into the patterns of land use and future development in the American West. Center For the American West Report No. 6. University of Colorado, Boulder, CO.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2011. Census of population and housing 2010: La Plata County, CO. http://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/LA00000US/041100000 (last accessed 3 April 2011).

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 1920–2007. The census of agriculture. Washington, DC: National Agricultural Statistics Service. http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/2007/index.asp (last accessed 3 February 2011).

Walker, P. A., S. J. Marvin, and L. P. Fortmann. 2003. Landscape change in Nevada county reflect social and ecological transitions. California Agriculture 57 (4): 115–21.

Weiler, S., and D. M. Theobald. 2003. Pioneers of rural sprawl in the Rocky Mountain West. The Review of Regional Studies 33 (3): 264–83.

Wright, J. B. 1993. Rocky Mountain divide: Selling and saving the West. Austin: University of Texas Press.

JOHN HARNER is Professor in the Department of Geography and Environmental Studies at the University of Colorado, Colorado Springs, 1420 Austin Bluffs Parkway, Colorado Springs, CO 80918. E-mail: jharner@uccs.edu. His research interests include American urban landscapes, U.S.–Mexico interactions, and cultural dynamics in the American Southwest.

BRADLEY BENZ is a practicing engineer and received an MA in Applied Geography at the University of Colorado, Colorado Springs, CO 80918. E-mail: benz.bradley@gmail.com. He has interest in southern Colorado and northern New Mexico land use.