Job-Rich but Housing-Poor: The Dilemma of a Western Amenity Town*

Patricia Gober, Kevin E. McHugh, and Denis Leclerc
Arizona State University

Sedona, Arizona, an amenity town that trades on intangible quality-of-life attributes like spectacular scenery, the arts, and its nonmetropolitan location, has a conflict between low-wage employment catering to its tourist sector and expensive housing for its affluent residents. Many of those who work in Sedona do not live in the community. This study, based on a survey of 286 employees, shows that workers who live in Sedona do not have incomes that are significantly higher than commuters from the outside, but they live in housing that is almost twice as expensive. Employees who live in Sedona pay dearly for housing in order to be near jobs, natural beauty, and the cultural ambience of an amenity town. Commuters, on the other hand, incur high travel costs but enjoy cheaper housing and the lifestyle of small towns and rural areas. The emergence of amenity environments and long-distance commuting in Sedona is symbolic of the increased differentiation of nonmetropolitan landscapes.

Key Words: amenity towns, jobs/housing imbalance, nonmetropolitan commuting.

Introduction

Like many amenity towns across the United States, Sedona, Arizona, has experienced phenomenal increases in land and housing prices as affluent retirees, actors, artists, writers, and locationally flexible businesses have discovered the quality of life in this scenic, nonmetropolitan setting. In conjunction with its rarefied physical and cultural setting, there also has emerged a strong tourism sector which draws an estimated three million visitors annually and accounts for a large majority of the community's employment. An inherent conflict has arisen between the mix of employment which is heavily weighted in favor of low-wage retail and service sector jobs and skyrocketing housing prices driven up by scarce land, eager demand, and affluent immigrants. Much of Sedona's housing stock is out-of-reach to many of its employees. For these individuals, Sedona is job-rich but housing-poor.

The resolution of this conflict is the emergence of long-distance commuting, an increasingly familiar phenomenon in nonmetropolitan areas (Clemente and Summers 1975; Hansen 1976; Maraffa and Brooker-Gross 1984; Brooker-Gross and Maraffa 1985). It is estimated that over one-half of Sedona's approximately 5,000 employees live outside the city limits (Sedona Community Plan—Economic Base Study 1990). The growing imbalance between increasingly expensive housing and low-wage jobs associated with the tourist sector raises the issues of fairness and equity and causes local businesses to worry about the long-term stability and availability of labor (Hall and Pijawka 1992).

The purpose of this paper is to examine the issues of housing affordability and commuting in Sedona and its environs—to determine who lives where and why. More specifically, we explore the popularly held notion that employees who can afford to live in Sedona do so while the others live elsewhere. We also investigate the tradeoffs people make in deciding where to live and work as a means of informing the current policy debate on the growing imbalance between jobs and housing (Bookout 1990). While this debate has centered on the suburbs of large metropolitan areas, it is equally relevant to nonmetropolitan areas, and in particular, to amenity towns in these areas.

Background

Amenity Towns

The emergence of amenity towns like Sedona on the nonmetropolitan landscape has attracted considerable attention in recent years, especially because these places have been at
the forefront of the resurgence of nonmetropolitan growth and in-migration (Beale 1975; Fuguitt 1985; Elo and Beale 1988). Usually defined as places that emphasize scenery, recreational potential, quaintness, historical significance, and rural settlement, amenity towns attract retirees, recreationalists, and others who value these intangible qualities of life (Coppack 1985). The value of land in amenity places is both a function of its contribution to the productive process and of its ability to produce uplifting experiences and meet psychological needs (Coppack 1988).

The emergence of amenity environments is a by-product of the increased affluence and leisure and the expanded scale of life associated with the postindustrial society (Coppack 1988). Pleasant scenery and the ambience of small town life are consumed by residents and visitors in search of a way to meet higher level needs on Maslow's (1974) scale of self-actualization.

Nonmetropolitan Commuting

The growing emphasis on amenities in nonmetropolitan areas is one component of the increased differentiation of rural landscapes. Associated with this differentiation is the emergence of long-distance commuting. As small towns take on a variety of functions in addition to their traditional roles as agricultural service centers, they draw labor from nearby towns and the surrounding countryside. Evidence indicates that commuting (defined as persons who cross a county boundary in getting to work) is just as prevalent in nonmetropolitan areas as in MSAs (Metropolitan Statistical Areas) and dispersed urban regions in spite of the dearth of public transportation in rural areas and the lower incomes which make private automobile ownership difficult (Hansen 1976).

In a study of white male employees of a large manufacturing facility in rural Illinois, Clemente and Summers (1975) examined the extent to which socioeconomic status, length of service, and age were associated with commuting distance. Failure to uncover any statistically significant relationships prompted Clemente and Summers to conclude that nonmetropolitan residence/workplace patterns do not look like metropolitan patterns. Relationships between socioeconomic status, length of service, and age and commuting distance are a function of the structure of metropolitan housing and employment. In the absence of such a structure, established associations between commuting distances and personal characteristics break down.

Maraffa and Brooker-Gross (1984) also found nonmetropolitan commuting patterns in Blacksburg, Virginia, that were different from those in metropolitan areas. High-income workers had shorter journeys-to-work than their lower income counterparts. The authors attribute this pattern to the presence of high-income housing in locations close to the employment center and the orientation of low-wage workers to a larger-scale, more regional pattern of employment. These results mirrored earlier findings of commuting in small towns wherein professional and managerial workers resided in the town where they worked while production workers commuted from the surrounding region (Wheeler 1966).

Geographic Setting

Set in spectacular redrock country of the Verde Valley in north central Arizona, Sedona's current commuting and housing situation is an outgrowth of its physical, regional, and historical geography (Fig. 1). The landscape in the vicinity of the city consists of eroded forms in Supai Sandstone deposited 290 million years ago (Elston 1984). Over time, erosion sculpted magnificent buttes, mesas, and canyons, and iron oxide stained these rocks a rusty red. This dramatic landscape has served as the backdrop for western movies, inspiration for local artists, and attraction for permanent migrants and tourists.

Sedona was first occupied in 1879 but officially founded in 1902 when T. C. Schnebly requested that the first post office be named after his wife, Sedona. Like other communities in the Verde Valley, Sedona's early development was based on ranching and farming. In addition, Sedona served as a stopping-off point for people traveling between Jerome, a booming mining town, and Flagstaff, the regional service center. In the late 1930s wealthy people were attracted to the area's scenery and climate, and by the end of World War II, amenity-based development began in earnest (Those Early Days 1968; Willard 1984).
Figure 1: The Verde Valley of central Arizona.

Equally complex is the economic history of the Verde Valley, Sedona's current laborshed. Early development was based upon ranching and farming. With the start of copper mining in Jerome in 1876 and the construction of a copper smelter in Clarkdale in 1915, the region's economic activities became focused on these two company towns and their satellite "suburb" of Cottonwood (Simmons 1984; Canty and Greeley 1987). After mining operations ceased in 1952, Verde Valley communities traded on their attractive natural settings and drew working class retirees. In the postmining period they emerged as trade centers with economies strongly dependent upon retail activity and services. Vigorous recent population growth is based upon tourism, retirement, construction, and employment opportunities in Sedona.

Sedona's population today is a curious mix of artists and writers, art dealers and gallery owners, New Age spiritualists, affluent retirees, real estate agents and developers, and entrepreneurs catering to the three million visitors who are attracted to the community annually. By comparison, the Grand Canyon, one of the centerpieces of the U.S. National Park System, draws an estimated four million visitors annu-
ally (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1990a). In the face of this deluge of tourists, Sedona residents have stubbornly refused to build adequate roads. Only recently (1988) did community residents agree to incorporate.

In 1990 the median age of Sedona's residents was 55 years, an indication of the strong role that retirees play in the demography of the community. The community's wealth was reflected in its 1987 per capita income of $14,724, by far the highest of any nonmetropolitan community in the state and significantly higher than that of the surrounding communities of Camp Verde ($9,950), Clarkdale ($8,715), and Cottonwood ($8,037) (Arizona Department of Economic Security 1990).

The affluence of Sedona's residents, rapid recent growth (from 5,368 in 1980 to 7,720 in 1990), and scarce land, stemming from the fact that the community is surrounded by the Coconino National Forest, result in very high land and housing prices. In 1990 the median value for a single-family home in Sedona was $157,900; the median contract rent was $491. While these figures may not seem high by the standards of some large metropolitan areas, they are completely out-of-character with the community's nonmetropolitan setting. Comparable figures for neighboring communities are $59,500 and $327 in Cottonwood, $62,200 and $313 in Clarkdale, $79,100 and $295 in Camp Verde, and $87,200 and $345 in Cornville (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1990b).

Housing values in Sedona also are inconsistent with the nature of its low-wage employment structure. In 1990 Sedona had 5,460 private and public sector jobs; 72% of those in the private sector were in retail trade and services which cover employment in hotels and motels, restaurants, and shops. The earnings of these retail and service sector workers were significantly below averages for employees in Coconino and Yavapai counties. Sedona sits on the border of these two counties; its territory and population are split between them. While the average annual wage for an employee in Yavapai County is $16,260, employees in the retail trade sector earn only $10,916 and those in the service sector earn only $14,514. Comparable data for Coconino County are $16,620 for employees overall, $10,127 in the retail trade sector, and $12,871 in the services (Sedona Community Plan—Economic Base Study 1990).

The concentration of workers in low-wage retail and service sectors, in combination with expensive housing, makes it difficult, if not impossible, for many of Sedona's workers to reside within the community. Communities like Sedona that trade on their natural surroundings, nonmetropolitan locations, rich histories, and unique cultural resources attract two, inherently contradictory types of activities: permanent residents at the high end of the income ladder and jobs at the low end of the wage ladder. In the absence of serious community efforts to ameliorate this contradiction, labor must be imported from the surrounding countryside to sustain the tourism sector.

To gain a fuller appreciation for the conflict between employment and housing, we surveyed Sedona's employees to determine their socioeconomic circumstances, commuting and employment patterns, and where they lived and why. Our research investigated whether more affluent employees live in Sedona while others live elsewhere, and how commuters evaluate the tradeoffs among commuting and housing costs, job opportunities, and the range of other characteristics that separate the amenity town from surrounding communities.

Survey

As part of a larger effort to assess Sedona's economic development future, we conducted a survey of the community's work force in August, 1991. From a list of members of the Sedona Chamber of Commerce, we chose every third business for a total of 199 businesses and attempted to distribute employee questionnaires to each business. A contact person was advised to give a survey questionnaire to each employee who, in turn, was instructed to mail the completed survey form directly to us. We successfully distributed questionnaires to 64 businesses with 846 employees. This low distribution rate was due to several factors, including high business turnover, business relocation, businesses with no employees other than the owner, and owners refusing to participate. Of the 846 questionnaires distributed, 286 were completed and returned to us at
Arizona State University in Tempe, a response rate of 33.8%.

The questionnaire provided information on where Sedona employees live, a host of demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, commuting and employment patterns, the current housing situation, and how they rate Sedona vis-à-vis their present community on a series of place attributes. We first divided respondents into three groups based upon their residence/workplace patterns. Group 1 consisted of employees who resided within the city limits of Sedona (N=153) and comprised 53.7% of all respondents; Group 2 was nearby residents of the village of Oak Creek (N=51), making up 17.9% of the sample; and Group 3 was long-distance commuters living in Cottonwood, Clarkdale, Cornville, Flagstaff, Camp Verde, Lake Montezuma, and other towns in Sedona’s laborshed (N=81) (Fig. 1). These commuters comprised 28.4% of all respondents.

Survey respondents accurately reflect the employment structure of Sedona’s businesses but somewhat overrepresent Sedona residents. The latter may have been more interested in the results of our survey than nonresidents, and therefore, more willing to return the questionnaire. Given that the goal of our study was to compare the characteristics and attitudes of Sedona and non-Sedona residents, the relative proportions were less important to us than the characteristics of each group.

It took, on average, 32.4 minutes for the long-distance commuters to get to work each day compared to 11.7 minutes for Village of Oak Creek residents and 9.7 minutes for Sedona residents. Given that the average travel time for commuters in large metropolitan areas is about 20 minutes (Pisarski 1987), it is clear that long-distance commuters to Sedona invest considerable time getting to and from work each day.

Results

Demographic and Socioeconomic Characteristics

In demographic terms, long-distance commuters (Group 3) were younger, more likely to be married, and more likely to have children than Sedona residents (Group 1) (Table 1). Residents of Sedona’s “suburb,” the Village of Oak Creek (Group 2), occupied an intermediate position—more family-oriented than Sedona residents but less so than the long-distance commuters. These figures are consistent with the view of Sedona as a destination for older persons and those with alternative lifestyles. Commuters are, in general, younger workers with stronger family ties.

Using length of residence as an indicator of the strength and durability of the respondents’ ties to their respective communities, we investigated whether long-distance commuters have stronger, more enduring ties to their communities than Sedona residents. Surprisingly, they did not. The most important distinctions were between the very recent arrivals to the Village of Oak Creek (Group 2) and the other two groups (Table 1). The fact that the typical long-distance commuter moved into his or her current community between six and seven years ago is inconsistent with the notion of deep roots and strong place ties. Long-distance commuters in our study moved into their current communities at about the same time that amenity migrants moved to Sedona.

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Characteristics</th>
    <th colspan="2">Place of Residence</th>
    <th rowspan="2">Long-distance Commuters Group 3</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Village of Oak Creek Group 2</th>
    <th>Long-distance Commuters Group 3</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mean Age *** (ANOVA)</td>
    <td>42.3</td>
    <td>39.1</td>
    <td>36.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Percent Married * (CHI-SQUARE)</td>
    <td>46.7</td>
    <td>54.9</td>
    <td>65.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mean Number of Children * (ANOVA)</td>
    <td>.58</td>
    <td>.78</td>
    <td>.96</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mean Length of Residence *** (ANOVA)</td>
    <td>7.4</td>
    <td>3.1</td>
    <td>6.5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Percent Arizona Natives ** (CHI-SQUARE)</td>
    <td>7.8</td>
    <td>3.9</td>
    <td>18.3</td>
  </tr>
</table>

*Statistically significant at .10 level.
**Statistically significant at the .05 level.
***Statistically significant at the .01 level.
Scheffe tests (at p = .10) for significantly different group means (ANOVA tests):

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Characteristics</th>
    <th colspan="2">Significant Differences Between</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mean Age</td>
    <td>Groups 1 and 3</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mean Number of Children</td>
    <td>Groups 1 and 3</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mean Length of Residence</td>
    <td>Groups 1 and 2, 2 and 3</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
</table>
The relatively weak or, at least, recent place ties of the long-distance commuters are consistent with the fact that few were Arizona natives. While the data show a statistical tendency for Group 3 to contain more Arizona natives than the other two groups (18.3% in Group 3 were born in the state compared to 3.9 for Group 2 and 7.8 for Group 1), a large majority of the long-distance commuters were from outside the state from a range of origins quite similar to those of Sedona and Village of Oak Creek residents.

The fact that long-distance commuters were largely non-natives and newcomers to the Verde Valley runs counter to the stereotypical image of nonmetropolitan commuting—an employment center drawing long-term residents from declining rural communities. Rather, employment in Sedona appeared to serve as a basis for in-migration and population growth in its surrounding laborshed. Out-of-state migrants moved to Cottonwood, Clarkdale, Cornville, and Camp Verde, knowing that employment opportunities were nearby in Sedona. Between 1980 and 1990, population growth in Cottonwood was 30%, 42% in Clarkdale, and 450% in Camp Verde (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1990b).

Having established the demographic make-up of long-distance commuters relative to residents of Sedona and its suburbs, we examined the notion that members of Group 3 are disproportionately drawn from the lower end of the income spectrum—that long-distance commuters are those who cannot afford to live in Sedona. Results indicate that, while somewhat more Sedona residents fell into the highest-income categories, there was surprising similarity in income levels across the three groups (Table 2). The median household incomes for the three groups were $28,744 for Group 1, $26,758 for Group 2, and $25,000 for Group 3.

Given the close association between income and homeownership, it is not surprising that homeownership rates did not differ significantly across the three groups (62.0% in Group 3, 67.6% in Group 2, and 56.8% in Group 1). What did vary, however, were housing values and monthly rents. Analysis of variance tests reveal that the mean values of owner occupied units were significantly higher for Sedona and Village of Oak Creek residents than for long-distance commuters (Table 3). Mean monthly rents differed significantly between Sedona residents and long-distance commuters with Village of Oak Creek "suburbanites" occupying a middle position.

Given the relative parity across the three groups in terms of yearly household income, it stands to reason that Sedona employees spend a much higher proportion of their household incomes on housing. These results refute the simplistic view that those who can afford to live in Sedona do so while others live elsewhere. Some employees from relatively high-income households work in Sedona but live outside the community, at the same time that many lower-income workers live in Sedona. The amenity town, rich in employment opportunities and natural and cultural resources but scarce in housing, creates a strong counterpoint to surrounding communities. In these communities, jobs are scarce and cultural resources are lim-

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Income Categories*</th>
    <th colspan="3">Place of Residence</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Sedona Group 1</th>
    <th>Village of Oak Creek Group 2</th>
    <th>Long-distance Commuters Group 3</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Under $10,000</td>
    <td>7.6</td>
    <td>5.9</td>
    <td>10.3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>$10,000-$19,999</td>
    <td>23.6</td>
    <td>21.6</td>
    <td>25.6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>$20,000-$29,999</td>
    <td>21.5</td>
    <td>33.3</td>
    <td>28.2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>$30,000-$39,999</td>
    <td>13.2</td>
    <td>15.7</td>
    <td>15.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>$40,000-$49,999</td>
    <td>13.2</td>
    <td>5.9</td>
    <td>9.0</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>$50,000 and above</td>
    <td>20.8</td>
    <td>17.6</td>
    <td>11.5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Total</td>
    <td>100.0</td>
    <td>100.0</td>
    <td>100.0</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Median</td>
    <td>$28,744</td>
    <td>$26,758</td>
    <td>$25,000</td>
  </tr>
</table>

*Chi-square statistic = 8.3; not significant at .05 level.

Table 3 Value of Housing and Monthly Rent for Sedona Employees

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Characteristics</th>
    <th colspan="3">Place of Residence</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Village of Oak Creek Group 1</th>
    <th>Sedona Group 2</th>
    <th>Long-distance Commuters Group 3</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mean Housing Value *** (ANOVA)</td>
    <td>$135,588</td>
    <td>$142,565</td>
    <td>$70,148</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mean Monthly Rent *** (ANOVA)</td>
    <td>$485</td>
    <td>$416</td>
    <td>$323</td>
  </tr>
</table>

***Statistically significant at .01 level.
Scheffe tests (at p = .10) for significantly different group means (ANOVA tests):
Characteristics
Mean Housing Value
Significant Differences Between Groups 1 and 3, 2 and 3
Mean Monthly Rent
Groups 1 and 3
ited, but housing is cheap and the ambience of small town life remains unencumbered by the onslaught of three million tourists annually.

Residential Satisfaction
To understand the nature of the tradeoffs that long-distance commuters make, we asked them to evaluate on a scale from 1 to 7 (where 1 was extremely negative and 7 was extremely positive) their own communities and Sedona with respect to 16 place attributes. Results indicate that long-distance commuters evaluated their home communities more positively than Sedona on 10 of 16 attributes (Table 4). Not surprisingly, the largest difference is in housing affordability where the mean response for the home community is 5.4 while the mean for Sedona is a very negative 1.6. Also large is the difference in the cost of living dimension of 4.9 for the home community and only 2.2 for Sedona. In addition to housing and living costs, the home community is viewed more positively on a range of characteristics typically associated with small town, rural environments: nearness to family, nearness to friends, people with similar interests and values, feeling of belonging in the community, openness and lack of congestion, safety from crime, good place to raise children, and schools. Respondents informally told us that they like the small town, more "country" atmosphere of their communities and that Sedona is congested, filled with tourists, and too expensive for them.

This view of Sedona was confirmed in another recent survey of Sedona residents. In this study, 92% of the respondents believed that traffic was a problem for Sedona, and 64% agreed that tourism has caused Sedona to lose its small town atmosphere (Leclerc 1991). The irony of tourism eroding precisely the cultural and natural resources that initially attracted tourists is a common lament in amenity areas (Jafari 1982).

The three areas in which Sedona is valued more highly than the home community are job opportunities, natural beauty, and entertainment/leisure time activities (Table 4). Sedona's booming economy is a draw for commuters, and its spectacular natural setting also is seen as a plus. In fact, the "natural beauty" of Sedona is the most highly rated of any of the 16 place attributes for both the home community and Sedona.

Sedona is not seen as significantly more positive than the home community in terms of the cost/time getting to work even though this group spends, on average, 32 minutes getting to work. That both the home community and Sedona received neutral scores (3.7 for the home community and 4.1 for Sedona) on this attribute suggests that commuting is not an onerous burden for the respondents or one that looms large in the decision of where to

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Attributes</th>
    <th colspan="2">Mean Values</th>
    <th rowspan="2">Difference</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Home Community</th>
    <th>Sedona</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Job Opportunities</td>
    <td>2.4</td>
    <td>4.6</td>
    <td>-2.2***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Housing Affordability</td>
    <td>5.4</td>
    <td>1.6</td>
    <td>3.8***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Cost/Time of Getting to Work</td>
    <td>3.7</td>
    <td>4.1</td>
    <td>-0.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Overall Cost of Living</td>
    <td>4.9</td>
    <td>2.2</td>
    <td>2.7***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Nearness to Family Members</td>
    <td>4.0</td>
    <td>3.0</td>
    <td>1.0***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Nearness to Friends</td>
    <td>4.4</td>
    <td>3.4</td>
    <td>1.0***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>People with Interests and Values Similar to Yours</td>
    <td>4.3</td>
    <td>3.5</td>
    <td>0.8**</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Feeling that You Belong in the Community</td>
    <td>4.4</td>
    <td>3.0</td>
    <td>1.4***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Natural Beauty</td>
    <td>5.1</td>
    <td>6.4</td>
    <td>-1.3***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Healthful Environment</td>
    <td>5.5</td>
    <td>5.7</td>
    <td>-0.2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Openness and Lack of Congestion</td>
    <td>5.7</td>
    <td>4.0</td>
    <td>1.7***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Safety from Crime</td>
    <td>5.5</td>
    <td>4.7</td>
    <td>0.8**</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Good Place to Raise Children</td>
    <td>5.5</td>
    <td>4.1</td>
    <td>1.4***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Schools</td>
    <td>5.1</td>
    <td>4.1</td>
    <td>1.0***</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Shopping Opportunities</td>
    <td>3.8</td>
    <td>3.9</td>
    <td>-0.1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Entertainment and Leisure Time Activities</td>
    <td>3.7</td>
    <td>4.4</td>
    <td>-0.7*</td>
  </tr>
</table>

*Significant at .05 level.
**Significant at .01 level.
***Significant at .001 level.
live. Like their metropolitan counterparts, commuters seem to have internalized a relatively long work trip as a fact of life and a factor that does not figure prominently in discriminating among potential places to live.

The internalization of this lifestyle also is revealed in respondents’ answers to the question: “In thinking about the future, do you think you will be working in Sedona (not necessarily the same job as you have now) two years from now?” On a scale from 1 to 5, with 1 being very unlikely and 5 being very likely, the average for Sedona residents was 3.99, 4.20 for Village of Oak Creek residents, and 3.65 for the long-distance commuters. These results indicate the long-distance commuters were almost as committed to their jobs in Sedona as Sedona and Village of Oak Creek residents. In exchange for a relatively long journey-to-work, commuters obtain affordable housing and a range of other satisfying qualities associated with the small towns in which they live.

Discussion and Conclusions

The conflict between expensive housing and low-wage jobs is increasingly on the public policy agenda although the issue is most often viewed as a metropolitan rather than nonmetropolitan phenomenon. The emergence of employment centers in suburban America has brought millions of retail and service jobs. For a variety of reasons including restrictive zoning practices, tax policies, and a preference for low-density housing, the growth in “affordable housing” has not kept pace with suburban job growth. Results include increased commuting and congestion and a loss in air quality. Seeking to ameliorate these negative effects, many planners and city officials have bought into the notion of creating a balance between jobs and housing. Policies are directed at increasing the number of affordable housing units in job-rich areas and increasing the number of jobs in housing-rich areas (Bookout 1990).

Sedona’s city leaders express similar concerns about the jobs/housing imbalance. Worries about traffic congestion, equity and fairness, and the community’s ability to support economic development with nonlocal labor are like issues discussed in metropolitan areas but adapted to the community’s amenity environment and nonmetropolitan setting.

What then does this study tell us about the jobs/housing imbalance in such a setting? First, such imbalances appear to be an inevitable outgrowth of the types of people relative to the types of jobs attracted to such places. When tourism and amenity migrants converge, as often occurs in amenity-rich areas, a sizable segment of the labor force will be unable or unwilling to purchase housing within the community. In the absence of any communitywide effort to construct affordable housing, a pattern of long-distance commuting evolves. Even with affordable housing, some employees may wish to commute from surrounding communities to retain the small town atmosphere that is antithetical to large-scale tourism and rapid in-migration.

Second, the obvious and significant difference in the cost of housing in the amenity town and its surrounding region does not lead to the conclusion that high-income employees live in the amenity town while service and retail workers live elsewhere. Our results indicate that employees who live in Sedona and its environs do not have significantly higher annual household incomes. There appears to be a more complicated system of residential decision-making whereby some people choose to pay dearly for housing to be near jobs, natural beauty, and cultural ambience while others opt for higher commuting costs, cheaper housing, and a small town atmosphere.

And finally, the presence of amenity towns like Sedona in nonmetropolitan areas increases the contrasts from one place to another in very much the same way that such sharp contrasts arise and persist in metropolitan areas. The emergence of a highly specialized and complex regional economy in which some places provide jobs while neighboring communities provide housing and the intangible qualities of small town life drastically alters the economies, sociologies, and political geographies of contemporary nonmetropolitan America.

Literature Cited

Arizona Department of Economic Security. 1990. State Data Center Newsletter 60:5–7.
Beale, C. L. 1975. The Revival of Population Growth in Nonmetropolitan America. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Bulletin ERS-605.
Bookout, L. W. 1990. Jobs and housing: The search for balance. Urban Land 49:5–9.

Brooker-Gross, S. R., and T. A. Maraffa. 1985. Commuting distance and gender among nonmetropolitan university employees. The Professional Geographer 37:303–09.

Canty, J. M., and M. N. Greeley. 1987. History of Mining in Arizona. Tucson: American Institute of Mining Engineers, Tucson Section.

Clemente, F., and G. F. Summers. 1975. The journey to work of rural industrial employees. Social Forces 54:212–19.

Coppack, P. M. 1985. A stage model of central place dynamics in Toronto’s urban field. East Lakes Geographer 20:1–13.

Coppack, P. M. 1988. Reflections on the role of amenity in the evolution of the urban field. Geografiska Annaler 70:353–61.

Elo, I. T., and C. L. Beale. 1988. The decline in American counter-urbanization in the 1980s. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America, New Orleans.

Elston, D. P. 1984. Rocks, landforms, and landscape development in central Arizona. In Landscapes of Arizona: The Geological Story, ed. T. L. Smiley, J. D. Nations, T. L. Pewe, and J. P. Schafer, 175–206. New York: University Press of America.

Fuguitt, G. V. 1985. The nonmetropolitan population turnaround. Annual Review of Sociology 11:259–80.

Hall, J. S., and K. D. Pijawka. 1992. Sustaining Sedona’s Economy: Planning Toward the Year 2000. Tempe, AZ: School of Public Affairs, Arizona State University.

Hansen, N. M. 1976. Nonmetropolitan Labor Markets in an Urban Society. Cambridge: Ballinger.

Jafari, J. 1982. Tourism and the host community. Journal of Travel Research 20:26–27.

Leclerc, D. 1991. A study of residents’ perception of tourism development in Sedona, Arizona. Unpublished Masters thesis, Department of Leisure Studies, Arizona State University, Tempe.

Maraffa, T. A., and S. R. Brooker-Gross. 1984. Aspects of the journey-to-work within a small city laborshed. Urban Geography 5:178–86.

Maslow, A. H. 1974. Motivation and Personality. New York: Harper and Row.

Pisarski, A. E. 1987. Commuting in America. Westport, CT: Eno Foundation for Transportation.

Sedona Community Plan—Economic Base Study. 1990. Phoenix: Sunregion Associates, Technical Report No. 5.

Simmons, I. J. 1984. Cottonwood, Clarkdale, and Cornville History. Cottonwood, AZ: American Association of Retired Persons.

Those Early Days: Oldtimers’ Memories. 1968. Sedona, AZ: Sedona Westerners.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1990a. Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1990 (110th edition). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1990b. 1990 Census of Population and Housing. Summary tape file 1A. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Wheeler, J. O. 1966. Occupational status and worktrips: A minimum distance approach. Social Forces 45:508–15.

Willard, D. 1984. An Old-timers Scrapbook. Mesa, AZ: Marker Graphics.

PATRICIA GOBER is Professor of Geography at Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287-0104. Her areas of specialization are urban and population geography emphasizing interregional migration processes and housing demography.

KEVIN E. MCHUGH is Associate Professor of Geography at Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287-0104. His research interests are in population, migration, and social geography.

DENIS LECLERC recently completed an M.S. degree in the Department of Leisure Studies, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287-2302. His thesis was entitled “A study of residents’ perceptions of tourism development in Sedona, Arizona.”