Rethinking rural citizenship in commodity regions. Lessons from the Los Lagos region, Chile.

Bustos-Gallardo Bustos

To cite this article: Bustos-Gallardo Bustos (2020): Rethinking rural citizenship in commodity regions. Lessons from the Los Lagos region, Chile., Geographical Review, DOI: 10.1080/00167428.2020.1865816

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00167428.2020.1865816
Publisher: Taylor & Francis & Copyright © 2020 by the American Geographical Society of New York

Journal: Geographical Review

DOI: 10.1080/00167428.2020.1865816

Title: Rethinking rural citizenship in commodity regions. Lessons from the Los Lagos region, Chile.

Beatriz Bustos-Gallardo
Associate Professor, Department of Geography, University of Chile.
bibustos@uchilefau.cl
Portugal 84, Santiago, Chile.
ORCID ID - I-3230-2013
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4586-9458

Acknowledgement:
Research for this paper was funded by Research Grant FR1160848.
The author thanks Alvaro Roman and Lindsey Carte for their comments for earlier drafts of this paper.
    Rethinking rural citizenship in commodity regions. Lessons from the Los Lagos region,
        Chile.

Abstract

Recent literature on commodity frontiers and resource-based economies has reopened the debate surrounding the effects of extractive economies on people’s connection to a political system that sustains predominant modes of production. However, the debate has focused on struggles and broader political tensions between social movements and private companies or the State. The present article adopts a different approach, reflecting on the emergence of distinct forms of citizenship in rural territories. Through examining the salmon industry in the Los Lagos region of Chile, I identify connections between commodity production, place-based identity politics, and citizenship performance. I argue
that the concept of rural citizenship understood here as the set of practices of relationship with the State grounded in a rural sense of belonging and assessment of the place rural areas have in the frontier project is central to understanding political participation in commodity regions and is informed by the trialectic relationship between place identity, commodity production, and the democratic institutions in place. The article concludes with an invitation for further research into frontier politics from a commodity perspective.

Keywords: Chilean Patagonia, Commodity frontiers, Rural Citizenship, Salmon industry.

1. Los Lagos as a commodity frontier

My mother-in-law, who worked in the fields of Compu, believed in the promise of progress, and, in order to make ends meet, she got a job at a salmon farm in Quellón. She really thought she’d made it. After a while she started spending more money ... along came the debts; along came the "changas", a word we use for overtime. She was in a hurry to become a slave of the industry ...

(Salmon worker, 2017)

The salmon industry has radically transformed the lives and landscapes of the Los Lagos, Aysén, and Magallanes regions industry over the past forty years to bring modernity to rural areas. The quotation illustrates the tension between the desire to engage in the modern promise of increased wealth and material goods, and the associated cultural and emotional costs experienced by rural communities in Southern Chile. Historically
connected by fishers and boats' movement, the Patagonian seas are considered today the frontier across which the salmon industry is gradually moving, driven by the need to expand production spaces following the Infectious Salmon Anemia (ISA) crises of 2008 and 2010.

The commoditization of natural resources in Chile began 40 years ago, with the Pinochet dictatorship's economic and political reforms (1973-1990) that opened up the natural resources of the country’s various regions to the global economy. The ongoing process results from political and identity discourses that legitimize neoliberal practices such as consumer-based interactions with the State (Moulian 1997) and neoliberal spaces such as private-public alliances for decision-making (Di Giminiani 2016, Holmes 2015, Nem Singh 2012). In this context, the opening quotation invites reflection upon the territorial processes heralded by the salmon industry and how rural inhabitants make sense of and engage with those processes.

The transformations brought by the salmon industry have led to social conflict and calls for improved working conditions, redistribution of the benefits brought by the industry, accountability for its environmental consequences, including the contamination of coastal waters and the extraction of marine resources (Asche et al. 2009, Leon 2007, WWF-Chile 2006, Leon 2006). This raises the question regarding how rural belonging in a transformed landscape affects citizenship practices.
Citizenship refers to the articulation of rights between a subject and a State. It was traditionally grounded on the axes of extent (norms of inclusion-exclusion), content (rights and responsibilities), and depth (thickness or thinness) (Isin and Turner 2002, 14). However, we are now facing a crisis of the modern idea of citizenship, and new trends emerged, calling for consideration identity, practices, and new forms of belonging. The inclusionary language of citizenship has expanded its role as a technology of control of governments, based on the exclusion and estrangement of certain groups (people of color, women, migrants, workers) and in frontier regions, rural subjects.

We have observed that a parallel process of subject formation and disciplining occurs in commodity frontiers through our research. Rural inhabitants have responded to industry expansion in five ways: resistance, assimilation, adaptation, expulsion, and replacement. These responses show that "the process of neoliberalization of nature has had profound consequences in the formation of the identity and sense of citizenship of the inhabitants of the region, configuring a neoliberal subject that is related to nature through the logic of the value of change, transforming a culture based on the logic of solidarity and cooperation" (Bustos, Délano and Prieto, 2019:3). I argue that rural citizenship constitutes a distinctive concept to understand political participation in commodity frontier regions and is informed by the trialectic relationship between place identity, commodity production, and the democratic institutions in place. I propose to understand rural citizenship in commodity frontiers as the set of practices of relationship with the State grounded in a rural sense of belonging and assessment of the place rural areas have in the
frontier project. I suggest that for rural subjects, the way their landscape was transformed into a salmon producing territory, and the responses that the State gave to their grievances over time, affected their political and identity connection with the national project into a position of resentment.

Los Lagos represents both a geographical and economical entry point to Chilean Patagonia – as it is from here that the salmon industry began its southward spread – and, importantly, a space in which the Chilean State articulates strategies to engage rural residents in its politics. Evidence for this paper was gathered within six years (2012-2018) of fieldwork in the Los Lagos region by a team of geographers, anthropologists, and sociologists who collected detailed data on at least eight districts across the region. The team conducted ethnographic work of at least six months each in two localities (Calbuco and Cochamó), nearly 70 semi-structured interviews in total, and four participatory mapping experiences (in Cochamó, Quellón, Quemchi, Curaco de Velez) lasting at least one year and varying between four and ten workshops each. During this time, we explored the effects of and transformations driven by the salmon industry in rural communities and its subsequent spatial patterns, monetary flows, and relationship with the State. The data was transcribed and coded using Atlas.ti software, using analytical categories emerging from resource frontier literature and rural citizenship. The quotes used in this paper represent general trends found in the data\textsuperscript{1}. Despite the historical differences in the relationship with the State between inland and Chilote’s inhabitants,
the coding showed no significant difference in how the State action and salmon industry were perceived across the region.

Following this introduction, I will discuss the existing literature on commodity frontiers and citizenship. Section three will provide empirical evidence to highlight the emergence of particular forms of rural citizenship in Los Lagos. Finally, I will discuss the connection with studies of Patagonia.

2. Commodity frontiers and forms of rural citizenship

Chilean Patagonia (3) has been discussed as an isolated territory that is disconnected from the nation-state and whose identity is based on its position as a frontier of the national project (Mandujano-Bustamante, Rodríguez-Torrent, and Reyes-Herrera 2016, Núñez et al. 2017). Although there is an interesting and growing body of literature reflecting upon the relationship between the Aysén region and the Chilean State, most work, centers on the configuration of the political frontier between Argentina and Chile (Núñez, Baeza, and Benwell 2017) or defines Aysén as the periphery, produced through interaction with the State and its nation-building project (Núñez et al. 2017).

In contrast, the present article adopts a contemporary understanding of frontiers - as resource availability sites - which conform to the capitalist project of ongoing accumulation. This project involves its own technologies of space and time by which white
male democracy controls marginalized inhabitants (Tsing, 2003; Peluso, 2017) through processes of land grabbing and accumulation by dispossession (Borras and Franco 2013, Edelman, Oya, and S. Borras 2013, Mezzadra and Gago 2017, Watts 2004), income distribution (Elden and Morton 2016), expansion of infrastructure (Arboleda 2016, Wilson and M. Bayón 2018), the establishment of property rights, primitive accumulation, replacement of knowledge systems, revaluation of nature, and the emergence of new property boundaries (Andreucci et al. 2017, Moore 2015, Rasmussen and Lund 2018). More specifically, I agree with Rasmussen and Lund (2018), who propose that frontier dynamics – i.e., the interactions of these processes – dissolve the existing order, but also give rise to the creation of a new order which sustains the mode of production associated with a resource and redesigns patterns of authority and institutional architectures. How is this new order projected onto and performed by rural dwellers? This section provides a brief overview of current debates on rural citizenship to explore the trialectic relationship between place identity, commodity production, and the democratic institutions in place.

2.1. Rural citizenship

In her analysis of the effects of globalization, Ong (2006) argues that it has led to “flexible citizenship” based on the logic of homo economicus, whose well-being depends on individual capacity to access the market. This creates a form of territorial disciplinary logic (Ong 2006, Ferguson 2006), which imposes, explicitly or implicitly, ways to inhabit, work, and access resources within a particular territory. The State backs this process by creating figures and institutions that define who, how, and when you access nature.
In other words, under neoliberal citizenship, belonging is no longer place-based but related to an individual’s participation in the predominant economic activity. As such, the legitimacy of the predominant mode of production is precarious and depends on evaluation by economic actors of their access to benefits. However, in the rural environment, subjects have different capacities and means. Those with more experience connecting to global value chains tend to capitalize more successfully on relationships within the territory (Aliste, Folchi, and Núñez 2018). Inequality may result in restricted access to networks and natural resources and, ultimately, in the expulsion of inhabitants of the territory (Blomley 2017, Sassen 2015, Soja 2010). From this perspective, the concept of rural citizenship enables us to understand the exercise of democracy in rural spaces.

On similar grounds, Wittman (2009) proposes the notion of agrarian citizenship as “the political and material rights and practices of rural dwellers”, arguing that the concept allows us to understand the reactions and strategies of resistance to the “metabolic rift” that agro-industries have brought to the rural environment. Her work offers an interesting examination of contemporary rural societies, exposing how the commodification of nature and labor are at the center of this metabolic rift, arguing that "agrarian citizenship is a contested space for dialectical negotiation between nature, State and society" (Wittman, 2009:820). While she focuses on farmers who operate outside or on the margins of capital, I build on her work by considering those subjects already part of the
commoditized economy but still live in rural areas. I believe that commoditized forms of citizenship in extractive frontiers are more complicated than those found by Wittman in Brazil because they are not about agrarian relationships derived from the Hacienda-Latifundio system. Instead, they emerged from a new combination of proletarization of rural economies and territorial commoditization.

Elsewhere (Bustos-Gallardo forthcoming), I have explored the idea of extractive citizenship to consider how rural subjects “becomes responsible for his/her economic choices and logics through an entrepreneurial relationship with nature, and by adopting more flexible and mobile economic practices, such as switching among multiple economic practices (e.g. agriculture and seaweed harvesting) and/or migrating or commuting for economic opportunity”. For this paper, I am narrowing the focus in the state-rural inhabitant interactions to explore resentment.

Some authors discuss this tension according to the notion of insurgent citizenship (Hecht 2011, Holston 2008); however, I believe it is more closely associated with what Cramer (2016) proposes through the notion of resentment. Resentment arises from perceived differentiation between rural and urban dwellers, and particularly decision-makers. The latter are seen as disconnected from the rural reality, and, therefore, rural dwellers mistrust their decisions. The notion of resentment connects their assessment of the State of the natural world (including ecological degradation and their own access to natural resources) with the perception of how the State treats rural territories, and has a range of
manifestations, from defiance to adaptation and assimilation. Table 1 summarizes the range of manifestations of rural citizenship led by inhabitants of extractive frontiers.

Table 1 ABOUT HERE

Source: Compiled by the author

Regarding place identity, for this argument, I understand following Harner (2001: 660) that “place identity arises when the shared beliefs about place meaning for the majority match the ideological beliefs of those in power.” Rural communities have experienced many changes in recent decades, raising questions regarding the traditional definition of "rurality", since it is no longer a condition considered backward, outdated, or in need of modernization or urbanization. Instead, the rural has become the geographic and ideological center of global insertion for natural resource-based economies within global circuits of accumulation (Barton, Gwynne, and Murray 2008, Barton and Murray 2009, Bebbington 2001, Murray 2006, Overton, Murray, and Banks 2012). This calls for a revision of how place identity becomes intertwined with commodity production because the commoditization of the rural areas provides the material grounds for naturalization of meanings connected with what rural areas should be for. Bustos, Delano and Prieto (2019) have discussed how the salmon industry triggered a transformation of identity performance in the Los Lagos region by exploring how fishers, farmers, and workers have developed strategies of resistance, assimilation, or adaptation to the institutional
framework implemented by the State to support the industry. The present article connects that debate with ideas on citizenship performance.

If we consider capitalism as an ecological regime (4) (Moore, 2015), commodity production refers to the actual process through which subjects, ecosystems, and industry interact. Thus, the very existence of the industry represents a disruption of the metabolic dynamics at play. Labor – both human and natural – becomes a key element as the salmon bodies work through existing ecosystem conditions and human-made farming practices to produce a commodity and a new ecosystem tailored to salmon production. In terms of rural citizenship, what matters here is how the State’s institutional responses to the ecological contradictions inherent in the Chilean salmon industry (Bustos-Gallardo and Irarrázaval 2016, Irarrázaval 2018) shape the performance of rural dwellers.

Finally, democratic institutions’ issue concerns both the formal spaces of decision-making regarding natural resources and economic activities in rural areas, along with legal moments of voting and electoral politics and those informal moments of struggle and negotiation between public organizations and subjects. At this point, we need to consider the effects of neoliberal reforms on rural areas. Market-based approaches to rural governance have brought significant changes to political and civic dynamics, such as the introduction of “neoliberal solidarity” (Nousiainen and Pylkkänen 2013), privatization or decentralization of service provision (Warner 2006), and clientelist relations (Durston 2005). However, the effects on rural equality of access and participation in decision
making remain unclear. As such, the politics of resentment take different forms depending on the level of engagement with both the industry and the State, and on the level of knowledge held by different subjects regarding the two.

In the next section, I will present the salmon industry's case in Chile to showcase the nature of rural citizenship in commodity frontiers.

3. The emergence of particular forms of citizenship in rural commodity frontier regions

The Los Lagos region lies in the south of Chile and covers an area of 48,584.5 km\(^2\). According to the latest census, 828,708 people lived there in 2017, 26% of whom resided in rural areas. Among its main economic activities are services, fishing and aquaculture, agricultural activity – primarily meat and dairy production – and tourism. The industry arrived during the 1970s (Vera-Bahamonde 2010) and soon became the region’s growth engine (Barton 1997).

There have been various changes in the region during the period of salmon expansion: GDP increased by 220% between 1996 and 2006 (INE, 2012), there was a 10% reduction in poverty between 2003 and 2006, and levels of unemployment have fallen by 8.56% over the past decade. The main contributors to the regional economy remain the service sector, followed by public administration and agriculture (Central_Bank 2017). However, the spatial economic pattern has become differentiated, with the north of the region
remaining strongly agricultural and the south focusing on aquaculture. The arrival of industry triggered changes in rural and urban populations, mainly led by migrant labor (CÁRDENAS 2016, Gobantes et al. 2011). Fish farms and associated processing facilities attracted the local population, and traditional activities such as agriculture and artisanal fishing were abandoned as young people left in search of new opportunities (Rebolledo 2012)

3.1. Emerging forms of rurality in Los Lagos as a frontier region

As I have argued, rural citizenship emerges as a distinctive category to understand the interaction between rural dwellers and the state because it invites to consider identity, practices, and new forms of belonging in a landscape transformed by modes of production of frontier regions. This section will delve into the triadic of democratic institutions- mode of production and place identity to illustrate how citizenship has move away from belonging to a national project. The effect of the changes brought by the industry is negatively valued by locals, giving way to politics of resentment, which are discussed in the next section. For now, I want to show the pervasive transformation into state-subject interaction that the salmon industry implied.

Democratic institutions
I always used to talk to my parents and siblings about how it would be to have a highway so that we could cut timber. That was always our hope: to have a highway and a truck, and to get into the forest for wood. It is how we could use the land. Because in recent decades, land has been of very little use.

(Rural resident, Cochamó)

The above quote reflects the aspirations of residents of rural localities regarding the State project. We heard different versions of it during our interviews with farmers, reflecting on the salmon industry's transformation to its locality. More concretely, we identify three key state-actions: (1) the creation of municipalities or local councils, (2) the construction of a public road (the Carretera Austral or Southern Highway) to connect remote localities within the Los Lagos region to the rest of the country, and (3) the arrival of private firms such as hydroelectric power plants, mussel canneries or salmon aquaculture farms. These combined actions brought the neoliberal project to rural spaces. Importantly, this neoliberalization was also a part of the Pinochet dictatorship’s (1973-1990) geopolitical strategy of centralized territorial control of Chilean Patagonia. As a result, the municipality became the local embodiment of State presence and the main actor transforming rural subjects into national citizens. Notably, the municipality and its provision of social services introduced the neoliberal logic of subsidies as the primary relationship between the State and local people. The arrival of the highway and the salmon farms represent the moment at which nature became a site of investment and accumulation. Both activities required a workforce, resulting in the local youth's proletarianization and abandonment of agrarian
labor. These workers also needed space to live, and the result was an increase in population density in coastal settlements.

New State regulations were applied to small-scale agriculture, including sanitary regulations, property rights, conservation, and natural resources management. Significant economic pressure targeted farmers in three particularly important areas. Forest management regulations limited the forest volume that could be commercialized, and restricted logging and clearing for agricultural purposes. Meat processing rules made the use of a slaughterhouse mandatory (5). This change prohibited traditional slaughter methods and forced those peasants wishing to sell their cattle as meat to pay for the butchery service, transportation of the animal to the slaughterhouse, and the use of a refrigerated truck in which the meat would be brought back to the town (6). Also, small farmers were required to tag their cattle to prevent livestock loss, which also increased production costs. Peasants poorly received these regulations: “we landowners cannot do anything. An owner does not truly own his things.” Small farms perceived these regulations as a threat, whose minimal scale makes them more vulnerable to regulatory policies' effects. "The law harms the poor, not the wealthy... they can afford what the law requires, unlike small farmers." Peasants claim these laws aim to bring about their disappearance:

    What happens is that laws are devised ‘between four walls,’ ignoring what people actually do and how such laws make life difficult for them. So, many people have
stopped farming. They do not understand that we have to live too and that, if we cannot cut wood, the forest will invade the farms and the mountain lions will come down and start killing the animals (resident of Cochamó).

This sentiment, expressed by a woman in her mid-forties, shows that the perceived threat is not limited to agricultural economic activities but also applies to rurality as a vital space in which fundamental practices of rural livelihoods are today being forbidden.

Mode of production

The arrival of salmon farming brought with it the idea of maritime productivity, legitimating aquaculture as the predominant economic activity and leading to private ownership of the sea through a system of maritime concessions. This process also resulted in several stark changes to the region's ecosystem and drove the emergence of parallel economic activities. For example, the artisanal fishers perceived an increase in the number of wild fish driven by a greater availability of food in the form of aquaculture debris. This led to conflict between them and the salmon farms, mutual suspicion, and accusations of stealing from one side and pollution, violence, and invasion of vital space – i.e., limited access to privatized waters – from the other. This restriction of resources led artisanal fishers to shift from fishing activities to mollusk (mostly mytilid) aquaculture, and organize themselves into a federation of workers’ unions. However, these groups exhibited the same productive logic as the salmon farms, namely privatizing space by
excluding other users, intensifying productive practices (monoculture), exhaustion of natural resources, and lack of accountability for environmental impact.

Today, the region's inhabitants talk about a landscape where the natural world is not enough (*la naturaleza no da*). This statement has two connotations: a productivist approach (referring to yields) and an economic approach (referring to pricing and monetarization). The first refers to low agricultural yields, attributed mostly to degradation through overexploitation. This explanation is supported by the rhetoric surrounding human impacts on the natural environment – particularly global warming discourses – which have helped establish an imaginary of hazards and environmental deterioration among local people. Farmers use chemical fertilizers and pesticides to increase agricultural output and diminish the risk of disease and other elements that threaten their crops. The presence of disease (7) has made it inconceivable for local farmers to grow potatoes without the support of fertilizers. Sheep pasture now requires applying chemicals, such as pesticides and fertilizers, to ensure rich grass. The cost of agricultural inputs is increasing, and, as a result, peasants have lost their autonomy, depending now on subsidies and grants provided by the State in order to be able to continue farming.

The second connotation refers to the monetarization of social relationships driven by salmon farming and its effects on agriculture. Although on the local level agriculture is generally subsistence-based, peasants invest greater effort and receive fewer rewards due
to lower crop prices. As a result, they perceive the sale of produce as “not worth it.”

Moreover, the Carretera Austral and the resulting availability of goods from other places make it more convenient to buy than to produce.

Place identity

A new logic has emerged within the social relationships of peasant life. Agricultural production traditionally relied on family labor, community cooperation, and reciprocity (vuelta de mano). Today, as is the case of the salmon farm laborer, all work performed must be remunerated. Agricultural labor is now also understood as paid work rather than as domestic labor necessary for family survival. Achieving cooperation in agrarian work is therefore becoming increasingly hard for peasants. Gobantes and Frías (2015) add that in 1977 the average number of children per family was six, while by 1997 it was only 2 or 3. Two farmers – from different parts of the region - comment on this, to show the expansion and depth of the transformation:

    Only a few people are farming. Today, agriculture is not as cooperative as it used to be. People willing to work are hard to find, and people sow just what they need. Potatoes are not profitable. They require much work and they fetch a meager price. Since there is no profit, they are not a product to sell (resident of Cochamó).
The loss of [cultural] identity is not a folk thing, some romantic idea that we are no longer as ‘Chilote’ as we used to be. No. It means that the company changes your whole life; the salmon company doesn’t care if you have to leave your sick child at home if your child has to be accompanied by mom or dad on their way to school in the morning if you need to go to a parent/teacher meeting or to the hospital (resident of Dalcahue).

As such, the common perception is that agriculture is not enough (no da). In the past, home-produced food was the most important. New needs have arisen in response to laborers’ access to credit – many of them salmon workers – thanks to their labor contracts. The inhabitants of rural areas now consider that a variety of goods previously not even considered as parts of everyday life, such as cars, TVs, and water heaters, are fundamental to living “in a place like this” (for more details on this, see Daughters and Pitchon 2018). Isolation and a growing dependence on the city of Puerto Montt drive the need for a car; lack of entertainment demands the existence of a TV.

Then there are hundreds of things that have been decisive in the life of the Chilote. Greetings between us, between neighbors, are no more. There are far more profound and painful illnesses that have taken root in Chiloé. For example, when I want to do something in the countryside, I no longer have my neighbor nearby, my people to laugh with. Before, one went to their house; now everyone
speaks on the phone. We have lost consciousness of what it means to maintain balance; we lose consciousness (rural resident).

Perhaps more crucial is the material transformation of the coastal landscape brought about by the industry. The closure of bays and ports to artisanal fishers and alterations to their marine routes due to the massive presence of cages have redefined the everyday relationship between rural residents and the sea. Guerra and Skewes (2010) called it a process of accumulation by dispossession whereby local people were denied access to seaweed, fish, and everything else that the sea provides as part of their staple diet, as this quote from a Chilote reflecting on the aftermath of the ISA crises express:

    The sea, source of life and subsistence for us Chilotes, is being treated like an object, and they trade it as such economically. Often, salmon farmers do not even use the concessions they have because their strategy is to monopolize cheaply and then sell for a profit (rural resident).

The transformation of the landscape caused by industrial waste and debris is a serious problem. A recent study by the University of Chile (8) found that by August 2017, over 30 tons of industrial garbage spread along the coast of Chiloé. In terms of place identity, the relationship between the industry and local people is complicated. Studies have produced mixed findings (Rodriguez S. 2016, CESCH 2019). While there is some recognition of the material transformations triggered by the industry in the landscape, the
only connection that the locals have with the industry is jobs. There is no clear sense of being part of a "salmon town"; thus, it does not translate into a cultural or emotional connection but more to a sense of invasion:

    The landscape has changed completely... we were already plagued by salmon fishing. That was difficult for us even when we used to fish because our spaces were lost, the fishing spaces ceased to exist because with the issue of anchorages to the salmon farms, you could not sow, you could not fish... With salmon farms, everything changed... then came the mussel farms, and with them, the few remaining spaces were finished (resident of Cochamó).

Some political actors emerged from the transformation described above: farmers, salmon workers, artisanal fishers, and indigenous communities. Each of these represents different forms of the politics of resentment covered in section two, and I will now briefly discuss them.

3.2. Politics of resentment as experienced by rural inhabitants

    Chiloe was a territory that did not interest the Chilean State, the central government. Then, when the State appeared... through this figure of salmon farming, it was received with open arms. Obviously, the State was welcomed in good faith. In this way, salmon farming expands on the archipelago.
Forty years of salmon industry presence in the region have not gone unnoticed. Over the years, different actors have raised demands and grievances against the industry at different times and in different places. These mobilizations remained localized and marginal, except for the ISA virus crisis of 2008 and the algal bloom event of 2016. The reaction of rural residents to the first event was described as “Stockholm syndrome” (Bustos 2015). However, the most recent event has been characterized as the result of “historical disappointments” caused by the State (Mascareño 2018). There has also been discussions of why and how the major social unrest of 2016 did not translate into a transformation of the social pact between the State, salmon firms and regional residents (Bustos and Roman 2019).

In this section, I want to propose three forms of the politics of resentment, as expressed by rural citizens in Los Lagos. As an ideal type, these facilitate reflection on how extractive frontiers produce particular types of citizenship, and while they are not precise, they are based on interviews and fieldwork. As stated previously, the logic of resentment connects their assessment of the State of nature (including access and ecological degradation) with the perception of the State’s treatment of rural territories. During our fieldwork, we encountered various expressions of this resentment.
Apathy refers to the lack of action from rural citizens toward the State regarding the industry's ecological deterioration. Underlying this is a shared understanding of nature as something to be exploited, and thus salmon farming is “just another” of the activities that affect nature. People do occasionally work for the industry; however, there is no identification with the commodity either. It has become invisible within the region's extractive landscape, where salmon farms, mussel ropes, and trucks are part of the landscape. Many explanations of these attitudes refer to the distance between residents' everyday lives and the outcomes of any decision or action on the State's part. However, there seems to be a degree of concentration of apathy in inland rural areas, making it more explicit in farmers who have been displaced twice: once from the predominant mode of accumulation, and then from their own. The following quotes sum up the encompassing sentiment found when assessing their material conditions now:

Now we are dealing with the issue of electricity, but that is a necessary good. It has changed everyone’s lives; even if we have power poles and cables everywhere, it is a necessary good. Cell phone antennas are also a necessary good, even if they do not look pretty anywhere. The towers are not going to look nice, but they are also a necessary good for the country. Supposedly we will also benefit from energy connectivity because they will give the district a certain number of kilowatts at a lower price... because we also have the most expensive electricity in Chile (resident of Cochamó).
Localities are dying. The schools are a sign of these deaths. (before they) had forty, fifty children, and two or three teachers. Now, they have ten... the issue is that the localities begin to die because people start to go in search of work that they consider easier than sowing and leading this more traditional countryside life (resident of Dalcahue).

People did not worry about environmental issues until problems began to occur; previously, no one talked about the environment because there was a balance.

Activities took place without significant inconvenience (resident of Dalcahue).

As these statements show, there is a sense of inevitability regarding the industry's evolution in these localities. Sometimes the evaluation is positive, other times negative. However, it is beyond these individuals' and groups' potential to affect the industry’s trajectory; it is not a political matter, so it does not require active engagement.

_Clientelist_ refers to the outcome-oriented interaction between rural inhabitants and the State regarding the industry's ecological deterioration. This interaction is triggered by the predominant subsidy-based intervention of State agencies within the territory and the rotational nature of labor as a result of cycles of boom and bust. As such, this is perhaps one of the most neoliberal forms of resentment. Local people understand how to navigate the legal framework through which compensation may be obtained. Thus, this interaction is not demobilizing; instead, it mobilizes to the point of negotiating compensation.
When they tried to do the training (after the ISA crises), they talked about diversification. You have to understand that most of the people here had little education. Some applied for seed funding, but in the end, they achieved nothing; their businesses all failed because they were unprepared and dependent on a salary (resident of Quellón).

About ten years ago, they launched a government program. It was pro-rural, depended on agriculture, and began to recruit professionals from different areas. It promoted the artisanal fishing sector in three areas: fishing, tourism, and agriculture. Then, there was momentum for development in those areas... right now, we are working on a tourism project linked to artisanal fishing; a diversification project (resident of Dalcahue).

These statements offer a sense of hope that a new activity may present itself that may change rural communities; however, there is also a sense of fatigue regarding State intervention's actual practices. Most State-sponsored programs run in annual cycles and, as such, have no long-term follow up. This leads local people to become permanently dependent on annual applications for State-funded grants, requiring them to produce documentation and comply with several stipulations; this produces strict citizenship behaviors measured in terms of goals and resource allocation.
A different version of this clientelist approach was the tense negotiation of compensation between artisanal fishers and the State in the wake of the algal bloom crises of 2016 (Thomas 2018). Although this example could be considered as an insurgent moment of citizenship, in the end, it amounted to the negotiation of compensation for the economic losses inflicted by the State moratorium on the harvesting of shellfish.

Insurgent refers to the active mobilization of rural inhabitants in territorial politics through activism and local demonstrations in response to ecological deterioration brought about by the industry. This mobilization is based on a strong sense of place and grievances relating to the noxious transformations triggered by the industry. There is a feeling that institutional responses from the State to ecological contradictions demonstrate a disregard for rural realities:

They fished, and they extracted, and the rest they threw into the water... I had no idea of the damage that was occurring to the sea... but when I dive, down there, I realize there is something yellow and spongy, and the mussel cannot be eaten. It is filled with hairs, and it’s something else... the batteries, the whole cables, and the surrounding steel cables and chains (resident of Cochamó).

If the salmon industry paid the environmental costs of what it has been doing for the past 30 years, it would not be such a profitable industry... because they do not pay the costs of the workers who are dismissed, and governments go out to save
them... but these guys are going to go on and the maritime settlements, so to speak, will disappear (resident of Chiloé).

These quotes convey the negative assessment of the salmon industry and the sense of injustice and anger toward the State. The lack of oversight from the State on the industry's pollution of the ecosystem, upon which so many local people depend, is considered a sign of neglect and their position as second-class citizens. This perception triggers a desire for rebellion and insurgency, which exploded during Chiloé’s large-scale protests in 2016.

While May 2016 marked a moment of explosion, citizen movements such as Defendamos Chiloé aim to eradicate the salmon industry from the island and promote autonomous and island-based territorial development, reframing the relationship between them the islanders and the Chilean State (Bustos and Roman, 2019). The movement's novel contribution is the notion of rural identity and consciousness that lies at the core of their grievance against the State.

4. Rural citizenship connections between commodity production, place-based identity politics and citizenship performance.

At the beginning of this article, I argued that rural citizenship is a crucial concept for understanding political participation in commodity frontiers regions. It is informed by the trialectic relationship between place identity, commodity production, and the democratic
institutions in place. In the present article, I have sought to contribute empirical evidence to debates about rural citizenship in frontier regions, and based on the case of the Los Lagos region in southern Chile, I propose a reconception of Chilean Patagonia as a commodity frontier; as an active center of accumulation as opposed to a mere peripheral location produced by a historical process of nation-building.

In this regard, its intensive use of landscape, labor, and capital makes the salmon industry a critical driver of change within Chilean Patagonia, from Los Lagos all the way down to Magallanes. Although these changes are currently most visible in the Los Lagos region, Aysén has quickly become the fastest-growing productive region in the wake of the ISA crises. Meanwhile, the Magallanes region is at the center of the political debate, with two parliamentary motions seeking to remove salmon farming from the Strait of Magellan.

The evidence provided shows that rural citizenship is about practices of interaction with the State guided by resentment based on the sense of belonging to a degraded landscape. State projects and interventions constrain the extent of rural citizenship's reach to expand the salmon project. For the State, a rural citizen is someone to discipline into the salmon project. For rural inhabitants, citizenship is about claiming belonging to a place transformed without their involvement. In other words, it is not about belonging to the State anymore.
In the present paper, I have shown how the combination of changes in labor patterns, modes of production, and environmental conditions are driven by the salmon industry in the Los Lagos region. They have triggered the emergence of different modes of rural citizenship in commodity frontiers, all of which are connected by the politics of resentment toward the perceived treatment of rural territories by the State.

Apathy, clientelism, or insurgency in rural politics toward the predominant economic activity within a commodity frontier occurs in a context of differentiated access to mobilization devices. The moments and mechanisms of conflict are grounded in rural dwellers' contextual capacity to frame their problem within national narratives of development and its effect on the environment and people. However, the neoliberal practices through which the State engages with rural citizens also play a role in the sense of citizenship perceived as viable.

Endnotes

(1) Decree Law 600 was passed in 1974 to promote foreign direct investment by means of a reduction (or elimination) of taxes and fees. Decree Law 701, also passed in 1974, sought to attract investment in the forestry sector and to turn over the landscape of southern Chile to timber-related industries. Both pieces of legislation have been identified as key in the neoliberalization of regional economic activities.

(2) According to the Chilean State, the Patagonian territory stretches from the Province of Palena in the Los Lagos region to Cape Horn in the Magallanes region.
(3) Moore defines it as the prevailing mode through which capital organizes nature, wealth and power to create cheap labor and cheap nature that sustain accumulation.

(4) Sanitary food regulation, Supreme Decree 977/96.

(5) Interviewees estimated that the addition of services would double the price of beef from US$4 to US$8 per kilogram.

(6) Solanum tuberosum L., a potato disease caused by the fungus Phytophthora infestans (Mont.) de Bary

(7) https://www.latercera.com/noticia/inedito-estudio-satelital-detecta-30-toneladas-basura-playa-chiloe/ (accessed June 2019)

5. References

Aliste, E., M. Folchi, and A. Núñez. 2018. "Discourses of nature in new perceptions of the natural landscape in Southern Chile." Frontiers in Psychology 9 (1177):1-16.

Andreucci, Diego, Melissa García-Lamarca, Jonah Wedekind, and Erik Swyngedouw. 2017. '"Value grabbing": A political ecology of rent." Capitalism Nature Socialism 28 (3):28-47.

Arboleda, M. 2016. "In the Nature of the Non-City: Expanded Infrastructural Networks and the Political Ecology of Planetary Urbanisation." Antipode 48 (2):233-251.

Asche, Frank, Havard Hansen, Ragnar Tveteras, and Sigbjorn Tveteras. 2009. "The Salmon Disease Crisis in Chile." Marine Resource Economics 24 (4):405-411.
Barton, J. R. 1997. "¿Revolución Azul? El impacto regional de la acuicultura del salmón en Chile." Eure-Revista Latinoamericana De Estudios Urbano Regionales Vol. XXII (N° 68): pp. 57-76.

Barton, J. R., R. N. Gwynne, and W. E. Murray. 2008. "Transformations in resource peripheries: an analysis of the Chilean experience." Area 40 (1):24-33.

Barton, J. R., and W. E. Murray. 2009. "Grounding Geographies of Economic Globalisation: Globalised Spaces in Chile's Non-Traditional Export Sector, 1980-2005." Tijdschrift Voor Economische En Sociale Geografie 100 (1):81-100.

Bebbington, A. 2001. "Globalized Andes? Livelihoods, landscapes and development." Ecumene 8 (4):414-436.

Blomley, N. 2017. "Land use, planning, and the “difficult character of property”." Planning Theory & Practice 18 (3):351-364.

Borras, S. M., and J. C. Franco. 2013. "Global Land Grabbing and Political Reactions 'From Below'." Third World Quarterly 34 (9):1723-1747. doi: 10.1080/01436597.2013.843845.

Bustos, B. 2015. "¿Síndrome Estocolmo? Comunidad, industria y desarrollo tras la crisis del virus ISA, Chiloé post 2008." In Revolución salmonera: paradojas y transformaciones territoriales en Chiloé, edited by A. Román, J. Barton, B. Bustos and A. Salazar. Santiago: RIL Editores.

Bustos, B., and A. Roman. 2019. "A sea uprooted: islandness and political identity on Chiloé Island, Chile." Island Studies Journal Ahead of print. doi: https://doi.org/10.24043/isj.91.
Bustos-Gallardo, B. forthcoming. "Anadromous Frontiers: reframing citizenship in extractive regions. The salmon industry in Los Lagos, Chile." In Handbook of Critical Resource Geography, edited by Elizabeth Havice, Gabriela Valdivia and Matt Himley. Routledge.

Bustos-Gallardo, B., J. Delano, and M. Prieto. 2019. '"Chilote tipo salmón"- relaciones entre comodificación de la naturaleza y procesos de producción identitaria, el caso de la región de los lagos y la industria salmonera." Estudios Atacamenos.

Bustos-Gallardo, Beatriz , and Felipe Irarrazaval. 2016. '"Throwing Money into the Sea": Capitalism as a World-ecological System. Evidence from the Chilean Salmon Industry Crisis, 2008." Capitalism Nature Socialism. doi:
DOI:10.1080/10455752.2016.1162822.

CÁRDENAS, MARCELA ALEJANDRA VARGAS. 2016. '"Del gualato al subcontrato". Migraciones laborales en el sur austral de Chile, 1980-2016." Universidad Austral de Chile.

Central_Bank. 2017. PIB por actividad económica, volumen a precios del año anterior encadenado, 2013 - 2016. edited by Central Bank.

CESCH. 2019. Archipiélago de Chiloé: nuevas lecturas de un territorio en movimiento: LOM.

Cramer, Katherine J. 2016. The politics of resentment: Rural consciousness in Wisconsin and the rise of Scott Walker: University of Chicago Press.

Daughters, Anton, and Ana Pitchon. 2018. Chiloé: The Ethnobiology of an Island Culture: Springer.
Di Giminiani, Piergiorgio. 2016. "How to Manage a Forest: Environmental Governance in Neoliberal Chile." Anthropological Quarterly:723-751.

Durston, John Wagner. 2005. "El clientelismo político en el campo chileno."

Edelman, M., C. Oya, and S. Borras. 2013. "Global Land Grabs: historical processes, theoretical and methodological implications and current trajectories." Third World Quarterly 34 (9):1517-1531.

Elden, S. , and A.D. Morton. 2016. "Thinking Past Henri Lefebvre: Introducing “The Theory of Ground Rent and Rural Sociology." Antipode 48 (1):57-66.

Ferguson, J. 2006. Global shadows. Africa in the neoliberal world order. Durham and London: Duke University Press.

Gobantes, Catalina, Jonathan Barton, Álvaro Román, and Alejandro Salazar. 2011. "Migraciones laborales entre la Isla de Chiloé (Chile) y Patagonia Austral: relaciones históricas y cambios recientes en un espacio transnacional." Miradas Transcordilleranas 2:20.

Gobantes, Catalina, and Daniela Frías. 2015. "Estrategias de asentamiento e integración territorial de la industria salmonera." Revolución salmonera: paradojas y transformaciones territoriales en Chiloé:151-179.

Harner, J. 2001. "Place identity and copper mining in Sonora, Mexico." Annals of the Association of American Geographers 91 (4):660-680. doi: 10.1111/0004-5608.00264.
Hecht, Susanna B. 2011. "The new Amazon geographies: Insurgent citizenship,“Amazon Nation” and the politics of environmentalisms." Journal of Cultural Geography 28 (1):203-223.

Holmes, George. 2015. "Markets, nature, neoliberalism, and conservation through private protected areas in southern Chile." Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 47 (4):850-866.

Holston, James. 2008. Insurgent citizenship: Disjunctions of democracy and modernity in Brazil: Princeton university press.

Irarrázaval, Felipe, and Beatriz Bustos-Gallardo. 2018. "Global Salmon Networks: Unpacking Ecological Contradictions at the Production Stage." Economic Geography.

Isin, Engin F, and Bryan S Turner. 2002. Handbook of citizenship studies: Sage.

Leon, J. 2006. Synopsis of salmon farming impacts and environmental management in Chile.. edited by WWF. Valdivia, Chile: WWF.

Leon, J., David Tecklin, Aldo Farias, Susana Diaz. 2007. Salmon farming in the Lakes of Southern Chile - Valdivian Ecoregion. History, tendencies and environmental impacts. edited by WWF-Chile. Valdivia: WWF.

Mandujano-Bustamante, Fernando, Juan Carlos Rodríguez-Torrent, and Sonia Reyes-Herrera. 2016. "El Estado Chileno Y La Patagonia: Conflictos Territoriales." Bitácora Urbano Territorial 26 (1):83–91. doi: http://www.scielo.org.co/scielo.php?pid=S0124-79132016000100010&script=sci_abstract&tlng=pt.
Mascareño, A. et al. . 2018. "Controversies in social-ecological systems: lessons from a major red tide crisis on Chiloe Island, Chile." Ecology and Society 23 (4):15.

Mezzadra, S., and V. Gago. 2017. "In the wake of the plebeian revolt: Social movements, 'progressive' governments, and the politics of autonomy in Latin America." Anthropological Theory 17 (4):474-496. doi: 10.1177/1463499617735257.

Moore, Jason W. 2015. Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of Capital: Verso Books.

Moulian, Tomas. 1997. Chile Actual: Anatomia de un mito 5ta edicion ed. Santiago: LOM Ediciones.

Murray, W. E. 2006. "Neo-feudalism in Latin America? Globalisation, agribusiness, and land re-concentration in Chile." Journal of Peasant Studies 33 (4):646-677.

Nem Singh, Jewellord T. 2012. "Who Owns the Minerals? Repoliticizing Neoliberal Governance in Brazil and Chile." Journal of Developing Societies 28 (2):229-256. doi: 10.1177/0169796x12448759.

Nousiainen, Marko, and Päivi Pylkkänen. 2013. "Responsible local communities—A neoliberal regime of solidarity in Finnish rural policy." Geoforum 48:73-82.

Núñez, Andrés, Enrique Aliste Almuna, Álvaro Bello, and Mauricio Osorio. 2017. Imaginarios Geográficos, Prácticas Y Discursos de Frontera: Aisén-Patagonia Desde El Texto de La Nación. Edited by Instituto de Geografía Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. Santiago.
Núñez, Andrés, Brígida Baeza, and Matthew C. Benwell. 2017. "Cuando La Nación Queda Lejos: Fronteras Cotidianas En El Paso Lago Verde (Aysén-Chile)-Aldea Las Pampas (Chubut-Argentina)." Revista de Geografía Norte Grande 66:97-116.

Ong, Aihwa 2006. "Mutations in citizenship." Theory, culture Society & Natural Resources 23 (2-3):499-505.

Overton, J., W. E. Murray, and G. Banks. 2012. "The Race to the Bottom of the Glass? Wine, Geography, and Globalization." Globalizations 9 (2):273-287. doi: 10.1080/14747731.2012.658251.

Rasmussen, Mattias Borg, and Christian Lund. 2018. "Reconfiguring Frontier Spaces: The territorialization of resource control." World Development 101:388-399.

Rebolledo, Loreto. 2012. "Resistencia y cambios identitarios en trabajadores/as del salmón en Quellón " Polis (Santiago) 11 (31):223-239.

Rodriguez S., Tomás. 2016. "Comunas salmoneras post crisis del virus ISA: hegemonía salmonera y construcción de lugar en la Región de Los Lagos." Geógrafo, Geografía, Universidad de Chile.

Sassen, S. . 2015. Expulsiones: brutalidad y complejidad en la economía global. Edited by Katz Editores. Buenos Aires.

Soja, E. W. . 2010. Seeking spatial justice. . Edited by University of Minnesota Press. Minneapolis.

Thomas, Eric H. 2018. "Crisis and catastrophe on Chiloé: Collective memory and the (re) framing of an environmental disaster." Cultural Dynamics 30 (3):199-213.
Vera-Bahamonde, Héctor 2010. La crisis del salmón ¿Por qué falló el tercer motor de la economía chilena?

: RIL Editores.

Warner, Mildred E. 2006. "Market-based governance and the challenge for rural governments: US trends." Social Policy & Administration 40 (6):612-631.

Watts, M. . 2004. "Antinomies of Community: Some Thoughts on Geography, Resources and Empire." Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 29 (2):195-216.

Wilson, J., and M. M. Bayón. 2018. "Potemkin Revolution: Utopian Jungle Cities of 21st Century Socialism." Antipode 50 (1):233-254.

Wittman, Hannah. 2009. "Reworking the metabolic rift: La Vía Campesina, agrarian citizenship, and food sovereignty." The Journal of Peasant Studies 36 (4):805-826. doi: 10.1080/03066150903353991.

WWF-Chile. 2006 "Actas Taller Cientifico: Investigacion Ambiental en la Salmonicultura Chilena: Gasto o inversion?", Valdivia, Chile.
Table 1: Politics of Resentment and its associated Citizenship performance

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Criteria</th>
    <th colspan="3">POLITICS OF RESENTMENT</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Apathy</th>
    <th>Clientelist</th>
    <th>Insurgent</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>place identity</td>
    <td>The industry’s mode of production is compatible with existing place dynamics. It is “just another”. There is no particular identification with the commodity</td>
    <td>Mixed engagement with the industry. Pride in achievements and material benefits obtained from the industry. Criticism of environmental degradation</td>
    <td>Strong sense of place and grievances concerning the negative transformations brought by the industry</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>commodity production</td>
    <td>Industry becomes a source of precarious labor income for rural dwellers. Institutional responses to ecological contradictions fail to consider rural dwellers</td>
    <td>Rotational access to labor based on boom and bust cycles. Institutional responses to ecological contradictions become an opportunity to renegotiate terms of participation and benefits</td>
    <td>Complete opposition to the industry’s existence, and no involvement. Institutional responses to ecological contradictions represent State disregard for rural realities</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>democratic institutions</td>
    <td>Marginal participation</td>
    <td>Active access to and engagement with State subsidies either associated with the main commodity produced or demanded as compensation for the industry’s effects on the place</td>
    <td>Active engagement with territorial politics through activism and local demonstrations.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source: own ellaboration

i As part of the ethics protocols approved for the research, we change all names for generic descriptors.