Spanish Colonization and Indian Property in Central Mexico, 1521–1620*

Hanns J. Prem

Department of Anthropology (Völkerkunde), University of Bonn, 5300 Bonn-3, Germany
FAX (49-228) 735579, bitnetPrem@dbnin5

Abstract. After the conquest of Mexico (1519–21), the Spaniards coopted Indian administrative structures, allowing the King and the new Colonial government to exploit traditional regional revenues. Key participants of the military campaigns were rewarded with rights to the tribute and limited labor conscription (encomienda) required of the indigenous population in a particular district. Legally, encomienda did not confer property rights, but holders of the privilege also received most of the earliest land grants and had the advantage of conscript labor during the planting and harvest seasons. As the encomienda system was gradually reformed and phased out, agriculture and stockraising became the major source of rural income for increasing numbers of Spanish settlers. Public land was overwhelmingly awarded to officials, the military, and the Colonial elite. Following the failure of the Puebla experiment (1531–34), designed to create a new class of farmers with small holdings, agricultural work was relegated to Indian labor. Property became the focus of competition between Spaniard and Indian, ending with partial dispossession of Indian lands by the early 1600s. The granting of lands (mercedes) is explicated by three examples: the Basin of Mexico, the district northwest of Puebla, and the Valley of Toluca. Archival documentation of land grants provides a powerful tool to decipher regional settlement histories and to examine the degree to which the Spanish legal system safeguarded Indian property rights. Spanish agricultural expansion was made possible by the Indian demographic collapse, as a result of recurrent epidemics, and was facilitated by Indian settlement amalgamation (congregación). While the processes and temporal patterns of property transfer show structural similarities in the heart of Central Mexico, settlement histories in peripheral areas are unique. The means by which Indian communities slowed Spanish expansion are discussed. The pattern of dispossession of the Indian was established during the first hundred years, setting in motion a process that culminated with the powerful haciendas of the nineteenth century.

Key Words: Colonial agriculture, congregación, depopulation, encomienda, land grants (mercedes), hacienda, Indian property, Mexico, Puebla, Toluca.

*Translated from the German by Karl W. Butzer.

The stereotypic view of the rural economy of Latin America is dominated by the hacendado, living in a fortress-like estate as lord of vast territories and master over teams of indigenous workers. As timeless as that image may seem, it has lost its general validity through revolutions and reforms. The great estates culminated in the nineteenth century, but they owe their origins to complex processes initiated during the 1520s, soon after the Spanish conquistadors entered Mexico. This paper examines how Colonial policy first experimented with a tribute system, before switching to a settlement policy based on land
grants. The process of awarding public lands to new settlers and its implications for the alienation of traditional Indian landholdings are fundamental to understanding Spanish colonization throughout the Spanish Americas.

Phase One: Encomienda and Tribute

Before 1519 the Spaniards had encountered chiefdoms (cacicazgos) with limited social organization or centralized authority on the Caribbean islands and along the Isthmus of Panama. Spanish commercial activity, beyond a little barter, had been focused on the exploitation of gold and recruiting of the necessary labor. The state organization of the Aztec empire offered more attractive possibilities, not only to seize its accumulated wealth, but to exploit the apparently unlimited flow of state revenues, to the benefit of all participants in the Conquest, from the king to the common foot-soldier. Such exploitation of tributary revenues marked the first phase of exploitation of the Aztec Empire and, a little later, its Inca counterpart.

Even before Conquest had been completed, the Spaniards had tapped considerable wealth. This included the direct spoils of war and, more important, the "gifts" extorted from the indigenous rulers. The sealed treasury of Moctezuma and the rooms filled with gold that belonged to Atahualpa are the best known examples. Ornaments of inestimable artistic value were hurriedly melted down to gold bars. Treasures lay open for the taking. But before the participants of the military campaigns could claim their reward for the efforts and dangers they had been put to, a fifth of the loot was claimed by the King and another fifth by the expedition leader, who also deducted his expenses as generously as possible. Little remained for the others, so that Bernal Díaz del Castillo (1960, 324) complained of Hernán Cortés's redistribution that "there was so little that many soldiers didn't want to accept it."

At first, the indigenous rulers were allowed to continue as nominal heads of state, while the conquistador-in-chief took control over the flow of tribute mobilized from the economies of the conquered regions. The instructions of the King to Cortés in 1523 state explicitly that Spain demanded tribute from the indigenous inhabitants: "They will give and pay us for each year as much revenue and tribute as were given and paid until now to their priests and lords" (CDIU 9, 167-72). In order to manage this in organizational terms, it was essential not only to maintain the lower echelons of Indian administration, but also to integrate them into the structures of colonial government.

The two systems interfaced in the cabeceras, sometimes recently founded settlements that became centers of administrative districts and the residence of the chief magistrate (alcalde mayor or corregidor) or his lieutenant, representing the lowest level of authority in the Colonial administration. By keeping the internal, indigenous institutions functional, this hybrid administration of the tribute system was highly advantageous to the conquerors, at least as long as the demographic decline, that began immediately, only reduced widespread population pressure, rather than cutting into productivity. Without further investment, other than the high cost of initial conquest, the new arrangement promised to provide both the crown and the conquerors with an apparently permanent source of revenue.

That income, however, went to the crown or its direct representatives and agents. Consequently another means of recompense and reward had to be found for all those others who had placed their lives and health at stake. The only practicable solution was to award such people rights to encomienda, a combination of tribute and service required of the indigenous population to support petty local rulers. This institution, however, had been thoroughly discredited, in the eyes of the King, during the administration initially tested with tragic results in the Antilles. As in Prehispanic times, demand was at first limited to agricultural and craft products, but labor could also be required on a limited scale, as for example, in house construction (Simpson 1966). In return for such an award, the encomenderos were supposed to provide for the religious education of their Indian wards. Despite royal interdiction and personal misgivings, Cortés began to award encomiendas on a large scale immediately after his subjugation of the Aztec empire (Cortés 1963, 201).

From the beginning, the crown sought to eliminate individual encomienda rights, in
favor of royal officials (corregidores), appointed for a fixed term and with salary to administer a particular district as a crown encomienda. According to the King's wish, personal encomiendas were only to be used as awards for the first generation of conquistadors, but pressures to extend these privileges were repeatedly supported by the Colonial administration. The clinching argument was that a system of permanent encomienda would best guarantee humane treatment of the Indians. In order to eliminate the evident negative impacts of the encomienda, the New Laws of 1542 (as well as subsequent legislation) imposed a long list of conditions on the encomenderos. Thus they were required to live in the province where they held their encomienda (Leyes Nuevas, article 48), yet strictly forbidden to stay for more than one night in the Indian towns they controlled, or to build a house or even a shed there. Encomenderos were further prohibited from owning grazing land within their encomienda territory, and their rights to raise pigs were also circumscribed (Recopilación, book 6, title 9, laws 10–14, 17–20); but ownership of agricultural land was not regulated and hence possible.

Until these restrictions went into effect, the encomenderos had at least a decade or two to exploit Indian tribute and the labor conscription that was part of the encomienda privileges. At first Spanish economic activity was focused on the lucrative extraction of precious metals. The tax reports known as the Libros de tasaciones reveal that many encomenderos were already engaged in mining immediately after the Conquest (Miranda 1965, 23). Although efforts were made to stop the use of encomienda Indians in mining (Miranda 1965, 12–13; see Recopilación 6-9-22), legislation and practice remained difficult to reconcile. Few mining enterprises proved to be really profitable, however, and in general they had little economic success (Haring 1963, 246).

The agricultural activities of the encomenderos were far more important as they promptly obtained a large number of royal grants (reales mercedes) for agricultural and grazing land. Because only a part of the related documents is preserved, they only provide a selective impression: more than half of the land titles awarded in 1542–43 went to encomenderos, a pattern that is even more striking among those grants made by the municipal council of Mexico City from 1525–28 (Miranda 1965, 26–27). At an early stage, the encomenderos evidently had little difficulty in acquiring large estates, holdings that were eventually enlarged and consolidated. This led to the conclusion that encomiendas were structural analogs of the later haciendas or big estates, although the two institutions were distinct in theory and practice (Lockhart 1969, 418–22).

There indeed were parallels in regard to labor. The encomenderos had an advantage over other landowners in that they could use Indian labor, to which the tribute arrangement initially entitled them. But the use of conscript Indian labor was increasingly denied, at least in theory, as tribute payment was progressively standardized and commuted by legislation, limiting it to a sum of money and, for an interim period, delivery of maize. Amounts were fixed on a uniform basis by the authorities, not by the encomenderos, and these rates were lower than in Prehispanic times (Leyes Nuevas, articles 49, 51).

The continuing struggle to extend encomienda privileges beyond one lifetime may give a contrary impression, but the encomienda as such had lost much of its economic importance, and hence its attractiveness, after the mid-sixteenth century. Critical for this development were the increasingly more rigorous legislation and the rapid decline of the Indian population, requiring readjustments every few years to reduce tributary service. As the number of settlers in New Spain continued to increase, and more and more encomiendas passed to the crown, the encomenderos' share of Indian revenues declined sharply.

A Failed Experiment:
Conquistadors as Farmers

Shortly after the conquest of New Spain, it became apparent that encomiendas could only provide income for a small part of the Spanish settlers, leading to a search for alternatives (Chevalier 1957, 6; Hirschberg 1979). Based primarily on the suggestions of the Franciscans, who espoused utopian ideas at the time, the colonial government (Audiencia) founded the city of Puebla de los Ángeles as "a town of Spaniards who are to cultivate the soil and create fields and farms as they do in Spain" (Motolinía 1971, 263). This explicit experiment
was expected to serve as a model “that towns be begun in which many Christians who now go about idle and vagrant can be brought together to give an example to the Indians of Christianity and of work as in Spain” (Motolinía 1971). The Spaniards were assigned a little Indian labor to start them off, after which a free labor market was expected to develop (Paso y Troncoso 1939–42, XVI, 11). Exactly what was meant by “as in Spain” is not specified, but the accompanying circumstances imply a society of urban-dwelling small farmers. This was the logical extension of a long-standing royal policy to encourage the emigration of farmers to the New World (Haring 1963, 206–07).

That the foundation of Puebla in 1531 was not some secondary effort, or just another founding of a Spanish town, can be inferred from the plan to make it into the second seat of the Colonial administration of New Spain (Paso y Troncoso 1939–42, XVI, 10). The Bishop’s residence for the second diocese of Mexico was indeed moved from Tlaxcala to Puebla (Fig. 1), but none of the offices of secular government were.

The social experiment in Puebla promptly failed. It would be too obvious to attribute this failure only to the opposition of nearby encomenderos, who saw this alternative strategy as harmful to their efforts to institute a permanent encomienda system. None of the new settlers, who at first included no encomenderos (Albi Romero 1970, 79), were willing to get behind a plow. Instead, the small land grants awarded around Puebla and in the fertile adjacent Valley of Atlixco promptly went up for sale. Wealthy and influential people bought them up, one after another, in order to assemble large estates (Prem 1984, 215). Within four years after Puebla had been founded, a handful of landowners had together planted some 10,000 grapevines, showing how quickly large holdings were amalgamated (Albi Romero 1970, 93).

The assumption that a community of small farmers could be installed and maintained in Puebla, in the midst of a sea of large land grants, was a little naive. Cortés and his lieutenant, Diego de Ordáz, already had established large farming operations nearby, a model glaringly incompatible with the idealistic goals set for Puebla. The subsequent evolution of Spanish Colonial agriculture took its inspiration not from Puebla, but from Cortés.

Phase Two: Land Ownership

Hernán Cortés not only aspired to be the conqueror of Mexico, but also its feudal lord and the fulcrum of its economic exploitation. The experience he gained during his campaigns allowed him to select the most promising areas, and his position of power made it possible for him to take them. His claims did require royal approval, which was delayed until 1528 and involved substantial reductions (see García Martínez 1969, 42–48), but this did not impede his pursuit of immediate economic goals. His plans for further voyages of exploration and conquest required time-consuming construction of harbors and ships, but agriculture could realize immediate profits. These efforts were centered in the fertile area he controlled around Cuernavaca, but he also “had wheat planted in Coyoacan, began a sugar plantation . . . in Tuxtlá, raised livestock in the Valley of Toluca” (García Martínez 1969, 46), and kept pigs in Huejotzingo, near Puebla (Fig. 1). These agricultural enterprises were begun even before his campaign in Honduras (Prem 1978, 38), and he instructed his representatives accordingly. For example, Hernando de Saavedra in Acapulco was told in 1524 to “set up a good farm with chilis and yucca which, although they are indigenous, will thrive well” (Cortés 1963, 441). At the same time he sought to expand stockraising, as his efforts to introduce livestock from Spain in 1526 show (Cortés 1963, 471).

Cortés’s agricultural ambitions reflected an accurate assessment of conditions in the early colony. The increasing demand of Spaniards for their familiar diet—particularly wheat bread, veal, and pork—could only be met by Spanish initiatives to produce them locally. Indian products that reached the Spaniards through trade or as tribute offered little more than maize and turkeys, both of them unfamiliar and unpopular foods. And it was apparent that neither Spanish dietary habits nor Indian agricultural production would change rapidly. Yet no one could have anticipated that five centuries later, the campesino of Indian descent would still prefer the higher yields of maize (Chevalier 1963, 51, 59).

The King had already instructed Cortés in 1523 that Spaniards should engage in farming. In Spanish settlements, “farms are to be
awarded according to the character and status of the persons and according to their service rendered . . . to reside there for five years in order to obtain the lifelong rights to dispose of [the farm] at will" (Cortés 1963, 590). Such awards were made by Mexico City and Puebla in their vicinity, and also by Cortés, within the areas he claimed; but after 1535, the Colonial administration reserved this right to itself (Gibson 1964, 272–73). Both in principle and practice, awards of land were designed to reward prominent citizens and those who had provided special services, primarily administrative and military. Land was rarely awarded to common immigrants, and the general dependence on Indian labor implied that agriculture required capital. This policy set in train a long process, continuing until 1910, whereby Indian small-holdings were largely displaced by haciendas owned by people of European descent.

The first farming enterprises of Cortés and colonial officials and encomenderos accounted for only a minimal part of the available arable land, despite their numbers. Adjacent to Mexico City, these farms were indispensable as a source of familiar provisions for the Spaniards of the capital. Existing Indian property rights were almost meaningless during the administration of the notorious First Audiencia (1528–32) (Gibson 1964, 273). Eventually, during the 1560s, the better lands around the Basin of Mexico began to be transferred to Spanish ownership, so that by 1620 only vestiges of Indian property remained (Gibson 1964, 277–79; Butzer and Butzer 1992).

One of the more significant impacts of the expansion of Spanish landholdings was the intrusion of livestock into Indian maize fields. Stockraising had been introduced on a large scale during the early years of the colony and remained a Spanish monopoly until after the middle of the century, when herds were so large that they undoubtedly posed a significant threat to Indian cultivation. Herds of 12,000–15,000 sheep are reported from the Basin of Mexico by 1560 (Gibson 1964, 280), while almost a thousand tons of wool were shorn in Tlaxcala in 1566 (Albi Romero 1970, 96). The founding of a mesta—an association of stockraisers—in Mexico City (1537) and in Puebla (1541) underlines the importance of Spanish livestock operations controlled from the two cities.

Property became the focus of competition between Spaniard and Indian for the remainder of the sixteenth century, until most Indian land in the heartland of Mexico—but not in the peripheral areas—was acquired by the new settlers. Consequently, the methods of how property was gained assume critical importance not only for understanding the history of Colonial settlement but also the partial, but by no means complete, dispossession of Indian lands. Furthermore they are of relevance for Indian-Spanish relationships to Colonial Mexico.

Property was acquired through several procedures, the documentation for which is uneven. At first usurpation was common, reflecting the conquest, the arbitrary rule of the First Audiencia, and the slow implementation of a legal system in the colony. Such usurpation was only gradually replaced by legally sanctioned methods, of which the awarding of a royal land grant was the least ambiguous. Several different forms of land acquisition make the general process difficult to trace. At the same time, over-generalization based on the complex and incomplete documentation can obscure spatial and temporal patterning (e.g., Simpson 1952), while limited studies are liable to distort interpretation of the major trends. Such difficulties notwithstanding, the land grants for understanding regional settlement histories as well as the transfer of land from Indian to Spaniard.

Sketch maps, drawn from Colonial documents and illustrating patterns of property holding, field parcelization, and land use, are reproduced by Wobeser (1983).

The Documentation for Land Grants

The land grants, initially awarded by local authorities, and then exclusively by the viceroy, display a temporal progression as well as changing spatial concentrations. This process took more than a century. Spanish settlers began to receive awards for agricultural and grazing lands by 1525 (K. W. Butzer 1992). After several decades with slowly increasing numbers of awards, a maximum of about 600 grants was awarded in 1591, followed by a slow decrease (see Simpson 1952, 8–9). But the awards made conditionally in Mexico still had to be confirmed later on, requiring examination of titles in addition to payment of relatively mod-
Table 1. Requests (Acordados) vs. Grants (Mercedes) of Land Titles in the Upper Atoyac Drainage (Puebla), 1587–1620

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Requests and grants</th>
    <th colspan="2">Requests</th>
    <th rowspan="2">Neither request nor grant preserved</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Both preserved</th>
    <th>Either preserved</th>
    <th>Preserved but not granted</th>
    <th>Neither granted nor preserved</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Number cases</td>
    <td>93</td>
    <td>122</td>
    <td>103</td>
    <td>67*</td>
    <td>41*</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Source: Data from Prem 1978, 131–32.
*Estimated from binomial distribution.

est and flexible sums of money prior to the granting of patents or permanent titles. This process, known as composición, began in earnest in 1631 and was concluded by 1645, except for a few areas (see Chevalier 1963, 266–70; Torales Pacheco 1990, 90–92), and it terminated the distribution of public lands. Subsequently there were many changes in individual ownership, including consolidation and subdivision, but Indian property holdings were no longer reduced. Fundamental structural changes awaited the selling off of tax-exempt lands (desamortización) in 1856, which destroyed Indian communal holdings and church properties, with further confiscations after the Mexican Revolution during this century.

Documentation of Colonial land grants involved a register in which the Audiencia officials in Mexico City entered requests for, as well as awards of, titles. These are included in the 86 volumes of the section Mercedes, now in the Archivo General de la Nación, Mexico City, which provide a powerful tool. According to Simpson (1952, 7), the 37 volumes up to 1620 include titles for 7553 caballerías de tierra (agricultural land, in units of 43 hectares), 1770 sitios de estancia de ganado mayor (cattle pastures, in units of 1756 ha), and 2227 sitios de estancia de ganado menor (sheep and goat pastures of 780 ha each). Just how complete this registry is remains unclear. About a third of the 40 years between 1541–80 are not included in the available registry lists, while most of the subsequent years are represented in two or three parallel volumes, with partial overlap. An explanation for this is the use of several registry books at once, to deal with the large number of title entries. In any case, the records are incomplete and in part fragmentary, and it is difficult if not impossible to ascertain to what degree.

I have attempted to estimate how complete the records are for the period 1587–1620, based on a detailed study of both the title requests and actual grants in the upper Río Atoyac drainage, northwest of Puebla (Prem 1978). Requests or applications for titles (referred to as a mandamiento acordado) and successful title awards (a merced) are mixed throughout the extant volumes, so that loss of individual volumes would affect both categories. The high number of requests for which there is no corresponding title must therefore include requests that were never granted, as well as ones for which the confirmatory deed has been lost. Similarly, the record of titles awarded includes those with preserved requests and those without. These either/or categories can be arranged as a binomial distribution, from which it can be estimated that 256 titles were actually awarded in the area. The probability that a title is preserved is only 60 percent for this period of good documentation. For 41 (16 percent) of these, neither an application nor a title is preserved, and for 93 (36 percent) both documents are preserved. Further, about two out of every five requests were denied (Prem 1978, 131–32; see Table 1).

For the period before 1587, the probability of preservation for titles in about 25 percent, assuming that all years without any records represent lost registers. This careful examination for a limited region shows that evaluation of the available documentation is liable to distortion by poor as well as uneven preservation.

Another limitation is that more land may have been awarded in the hinterland of the larger cities—in the Basin of Mexico, the Puebla district, and the Valley of Toluca (Fig. 1)—than there actually was. In the upper Atoyac drainage, title was given for 808 km² of land according to the mercedes and other sources. Yet the productive surface, including the high mountains and small tracts of barren
Figure 1. The major basins of central Mexico and Spanish settlement areas during the sixteenth century.

land, is little larger than 1000 km\(^2\). Allowing for missing land titles, the total may even have exceeded the available area. It may well be that livestock estancias, especially those within the forested uplands, were never properly measured. In addition, their owners may have deliberately requested land segments that were known to overlap, simply to avoid the possibility that an interloper might claim land somewhere in between. Another problem for this evident discrepancy is that it is not known to what elevation the mountains were utilized for sheep grazing, or whether the upland forests would even have been awarded to private owners. Detailed study of these issues is needed.

Despite the lack of evaluation of the land grant records for large parts of New Spain, and the impossibility of a complete quantitative analysis because of the incomplete records, the broad lines of the granting process can be discerned. The timing, rate, and completeness of Spanish land acquisition depended on local circumstances. Key factors were the number of Spaniards resident in the area, proximity to market centers and expected profitability, and the density of Indian land use (Lockhart 1976, 5). These criteria distinguish the central Basin of Mexico from its hinterland, around Puebla and Toluca, and outlying, peripheral areas.

The Center: The Basin of Mexico

Spanish land holdings in the Basin of Mexico first expanded from the capital along the margins of the old lake. A total of 2112 farm units (90,400 ha) and 416 sheep estancias (3245 km\(^2\))
were awarded here (Butzer and Butzer 1992; but see the much lower totals given by Gibson [1964, 277] or Simpson [1952, 55]). Measured against 233,100 ha of cultivable land (Sanders, et al. 1979, 378) and 5000 km\(^2\) of land surface overall, this implies that 83 percent of the total was awarded. No grants were given in the Indian territory around Xochimilco, however, while the land to the southwest of Mexico City was controlled by Cortés and his descendents. Titles there were given out independent of the viceroy, and consequently do not show up in the Audiencia records. This means that, even without allowing for incomplete preservation, more grants were given than there was available land. However the excess of titles for grazing may be explained, most of the arable land outside of the Xochimilco district was taken over by Spaniards no later than the 1620s. The pressures on Indian holdings implied by this process are easy to imagine. The government rule that land grants had to be at least 500 varas or yards away from the center or outskirts of Indian settlements illustrates the degree to which such villages were crowded in.

Apart from the small numbers of grants distributed west of Mexico City in 1525–32, a pattern of systematic awards was delayed until the early 1560s, when accelerating numbers of titles began to be granted around ten key centers in the northwestern, eastern, and southeastern sectors of the basin (Butzer and Butzer 1992). In these areas, some 85 percent of the grants had been awarded by the 1590s, but grants for smaller centers in between, and in the area northeast of the lake, were delayed by about twenty-five years. The process becomes more transparent by analyzing the composite data: all but fifteen of 146 documented cases of purchase of or encroachment on Indian lands or water rights date from 1581–1617, and the 27 titles to “abandoned” lands (tierras eriazas) were given out between 1584–1620 (K. W. Butzer, personal communication). These circumstances show that the centers of traditional Indian landholdings remained relatively intact until after severe population loss from the pandemic of 1576.

Gibson (1964, 323–25) has estimated the size of areas with wheat cultivation on the basis of allocations of Indian workers. If his assumptions are valid, then in 1563, 44 percent of the wheat farms had less than 50 fanegas (31 or 178 ha, depending on which type of fanega) of cultivated land, while in 1602 some 92 percent would have been larger than 100 fanegas, and 51 percent larger than 200 fanegas. Regardless of whether his samples are representative and which type of fanega is implied, it is evident that arable holdings, originally awarded in units of 43 ha, were being consolidated into very large farms, through purchase or other manipulations. At the same time, since the number of holdings increased roughly fourfold during these forty years, the area of wheat cultivation must have increased tenfold.

The expansion of Spanish land ownership was predicated upon or interrelated with several other processes. It was the dramatic decline of the Indian population that opened up such a large area to Spanish acquisition. Although reconstructions for that decline after 1519 continue to diverge (see Cook and Borah 1971–79 vs. Prem 1991, Prem et al. n.d.), its importance is beyond doubt. The demographic consequences of actual warfare during the conquest were not inconsequential, but they were not the primary cause of decline. Far more incisive was the high mortality associated with the pandemics that swept Mexico at short intervals after 1520. A mortality of 50 percent can be estimated for the smallpox epidemic of 1520, while the pandemics of 1545 and 1576 with mortalities of 50 percent locally, up to 90 percent must have had even greater demographic impact. The many minor epidemics in between affected each district differently, but were also important (Prem 1991). During the period 1560–1600, which includes only one of these pandemics, the population of central Mexico declined by two-thirds, so that a substantial part of the Indian lands must have been uncultivated by 1600, opening them to Spanish acquisition. This is consonant with the evidence cited above.

A second factor, often overestimated as to its importance for the shift from Indian to Spanish ownership, was the process of Indian settlement amalgamation (congregación). This began during the mid-1500s but was concentrated between 1590–1605 (Gerhard 1977; Licate 1981, 88–98). The purpose of amalgamation was to nucleate Indian populations that had been dispersed in small hamlets into new, planned towns that were easier to administer and located at more accessible sites. The missionaries had repeatedly complained that the wide dispersal of the Indian population amid complex
topography made it very difficult for them to administer and oversee the numerous small communities. The colonial authorities responded in 1551 and at later dates by ordering nucleation in central sites (Recopilación 6-3-1), which also facilitated administration.

While the process of resettlement associated with congregación was explicitly not intended to affect Indian property holdings, Indians from more distant locations could only use and tend their traditional fields with difficulty, and many milpas thus remained unused. This secondary effect benefited Spaniards trying to obtain land. But many of the amalgamation projects were evidently not implemented, and even successful efforts at nucleation could not prevent substantial numbers of Indians from only nominal compliance, as they either remained in their traditional settlements or returned there promptly, or fled (see Gibson 1964, 282–83; Lovell 1992). Nonetheless the congregación process did lead to abandonment of marginal lands that, according to Spanish law, could then be awarded to others.

Much of the land of central Mexico was unsuitable for maize cultivation but adequate for pasture, so that the introduction of livestock led to a substantial expansion of permanent land use. Forest grazing was possible in parts of the mountain country that did not allow maize harvests because of elevation and frost hazards. Sheep and goats could also find food in other areas where steep slopes, soil erosion, salinization, or lack of adequate moisture inhibited agriculture. Furthermore, Spanish irrigation was introduced to some areas or expanded in others.

Another factor that contributed directly to the reduction of land cultivated by Indians was work conscription on Spanish holdings (repartimiento): as part of the tributary obligations of their communities, Indians were required to provide labor at a rate specified by the Colonial authorities (Chevalier 1963, 66–68), and they were allocated accordingly by a Spanish official. Although the number of absent Indians engaged in conscript labor at any one time was small, the effect was that a percentage of the Indian work input was shifted to Spanish holdings. Such work was limited to the planting and harvest seasons and, by the end of the 1500s, such obligations were increasingly switched to wage labor (gañanes) that was no longer assigned to particular Spaniards. This development favored long-term employment on Spanish farms, with the result that more and more families moved out of their traditional communities to take up permanent residence on the growing estates.

During the early period, repeated mention is made of lands whose production, prior to the Conquest, had been assigned to support Indian institutions such as temples, temple schools, the army, and government officials (Chevalier 1963, 52). The extent of such lands cannot be estimated but, in comparison to the other factors discussed above, they were unimportant, if only because they were directly transferred to the ownership of the last persons to legally farm them at the time of conquest.

Although the basic circumstances for property transfer to Spaniards were similar in the broad valleys surrounding the Basin of Mexico, that process unraveled differently in each, particularly in regard to timing. But since study and interpretation of the available documentation remains uneven, comparisons can only be made with caution.

A Secondary Center: The Puebla District

All authors are in agreement that the second center of Spanish agriculture was located between the volcanic ranges of Popocatepetl in the west and Mt. Orizaba in the east. The transfer of property to Spanish settlers in the piedmont of the upper Río Atoyac drainage, northwest of the city of Puebla, has been exhaustively studied (Prem 1978). This area belonged to the independent state of Huejotzingo in Aztec times. Cortés began raising pigs here before 1525, and in 1530 the encomendero of Huejotzingo, Diego de Ordáz, introduced cattle raising and began wheat cultivation in the adjacent Valley of Atlixco (Fig. 1). Shortly thereafter, the first settlers of Puebla (see above) received farmlands here amounting to 1840 ha in the first year alone. Just how attractive Atlixco was can be judged by the slow settlement of Huejotzingo proper, where only 10 agricultural grants are documented before 1578.

Indian settlement amalgamation in Huejotzingo during the mid-1500s was not very successful (Dyckerhoff 1990b, 44–45) and did not benefit the expansion of Spanish holdings. But
GRANTS OF AGRICULTURAL LAND. HUEJOTZINGO - ATLIXCO DISTRICT

Number of volumes of Mercedes
Land requested, in Ha.
Land granted, in Ha.

Figure 2. Awards of agricultural lands (caballerías de tierra) in the Huejotzingo-Atlixco district (Puebla), 1541–1620, in ha.

the pandemic of 1576 probably reduced the Indian population by close to a half, with the result that land awards began to accelerate in 1579 (Fig. 2). The linkage is clear, although the exceptional preservation of large numbers of titles in some years distorts the pattern. After an interruption in 1585, not related to the quality of documentation, the number of requests for land increased dramatically until 1592, followed shortly thereafter by a first peak in titles awarded. Two years later both the applications and titles declined sharply, terminating altogether in 1598.

A fresh increase began in the following year, first of applications, then of title deeds, but both the number and the size of the awards were less than half of what was requested. Two more waves of granting are apparent before 1620, although their amplitude was decreasing. These oscillations are difficult to explain. Several further epidemics between 1587–97 did not cause significant population losses and played no important role. The answer may lie in the mechanics of the application process itself. A rapid increase in the number of requests would quickly dispose of the lands momentarily available, so that the ratio of unsuccessful bids would discourage further applicants, thus the number of requests would decline until no new requests were made. During interruption of the granting process, only a few new requests would be made, most of them unsuccessful.

The accelerating half-cycle may be linked to a new phenomenon of the late sixteenth century. Most of the land in several parts of the area was in Spanish hands by then, but not all of it had clear title. This led to efforts by the owners in question or by potential interlopers, or the front men for either group, to apply for grants to land already held but incompletely or inadequately covered by titles (en demasías). After each wave of new grants, remaining questions of title or possible gaps in the property cover would only become apparent as time elapsed.

Each wave of grants represented an advance of Spanish property holdings into the core areas of Indian settlement. After 1600, title requests concentrated on areas with semi-continuous Indian agriculture, but, for more than half of the land applied for, appear to have been denied, suggesting increasingly effective Indian resistance.

The last wave of applications, from 1613–16, was directed at the last gaps of cultivation within the Indian core area. By then the peripheral belt was solidly in Spanish hands, and larger estates were actively engaged in consolidating their holdings. An example for this is
GRANTS FOR SHEEP GRAZING (ESTANCIAS), HUEJOTZINGO-ATLIXCO DISTRICT

Number of volumes of Mercedes
Land requested, in Ha.
Land granted, in Ha.

Figure 3. Awards of estancias for sheep grazing (sitios de ganado menor) in the Huejotzingo-Atlixco district (Puebla), 1541–1620, in ha. Two grants for cattle grazing (sitios de ganado mayor) are included in the diagram.

provided by the Apapasco hacienda, belonging to the Augustinians of Puebla; in 1610 it controlled almost 3000 ha, mostly arable.

A similar evolution can be noted for the acquisition of grazing rights in the region, almost exclusively for sheep and goats, but the details vary from one sector to another. Sheep estancias were awarded to Spaniards on a large scale even before they were able to acquire cultivable lands. Most but not all of these were on the forested slopes of the high mountain range (to above 3000 m elevation), in areas too cool for maize but in proximity to the two mountain roads from Puebla to Mexico City (Fig. 3). Grants for sheep estancias followed at a steady pace, reaching a first maximum in 1588–92, more or less simultaneous with the early peak in agricultural titles. The end of this wave was abrupt, and a detailed mapping of the locations of the sheep estancias (Prem 1978, 235–60) shows that essentially all areas of lowland marsh and steep forest had already been awarded. The remaining areas, on even less desirable tracts, were given out in a last wave from 1611–19.

For both processes the end result was the same. By 1620 most of the productive land was in the hands of people of European descent. This is verified by the composición or complete inventory of confirmed titles for the district of Huejotzingo-Atlixco in 1643. Although lacking in detail here, the composición confirms the fragmentary record of successive grants, while local property owners declared that there was no more free land available. Complete details are included in the composición for the Valley of Atlixco, which documents that 18,915 ha out of a total of about 23,000 (including settlements and some unproductive tracts) belonged to persons of European descent. Some 44 percent of this surface was irrigated, allowing two harvests per year on the unusually fertile vertisols (Albi Romero 1970, 93; Prem 1984, 212, 215).

The Valley of Toluca and the Peripheries

Equally fertile and attractive for agricultural expansion was the Valley of Toluca, west of the Basin of Mexico (Fig. 1). The sequence of land acquisition here was similar to that around Puebla, beginning with Cortés’s early involvement with local cattle raising. More than 150,000 head of cattle were reported in the early 1550s (García Martínez 1969, 140), and the first peak of title awards in 1560–70 came two decades earlier than around Huejotzingo, while the climax of several waves of awards came a little later (Quezada Ramírez 1972, 102).

A spatial breakdown of the grants shows that
the northern part of the valley around Jiquilpilo was settled first, the southern and southwestern mountainous peripheries last; 34,150 ha of agricultural land were awarded and 325,600 ha of grazing for cattle (52 percent), sheep (46 percent), and horses (2.7 percent) (Butzer and Butzer 1992). This represents only 28.5 percent of the larger region, and even allowing for missing records for Cortés's cattle estates and for large tracts of mountain topography, this shows that large parts of the Toluca district remained in Indian hands. There were small, scattered Spanish wheat farms around Toluca itself (Lockhart 1975, 438–47), but most of the Spanish farm land was concentrated around the periphery rather than in the center of the basin (Butzer and Butzer 1992). The spatial pattern and social context was then quite different from that of the Huejotzingo district, in that core Indian settlement was not overwhelmed.

Moving out from the heartland of central Mexico (Fig. 1), the structural similarities weaken and each regional settlement history became more or less unique. In the Valley of Mezquital, the region to the north of the Basin of Mexico, Spaniards acquired 60 percent of the land for sheep grazing, but only 4 percent for agriculture; the rest remained in Indian hands (Melville 1990). In the smaller fertile Valley of San Pablo, 50 km east of Puebla, Spanish wheat farms were important (Licate 1981, 116). As in Toluca, the Spanish acquisition of land in the peripheral zone was less complete, and stockraising dominated over grain farming. Two other examples, from areas outside of the region emphasized here, serve to broaden the perspective.

In the Valley of Oaxaca, the properties of Hernán Cortés again provided the first nucleus of European agriculture. Stockraising remained dominant during the 1500s (Taylor 1972, 113–21), but Spanish acquisition was slow and incomplete until the early 1600s.

The preponderance of stockraising is much more striking in the Valley of Tepalcatepec, a major tributary river of the Río Balsas in western Michoacan. Until the late 1500s, land titles were almost exclusively awarded for cattle pastures, and any agricultural land was designed to supply grain for consumption by the labor employed on the estates. Located in an area of sparse Indian settlement, there was little direct interethnic competition. During the early 1600s, Spanish agriculture expanded with the benefit of irrigation, to grow cacao and sugar cane (Barrett 1973, 82–84). Nonetheless, 95 percent of the area remained in pasturage.

The Indian Response

The expansion of Spanish landholdings did not inevitably lead to conflict with the Indian population. It is true that the expansion of stockraising, even in the early years, invariably was detrimental to the Indians. Complaints about livestock breaking into maize fields and destroying them are legion (Gibson 1964, map 8; Taylor 1972, map 3), as are viceregal attempts to regulate the problems; the numbers alone argue that efforts at control were unsuccessful. Equally clear is that, in their purchase and lease of land, as well as in their quest for land titles, the Spaniards enjoyed close connections with the Colonial authorities and used them to their full advantage vis à vis the Indians.

But on the other hand, the Indians were not simply victims. They themselves engaged in the sale of their properties, effectively supporting the growth and consolidation of Spanish estates (Prem 1978, 285–92; Barrett 1974, 86). Hurdles placed by the Colonial administration to limit the sell-out of Indian lands to Spaniards were circumvented jointly, by both parties. However, the Indian government of Huejotzingo prohibited land sales by Indians in 1579, apparently on account of many illegalities during such transactions, but the viceroy failed to approve this resolution because it contradicted official procedures. The motivation of the Spaniards is evident, but it is difficult to understand why so many Indians were eager to sell their properties, almost always at very low prices. Even the requisite affidavits, that the Indians offering land for sale did not need such properties and held sufficient other land to feed their families, do not seem to have made them aware of the consequences of such actions. A justification that they needed cash to pay their tribute was almost always added to two or three other reasons offered to convince the authorities. There was in fact no reasonable relationship between the regular tribute payment of a peso per year to the much higher value of a land sale (Prem 1978, 285–92).
During the second half of the sixteenth century, Indian communities as well as individuals began to protect their land by obtaining land titles of their own, even though such traditional ownership was secured by Spanish law. However great the pressures of Spanish land owners may have been, this procedure seems absurd: the condition for granting a title was that the land be unclaimed, so that an Indian technically had to give up his rights in order to then obtain a title for the land. This option was not commonly used in most areas, but it deserves mention because one might otherwise assume that the Indians retained only that land to which they had acquired formal titles.

In Morelos, favorably located in proximity to Mexico City, Indians do not appear to have requested titles (Martin 1985, 28–32). The same is true in peripheral Tepexi (Jäcklein 1978, 178). In Hueyotzingo the grants given to Indians amounted to only four percent of the total awards, most of these given in one town. The proportion in the Valley of Toluca appears to have been similar (Quezada Ramírez 1972), but in Tepalcatepec the Indians received 16 percent of the awarded lands (see Barrett 1973, 1974). Yet in Tecamachalco, a third of the titles went to individual Indians or to their communities (Licate 1981, 115), while in the Valley of Mezquital, the Indians acquired titles to almost all the 36 percent of the land they retained (Melville 1990).

Even more striking is that only 32 percent of the land represented in formal titles for the Valley of Oaxaca went to Spaniards. The remaining land went to Indians, approximately half to communities, the other part to individuals, many of whom probably represented their communities. This situation appears to be unique, but a convincing explanation is lacking. The small number of resident Spaniards probably played a role (Taylor 1972, 198); in addition, limited local demand for wheat and the great distance to Mexico City probably reduced incentives to grow this Spanish crop.

Other strategies also served to halt the alienation of Indian holdings, such as the inspection of the often flawed Spanish land titles during composición. Numerous cases of litigation sustained Indian rights vs. haciendas, and sometimes land was bought back by Indians. By such means the Indian communities were repeatedly able to stabilize the situation and to slow the advance of Spanish property seekers, as for example, in Metztitlán (Osborn 1973).

The Spanish Land Owners

It has already been emphasized that the encomienda did not inaugurate Spanish acquisition of land, either legally or in fact. But the encomenderos, as the most influential persons of the early colony and as the beneficiaries of tribute, were the first to get land and to practice agriculture (Lockhart 1969, 418). It was not their role as encomenderos but their interdigitation with the Spanish Colonial elite that made this possible. Colonial officials such as local magistrates also were among the first to obtain land titles. Both the encomenderos and officials selected their properties in adjacent districts, because ownership within one's own jurisdiction was illegal. Small wonder that the Audiencia officials, who controlled the award of titles, had little difficulty acquiring property themselves (Chevalier 1963, 123–27). Not all were as skilled as Gaspar Rodríguez de Castro, the private secretary of Viceroy Montesclaros, who acquired an incredible number of land titles, including the permission to sell them immediately, during the viceroy's last months in office in 1607 (Prem 1978, 203–04). Relatives and retainers of officials showed no compunction to serve as surrogates for title applications when the real owner did not wish to be identified (Chevalier 1952, 136). By contrast, Viceroy Velasco (1550–64) stood out by his undisputed integrity, but at the price of going heavily into debt.

Legalistic historians are prone to believe that church institutions were excluded from obtaining land. While it is true that every grant deed specified that the land in question could not be transferred to clergymen or to religious institutions, this rule as well as that interdicting sales of titles was ignored for many years. Time and again, persons obtaining a title or permission to sell one showed up in front of a notary only days later to declare that they had acted in proxy for the Augustinian monastery of Puebla; the transfer would then be sanctioned without difficulty and without comment (Prem 1978, 188). Another effective device was to obtain a permit to plant crops (licencia para sembrar) on estancias granted for stock raising, thus converting to cultivation an area equivalent to
twenty-seven caballerías. This strategem, used not only by monasteries, was one of many ways to acquire land legally. In such ways the Augustinian hacienda Apapasco acquired 1926 ha of cultivable land, while another 800 ha of pasture were cultivated without a record for permission (Prem 1978, 190). Other religious orders, with the notable exception of the Franciscans, also strove diligently and successfully to amass property.

Study of the royal land titles obviously does not provide a complete picture of land acquisition. Not every Spaniard sought to obtain land through the proper but somewhat cumbersome legal procedures. Since Indian ownership was legal and undisputed in theory, sale of land to a Spaniard carried some legal weight. Most of the available deeds of purchase are indirectly linked to grants of title. One of the most common difficulties and impediments to secure title in areas of denser Indian settlement was a requirement to demonstrate that the land in question was neither owned nor claimed by someone; this was to be investigated by the resident Spanish magistrate in front of an assembly of the Indians, and commonly led to protestations. The simplest way to avoid such a procedure was to buy the land from the rightful Indian owners well in advance. This was both a common and widespread practice (Prem 1978, 285–92; Cline 1986, 155–56).

Another approach, to obtain property by marriage, is rarely documented and is all too commonly overlooked. Younger Spaniards with little prospect of economic advancement not infrequently married into the families of the Indian elite. They and their children (their daughters commonly marrying Spaniards as well) aspired to inherit the offices of Indian nobility (caciques), together with their often substantial properties or the lands held by the mid-level community elite.

Land acquisition and agriculture required capital that could be gained through other economic activities. One such opportunity was to operate textile workshops (obrajes) that produced wool and cotton cloth or clothing for local or distant markets (Lewis 1976, 129; Szewczyk 1976, 145–47). Trade offered another possibility. Many Spaniards owned small shops in the city centers (Szewczyk 1976, 140–42; Lewis 1976, 131), selling goods locally, while buying their wares from distant source areas, via agents or directly from itinerant tradesmen.

Gristmills and Irrigation as Indices

Although maize, the traditional Indian staple, was always ground to meal at home immediately before use, wheat was purchased in the form of milled flour. Gristmills were therefore set up at the same time that wheat cultivation was introduced to an area. Such mills were already set up in the environs of Mexico City at Tacuba and Tacubaya during the First Audiencia, implying that many of the small irrigated tracts awarded nearby (suertes de huerta) were used to grow wheat. Some of the highest officials of the Audiencia were so engaged (Paso y Troncoso 1939–42, XIV, 178).

Gristmills therefore serve as an indirect indicator for wheat production. Between 1542–1640, at least twenty-three mill sites were applied for or granted in the Atlixco or Huejotzingo areas. Not all requests were honored, but others can be documented for which no titles are preserved. The latter include the gristmill of the Indian community in Huejotzingo, which has an inscription dated 1559. It was, however, never operated by the Indians but was leased to Spaniards instead (Prem 1975, 31). Awards for gristmills were most common around 1594, at the time of the first maximum of awards of agricultural lands to Spaniards. In the Basin of Mexico, 41 of 66 documented licenses to build gristmills were granted between 1581–1607, approximately coeval with the majority of the titles awarded for agricultural land (K. W. Butzer, personal communication).

A second feature that elucidates Spanish land acquisition was the introduction of irrigation. Although irrigation was probably used in the Valley of Atlixco in Prehispanic times, it was only introduced in the northern part of the Valley in Colonial times (Dyckerhoff 1990a, 23). The last land awards, given for the level terrain northwest of Huejotzingo during the first decade of the 1600s, terminated the process of acquisition. Subsequently, increases of production could only be achieved here by intensification. It therefore comes as no surprise that thirty-six of forty-two applications for or
awards of title for irrigation waters date to the decade 1610–20.

Conclusions

The process of land transfer from Indian to Spanish hands in the heartland of Mexico took about one hundred years. Traditional Indian lands were protected under Spanish law, but only as long as they were cultivated. Land abandonment was primarily a result of the Indian demographic collapse, reinforced by Indian resettlement in nucleated new towns and by migration of workers from traditional communities to Spanish estates. Alienation of Indian landholdings began on a large scale after 1580, and by 1620 most Indian properties in the Basin of Mexico and around Puebla had been awarded as land grants to Spaniards. The Spanish farms, owned by absentee landlords and worked by Indian wage labor, were steadily expanded through purchase and consolidated into large estates. In areas peripheral to Mexico City, Spanish acquisition of Indian property was incomplete and, with increasing distance, stockraising became more important than farming. Each regional settlement history differed in detail, depending on the size of the resident Indian population, the quality of land, and the proximity of larger Spanish towns and major roads.

The processes and patterns identified by this study are far more complex than those envisioned in Chevalier's (1963) general overview for all of Mexico. Further, detailed local studies are needed to explicate the pattern of regional divergence and to link the process of estate consolidation to the emergence of the great haciendas of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

References

Albi Romero, Guadalupe. 1970. La sociedad de Puebla de los Angeles en el siglo XVI. Jahrbuch für Geschichte von Staat Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Lateinamerikas 7:76–145.

Barrett, Elinore M. 1973. Encomiendas, mercedes and haciendas in the tierra caliente of Michoacan. Jahrbuch für Geschichte von Staat Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Lateinamerikas 10:71–107.
———. 1974. Indian community lands in the tierra caliente of Michoacan. Jahrbuch für Geschichte von Staat Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Lateinamerikas 11:78–120.

Butzer, Karl W. 1992. Personal communication.
——— and Butzer, Elisabeth K. 1992. Transfer of the Mediterranean livestock economy to New Spain: Adaptation and consequences. In Legacies of the Columbian Encounter, B. L. Turner II, ed., forthcoming. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas.

Chevalier, François. 1957. Significación social de la fundación de la Puebla de los Angeles. Puebla: Centro de Estudios Historicos.
———. 1963. Land and society in colonial Mexico: The great hacienda. Trans. Lesley Byrd Simpson. Berkeley: University of California Press. (Lacks the documentation of the original 1952 French ed.)

Cline, S. L. 1986. Colonial Culhuacan, 1580–1600: A social history of an Aztec town. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.

Colección de documentos inéditos, relativos al descubrimiento, conquista y organización de las antiguas posesiones españolas de ultramar (CDIU). 1885–1932. 25 vols. Madrid: Rivadeneyra.

Cook, Sherburne F., and Borah, Woodrow. 1971–1979. Essays in population history. 3 vols. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Cortés, Hernan. 1963. Cartas y documentos. Ed. M. Hernández Sánchez-Barba. Mexico City: Porrúa.

Díaz del Castillo, Bernal. 1960. Historia verdadera de la conquista de la Nueva España. 2 vols. Mexico City: Porrúa.

Dyckerhoff, Ursula. 1990a. Control hidráulico en el Huejotzingo prehispánico. Papeles de la Casa Chata 5(7):19–27.
———. 1990b. Colonial Indian corporate landholding: A glimpse from the Valley of Puebla. In The Indian community of Colonial Mexico, Arij Ouwenenel and Simon Miller, eds., 40–59. Amsterdam: CEDLA.

García Martínez, Bernardo. 1969. El Marquesado del Valle. Mexico City: El Colegio de México.

Gerhard, Peter. 1977. Congregaciones de indios en la Nueva España antes de 1570. Historia Mexicana 26:347–95.

Gibson, Charles. 1964. The Aztecs under Spanish rule: A history of the Indians of the Valley of Mexico. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Haring, C. H. 1963. The Spanish empire in America. New York: Harcourt, Brace.

Hirschberg, Julia. 1979. Social experiments in New Spain: A prosopographical study of the early settlement at Puebla de los Angeles, 1531–1534. Hispanic American Historical Review 59:1–33.

Jäcklein, Klaus. 1978. Los Popolocas de Tepexi (Puebla): Un estudio etnohistórico. Wiesbaden: Steiner, Mexiko-Projekt der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft, 15.
Lewis, Leslie. 1976. In Mexico City's shadow: Some aspects of economic activity and social process in Texcoco, 1570–1620. In Provinces of early Mexico: Variants of Spanish American regional evolution, Ida Altman and James Lockhart, eds., 125–36. Los Angeles: UCLA Latin American Center Publications.

Licate, Jack A. 1981. Creation of a Mexican landscape: Territorial organization and settlement in the eastern Puebla Basin, 1520–1605. Department of Geography Research Paper 201. Chicago: University of Chicago.

Lockhart, James. 1969. Encomienda and hacienda: The evolution of the great estate in the Spanish Indies. Hispanic American Historical Review 49:411–29.

———. 1975. Españoles entre indios: Toluca a fines del siglo XVI. In Estudios sobre la ciudad iberoamericana, Francisco de Solano, ed., 435–91. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas.

———. 1976. Introduction. In Provinces of early Mexico: Variants of Spanish American regional evolution, Ida Altman and James Lockhart, eds., pp. 3–28. Los Angeles: UCLA Latin American Center Publications.

Lovell, W. George. 1992. The real country and the legal country: Spanish ideals and Mayan realities in Colonial Guatemala. GeoJournal 26:181–85.

Martin, Cheryl English. 1985. Rural society in Colonial Morelos. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.

Melville, Elinore G. 1990. Environmental and social change in the Valle de Mezquital, Mexico, 1521–1600. Comparative Studies in Society and History 32:24–53.

Miranda, José. 1965. La función económica del encomendero en los orígenes del régimen colonial (Nueva España 1525–1531). Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México.

Motolónia (or Benavente), Toribio de. 1971. Memoriales o libro de la Nueva España y de los naturales della. Ed. Edmund O'Gorman. Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México.

Osborn, Wayne S. 1973. Indian land retention in Colonial Metztitlan. Hispanic American Historical Review 53:217–38.

Paso y Troncoso, Francisco, ed. 1939–42. 16 vols. Epistolario de Nueva España. Mexico City: Robredo.

Prem, Hanns J. 1975. Los afluentes del Río Xopanac: Estudio histórico de un sistema de riego. Comunicaciones Proyecto Puebla-Tlaxcala 12:27–40.

———. 1978. Milpa y Hacienda: Tenencia de la tierra indígena y española en la Cuenca del Alto Atoyac, Puebla, México (1520–1650). Wiesbaden: Steiner. Mexiko-Projekt der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft, 13. (Second printing: Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Económica 1988.)

———. 1984. Early Spanish colonization and Indians in the Valley of Atlixco. In Explorations in ethnohistory, H. R. Harvey and Hanns J. Prem, eds., 205–26. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.

———. 1991. Disease outbreaks in central Mexico during the sixteenth century. In Secret judgments of God: Old World disease in Colonial Spanish America, ed. Noble David Cook and W. George Lovell, pp. 20–48. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

———; Dyckerhoff, Ursula; and Feldweg, Helmut. n.d. Reconstructing Central Mexico's population. Manuscript.

Quezada Ramírez, María. 1972. Los Matlatzincas: Época prehispánica y época colonial hasta 1650. Mexico City: Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia, Investigaciones, 22.

Recopilación de leyes de los Reyes de las Indios. 1973 [1681]. 4 vols. Madrid: Ed. Cultura Hispánica.

Sanders, William T.; Parsons, Jeffrey R.; and Santley, Robert S. 1979. The Basin of Mexico: Ecological processes in the evolution of a civilization. New York: Academic Press.

Simpson, Lesley Byrd. 1952. Exploitation of land in central Mexico in the sixteenth century. Ibero-Americana 36. Berkeley: University of California Press.

———. 1966. The encomienda in New Spain. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Szewczyk, David M. 1976. New elements in the society of Tlaxcala, 1519–1618. In Provinces of early Mexico: Variants of Spanish American regional evolution, ed. Ida Altman and James Lockhart, pp. 137–54. Los Angeles: UCLA Latin American Center Publications.

Taylor, William B. 1972. Landlord and peasant in Colonial Oaxaca. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Torales Pacheco, María C. 1990. A note on the composiciones de tierra in the jurisdiction of Cholula, Puebla (1591–1757). In The Indian community of Colonial Mexico, ed. Arij Ouweneel and Simon Miller, pp. 87–102. Amsterdam: CEDLA.

Wobeser, Gisela von. 1983. La formación de la hacienda en la época colonial. El uso de la tierra y el agua. Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México.