American Geographical Society

Hurricane Hazard in Western Samoa
Author(s): Deborah D. Paulson
Source: Geographical Review, Vol. 83, No. 1 (Jan., 1993), pp. 43-53
Published by: American Geographical Society
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/215379
Accessed: 19-02-2016 18:21 UTC

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Wiley and American Geographical Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.
HURRICANE HAZARD IN WESTERN SAMOA*

DEBORAH D. PAULSON

ABSTRACT. Vulnerability of agricultural societies to natural hazards sometimes increases as those groups are incorporated into the global economy. Data and observations taken after a 1990 hurricane suggest that market participation did not increase vulnerability of two rural communities in Western Samoa. Although a weakening of the moral economy probably accentuated the vulnerability of poor households, the relationship between market participation and a breakdown in precapitalist social relationships was not simple. Positive self-help response of villages to the hurricane can be attributed to strength of their social institutions.

DURING the past two decades geographers and others have studied how commoditization and marginalization determine the effects of hazards on peripheral societies. It has been argued that most natural hazards, though unpredictable, are a known part of the environment for which precapitalist societies had coping mechanisms. The real cause of contemporary disasters resulting from these hazards is changing social and economic relationships associated with incorporation into the global economy. The moral economy (Scott 1976), which consists of nonmarket, reciprocal social relationships that guarantee subsistence for all members of precapitalist societies, has been replaced by market relationships that intensify vulnerability of marginal households and groups during periods of natural stress (O'Keefe, Westgate, and Wisner 1976; Watts 1983). Moreover, the shift from subsistence to cash-crop production can intensify vulnerability by emphasizing a small number of profitable crops rather than the diverse array of crops associated with subsistence production (Campbell 1984). Finally, outside disaster-relief efforts tend to increase dependency and vulnerability to natural hazards by weakening local self-sufficiency and exchange (Thaman, Meleisea, and Maka-siale 1979; Bayliss-Smith and others 1988).

This article examines these issues in two rural villages during the aftermath of a hurricane in Western Samoa. Rural Western Samoans have become involved in the global market through production of export crops, through emigration, and through wage labor. The evidence from this case study suggests that the relationship between participation in the global economy and household and community vulnerability to hazards is complex. Social

* Financial support for the fieldwork on which this research was based came from the East-West Center, Honolulu. The Western Samoa Department of Agriculture, Forests and Fisheries and the Institute for Research, Extension and Training for Agriculture provided logistical support. I express my appreciation to Vae Vaipuna and Gaosi Simone Fiso for assistance during the fieldwork. I am especially grateful to the people of Fusi and Vaipua.

● Dr. PAULSON is an assistant professor of geography at the University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming 82071.
Fig. 1—Western Samoa and study villages.

relationships and institutions at the village level are important intermediary variables in the relationship, and these variables can be fairly resistant to transformation.

BACKGROUND AND METHODS

On 2–4 February 1990, Hurricane Ofa passed over Western Samoa and caused extensive damage on the islands. One of the most severe tropical storms to hit Western Samoa since the recording of such events began in 1831 (Ulafala 1990), the hurricane damaged or destroyed many crops and structures on both of the high islands that constitute the country. As most rural households in Western Samoa grow the bulk of their staple food and as the urban populace obtains much of its foodstuff from the local market, the storm severely disrupted the local food supply. Local staples were especially scarce from May until late July, three to six months after the hurricane. Relief aid came in various forms from around the world.

The data presented here are based on household interviews, landuse surveys, and general observations recorded from early April 1990 to late August 1990, two to seven months after the storm, in Fusi and Vaipua, two villages on the island of Savaii (Fig. 1). A sample of fifteen households was selected in each village. The mayor or a knowledgeable member of his family was asked to place each village household in a high, average, or low socio-
economic category, without further definition of those categories. Sample households were drawn from each category in proportion to the number placed in each category. In May, each sample household was surveyed as to staple foods eaten at the two main daily meals during the most recent four-day period that included a weekend. A second survey of the sample households in late June was used to gather information on food gifts given and received during the most recent five-day period that included a weekend. A census of all households in both villages, conducted from May through July, included questions about hurricane damage and repairs.

SUBSISTENCE AND CASH–CROP STRATEGIES

The high crop diversity typical of traditional shifting cultivation is averred to be a sound strategy for mitigating the effects of natural hazards on Pacific islands (Thaman, Meleisea, and Makasiale 1979; Campbell 1984). However, trends there as elsewhere in the world have been away from diversified subsistence production toward monocropping of cash crops. The increased dependence on single cash crops and the displacement of food crops to less fertile, less accessible sites accentuated vulnerability to hurricanes in both Fiji and Tonga (Brookfield 1977; Lewis 1981).

In Western Samoa, too, some traditional crops have declined or disappeared. Yams, which keep well in the ground for months after a hurricane, have become much less common during the last century (Farrell and Ward 1962); several famine crops have virtually disappeared. Other traditional and imported crops have become important cash crops and have expanded over large areas. Coconut groves, a source of a traditional supplemental food and an important export for more than a century, now account for more than half of the agricultural land in most villages. Banana and cocoa trees, now grown mainly for subsistence, were planted for export on large areas in the 1950s and 1960s. Today the most profitable cash crop for village households is taro, a traditional and preferred staple root crop that is both exported and sold on the local market. Bananas, breadfruit, and the root crop taamu remain as traditional staple foodstuffs to supplement taro.

The level of market production and the amounts of various crops grown vary considerably among households, even in each study village, which thus enables comparisons of the vulnerability associated with different crops and production strategies. Most households in rural Western Samoa grow the bulk of their staple food and also sell produce locally or for export. However, household strategies range from specialization in the production of taro for sale at the expense of other staple crops to reliance on a diversity of subsistence crops, with infrequent sale of surplus crops. Households that only occasionally produce a surplus of taro for sale depend much of the time on bananas and breadfruit to supplement taro to meet staple-food needs.

Hurricane Ofa did not damage all crops equally. Losses of breadfruit and bananas were almost 100 percent over much of Western Samoa (Western
Fig. 2—Taro plantation in Vaipua 1 May 1990, three months after Hurricane Ofa.

Samoa Department of Agriculture 1990). The first new bananas were not available until six months after the storm, and restoring the breadfruit trees that were destroyed will require years. By contrast, root crops were much less seriously affected. Early official estimates of losses of taro were 30 to 50 percent in the districts where the study villages are located, but villagers reported that the losses were much less. Although the hurricane destroyed the leaves of this root crop, all but the more mature plants quickly recovered (Fig. 2). By early April, two months after the storm, there was no evidence in the two study villages that the hurricane had affected the taro crop, except for the lack of mature taro.

Traditional root crops, such as taro, taamu, and yams, were almost the only nonimported staple foods available in the villages until six months after the hurricane. Of the one hundred twenty meals from the sample households in each village during a four-day period in May, more than half were based on taro. Imported rice or flour, the second-most-common staple, made up 46 percent of meals in Fusi and 28 percent in Vaipua. Except for ten meals of taamu in Vaipua, other crops accounted for only a minor part of the diet.

Thus crop diversity by itself did not protect households from the negative impacts of Hurricane Ofa. After the hurricane, households that specialized in taro production were more favorably positioned than those that had practiced a diversified subsistence strategy that included bananas and bread-
fruit but little surplus taro. Households that normally would have surplus taro to sell had enough taro for food even after the hurricane-induced losses. A few households in each village with especially large taro plantations were able to sell taro at the urban markets at double the prehurricane price. On the other hand, households that had planned to supplement their taro with bananas and breadfruit found themselves short of food. Many such households depended on credit at the local store, food from the church, aid from relatives overseas, and taro from their neighbors during the months after the storm. Rice and flour were easier to obtain than the preferred staples, which were very high priced after the hurricane.

Although specialization in taro did not intensify vulnerability, specialization in coconut production did. A hurricane may destroy only a small portion of a coconut grove, but loss of immature nuts affects production for several years. A few families sold fallen coconuts immediately after the storm, but overall sales of coconuts had almost ceased three to six months after the storm. Households heavily dependent on income from coconut sales were seriously affected, which was true of few households in the study villages. However, elsewhere in villages where reliance on coconut was greater, food shortages were reportedly more severe. The high degree of vulnerability to hurricanes observed in other parts of the Pacific resulted mainly from reliance on coconut as a cash crop, and in some cases on cassava (Brookfield 1977; Lewis 1981; Bayliss-Smith and others 1988). Cassava, which is easily damaged by high winds, has replaced wind-resistant root crops in some parts of the Pacific, but it is still uncommon in Western Samoa.

The situation in Fusi and Vaipua during the first six months after Hurricane Ofa suggests that the type of crops was more important than actual crop diversity or than whether production was commercial. Diversified agriculture alone, without the food storage and famine foods of the past, is more vulnerable to hurricanes than are some cash-crop production strategies. It should be noted that hurricanes are only one of several hazards present in Western Samoa. Taro is more vulnerable to drought and insect outbreaks than to high winds, and diversity may still be a good strategy against these and other potential hazards. However, it is probably wrong to assume that diversity alone is an adequate defense against the hazards of any given place or that market production directly increases vulnerability to hazard.

VULNERABILITY AND THE MORAL ECONOMY

Involvement in the global market brings about changes not only in cropping systems but also in social and economic relationships. Precapitalist social arrangements have been described as a moral economy, under which groups living close to the subsistence margin ensure a minimum level of survival to all members of society (Scott 1976). These social arrangements are based on reciprocal, nonmonetary relationships that are undermined by export-commodity production, monetization, and taxation that accompany
participation in the global market economy (Watts 1983). As traditional social mechanisms for coping with hazards are eroded, poor households specifically become more vulnerable to disaster (Bayliss-Smith and others 1988).

Households in rural Western Samoa have been involved in market production of crops since the late 1800s, when coconuts were grown to pay church dues (Wright 1963). Village households became increasingly committed to export production of various crops during the first half of the twentieth century (Lewthwaite 1962). After 1945, roads were extended to most villages, and today most rural households produce crops for export. Wage labor is another factor, and almost every household has someone who is absent working elsewhere, especially in New Zealand.

Because of its extended but peripheral participation in the global market, Western Samoa might be expected to show the negative effects of incorporation into that economy. The aftermath of the 1990 hurricane provides an opportunity to assess the status of the moral economy and household vulnerability in the two study villages. Although both villages heavily participated in export production of certain crops for more than twenty years, Fusi, because of its location, became deeply involved sooner than did Vaipua by at least two decades (Farrell and Ward 1962). More of the population of Fusi was involved in wage labor because of its proximity to governmental and commercial centers: 23 percent of adults in Fusi but only 10 percent of them in Vaipua were wage earners at the time of my study. Thus one might expect a weaker moral economy and a greater vulnerability for the poor in Fusi than in Vaipua.

A frequently voiced complaint after the hurricane was a desire for traditional food staples. Most persons reported that they ate more rice and flour than was usual, and pity was often expressed for households that had to base meals on those staples day after day. Staples for the umu, or traditional stone oven, prepared on Sundays were especially important. Some households spent the little income they had on purchase of taro or other root crops for the weekend, even at the prevailing high prices. The percentage of meals with traditional staples is one indicator of the hardship faced by households after the storm.

Data from the sample households in Fusi and Vaipua reveal that only in the former did households base more than half of their meals on imported rice and flour, although most households in both villages had some of the eight sample meals based on them. All four Fusi households that based most of their meals on rice and flour were in the low socioeconomic category. For households in this category, the average number of meals without traditional staples was twice as high in Fusi as in Vaipua—5.3 to 2.7. Five sample households in Fusi, four of which were in the low category, purchased taro, a fact that may have affected their ability to buy fish or meat to supplement the staples. All traditional staples in the sample at Vaipua, by contrast, were procured from plantations in the village. The differences between the villages
cannot be explained by variations in the amount of taro grown. Both Fusi and Vaipua were known as taro-exporting villages; indeed, per capita land area in taro or taro fallow was slightly higher in Fusi than in Vaipua at the time of my study.

To what extent can the greater vulnerability experienced by poor households in Fusi be explained by a breakdown in the moral economy? To obtain some quantification of the moral economy in each village, I used a survey of nonmonetary food gifts given and received by the fifteen sample households in each village during a five-day period in June. There were many more nonmonetary exchanges of food among households in Vaipua than in Fusi. Most exchanges were plates of cooked food, although there were fewer but significant gifts of baskets of raw taro, pieces of fresh meat, or stringers of fish. In both villages households reported giving far more food gifts to other households than they received in return, a discrepancy that probably resulted from the phrasing of the question and from a reluctance to report gifts received rather than from a difference in the number of gifts actually exchanged.

The number of food gifts to church pastors was similar in each village and far outnumbered the gifts received from the church. Only three gifts were reportedly received from the church in each village sample, but they were much larger in Fusi than those in Vaipua. All of the gifts received from the pastor or church in Vaipua were small pieces of meat. The gifts reported in Fusi were significant quantities of rice and canned goods given periodically by the Mormon church to each of its members in response to the hurricane. Much of this food came ultimately from the church outside Western Samoa. The Mormon church thus alleviated some of the need for interhousehold exchange, at least for the significant minority that were members in Fusi. There were no such church or members in Vaipua.

Anecdotal evidence also suggests that nonmonetary exchange was more important in Vaipua than in Fusi. Only in Vaipua did I observe children asking for and receiving taro from unrelated households. It was not uncommon for the largest taro producers in Vaipua to give large baskets of taro or to allow young men from other households to harvest taro from their plantations. Large taro producers in both villages had enough taro to sell after the hurricane. However, one in Vaipua never sold taro; instead it was given to village families and related ones from other villages. This household received no monetary gain for its taro, but it rose in social standing and perhaps in political status in the village. Although taro and other food were exchanged among closely related households in Fusi, the large producers there did not report requests for taro from unrelated households, and all sold their surplus taro. One producer there sold some at half its market value to other village households. In general, relationships between unrelated households, though not strictly market based, appeared more monetary in Fusi than in Vaipua.
The greater vulnerability of households in Fusi may indeed be explained by a weakening of the moral economy. The greater reliance of poor households on nonpreferred, imported staples was paralleled by a reduction of nonmonetary exchange and food gifts to them. Vaipua retained a stronger moral economy, which may well have protected the poor from this hardship. Differences between the villages should not obscure the important aspects of a moral economy persisting in each. The poorest in each village were able to obtain a preferred staple for at least one meal a week, and malnutrition was not apparent in either village. In neither village were customary rights to land or property threatened. Nonmonetary relationships and a moral economy persisted to a large degree in spite of widespread participation in export crop production and emigration. Although there is evidence of change, the social system in both villages has been fairly resistant to transformation.

VILLAGE SELF-RELIANCE

Connections to the rest of the world have affected the ways that once-isolated groups now cope with hazards. In the Pacific, traditional methods of storing food have largely been abandoned, and the cultivation of some hurricane-resistant crops and famine foodstuffs have declined (Thaman, Meleisea, and Makasiale 1979). Total self-sufficiency through labor- and land-consuming strategies may not be practical or rational in view of the easy global connections to alternative food sources that prevail today. Perhaps more serious are the psychological effects of external relief efforts, which can leave people feeling dependent or powerless. Where centralized or external agencies have taken over relief efforts after natural disasters, mutual support in communities or among related islands has declined (Lewis 1981; Waddell 1983; Bayliss-Smith and others 1988). In a few cases of misplaced or excessive aid, people showed little motivation in exerting themselves to repair damage or to produce foodstuff (Marshall 1979; D'Souza 1988).

Western Samoa received large amounts of international aid in the aftermath of Hurricane Ofa. However, that aid did not prevent a strong community self-help response in the study villages. By two months after the hurricane, most of the damage to the villages had been repaired. Roads and paths to plantations had been cleared, and yards were neat and well groomed. The amount of taro planted, according to villagers and nonvillage observers, was greater than it had been before the storm. Many long-unused fallow areas near the village had been cleared and planted to taro. In Vaipua, many were taking advantage of the forest thinning that the hurricane had accomplished by expanding their plantations (Fig. 3).

The speed with which households could repair structures depended on the type of building and materials used. At least 75 percent of buildings with only moderate damage were repaired within five months, regardless of house type. The ability of village households to replace destroyed houses depended on the materials used. More than two-thirds of the simple open
Fig. 3—Taro plantation in Vaipua extended into a hurricane-thinned forest.

houses, built of locally available materials, had been replaced during the five-month period. In contrast, none of the European-style houses that had been destroyed were rebuilt in that time. Larger houses, with cement floors, iron roofs, and other purchased materials, are usually constructed with significant financial help from relatives overseas. Thus a much longer period is required to gather funds to rebuild them. Such houses, however, suffered a lower rate of destruction than did more simple ones.

There was a high degree of community cohesion and control in the wake of Hurricane Ofa. The mayor of each study village required each male adult to plant additional amounts of taro, to compensate for the lack of other crops in the months ahead. In Vaipua, village work-crews were organized immediately after the hurricane to remove fallen trees and to repair houses. Also the village council imposed fines on people who had been caught stealing crops. In each village the women’s committee inspected yards and houses and imposed fines on any that was unkempt or unsafe. In July, five months after the storm, the school committee of Fusi and a neighboring village hosted a dance to raise funds for a new school building; villagers donated food and labor. Six months after the storm, work began in Fusi on a large project to widen and extend a plantation road.

In the months after the storm, rites of passage such as marriage, burial, and conferral of titles continued, with large exchanges of goods, although
the quantity and variety of traditional foods were less than before the storm. Both villages contributed food and money to take part in annual church and sporting events. Villagers reported that social cohesion was strengthened in that time of stress. Only in the case of a few rural villages, where most of the buildings had been destroyed and whole families had moved temporarily, did one hear of insufficient social cohesiveness to rebuild after Hurricane Ofa.

Two factors help explain the strong self-help response in Western Samoa. First, it still has a vibrant subsistence economy and intact indigenous social organizations. Provision of basic needs and control of resources and society have remained largely at the village level. Although people gladly accepted assistance from foreign agencies and distant relatives, there was no sense of expectation that they would solve the problems resulting from the storm. Second, the amount of aid received at the village level was not overwhelming. A large portion of the disaster aid was allotted to repairing infrastructure. In the study villages, each household received small quantities of rice, flour, and sugar, as well as less than ten Western Samoan dollars a person. That aid did not provide more than a few weeks' supply of staple foods for most people and did not seem to discourage village production or rebuilding efforts.

CONCLUSIONS

Although rural Western Samoans have participated in the global economy through production of export crops for more than a century and in labor migration for several decades, the evidence from two study villages after Hurricane Ofa suggests that they were able to cope with that hazard with a high degree of self-sufficiency. Households that specialized in market production of taro, which is resilient in high winds and is a preferred traditional staple crop, were more secure than those that followed a diversified subsistence strategy that relied on bananas and breadfruit, crops susceptible to destruction by hurricanes. Market participation in itself may not increase vulnerability to hazard, and greater crop diversity alone may not mitigate disaster. The characteristics of the crops chosen, whether for cash or subsistence purposes, are important in determining their vulnerability to various hazards.

The most vulnerable segment of society received a minimal level of support after the storm, because nonmonetary economic relationships and social obligations were still strong in rural Western Samoa. There is some evidence, however, that nonmonetary exchange was less frequent and vulnerability of poor households greater in Fusi, the village with longer and slightly stronger connections to the global market. Even so, persistence of fairly strong nonmarket relationships in communities where most households are in some way involved in the global market is notable and suggests that indigenous social systems can be resistant to transformation.
A strong social system also played a role in each village's response to the hurricane. The village councils and women's organizations took responsibility for directing replanting and expansion of food crops, rebuilding of houses, and village cleanup. That people feel an integral part of and take pride in their village helps explain the generally positive response to post-storm reconstruction. One key to promoting self-reliant response to natural hazards is the strengthening of local-community social organization and resource management.

REFERENCES

Bayliss-Smith, T., R. Bedford, H. Brookfield, and M. Latham. 1988. Islands, islanders and the world: the colonial and post-colonial experience in eastern Fiji. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Brookfield, H. C. 1977. Hurricane hazard: natural disaster and small populations. UNESCO/UNFPA island reports 1. Canberra: Australian National University Press for UNESCO.

Campbell, J. R. 1984. Dealing with disaster: hurricane response in Fiji. Suva: Government of Fiji.

D'Souza, F. 1988. Famine: social security and an analysis of vulnerability. Famine, ed. G. A. Harrison, 1–55. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Farrell, B. H., and R. G. Ward. 1962. Village and its agriculture. Western Samoa: land, life and agriculture in tropical Polynesia, eds. J. W. Fox and K. B. Cumberland, 177–238. Christchurch, N.Z.: Whitcombe and Tombs.

Lewis, J. 1981. Some perspectives on natural disaster vulnerability in Tonga. Pacific Viewpoint 22: 145–162.

Lewthwaite, G. R. 1962. Land, life and agriculture to mid-century. Western Samoa: land, life and agriculture in tropical Polynesia, eds. J. W. Fox and K. B. Cumberland, 130–176. Christchurch, N.Z.: Whitcombe and Tombs.

Marshall, M. 1979. Natural and unnatural disaster in the Mortlock Islands of Micronesia. Human Organization 38:265–272.

O'Keefe, P., K. Westgate, and B. Wisner. 1976. Taking the naturalness out of natural disasters. Nature 260:566–567.

Scott, J. C. 1976. Moral economy of the peasant. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Thaman, R. R., M. Meleisea, and J. Makasiale. 1979. Agricultural diversity and traditional knowledge as insurance against natural disasters. Annex 10 in Natural disaster prevention, preparedness and rehabilitation meeting, South Pacific Bureau for Economic Cooperation, 26–30 November 1979, Suva.

Ulafala, A. 1990. Ofa was one of the worst in 169 years. Pacific Island Monthly 60(3):12–13.

Waddell, E. 1983. Coping with frosts, governments and disaster experts: some reflections based on a New Guinea experience and a perusal of the relevant literature. Interpretations of calamity: from the viewpoint of human ecology, ed. K. Hewitt, 33–43. Boston: Allen & Unwin.

Watts, M. 1983. On the poverty of theory: natural hazards research in context. Interpretations of calamity: from the viewpoint of human ecology, ed. K. Hewitt, 231–262. Boston: Allen & Unwin.

Western Samoa Department of Agriculture. 1990. Damage survey 1 March 1990. Apia.

Wright, A. C. S. 1963. Soils and land use of Western Samoa. New Zealand Soil Bureau bulletin 22. Wellington: New Zealand Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.