American Geographical Society

Urban-System Evolution on the Frontier of the Ecuadorian Amazon
Author(s): Roy Ryder and Lawrence A. Brown
Source: Geographical Review, Vol. 90, No. 4 (Oct., 2000), pp. 511-535
Published by: American Geographical Society
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3250782
Accessed: 28-12-2015 23:44 UTC

REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3250782?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents

You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
URBAN–SYSTEM EVOLUTION ON THE FRONTIER OF THE ECUADORIAN AMAZON

ROY RYDER and LAWRENCE A. BROWN

ABSTRACT. Like the North American frontier, Ecuador’s Amazonian margin has advanced in periodic waves. But the impetus has been extremely varied, interlacing periods of socioeconomic crisis with times of prosperity. Recent events in eastern Ecuador confirm that urbanization is a fundamental component of frontier development in South America. The urbanization process is not a sign, however, of regional economic strength. Capital gains at the periphery are transferred to the nation’s core region. Even the larger boom towns display little functional specialization; they are, instead, precariously dependent on employment in the public-service sector. Nonetheless, urban centers in the Ecuadorian Amazon continue to grow and to drain surrounding rural areas of younger and more educated individuals. Keywords: Amazon, boom towns, Ecuador, frontier regions, regional development.

The six provinces of the Ecuadorian Amazon—the Oriente—account for 48 percent of the nation’s territory but contain only 4 percent of the population (INEC 1991). When oil was discovered there in the late 1960s, new access roads brought an end to the isolation of the region and facilitated large-scale spontaneous colonization of rain forest-dominated terrain. In the prepetroleum era colonists had been restricted mainly to the piedmont or the banks of navigable rivers, but the new waves of pioneers rapidly thrust the agricultural frontier deep into the northeastern Oriente (Figure 1).

Boom towns have become a fundamental feature of the frontier’s landscape. To demonstrate this, we first review the literature on urban systems at the South American frontier, then present detailed analyses of Puyo and Nueva Loja, the two largest boom towns in the Ecuadorian Amazon. Our emphasis is on factors that have influenced their development: rural–urban migration, local primacy, and spatial interaction with other towns in the Oriente. We include references to the findings of other researchers of frontier development and compare the development of pioneer towns in the Ecuadorian Amazon with those in the coastal plain—the Costa. Our final comments focus on an examination of current negative and positive perceptions of the potential resilience of the Oriente and its urban network.

Urbanization at the South American Frontier
The ambiguous term frontier can be applied to either a relatively static border zone between neighboring states or a dynamic peripheral region in the throes of absorption into the national and global economies. John Friedmann recognizes two kinds of dynamic frontiers: those characterized by settlement and those dominated by extraction (1996).
Fig. 1—Cities and regions of Ecuador. (Cartography by Sang-Il Lee, Department of Geography, Ohio State University)

Settlement frontiers are colonized by farmers who migrate from the established heartland of a nation to thinly populated margins in search of land. Ensuing pioneer rural communities are accompanied by remarkable boom towns that articulate the frontier economy with the rest of the nation and the world at large. As in the frontier characterized by Frederick Jackson Turner, the wilderness is tamed and the landscape evolves through successive stages of economic development (Turner 1920). Historical evidence reveals that settlement frontiers do not necessarily advance at a uniform rate. Expansion of the North American settlement frontier in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was sensitive to long-wave Krondatiev economic episodes. Prosperous periods associated with a push to the west alternated with stagnation of the frontier during economic depressions (Earle 1992; Berry 1996).

Extractive frontiers do not involve permanent rural settlement but are penetrated primarily to extract minerals, fuel, or timber for export to industrial regions. As in Alaska, the Canadian North, or the Australian interior, it is assumed that extractive frontiers will remain sparsely populated (Elazar 1996). In the absence of rural settlers, towns established for resource-extraction purposes eventually decline and become ghost towns once the resource is exhausted.

Frontier regions in South America, both settlement and extractive, share the distinctively urban personality of that continent. Amazonia may be considered an
“urbanized jungle” (Becker 1996, 91) because the majority (55.2 percent in 1991) of Brazil’s Amazonian inhabitants are not small, rural producers but live in towns and participate in urban activities. Case studies of boom towns in the Brazilian Amazon show, however, that their economic growth is uneven and depends on external forces and changes in transportation (Lisansky 1990; Godfrey 1992; J. T. Roberts 1992). In addition, employment is mobile, and it blurs any interface between urban and rural areas. David Cleary describes how one-quarter of the households in the Brazilian boom town of Rio Branco still gain better than half of their income in the rural zone through extractive activities, agricultural work, or sales of family-farm products (1993). Male residents of Xinguara in southeastern Amazonia leave home to work in the lumber or mining industries in the dry season and find employment in local construction projects or commerce during the rainy season (Godfrey 1990).

Boom towns in the Ecuadorian Amazon are a recent phenomenon, but one with old economic problems. Although state funds have trickled down to expand employment in public-service agencies, jobs still are scarce and incomes low. Urban inhabitants scramble for bureaucratic and service positions in local government or fall back on one of a multitude of small-scale commercial enterprises. Field surveys of establishments in both Ecuador (Brown and Ryder 1999; Ryder and Brown 2000) and Brazil (Volbeda 1986) reveal a proliferation of modest restaurants, bars, corner stores, and retail outlets. Commercial establishments outnumber all others in Amazonian boom towns regardless of differences in city size, city age, or the nature of the local economy (oil extraction, mining, lumber, ranching, pioneer agriculture). This finding is consistent with research by Cleary (1993) and by Brian Godfrey (1990), both of whom emphasize the importance of small-scale commerce in towns of the Brazilian Amazon. The informal sector is clearly as important in Amazonian boom towns as it is in the capital city of Quito, situated in the Sierra (Teltscher 1993), the port city of Guayaquil, in the Costa (Placencia and Vásquez 1986), and other Latin American cities (Bromley 1982; Safa 1986; Portes and Johns 1989; Portes, Castells, and Benton 1989; Lawson and Klak 1990).

Boom towns link frontier regions to more established parts of their nations. They also routinely display little interaction with each other and do not often diffuse prosperity to the hinterlands (Lithwick, Gradus, and Lithwick 1996). Even when frontier growth centers are planned and equipped with industrial or mineral-extraction facilities, they may have limited success in spreading economic development. Ciudad Guayana, in Venezuela, has become a relatively dynamic industrial center, but it absorbs migrants from the surrounding region, and there is little evidence of economic progress beyond the city itself (Hollier 1988; Brown and Lawson 1989). Similarly, the planned mining complex of Carajás, with its associated spontaneous boom town of Parauapebas, has generated considerable export revenue for Brazil but remains an exotic enclave with negligible trickle-down effects for the Amazonian state of Pará. Most of the miners employed in Carajás come from outside Pará, and company cafeterias and town supermarkets are almost entirely supplied with food and merchandise from out-of-state sources (Roberts 1995).
The disappointing performance of planned frontier growth centers has convinced former proponents to reject their value as stimulants for development in frontier regions. Friedmann now considers growth poles to be more parasitic than generative (1992).

That neither planned nor spontaneous urban centers in frontier regions energize their surrounding rural communities is not surprising. Rural life in Latin America is predominantly one of drudgery, in which household members work long hours on the farm. The viability of small-scale pioneer agricultural enterprises is diminished by problems of insufficient capital and credit, insecure land tenure, poor soils, unreliable roads, lack of transportation, inadequate technical assistance, low prices for food crops in urban markets, and crop damage caused by pests and plagues. Living conditions in the Latin American countryside are inferior to those in urban habitats, which offer better housing, amenities, and health and educational facilities. Even the immigrant inhabitants of urban squatter neighborhoods compare their situation favorably with their prior existence in the rural areas they abandoned (B. Roberts 1992). Latin American frontier towns therefore attract migrants from hinterlands and can display remarkable rates of population growth.

John Browder and Brian Godfrey view the Brazilian Amazon as a peripheral sociospatial continuum with a wide range of coexisting populist and corporatist socioeconomic groups (1990, 1997). Associated urban systems vary so much in morphology, function, and extraregional linkages that they cannot be explained by central place theory, the Turner thesis of frontier development, structural frameworks, or any other single theoretical model. Populist segments of the frontier are characterized by small farmers, independent miners, petty merchants, and others engaged in labor-intensive activity. They are distinguished by four benchmark stages of urban development. Initial resource extraction is served by rudimentary expeditionary resource settlements. Subsequent immigration of pioneer peasant farmers is accompanied by the development of local service centers. Selected service centers attain the privileged status of municipality and benefit from the influx of public-service employment, services, and utilities. Many municipalities eventually yield market area to new service centers at the expanding frontier. In the absence of productive—usually manufacturing—specialization they diminish in political/economic vitality and become relict municipalities.

Corporatist segments of the Amazonian frontier are dominated by public and private capitalized enterprises, including cattle ranching, agribusiness, large-scale mining, wood processing, and hydropower projects. Initial planned company towns are well equipped and designed to cater for management and technical staff. Surrounding satellite shanty towns spring up spontaneously to house construction workers, domestics, and other low-income residents. The bicephalic complex may eventually attain municipality status, but depletion of the local resource base leads to closure of the company town and collapse of the symbiotic shanty settlement. A small residual settlement may remain, with minor government services and petty market activities. Thus, unlike the populist model, the corporate frontier does not
evolve toward increasingly complex forms of urbanization but degenerates in stages from planned settlements to residual depressed nuclei.

Browder and Godfrey outline other broad principles of urbanization in Amazonia. Urban growth in the Amazon is generally disarticulated from surrounding agricultural development. Linked to the national and global economies, larger boom towns exhibit growth that exceeds local levels of economic progress. Inconsistent state policies have promoted both populist and corporatist frontiers with contrasting urban patterns, but whatever the development strategy, the survival of individual boom towns is greatly enhanced if they are able to achieve municipality status and expand employment in the service sector. Key locations in transportation networks also are particularly favorable to growth and may lead to the development of regional secondary cities or even regional metropolitan centers.

The general spatial evolution of towns in the Ecuadorian Amazon has been analyzed by Lawrence Brown and Rodrigo Sierra (1994) and by Brown and his coauthors (1992, 1994, 1996), who observe similarities between emerging reality in Ecuador and universal core-periphery models of frontier development, including Edward Taaffe, Richard Morrill, and Peter Gould’s model sequence of transportation development (1963). They also find context-dependent theoretical frameworks, including Edward Muller’s three-stage classification—pioneer, specialized, transitional periphery—of nineteenth-century North American pioneer regions to be relevant (1977). Thus Coca (Puerto Francisco de Orellana), Nueva Loja, and Shushufindi are elements of a specialized periphery, whereas Puyo is considered to be developing into a major gateway and the dominant center of a transitional periphery. The principal discrepancy with context-dependent models corresponds to economic functions: Ecuadorian pioneer towns have exceptionally large service sectors and relatively weak representation of wholesaling and financial activities. Brown explains variations in the development of Ecuadorian Amazon towns by identifying distinctive combinations of endogenous and exogenous forces (1999).

Development Factors in the Evolution of Puyo

Puyo, the largest town in the Ecuadorian Amazon, originated as a Dominican mission in 1899. Pioneer farmers began to arrive in the 1930s, when a North American oil company, Leonard Exploration, began to build a road from the Sierra town of Baños to Puyo. Dominican priests constructed a church and two schools in 1932, and an army base was established in 1935. By 1938 Puyo’s population was 1,073, and it was already the largest settlement in the province of Napo-Pastaza (Hurtado 1988).

The 1941 invasion by Peru made the Ecuadorean government painfully aware of the need to reduce the isolation of its vulnerable Amazonian provinces. Shell Oil, which replaced Leonard Exploration in 1939, continued construction of the Baños–Puyo road until it reached an airstrip bearing the company’s name in 1942. It took five additional years, however, to complete the final 6-mile road link to Puyo. Shell suspended its unsuccessful search for oil in 1949, but Puyo continued to attract colonists, including refugees from a major earthquake in Sierra towns of Pelileo and
Ambato. Leonard Exploration returned to the region in 1957 and initiated an extension of the Baños–Puyo road to Tena. This road was completed in 1963 and stimulated the development of Teniente Ortiz, Santa Clara, and other new communities. No oil was discovered, however, in the region surrounding Puyo.

In 1959 Napo-Pastaza was subdivided into two provinces. Tena continued to administer Napo, and Puyo was declared capital of Pastaza. Significant colonization occurred in 1964–1965, after Ecuador approved an agrarian reform and colonization law. Haciendas in the Sierra readily released dependent serfs, modernized production, became increasingly livestock oriented, and functioned with a reduced pool of temporary hired workers. Peasants lost access to hacienda pasture and fuelwood sources and were relegated to small, infertile land parcels that became even smaller when they were fragmented by inheritance (Brown 1991). Rapid population growth and decreased access to land forced many peasants to seek scarce employment in urban areas, cultivate high-altitude moorlands (Gondard 1986), or colonize coastal and Amazonian rain forests (Lowder 1982). In the mid-1960s Puyo was a “busy town,” with schools, shops, and an agricultural extension service (Hegen 1966). Another wave of migrants came from drought-stricken Loja Province in 1969–1970 (Aspiazu 1982). The rural population of Pastaza continued to increase by 2.14 percent per year between 1974 and 1982, but this growth was overshadowed by the province’s urban population, which grew at an annual rate of 8.54 percent (Uriiola 1988). Urbanization was stimulated by state revenues from the 1970s oil boom that were used to expand educational, medical, legal, technical, and administrative facilities in the province. It was in the nation’s interest to consolidate control of the sparsely populated Oriente, encourage colonization, promote socioeconomic development, and reduce the risk of further loss of oil-rich territory to neighboring Amazonian countries.

Ecuador always protested the 1942 Protocol of Rio de Janeiro, which favored Peru and reduced Ecuador’s Amazonian territory to a fraction of its former size. Significant border skirmishes broke out in the southern Oriente in 1981 and early 1995, but, in response to international pressure, Ecuador and Peru finally adopted a peace proposal in 1998 that may bring political stability to the southern Oriente.

The population of Puyo in 1990 was 14,438 (INEC 1991). In Browder-Godfrey terminology, the town has become the most successful “municipality” of the piedmont settlement frontier, and it has a more sedate and orderly appearance than do other settlements in the Oriente (Figures 2 and 3). The central streets are paved, and the majority of the buildings are solidly constructed of cement blocks. The town boasts a modern marketplace, a new bus terminal, and excellent recreational sports facilities, including a new soccer stadium. Deficiencies in the supply of water and the disposal of sewage continue, but electricity is available at all times, and the streets are kept reasonably free of litter. Puyo has attained an air of maturity.

Change in Third World regions results from the interaction of endogenous—local—characteristics with exogenous forces related to world economic circumstances, national conditions, and state policies (Brown 1991, 1999; Brown and others 1994). Puyo’s complex evolution has been strongly influenced by exogenous factors
Fig. 2—By July 1993 Puyo, the leading town in the Ecuadorian Amazon, had attained an air of maturity, with paved streets and a wide range of urban services. (Photograph by Roy Ryder)

Fig. 3—The weekend fair at Puyo fills downtown streets with people and produce. (Photograph by Roy Ryder, July 1993)
Fig. 4—Despite somewhat chaotic and unattractive downtown streetscapes, Nueva Loja, the second largest settlement in the Ecuadorian Amazon, was well on the way to overcoming its shanty-town appearance by July 1993. (Photograph by Roy Ryder)

Fig. 5—The main street of Nueva Loja is characterized by solid buildings and bustling commerce. (Photograph by Roy Ryder, July 1993)
operating at both international and national levels. Relevant international forces include the early intervention of foreign missionaries, the 1941 invasion by Peru, and various stages of oil exploration related to the growing world demand for fossil fuels. An influential national policy was the 1964 law that facilitated colonization as an escape valve for peasants who had been marginalized by the modernization of large farms in the Costa and the Sierra. Together with the 1949 earthquake in Ambato and the 1969–1970 drought in Loja Province, this legislation stimulated pioneer agriculture in Puyo. Brief periods of prosperity in agriculture were related to fleeting favorable prices for tea, naranjilla fruit (Solanum quitoense), and sugarcane in national and international markets. A particularly relevant outside factor was Puyo’s selection as provincial capital in 1959, which was followed by local expansion of state administrative facilities using revenues derived from the country’s 1970s oil boom.

Endogenous factors in the growth of Puyo are more difficult to specify. The indigenous population, the target of early missionary activity, has not participated significantly in the town’s development. The surrounding region is poorly endowed with natural resources, and local soils manifest limited potential for agriculture. Forest reserves are so depleted that local artisans use wood from the northeastern Oriente. Nonetheless, it was the unique geological structure of the central Oriente that stimulated exploration for oil and led to construction of the road from Baños to Puyo. No oil was discovered, but the perceived potential for oil exploitation was clearly a significant endogenous factor in the early development of Puyo. The dominant contemporary endogenous characteristic of town is probably its geographical location in the center of the Oriente, with a comparatively short access route to the Sierra. The road that winds its way up the Pastaza Canyon is very fragile, but it is a vital link between Puyo and dynamic markets in Ambato.

Development Factors in the Evolution of Nueva Loja

The boom town of Nueva Loja owes its origins to discoveries of oil in the north-eastern Oriente in 1967. The first buildings were erected in the late 1960s by pioneers from Loja Province who belonged to an agricultural cooperative called “Nueva Loja.” The chosen site was beside an oil camp named “Lago Agrio,” and most local people still refer to their town by that name. A study of initial colonization in the region describes Nueva Loja as a rudimentary “squatter settlement of about 100 houses” (Bromley 1972, 289). By 1971, however, Texaco-Gulf had completed the road from Quito to Nueva Loja, and the town had become the point of origin of the most dynamic agricultural frontier in the Ecuadorian Amazon (Figures 4 and 5).

Many colonists were unskilled or semiskilled construction workers for Texaco-Gulf and associated contracting companies before they claimed and cleared roadside land. Some came to the region with the specific objective of establishing pioneer farms (Barral 1983). Oil extraction and spontaneous agricultural colonization occurred simultaneously. Ray Bromley estimated that at least 1,400 new roadside farms had been established by the end of 1971 (1972). Most of the migrants were
poor and of rural origin. They came from Pichincha and other neighboring Sierra provinces but also included peasants who were fleeing economic depression in Manabí Province and drought in Loja Province. Anne Lise Pietri estimated that 150,000 people abandoned Loja Province between 1962 and 1982 to seek better fortune elsewhere, especially in Quito and the Ecuadorian Amazon (1986). Bromley emphasized that the flood of colonists was motivated neither by high agricultural potential nor a romantic pioneering spirit (1972, 1981). The influx was largely the consequence of difficulty in obtaining land or lucrative employment in the highlands or the coastal plain.

In 1982, census results showed that Nueva Loja (7,237 inhabitants) had a larger population than Tena (5,457), the capital of Napo Province (INEC 1982). Communications between Nueva Loja, in northern Napo, and Tena, in the extreme southwest, have always been difficult. As a result, booming Nueva Loja was declared capital of a new province, Sucumbíos, created from the northern flank of Napo in 1989. By the following year Nueva Loja had accumulated 13,165 residents to become the second largest settlement in the Ecuadorian Amazon. Only Puyo, with its population of 14,438, had more inhabitants (INEC 1991).

It is clear that the evolution of Nueva Loja, like that of Puyo, has been strongly influenced by exogenous factors. At the international level, the world demand for oil and the construction of the Quito—Nueva Loja road by Texaco-Gulf gave origin to the town and made it accessible to the rest of Ecuador. Subsequent national factors include the government's policy of permitting spontaneous colonization around Nueva Loja in order to convert the region into a live frontier—and to reduce the risk of invasion by Colombia. At the same time, this policy was intended to alleviate peasants' demand for land in the Sierra and to provide a haven for refugees from the drought in Loja Province.

The most significant endogenous factor involved in the economic development of Nueva Loja and its surrounding region has been the presence of oil. Indeed, if oil had not been discovered there in 1967, the northeastern Oriente might still be an inaccessible periphery. Initial exploration and road construction in the late 1960s and early 1970s created abundant full- and part-time unskilled jobs for colonists. This labor force rose to a peak of about 5,000 between 1969 and 1971 (Bromley 1972). In recent years, however, the impact of the oil industry on employment has diminished. Ekkehard Buchhofer estimated that approximately 1,000 unskilled laborers continued to work for small firms that performed subcontracted construction work, maintenance, and repair operations for the national oil corporation (1988). These low-income employees were frequently hired on a temporary basis. Blandine Gravelin found that only a handful of the 300 employees in the Nueva Loja oil camp were from the town itself (1987). The vast majority of skilled oil workers still travel by air from Quito, live in an oil camp fenced off from the town, work nine-day shifts, and return home to the Sierra between work assignments. Even food supplies are flown in to the oil camp from Quito (Wesche 1989). Like the Carajás mining camp in Brazil, oil-extraction facilities at Nueva Loja are
enclosed in an enclave that has a restricted economic impact on the neighboring town and its hinterland.

LOCAL PRIMACY AND RURAL–URBAN MIGRATION: PUYO AND PASTAZA

Scarce employment in Puyo is aggravated by immigration from the surrounding region. City planners voice deep concern about economic stagnation in rural Pastaza, where few incentives exist for agriculture (Urriola 1988). Technical assistance from state agronomists is inadequate, and productivity is diminished by persistent pests and disease that attack crops and livestock. At times, crop failure is on a massive scale. A plague devastated naranjilla crops in the 1960s and 1970s, causing colonists to migrate from the rural community of Fátima to Puyo or Tena. Many farmers encounter difficulties in taking their produce to urban markets because of poor accessibility. Even those who have properties close to roads are discouraged by low food prices that do not compensate for the high costs of transportation. As observed in the northeastern Oriente, crops are increasingly being replaced with pasture for cattle, which are more easily taken to market and require less labor (Hiraoka and Yamamoto 1980). The demise of cropping and the surge in cattle ranching are reflected in the distribution of loans approved by Puyo’s branch of the Banco Nacional de Fomento (National Development Bank), the principal source of credit for Pastaza’s agriculturalists. Funds were invested in tea plantations in the early 1970s, but production was severely reduced after 1976 as a consequence of falling international market prices and increasing labor costs (Aspiazu 1982). Since then, bank funding for cultivation has been negligible. James Hicks argues that the Banco Nacional de Fomento has given preferential treatment to ranchers in the Ecuadorian Amazon (1990). Provincial planners argue, however, that diminished financing of cropping is not bank policy but a sign that farmers no longer wish to risk committing themselves to a loan for crops. Oriente farmers are not alone in their decision to replace crops with pasture. Owners of large Sierra farms also have turned to livestock to produce meat and dairy products for the growing urban market, to reduce labor costs, to free up capital for investment in urban real estate and industrial projects (Vos 1988), and to lower the risk of state expropriation by converting a large proportion of the farm to pasture (Brown 1991). Pastaza’s economically active population employed in agriculture fell from 4,752 (59.7 percent) in 1974 to 3,993 (39.2 percent) in 1982. The province’s rural population grew at a sluggish 2.14 percent in the same period, and its share of the total population decreased from 77 percent to 67 percent (Urriola 1988).

Migration from Pastaza’s countryside to Puyo is not caused by modernization of production or land consolidation. Colonists in the Oriente are not forced to leave their land by cattle ranchers and land speculators, as has been reported in the Brazilian Amazon (Bakx 1990; Godfrey 1990; Schmink and Wood 1992). Although ranching is becoming increasingly significant in Pastaza, and 8.73 percent of the farmers control 37.03 percent of the farmland (Laspina 1981), there is no widespread process of involuntary expulsion of small farmers. City planners suggest that mi-
Table I—Population Change in the Largest Settlements of Pastaza Province, Ecuador, 1974–1990

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">SETTLEMENT</th>
    <th rowspan="2">ROAD DISTANCE FROM PUYO (km)</th>
    <th colspan="2">POPULATION IN 1982</th>
    <th colspan="2">MEAN ANNUAL GROWTH RATE, 1974–1982 (%)</th>
    <th colspan="2">MEAN ANNUAL GROWTH RATE, 1982–1990 (%)</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>POPULATION IN 1982</th>
    <th>MEAN ANNUAL GROWTH RATE, 1974–1982 (%)</th>
    <th>POPULATION IN 1990</th>
    <th>MEAN ANNUAL GROWTH RATE, 1982–1990 (%)</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Puyo</td>
    <td>–</td>
    <td>9,758</td>
    <td>9.5</td>
    <td>14,438</td>
    <td>6.0</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Shell</td>
    <td>6</td>
    <td>2,055</td>
    <td>5.1</td>
    <td>3,322</td>
    <td>7.7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mera</td>
    <td>15</td>
    <td>569</td>
    <td>–1.3</td>
    <td>689</td>
    <td>2.6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Veracruz</td>
    <td>6</td>
    <td>369</td>
    <td>–0.2</td>
    <td>463</td>
    <td>3.2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Santa Clara</td>
    <td>45</td>
    <td>268</td>
    <td>1.9</td>
    <td>473</td>
    <td>9.6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Arajuno</td>
    <td>No road</td>
    <td>256</td>
    <td>2.9</td>
    <td>228</td>
    <td>–1.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Sarayacu</td>
    <td>No road</td>
    <td>212</td>
    <td>–1.6</td>
    <td>283</td>
    <td>4.2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Curaray</td>
    <td>No road</td>
    <td>176</td>
    <td>–16.3</td>
    <td>204</td>
    <td>2.0</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Fátima</td>
    <td>8</td>
    <td>146</td>
    <td>–2.3</td>
    <td>169</td>
    <td>2.0</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Montalvo</td>
    <td>No road</td>
    <td>134</td>
    <td>–6.3</td>
    <td>580</td>
    <td>41.6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Madre Tierra</td>
    <td>9</td>
    <td>134</td>
    <td>–4.7</td>
    <td>194</td>
    <td>5.6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Diez de Agosto</td>
    <td>13</td>
    <td>130</td>
    <td>0.0</td>
    <td>198</td>
    <td>6.5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Tarqui</td>
    <td>8</td>
    <td>100</td>
    <td>–0.6</td>
    <td>143</td>
    <td>5.4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Teniente Ortiz</td>
    <td>18</td>
    <td>69</td>
    <td>–6.3</td>
    <td>57</td>
    <td>–17.4</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Sources: Ruiz and Alvear 1988; INEC 1991.

gration to Puyo is caused by disenchantment with pioneer agriculture. Young family members, in particular, take advantage of education in rural schools to abandon the rigors of farming in the rain forest and search for alternative income strategies in Puyo. An analysis of deforestation in Morona-Santiago Province reveals a similar situation among second-generation colonists in the southern Oriente (Rudel 1993). Farming an inherited share of the family farm with degraded soils is not an attractive option for the future. Those who establish a farm are faced with the arduous task of repeating their parents’ pioneering experience in inaccessible rain forest. In the absence of new road-building projects that will improve access to unclaimed land, many decide to seek alternative income opportunities in urban areas—an option that was not available to the older generation of colonists.

Carlos Aramburú observed similar migration of more successful colonists into Peruvian Amazon frontier towns, where they invested in stores, restaurants, repair shops, and other nonagricultural activities (1984). John Terborgh believes that most inhabitants of tropical rain forests in Latin America would gladly trade their farms for a steady job in a town if such employment were available (1993). As observed elsewhere in Latin America, rural–urban migration in the Ecuadorian Amazon is a selective process, with ominous implications for the future of rural areas (Gilbert 1990). Those who abandon the countryside are generally young and educated, whereas the residual rural populations are older, less skilled, and unreceptive to technological changes that would make farming less destructive of the environment. In short, Puyo is draining rural Pastaza of its more talented inhabitants.

All of the most populated settlements in Pastaza are seats of administrative units. Road connections are important—and available—to link only nine communities to
Fig. 6—Urban settlements in the Puyo region. (Cartography by Sang-Il Lee, Department of Geography, Ohio State University)

Puyo (Table I, Figure 6). The other settlements are in the eastern rain forest and depend on air transportation through Shell. Only two urban centers were characterized by rapid annual growth rates during the oil boom of the 1970s. Puyo reaped the benefits of an unprecedented expansion of public-service facilities and government employment opportunities. Shell, with its army base and airstrip, displays considerable corporate vigor but still lags far behind the provincial capital. The majority of the other settlements had negative rates of population growth between 1974 and 1982 (Ruiz and Alvear 1988). It would appear that they lost many inhabitants to Puyo during that critical period.

Between 1982 and 1990 Puyo’s mean annual growth rate declined from 9.5 percent to 6.0 percent, affected by the onset of national economic recession and shrinking public expenditure. In contrast, the surrounding small communities exhibited some signs of a weak recovery. Apart from Arajuno and Teniente Ortiz, rural settlement population growth rates were 2 percent or greater. The abnormally high rate of 41.6 percent for Montalvo, with its male:female ratio of 4.8:1, is explained by its function as a military base close to the border with Peru (INEC 1991). It would be premature, however, to interpret the recent revival of the small villages as evidence of provincial polarization reversal. In terms of absolute population, Puyo still clearly dominates even the larger villages within its sphere of influence.

Puyo is the primate central place of the Pastaza Province, monopolizing services, facilities, commerce, and skilled labor. Together with farmers from rural ar-
Fig. 7—The rudimentary nature of transportation in the Ecuadorian Amazon is reflected in the simplicity of buses that travel between Nueva Loja and Coca. (Photograph by Roy Ryder, July 1993)

eas, inhabitants of smaller settlements travel to Puyo to sell produce, buy supplies, settle legal and administrative affairs, consult a doctor, or find a high school for their children. The prosperity of Puyo does not trickle down through an urban hierarchy. Puyo may be comparatively small, but provincial planners consider the town to be “hyperurbanized” and suggest that there should be decentralization of activities from the provincial capital to smaller communities (Jaramillo and others 1988).

INTERACTION AMONG TOWNS IN THE ECUADORIAN AMAZON

The flow of goods and people is constant between Puyo and the Sierra through Ambato and Riobamba, but Puyo has limited interaction with other settlements in the Oriente. The roads that cross the rolling foothills, terraces, and plains of the Oriente are no better than those that wind up the precipitous Andean slopes and deep canyons and into the high intermontane valleys of the Sierra: They are narrow, sinuous, unpaved, and deteriorate rapidly in inclement weather. An upper layer of crude oil allows vehicles to travel somewhat faster in the Nueva Loja–Coca region, but the slick surface is slippery when wet.

The rudimentary road network limits buses to an average speed of approximately 20 miles per hour. In addition, inhabitants of the Amazon are accustomed to frequent long delays caused by rain and landslides. It is not surprising, therefore, that Puyo has direct bus service only to the two nearest provincial capitals of the
Oriente—Tena and Macas. The twelve buses per day to Tena and six buses per day to Macas are continuations of services that link the Sierra to these towns by way of Puyo. The duration of the 50-mile trip from Puyo to Tena is three hours. A traveler who wishes to continue his trip to Coca, in the dynamic northeastern region, must change buses in Tena and travel another grueling 100 miles in seven additional hours. Brown and his coauthors consider Puyo a major gateway to the Ecuadorian Amazon (1994). The tenuous bus connection to the northeastern Oriente, however, bespeaks Puyo as a city that has not taken full advantage of its unique central location and proximity to the Sierra.

As long as it may be, the six-hour trip south from Puyo to Macas eventually may become a significant outlet for produce from Morona-Santiago Province, because roads in the south-central Oriente are even more primitive. A major landslide in 1993 added a two-hour detour to the nine hours already required to travel 100 miles from Gualaquiza to Cuenca in the Sierra. Furthermore, the principal newspaper in Cuenca recently reported that the 125-mile intraregional trip from Gualaquiza to Macas demands twelve hours of the passenger’s time (El Mercurio 1993).

Cartographic analysis of daily interprovincial bus schedules in other Oriente towns also suggests that extraregional links with the Sierra are still far more important than intraregional connections are (Ryder and Brown 2000). Buses leave Nueva Loja for Coca hourly (Figure 7), but there is no direct service to Tena or Puyo. In contrast, eighteen buses per day go from Nueva Loja to Quito, and five additional buses go to cities in the Costa. Similarly, Tena offers sixteen daily connections to the Sierra but only one bus to Nueva Loja. Coca also offers ten buses to the Sierra and Costa every day. In short, the emerging roadway network provides new options for travel to the Sierra but does little to promote interaction within the region.

Abundant bus connections between northern Oriente towns and Sierra cities are related to the origins of the colonists, who emigrated principally from the provinces of Pichincha, Tungurahua, and Chimborazo. Equally important are the comparatively large urban centers of Quito, Ambato, and Riobamba, which offer significant commodities and services. People normally turn to higher-order central places to buy better merchandise, seek professional assistance, or settle administrative affairs. Colonists find little incentive to visit other Oriente towns that are comparable in size or smaller than their place of residence. Just as the small villages in Pastaza Province are subordinate to Puyo, the larger Oriente settlements are dominated by Ambato, Riobamba, and, above all, Quito. Towns in the Oriente are not unique in their dependence on larger cities. A nationwide analysis of bus services by Ray and Rosemary Bromley demonstrated the overpowering influence of Quito and Guayaquil over other Ecuadorean towns (1979).

A more detailed analysis of transportation in the Oriente is needed to confirm the limited interaction between boom towns. Roads linking the region to the Sierra pass through numerous minor settlements. Local bus and taxi services also connect boom towns to surrounding small rural communities. Nonetheless, activities in larger Ecuadorian Amazon towns would appear mainly limited to entrepôt func-
tions—reception and distribution of goods and services from outside the frontier, frontier goods destined for external markets, and goods circulating within the sphere of influence of each town. Just as Browder and Godfrey observed at populist frontiers of the Brazilian Amazon (1997), towns in the Ecuadorian Amazon evolve into service centers but remain tied to the metropolis, and interaction between the towns themselves is limited.

COMPARISON OF AMAZONIAN AND COASTAL PIONEER TOWNS

Towns undoubtedly have become a significant component of landscapes in the Ecuadorian Amazon during the past five decades. Census results for 1990 show that 26.7 percent of the Oriente’s population is classified as urban. Between 1982 and 1990, urban population grew by 62.1 percent, while overall population growth in the region was only 41.2 percent (INEC 1982, 1991). Nueva Loja, Puyo, Tena, and Coca have experienced particularly rapid development since 1970.

Such remarkable growth of towns in the Amazon is best kept in proper perspective. In the late twentieth century, urban expansion in the Oriente paled in comparison with urbanization in the Costa. In 1950 Ecuador had only thirteen towns with more than 10,000 inhabitants; by 1982 the country had thirty-six additional towns with populations greater than 10,000, including twenty-eight in the Costa (León 1987). Table II compares population statistics of four towns in the Ecuadorian Amazon with those of three pioneer towns in the Costa. In 1950 Santo Domingo was only 50 percent larger than Puyo, but by 1990 it had accumulated eight times as many residents. The expansion of Quevedo and Babahoyo has been less dramatic, but they still have grown much more than the largest Oriente towns have.

Many factors have contributed to the more rapid colonization, agricultural development, and urbanization of the Costa. Ridged fields on the fertile Guayas alluvial floodplain show that intensive agriculture has been a traditional feature of the region since prehistoric times (Parsons 1969). The cocoa boom of 1880–1925 initiated the development of an influential, export-oriented entrepreneurial class based in Guayaquil. In the 1950s and 1960s a banana boom also stimulated agro-industrial development and commercial activities that were partially channeled by dynamic Asian minority groups.

Geographical location has also been a significant factor. Unlike Amazonian farmers, isolated from coastal ports by two cordilleras, coastal plantation owners and smallholders have had ready access to international markets through Guayaquil and the Panama Canal (Bromley 1981). Located between the nation’s two biggest cities, Guayaquil and Quito, farms in the Costa also have been able to grow produce for domestic markets. The extraordinary success of Santo Domingo is explained partially by successful efforts of local farmers to diversify production and reduce dependence on fluctuating international food prices by growing produce for consumption at home and abroad (Gravelin 1987). Modernization of agriculture in the Costa also has sent waves of migrants to coastal towns.
Future Development of the Ecuadorian Amazon and Its Towns

The Oriente has played a major role in Ecuador’s development over the past three decades. Amazonian oil generates 40 percent of the country’s export income and national budget (Kimerling 1993). Nonetheless, oil has not served to diversify the region’s economy or create a more balanced distribution of wealth. In the 1970s, at the peak of the oil boom, planners in the Ecuadorian Amazon protested that a comparatively small portion of oil revenues was invested in the source region (Poveda and Cruz 1988). In the 1980s and 1990s, when the nation’s economy was crippled by massive foreign debt, energetic requests by local authorities for state funds to improve the region’s basic infrastructure continued to be unsuccessful.

A sense of gloom and pessimism pervades recent studies of the Oriente, where development appears to be up against overwhelming obstacles. Many of the soils have limited value for agriculture, and the most fertile are already occupied by settlers and indigenous groups. Use of poor soils for extensive pasture only leads to severe compaction by cattle as they graze (Custode and Sourdat 1986; De Noni and Trujillo 1986). As a result, opportunities for expansion of sustainable agriculture or ranching are limited (Hicks 1990). Michel Portais speculated that African oil palms could become as significant for the development of the northeastern Oriente in the 1980s as bananas were for the Costa in the 1950s (1983). The economic impact of oil palms still is restricted, however, to the Shushufindi area, and there is mounting criticism of plantation fertilizers and insecticides that contaminate the soil and the network of rivers (Martínez Salaberria 1990). Pollution from oil installations has also had a negative impact on the environment. In addition to the major oil spills caused by earthquake and landslide damage to pipelines in 1987 and 1989 (Hicks 1990), regular oil-well operations eject 4.3 million gallons of toxic waste into the rain forest every day (Kimerling 1993). Meanwhile, oil reserves are steadily dwindling.

<table>
  <tr>
    <th rowspan="2">Town</th>
    <th colspan="5">Population</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>1950</th>
    <th>1962</th>
    <th>1974</th>
    <th>1982</th>
    <th>1990</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td colspan="6"><i>Oriente</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Puyo</td>
    <td>1,092</td>
    <td>2,290</td>
    <td>4,730</td>
    <td>9,758</td>
    <td>14,438</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Nueva Loja</td>
    <td>0</td>
    <td>0</td>
    <td>1,762</td>
    <td>7,237</td>
    <td>13,165</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Tena</td>
    <td>351</td>
    <td>1,092</td>
    <td>2,106</td>
    <td>5,457</td>
    <td>7,873</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Coca</td>
    <td>66</td>
    <td>237</td>
    <td>1,211</td>
    <td>3,996</td>
    <td>7,805</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td colspan="6"><i>Costa</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Santo Domingo</td>
    <td>1,529</td>
    <td>6,951</td>
    <td>30,523</td>
    <td>69,235</td>
    <td>114,422</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Quevedo</td>
    <td>4,168</td>
    <td>20,602</td>
    <td>43,101</td>
    <td>67,023</td>
    <td>86,910</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Babahoyo</td>
    <td>9,181</td>
    <td>16,444</td>
    <td>28,914</td>
    <td>42,266</td>
    <td>50,285</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Sources: INEC 1950, 1962, 1974, 1982, 1991.
Cocaine is produced in the neighboring Colombian province of Putumayo (Poveda 1988), and it is feared that disheartened Ecuadorian colonists will turn to cultivation of narcotic crops (Poveda and Cruz 1988; García Negrete 1993). Colombian guerrillas and rival paramilitary groups frequently cross the border for supplies and temporary refuge. Many of the 4,000 Colombians who live in Nueva Loja have fled the turmoil of Putumayo. The United States is providing financial assistance for Colombian government efforts to eradicate drugs and narcoguerillas in Putumayo (Steinberg 2000). The escalating conflict is expected to send new waves of refugees across the border to Nueva Loja. Despite the growth of political organizations designed to protect the territorial rights of indigenous groups, reservations in the Oriente still are invaded by colonists and oil companies (Trujillo 1988; Nations 1993). Concern is growing that frustrated Ecuadoreans may be forming guerilla units of their own in the Oriente.

Towns offer few opportunities for employment in manufacturing, and many urban residents rely on income from a public-service sector that is precariously dependent on funds from the national government. Sustained structural-adjustment policies related to Ecuador’s foreign-debt crisis will cause reductions in public-service employment and make urban residents of the Amazon even more dependent on the informal sector. The basic infrastructure of most Amazonian settlements is primitive, and many town-dwellers still have no access to clean drinking water or sewer facilities. Nelson Gómez and his coauthors predicted the collapse of towns in the Amazon when oil production finally comes to a halt (1992). The national government will be unable or uninterested in maintaining the fragile, oil-related road network, boom towns will become ghost towns, and oil installations will be swallowed up by the rain forest. The Oriente will no longer be a frontier with potential for development but will revert to its former status of marginal periphery.

Some researchers, however, have a more positive view of the Amazon’s future. With some improvements in basic infrastructure, especially roads and energy supply, agro-industrial installations could be established to produce juice from naranjillas, vegetable oil from African palms and local species of peanuts, alcohol and flour from cassava, meat products from livestock, and meat tenderizer from papayas (Jaramillo and Villacís 1988). An appropriate regional-development plan would stimulate small-scale activities designed to use other local resources, produce items for local consumption, and reduce dependence on commodities brought into the region from Quito and other extraregional sources. With modest financial and technical support, small, labor-intensive firms could be established in the Oriente to manufacture construction materials, leather goods, and wood products. Early achievements of the Centro de Reconversión Económica del Austro (Center for Economic Modernization of the South) were based on a similar strategy of supporting small-scale, labor-intensive agricultural and industrial enterprises designed to meet the needs of the provinces of Azuay, Cañar, and Morona-Santiago (Morris 1982).
As for mineral resources, René Benalcázar predicted that oil exploration would discover sufficient reserves to extend current rates of extraction to the year 2040 (1989). Even when petroleum reserves become exhausted, there are other mineral resources to be exploited in the Oriente. Gonzalo Durán estimated that an additional daily supply of 2,000 tons of cement would be needed to meet the demands of Ecuador’s construction industry (1988); the 300 million tons of limestone in the vicinity of Tena could satisfy this need for 300 years. Phosphates discovered in the northern and southern portions of the Ecuadorian Amazon could be used to manufacture fertilizer, insecticides, and detergents. Canadian mining companies have identified substantial deposits of copper in the southern Oriente. Significant placer deposits of gold and silver are found throughout the region, as shown by recent events in Nambija, an abandoned Spanish gold-mining settlement near Zamora that a spontaneous invasion of gold miners brought back to life in the 1980s. At its peak, the brief gold-mining boom generated a floating population of up to 15,000 miners living in a chaotic urban environment (Uria 1992). Other minerals in the Oriente include uranium, kaolin, asphalt, and gemstones. Mineral wealth probably was a fundamental cause of the struggle between Peru and Ecuador for Amazonian territory, but now that the long-standing border dispute has been resolved, a binational technical committee has proposed potential cooperative mining ventures in the southern Oriente.

Ecotourism joins agro-industrial development and mining as an additional potential source of income for both colonists and the indigenous populace. Approximately 18,000 tourists visited Napo Province in 1991 (Wesche 1993). As a result, there already are eleven lodges and a floating hotel on the Napo and Aguarico Rivers. Rolf Wesche makes a strong case for developing low-capital, indigenous, community-operated ecotourism projects designed to accommodate “backpacker” tourists who wish to become familiar with unaltered rain-forest habitats and native settlements (1993). Even remote indigenous communities have become dependent on modern goods and services, and ecotourism could offer their inhabitants greater remuneration than can agriculture or forestry. Legislation and state regulation will be needed to prevent negative environmental and cultural impacts associated with irresponsible ecotourism in frontier regions (Harrington 1993; Butler 1996), however, and it is to be hoped that the growing presence of Colombian guerrillas does not jeopardize efforts to promote this new industry. In September 1999 twelve foreign tourists and oil workers were kidnapped by guerrillas at the northeastern frontier (Seattle Times 1999). They were released one month later. Ten additional foreign oil workers were kidnapped in Sucumbíos by Colombian rebels in October 2000 (cnn 2000). After five months of captivity, one victim was assassinated and the remaining nine hostages were released in exchange for ransom payments (cnn 2001).

Agro-industrial enterprises, mining, and tourism would stimulate urban development in the Oriente and help towns absorb migrants from surrounding rural areas. As colonists move to towns the rate of deforestation should decline. Subse-
quent conservation of the rain forest would make available ecological resources, including spices, pharmaceuticals, and orchids, that could generate export income.

CONCLUSIONS

Brian Berry (1996) and Carville Earle (1992) have argued that the North American frontier advanced in spurts that were tied to waves of economic prosperity and related innovations in technology. The frontier of the Ecuadorian Amazon is no stranger to such periodic surges, but with extremely varied causes related to episodes of both socioeconomic crisis and prosperity. Thus immigration has surged with earthquakes, droughts, and other natural disasters in the Sierra, with land-reform policies that led to the expulsion of peasants from haciendas, with foreign investments in road construction to search for and extract petroleum, and with oil-revenue-financed diffusion of administrative funds to provincial capitals in order to assert geopolitical control of a marginal territory threatened by invasion from Peru.

Past experience suggests that the Ecuadorian Amazon will not be controlled or planned by its residents, because the region is at the mercy of exogenous forces. If alternative income opportunities remain scarce in Ecuador’s largest cities, colonists will invade the rain forest in spontaneous waves each time foreign enterprises provide access roads designed to extract a natural resource. Moreover, the immediate future of Nueva Loja and the northeastern frontier may be severely affected by a relatively new exogenous factor: Escalating conflicts between Colombian armed forces, paramilitary groups, and guerrillas in neighboring Putumayo Province, Colombia, threaten to drive unprecedented numbers of refugees across the border.

Puyo and Tena belong to a well-defined populist settlement frontier in the western piedmont sector of the Ecuadorian Amazon. On the other hand, developments in the northeastern Oriente since the late 1960s suggest that the extractive and settlement categories in Friedmann’s dualistic classification of dynamic frontiers are not always mutually exclusive in a tropical rain-forest setting. As soon as an access road was constructed to link the Sierra to the corporate oil-mining camp at Lago Agrio, massive and spontaneous rural settlement of that region followed, with accompanying urban growth of Nueva Loja and other frontier service centers. Settlement and extraction continue to be parallel processes in the eastern part of the Ecuadorian Amazon, especially south of Coca. This finding confirms research by Godfrey and Browder (1996), who discovered that populist and corporate modes of production overlap in many parts of the Brazilian Amazon.

The experience of the Ecuadorian Amazon corroborates research in Brazil showing urbanization as a fundamental component of frontier development in South America. Declaring the Oriente an “urbanized jungle” may be premature, but towns are undoubtedly outstanding features of the region. Rapid urbanization at the Ecuadorian Amazon frontier is not, however, an indicator of regional economic strength. Prosperity at the North American frontier was reflected in the vibrant financial and wholesaling functions of boom towns. In contrast, warehouses and
banks are not prominent features of the urban landscapes in the Ecuadorian Amazon. Capital gains from oil extraction or large cattle ranches are not invested in the local economy but appear to be transferred immediately to the nation’s core region.

As observed in other frontier regions, urban centers in the Ecuadorian Amazon do not diffuse economic progress to their hinterlands. To the contrary, provincial capitals like Puyo are characterized by local primacy. They overshadow smaller urban centers and drain surrounding rural areas of younger and more educated individuals. Rural–urban migration will not cease as long as national government policies continue to favor urban and industrial development and neglect the needs of small-scale farmers and rural communities.

Interprovincial bus schedules suggest that interaction among the larger towns of the Ecuadorian Amazon is limited: As in other frontier regions, boom towns are tied to national core areas, and the prevalence of exogenous factors in the development of frontier regions restricts significant intraregional integration. Tena may soon share the fate of Brazilian relict municipalities. The dynamic eastern portion of the province of Napo, administered by Tena, has been converted into two new provinces—Sucumbíos, formed in 1989, and Orellana, formed in 1998—governed by the rival boom towns of Nueva Loja and Coca, respectively. Even the dominant towns, Puyo and Nueva Loja, have administrators who express concern about the future if jobs in public service are not augmented with employment in other economic sectors.

Michel Portais and José Rodríguez argue that a strong manufacturing sector is not essential for vigorous urban growth in Ecuador (1987). Long-term survival reflects increased economic specialization (Portais 1987); as in more advanced economies of the world, successful towns in Ecuador are associated with specific areas of development. Ambato and Santo Domingo thrive on their dynamic commercial function, Guayaquil is a financial stronghold, Quito has administrative power, Ibarra and Salinas progress with tourism, and Cuenca is strengthened by commerce and industry. Specialization is still insignificant in the Oriente, however. The population of towns in the Amazon may continue to expand in the near future with additional immigration of the rural poor, but demographic growth without accompanying urban economic growth and specialization will only exacerbate existing problems of limited income opportunities and deficient urban infrastructure.

Ultimately, the future of towns in the Oriente depends on how Ecuador manages economic development throughout its Amazonian region. A “post–oil boom” collapse of the regional urban network as predicted by Gómez and his coauthors in 1992 is excessively pessimistic. The Oriente has alternative resources that motivate continued occupancy. On the other hand, the interior location of the region appears to preclude the dramatic growth experienced by towns in the Costa during the latter half of the twentieth century. A more likely scenario, one observed in other regions of the world, is that selected Amazonian towns with advantageous locations, resource endowments, and political clout will prosper, while others fade away.
REFERENCES

Aramburú, C. E. 1984. Expansion of the Agrarian and Demographic Frontier in the Peruvian Selva. In Frontier Expansion in Amazonia, edited by M. Schmink and C. H. Wood, 153–179. Gainesville: University of Florida.

Aspiazu, P. 1982. Organización regional del espacio: La región del Puyo. Revista Geográfica del Centro Panamericano de Estudios e Investigaciones Geográficas 9: 1–93.

Bakx, K. 1990. The Shanty Town, Final Stage of Rural Development? The Case of Acre. In The Future of Amazonia: Destruction or Sustainable Development? edited by D. Goodman and A. Hall, 49–69. London: Macmillan.

Barral, H. 1983. Poblamiento y colonización espontánea en la provincia del Napo en 1977. Documentos de Investigación del Centro Ecuatoriano de Investigación Geográfica 3: 53–67.

Becker, B. 1996. Brazil’s Frontier Experience and Sustainable Development: A Geopolitical Approach. In Frontiers in Regional Development, edited by Y. Gradus and H. Lithwick, 73–98. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.

Benalcázar, R. 1989. Análisis del desarrollo económico del Ecuador. Quito: Banco Central del Ecuador.

Berry, B. J. L. 1996. Long Waves of Frontier Development. In Frontiers in Regional Development, edited by Y. Gradus and H. Lithwick, 191–212. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.

Bromley, R. J. 1972. Agricultural Colonization in the Upper Amazon Basin. Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 63 (July-August): 278–294.
———. 1981. The Colonization of Humid Tropical Areas in Ecuador. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 2: 6–24.
———. 1982. Working in the Streets: Survival Strategy, Necessity or Unavoidable Evil? In Urbanization in Contemporary Latin America: Critical Approaches to the Analysis of Urban Issues, edited by A. Gilbert, 59–71. New York: John Wiley.

Bromley, R. J., and R. D. F. Bromley. 1979. Defining Central Place Systems through the Analysis of Bus Services: The Case of Ecuador. Geographical Journal 145 (3): 416–436.

Broder, J. O., and B. J. Godfrey. 1990. Frontier Urbanization in the Brazilian Amazon: A Theoretical Framework for Urban Transition. Yearbook of the Conference of Latin Americanist Geographers 16: 56–66.
———. 1997. Rainforest Cities: Urbanization, Development, and Globalization of the Brazilian Amazon. New York: Columbia University Press.

Brown, L. A. 1991. Place, Migration and Development in the Third World: An Alternative View. New York: Routledge.
———. 1999. Change, Continuity, and the Pursuit of Geographic Understanding. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 89 (1): 1–25.

Brown, L. A., and V. A. Lawson. 1989. Polarization Reversal, Migration Related Shifts in Human Resource Profiles, and Spatial Growth Policies: A Venezuelan Study. International Regional Science Review 12 (2): 165–188.

Brown, L. A., and R. Ryder. 1999. Employment in Boom Towns of the Ecuador Amazon. 1998 Yearbook of the Association of Pacific Coast Geographers 60: 75–104.

Brown, L. A., and R. Sierra. 1994. Frontier Migration as a Multi-Stage Phenomenon Reflecting the Interplay of Macro Forces and Local Conditions: The Ecuador Amazon. Papers in Regional Science 73: 267–288.

Brown, L. A., R. Sierra, D. Southgate, and L. Lobao. 1992. Complementary Perspectives as a Means of Understanding Regional Change: Frontier Settlement in the Ecuador Amazon. Environment and Planning A 24 (7): 939–961.

Brown, L. A., R. Sierra, S. Digiacinto, and W. R. Smith. 1994. Urban-System Evolution in Frontier Settings. Geographical Review 84 (3): 249–265.
———. 1996. Urban System Development, Ecuador’s Amazon Region, and Generalization. In Frontiers in Regional Development, edited by Y. Gradus and H. Lithwick, 99–124. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.

Buchhofer, E. 1988. Desarrollo urbano en la zona petrolera del Oriente ecuatoriano. Revista Geográfica del Instituto Geográfico Militar 27: 89–108.

Butler, R. W. 1996. The Development of Tourism in Frontier Regions: Issues and Approaches. In Frontiers in Regional Development, edited by Y. Gradus and H. Lithwick, 213–229. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.
Cleary, D. 1993. After the Frontier: Problems with Political Economy in the Modern Brazilian Amazon. Journal of Latin American Studies 25 (2): 331–349.

CNN [Cable News Network]. 2000. Colombian Rebels Take Helicopter Crew Hostage in Ecuador. CNN.com, 12 October. [http://www.cnn.com/2000/WORLD/americas/10/12/ecuador.kidnapping.ap/].

———. 2001. Released U.S. Hostages Arrive Home from Ecuador. CNN.com, 3 March. [http://www.cnn.com/2001/US/03/03/hostage.release.02/].

Custode, E., and M. Sourdat. 1986. Paisajes y suelos de la Amazonía ecuatoriana: Entre la conservación y la explotación. Cultura 24 (a): 325–337.

De Noni, G., and G. Trujillo. 1986. Degradación del suelo en el Ecuador. Cultura 24 (a): 383–394.

Durán, G. 1988. Inventario de los recursos mineros de la provincia del Napo. In Diagnóstico de la provincia del Napo, i: 159–182. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala.

Earle, C. 1992. Geographical Inquiry and American Historical Problems. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Elazar, D. J. 1996. The Frontier as Chain Reaction. In Frontiers in Regional Development, edited by Y. Gradus and H. Lithwick, 173–190. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.

Friedmann, J. 1992. The Right to the City. In Rethinking the Latin American City, edited by R. M. Morse and J. E. Hardoy, 98–109. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press.

———. 1996. Introduction: Borders, Margins and Frontiers: Myth and Metaphor. In Frontiers in Regional Development, edited by Y. Gradus and H. Lithwick, 1–20. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.

García Negrete, J. 1993. Visión geopolítica de la faja fronteriza en la región Ecuador-Colombia. Revista Geográfica del Instituto Geográfico Militar 32: 59–70.

Gilbert, A. 1990. Latin America. London and New York: Routledge.

Godfrey, B. J. 1990. Boom Towns of the Amazon. Geographical Review 80 (2): 103–117.

———. 1992. Migration to the Gold-Mining Frontier in Brazilian Amazonia. Geographical Review 82 (4): 458–469.

Godfrey, B. J., and J. O. Browder. 1996. Disarticulated Urbanization in the Brazilian Amazon. Geographical Review 86 (3): 441–445.

Gómez, N., S. Moreno, O. López, and A. Narváez. 1992. Tempestad en la Amazonía ecuatoriana. Quito: Ediguías.

Gondard, P. 1986. Cambios históricos en el aprovechamiento del medio natural ecuatoriano. Cultura 24 (b): 567–577.

Gravelin, B. 1987. Proceso de urbanización en zonas pioneras. In El espacio urbano en el Ecuador, edited by M. Portais and J. León, 170–181. Quito: Instituto Panamericano de Geografía e Historia.

Harrington, T. 1993. Tourism Damages Amazon Region. In Tropical Rainforests: Latin American Nature and Society in Transition, edited by S. E. Place, 213–216. Wilmington, Del.: Scholarly Resources.

Hegen, E. E. 1966. Highways into the Upper Amazon Basin: Pioneer Lands in Southern Colombia, Ecuador, and Northern Peru. Gainesville: University of Florida Press.

Hicks, J. F. 1990. Ecuador’s Amazon Region: Development Issues and Options. World Bank Discussion Papers, 75. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Hiraoka, M., and S. Yamamoto. 1980. Agricultural Development in the Upper Amazon Basin of Ecuador. Geographical Review 70 (4): 423–445.

Hollier, G. P. 1988. Regional Development. In The Geography of the Third World: Progress and Prospect, edited by M. Pacione, 232–269. London and New York: Routledge.

Hurtado, H. 1988. Pastaza: Antecedentes históricos, cronología, bibliografía. Quito: Centro de Investigaciones CIUDAD.

INALDAZ. 1989. Plan de desarrollo urbano de El Puyo. Puyo, Ecuador: Municipio de Puyo.

INEC [Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos]. 1950. I Censo de población. Quito: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos.

———. 1962. II Censo de población y I de vivienda. Quito: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos.

———. 1974. III Censo de población y II de vivienda. Quito: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos.

———. 1982. IV Censo de población y III de vivienda. Quito: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos.

———. 1991. V Censo de población y IV de vivienda, 1990: Resultados definitivos. Quito: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos.

Jaramillo, J., and G. Villacís. 1988. Diagnóstico del sector agropecuario de la provincia de Napo. In Diagnóstico de la provincia del Napo, i: 267–289. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala.
Jaramillo, M., A. Matovelle, J. Medina, D. Carrion, and S. Rivadeneira. 1988. Pastaza: Desarrollo provincial—Lineamientos. Quito: Centro de Investigaciones CIUDAD.

Kimerling, J. 1993. Crudo amazónico. Quito: Abya-Yala.

Laspina, I. 1981. El proceso de colonización en la región de El Puyo. Quito: Centro Panamericano de Estudios e Investigaciones Geográficas (CEPEIGE). Unpublished manuscript.

Lawson, V. A., and T. Klak. 1990. Conceptual Linkages in the Study of Production and Reproduction in Latin-American Cities. Economic Geography 66 (4): 310–327.

León, J. 1987. Geodemografía de la red urbana ecuatoriana. In El espacio urbano en el Ecuador, edited by M. Portais and J. León, 37–55. Quito: Instituto Panamericano de Geografía e Historia.

Lisansky, J. 1990. Migrants to Amazonia: Spontaneous Colonization in the Brazilian Frontier. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Lithwick, H., Y. Gradus, and I. Lithwick. 1996. From Frontier to Periphery: The Development of Israel's Negev. In Frontiers in Regional Development, edited by Y. Gradus and H. Lithwick, 143–170. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.

Lowder, S. 1982. La colonización como estrategia para el desarrollo. In Geografía y desarrollo, edited by R. Ryder and N. Robelly, 127–232. Quito: Centro Panamericano de Estudios e Investigaciones Geográficas (CEPEIGE).

Martínez Salaberría, J. 1990. Napo: Subdesarrollo evitable. Quito: Fundación Interayuda.

El Mercurio. 1993. El Mercurio [Cuenca, Ecuador], 14 August.

Morris, A. 1982. Planificación y desarrollo regional en el Ecuador. In Geografía y desarrollo, edited by R. Ryder and N. Robelly, 301–312. Quito: Centro Panamericano de Estudios e Investigaciones Geográficas (CEPEIGE).

Muller, E. K. 1977. Regional Urbanization and the Selective Growth of Towns in North American Regions. Journal of Historical Geography 3 (1): 21–39.

Nations, J. D. 1993. Protected Areas in Tropical Rainforests: Five Lessons. In Tropical Rainforests: Latin American Nature and Society in Transition, edited by S. E. Place, 193–200. Wilmington, Del.: Scholarly Resources.

Parsons, J. J. 1969. Ridged Fields in the Rio Guayas Valley, Ecuador. American Antiquity 34 (1): 76–80.

Pietri, A. L. 1986. La red urbana de la provincia de Loja. Cultura 24 (c): 781–791.

Placencia, M. M., and H. Vásquez. 1986. Reflexiones acerca de las condiciones de trabajo y de vida en el sector informal urbano. Cultura 24 (c): 991–1006.

Portais, M. 1983. Los actores del manejo del espacio en la región amazónica ecuatoriana. Documentos de Investigación del Centro de Investigación Geográfica 3: 5–11.

———. 1986. El papel de las ciudades intermedias de la Sierra en la evolución de la red urbana ecuatoriana. Cultura 24 (c): 829–841.

———. 1987. Las ciudades intermedias de la Sierra. In El espacio urbano en el Ecuador, edited by M. Portais and J. León, 136–157. Quito: Instituto Panamericano de Geografía e Historia.

Portais, M., and J. Rodríguez. 1987. Jerarquía urbana y tipos de ciudades en el Ecuador. In El espacio urbano en el Ecuador, edited by M. Portais and J. León, 56–75. Quito: Instituto Panamericano de Geografía e Historia.

Portes, A., and M. Johns. 1989. The Polarization of Class and Space in the Contemporary Latin American City. In Lost Promises: Debt, Austerity, and Development in Latin America, edited by W. L. Canak, 111–137. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Portes, A., M. Castells, and L. A. Benton, eds. 1989. The Informal Economy: Studies in Advanced and Less Developed Countries. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Poveda, J. 1988. Perspectivas de desarrollo de la región fronteriza amazónica ecuatoriana colombiana. Revista Geográfica del Instituto Geográfico Militar 27: 7–38.

Poveda, J., and R. V. Cruz. 1988. Conclusiones y recomendaciones del diagnóstico de la provincia del Napo. In Diagnóstico de la provincia del Napo, 4: 135–164. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala.

Roberts, B. 1992. Transitional Cities. In Rethinking the Latin American City, edited by R. M. Morse and J. Hardoy, 50–65. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Roberts, J. T. 1992. Squatters and Urban Growth in Amazonia. Geographical Review 82 (4): 441–457.

———. 1995. Trickling Down and Scrambling Up: The Informal Sector, Food Provisioning and Local Benefits of the Carajás Mining “Growth Pole” in the Brazilian Amazon. World Development 23 (3): 385–400.

Rudel, T. K. 1993. Tropical Deforestation: Small Farmers and Land Clearing in the Ecuadorian Amazon. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ruiz, S., and A. L. Alvear. 1988. Pastaza: Asentamientos humanos. Quito: Centro de Investigaciones CIUDAD.

Ryder, R., and L. A. Brown. 2000. Urban Development at the Ecuador Amazon Frontier: Boom Towns or Gloom Towns? In Developing Frontier Cities: Global Perspectives—Regional Contexts, edited by H. Lithwick and Y. Gradus, 313–343. Dordrecht, Netherlands, and Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Safa, H. I. 1986. Urbanization and Poverty in Latin America: A Dependency Perspective. Urban Anthropology 15 (1–2): 135–164.

Schmink, M., and C. H. Wood. 1992. Contested Frontiers in Amazonia. New York: Columbia University Press.

Seattle Times. 1999. Gunmen Kidnap 12 Foreigners in Ecuador. Seattle Times, 13 September. [http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/news/nation-world/html98/kidn_19990903.html].

Steinberg, M. K. 2000. Generals, Guerrillas, Drugs, and Third World War-Making. Geographical Review 90 (2): 260–267.

Taaffe, E. J., R. L. Morrill, and P. R. Gould. 1963. Transport Expansion in Underdeveloped Countries: A Comparative Analysis. Geographical Review 53 (4): 503–529.

Teltscher, S. 1993. Gender Differences in Ecuador’s Urban Informal Economy: Survival to Upward Mobility. Yearbook of the Conference of Latin Americanist Geographers 19: 81–92.

Terborgh, J. 1993. The Whys and Wherefores of Deforestation. In Tropical Rainforests: Latin American Nature and Society in Transition, edited by S. E. Place, 31–36. Wilmington, Del.: Scholarly Resources.

Trujillo, J. 1988. La colonización en el Ecuador. In Transformaciones agrarias en el Ecuador, edited by P. Gondard, J. B. León V., and P. Sylva Ch., 59–70. Quito: Centro Ecuatoriano de Investigación Geográfica.

Turner, F. J. 1920. The Frontier in American History. New York: Henry Holt.

Uriá, C. 1992. Nambija: El Dorado encontrado. Revista Geográfica del Instituto Geográfico Militar 29: 127–133.

Urriola, R. 1988. Pastaza: Aspectos sociales y económicos. Quito: Centro de Investigaciones CIUDAD.

Volbeda, S. 1986. Pioneer Towns in the Jungle: Urbanization at an Agricultural Colonization Frontier in the Brazilian Amazon. Revista Geográfica del Instituto Panamericano de Geografía e Historia 104: 115–140.

Vos, R. 1988. Petroleo, estado y cambio agrario, Ecuador 1972–1984. In Transformaciones agrarias en el Ecuador, edited by P. Gondard, J. B. León V., and P. Sylva Ch., 15–37. Quito: Centro Ecuatoriano de Investigación Geográfica.

Wesche, R. 1989. Los lugares centrales en una zona de colonización amazónica: La provincia de Napo. Paisajes Geográficos 22: 5–51.

———. 1993. Ecotourism and Indigenous Peoples in the Resource Frontier of the Ecuadorian Amazon. Yearbook of the Conference of Latin Americanist Geographers 19: 35–46.