<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/raag21

## How Far to Go to Encounter the Differences: Examining the Nonlinear Relationships Between Low-Income Migrants' Activity-Space Segregation and Traveling Distances in Shenzhen, China

Zifeng Chen, Yi Zou &amp; Yiming Tan

To cite this article: Zifeng Chen, Yi Zou &amp; Yiming Tan (2025) How Far to Go to Encounter the Differences: Examining the Nonlinear Relationships Between Low-Income Migrants' ActivitySpace Segregation and Traveling Distances in Shenzhen, China, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 115:7, 1651-1673, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2025.2504584

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2025.2504584

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 02 Jun 2025.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 345

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## How Far to Go to Encounter the Differences: Examining the Nonlinear Relationships Between Low-Income Migrants ' Activity-Space Segregation and Traveling Distances in Shenzhen, China

Zifeng Chen, Yi Zou, and Yiming Tan

School of Geography and Planning, Sun Yat-sen University, China

Sociospatial segregation has long been a critical subject in urban studies. In recent decades, increasing attention has been given to the segregation experienced in activity spaces beyond the well-examined residential locations. A large body of studies revealed that disadvantaged groups (e.g., low-income migrants) can access more opportunities for cross-group interaction by engaging in activities outside of their residential areas. This study extends this body of research by examining whether individuals have to travel a certain distance before their activity-space exposure noticeably increases (i.e., gaining more opportunities for crossgroup interaction), with a focus on low-income migrants in Shenzhen, China. Through analyzing the nonlinear relationship between travel distance and activity-space exposure using cellphone data and gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT) models, the study not only confirms the possibility of increased interactions in activity spaces, but also reveals that low-income migrants must travel a threshold distance before their activity-space exposure significantly increases. For central-city migrants, this threshold is 2km for work activities or 3 km for nonwork activities, whereas suburban migrants must travel at least 9 km for work activities or 8km for nonwork activities. These results highlight disparities between urban locations: Central-city areas offer shorter distance opportunities for diverse social interactions due to higher population density and proximity to urban amenities, whereas suburban areas necessitate longer travel due to lower land-use density and limited local opportunities. The study contributes to the growing literature on activity-space segregation by identifying a specific condition (i.e., travel distance threshold) required for meaningful social exposure. Key Words: activity space, big data, migrants, nonlinear relationship, socio-contextual exposure, sociospatial segregation, urban China.

S ociospatial segregation has been a critical subject in urban studies, reflecting the uneven distribution of social groups and its implications for social equity and integration. Traditionally, this phenomenon has been understood through residential patterns and measured using static data such as population censuses (Massey and Denton 1988; Wong 1993). This approach, however, overlooks the dynamic nature of segregation beyond residential neighborhoods, including workplaces, commuting patterns, and other activity spaces (Ellis, Wright, and Parks 2004; Silm and Ahas 2014). Increasing attention has been given to segregation in activity spaces, where individuals perform daily activities and interact with others (Kwan 2013). Exposure to diverse social groups within these spaces can

<!-- image -->

enhance cross-group interaction, reduce segregation, and foster integration (Sch € onfelder and Axhausen 2003; Wong and Shaw 2011; Y. Shen and Luo 2023).

Studies across various urban contexts consistently indicate that out-of-home activity locations offer greater exposure to diverse social groups compared to residential settings (Toomet et al. 2015; € Osth, Shuttleworth, and Niedomysl 2018; Zhou et al. 2021). Research shows that whereas residential segregation persists, workplaces and shared spaces provide opportunities for diverse social encounters, driven by urban mobility (Ellis, Wright, and Parks 2004; D. Wang and Li 2016; Tan, Chai, and Chen 2019). Existing studies, however, have largely focused on the potential for out-of-home activities

to enhance cross-group interaction without addressing how far individuals must travel to achieve meaningful increases in exposure. This gap is significant, as urban opportunity distribution (Y. Shen and Luo 2023), mobility disparities (Cantor et al. 2022), and differing activity location preferences (Browning et al. 2017) collectively shape destination choices and social group composition. Simply leaving one ' s neighborhood does not guarantee increased interactions unless traveling and reaching a location that attracts diverse individuals.

This study proposes two hypotheses: First, individuals must travel a certain distance before their activity-space exposure significantly increases, providing more opportunities for cross-group interaction; second, this distance varies based on urban location, with suburban residents requiring longer travel distances than those in central-city areas. To test these hypotheses, an empirical analysis focuses on the migrant population in Shenzhen, China. Unlike Western cities, where residential segregation is often ethnic-based, sociospatial segregation in Chinese cities is primarily shaped by socioeconomic status (F. Wu and Li 2005). A key factor is the hukou system, which imposes restrictive policies on rural-to-urban migration (Fan 2008). This system structurally disadvantages low-income migrants, making their experiences of segregation a crucial component of sociospatial inequality (He et al. 2010; Liu et al. 2010; Zhao and Webster 2011; F. Wu, Zhang, and Webster 2013; F. Wu and Logan 2016). Accordingly, this study focuses on low-income migrants in Shenzhen as an empirical example.

This study uses 2019 cellphone data to identify migrant populations and their residential and daily activity locations in Shenzhen. Residential and activity-space exposure (for both work and nonwork activities) are measured based on cellphone data. A gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT) model is applied to explore the nonlinear relationship between activity-space exposure and travel distance, determining whether individuals must travel a certain distance before exposure significantly increases. Through analyzing this relationship, the study advances understanding of how spatial mobility mediates sociospatial segregation. The findings refine knowledge of activity-space segregation by identifying a specific travel distance threshold required for meaningful social exposure, offering practical implications for urban planning and policies aimed at fostering inclusive, equitable cities. Additionally, the findings provide insights into discussions on the neighborhood effect averaging problem (NEAP) by identifying travel beyond a threshold distance as a condition affecting the extent to which mobility facilitates the neighborhood effect averaging process.

The remainder of this article is organized as follows. After the introduction, the existing literature is reviewed, and research hypotheses are outlined. Next, a brief description of the research context is provided, followed by the methodology section, including an overview of the study area, methods for data processing and measuring activity-space segregation, and details of the modeling approach. Subsequently, findings from the empirical analysis are presented. Finally, the concluding section discusses policy and theoretical implications.

## Literature Review

## Activity-Space Segregation and the Use of Big Data

Sociospatial segregation in urban areas has been a major policy concern and research focus for decades (Massey and Denton 1988; Wong 1993). Traditionally, studies have framed segregation in terms of residential patterns, measuring population distributions via census data. This residence-based approach, however, overlooks segregation in other daily spaces, such as workplaces (Silm and Ahas 2014; J € arv et al. 2015; Tan, Chai, and Chen 2019). During commuting, the residential areas of one group frequently serve as the employment zones for others, leading to distinct segregation experiences in workplaces compared to those in neighborhoods (Ellis, Wright, and Parks 2004).

In response, an increasing number of studies examine segregation beyond residences, considering activity spaces -places individuals visit daily (Sch € onfelder and Axhausen 2003; Wong and Shaw 2011; Kwan 2013; D. Wang and Li 2016; Park and Kwan 2017; Tan, Chai, and Chen 2019). These studies suggest that sociospatial segregation is shaped by interactions in these spaces. Greater exposure to diverse groups enhances social integration. Ellis, Wright, and Parks (2004) compared segregation in residential and workplace settings, noting that although diverse groups might work together, they often live separately. They argued that labor market

structures facilitate workplace integration despite residential segregation. Expanding on this, Wong and Shaw (2011) introduced the concept of activityspace segregation, focusing on how individuals interact across different spaces. Krivo et al. (2013) further examined how ethnic and income groups are exposed to varied social contexts, measured by socioeconomic indicators like unemployment rates and the prevalence of female-headed households.

A key perspective in activity-space segregation studies is exposure to social contexts (Kwan 2013). Because individuals move beyond their residential neighborhoods, their actual social exposure is shaped by various daily locations. Many studies use activity diaries to analyze sociocontextual exposure, typically combining these with census data (Wong and Shaw 2011; D. Wang and Li 2016; Ta 2023). For example, D. Wang and Li (2016) examined segregation in Hong Kong ' s public and private housing, finding that public housing residents interact more frequently with socially similar individuals. These studies, however, often rely on residential-based conceptualizations of social context and overlook shifting population dynamics.

The emergence of big data has provided new tools for analyzing activity-space segregation. Data sources include cellphone tracking (Zhou et al. 2021), public transit records (Abbasi, Ko, and Min 2021), and social media data (Huang and Wong 2016). Compared to surveys, big data offers advantages like larger sample sizes, real-time updates, and broad spatial-temporal coverage, although it lacks detailed socioeconomic attributes. Big data allow researchers to track population distribution changes across different times of the day, revealing more dynamic segregation patterns (Luo et al. 2016; Y. Shen et al. 2019; Q. Q. Li et al. 2022). For example, nighttime activity reflects residential population distribution, whereas daytime activity corresponds to employment zones. This makes big data a powerful tool for measuring ' real ' social contexts. Several studies have leveraged big data for mobilitybased social exposure analysis. Moya-G  omez et al. (2021) used mobile phone data to develop mobilitybased exposure indicators, employing location quotients, spatial autocorrelation indexes, and entropy. W. Xu (2022) compared mobile app location-based exposure indexes with traditional census-based measures. Abbasi, Ko, and Min (2021) used transit card data to assess dynamic social environment exposure across different time scales with measures like isolation, exposure, and entropy. Some researchers have also applied social network analysis to flow-based big data to supplement traditional segregation measures (Prestby et al. 2020; Candipan et al. 2021).

## Debating the Impact of Out-of-Home Activities on Outgroup Interactions

A common finding in existing studies on activityspace segregation is that individuals can access more opportunities for interaction with different social groups by traveling beyond their residential neighborhoods. Toomet et al. (2015), through mobile phone data analysis, found that sociocontextual exposure at nonwork activity locations outside the home was higher than at residential and work locations; moreover, sociocontextual exposure at nonwork locations showed weak correlation with the built environment at the residential and work locations. € Osth, Shuttleworth, and Niedomysl (2018) and Hedman et al. (2021) analyzed the sociocontextual exposure of residents from different income levels and ethnic groups in Swedish cities using cellphone data. Their research revealed that residents gained more cross-group social interaction opportunities outside their residential areas through daily mobility. Zhou et al. (2021) used cellphone data to measure the sociocontextual exposure of migrant workers in Shenzhen, finding that sociocontextual exposure at residential locations was more likely to exhibit extreme values (e.g., complete lack of exposure), whereas sociocontextual exposure at work locations was more evenly distributed.

Other studies report similar patterns. Silm and Ahas (2014) observed that ethnic segregation in Tallinn was lower on weekdays than weekends, likely due to increased weekday interactions through work. Abbasi, Ko, and Min (2021) found that in Seoul, interaction opportunities for elderly, youth, and disabled individuals peaked during weekday rush hours. Moya-G  omez et al. (2021) noted lower sociospatial segregation in Medell  ı n during the day than at night. Y. Shen et al. (2019), using Sina Weibo check-in data, found that social interactions in Shanghai were more dispersed during the day due to commuting and more concentrated at night.

This common finding suggests that, even when disadvantaged urban groups live in areas predominantly composed of similar individuals, they can mitigate the limitations of their residential

environments by engaging in daily activities outside their neighborhoods. This, in turn, increases their chances for cross-group interactions at various activity locations. Such a conclusion is consistent with the concept of the neighborhood effect averaging problem (NEAP) introduced in recent environmental exposure research (Kwan 2018). The NEAP posits that an individual residing in a neighborhood characterized by high levels of a specific environmental factor tends to experience lower exposures to that factor when engaging in activities outside their residential area, as other parts of the city are more likely to have lower levels of the factor. Conversely, individuals from neighborhoods with low levels of the factor tend to encounter higher exposures when traveling to other areas. Consequently, incorporating individuals ' daily mobility into environmental exposure assessments typically results in a convergence toward the average exposure level.

Existing studies, however, although revealing the potential for gaining more opportunities for crossgroup interaction through traveling outside of the neighborhoods for daily activities, have not addressed the critical question of how far one must travel. The theoretical assumption that out-of-home activities can lead to more opportunities for crossgroup interaction is subject to several constraints as follows. Differences in mobility capabilities between groups -such as access to transportation resources, or the temporal, spatial, and institutional constraints they face -and variations in preferences for activity locations all influence the choice of destinations and, consequently, the composition of social groups at these activity locations.

Recent research underscores how motivational factors and facility constraints affect mobility patterns and social exposure across socioeconomic groups (Ta 2023; Candipan, Vachuska, and Levy 2025). Motivational factors -such as personal preferences, social networks, and perceived safety -strongly influence individuals ' willingness to visit different city areas. Higher income groups often favor exclusive destinations, whereas disadvantaged groups might avoid certain areas, reinforcing segregation (Browning et al. 2017). Studies confirm that preferences drive activity-space segregation: Chen et al. (2024) found migrants prefer self-segregated environments, whereas the highly educated seek more integrated ones; Kamenik et al. (2014) linked ethnic segregation in leisure activities to individual preferences; Y. Wu et al. (2023) noted that consumption habits, not just income, drive sociospatial divides; and cultural familiarity influences recreational participation (Browning et al. 2017).

Facility constraints, particularly public transit accessibility, are another decisive factor affecting mobility. Limited transportation disproportionately affects low-income groups, restricting access to jobs, education, and leisure, and deepening segregation (Cheng, Zhang, and Shaw 2025). In contrast, wealthier individuals benefit from private transport and financial flexibility, enabling them to travel further and participate in diverse activities in exclusive zones (Y. Xu, Santi, and Ratti 2022). Tao et al. (2020) observed that privileged groups enjoy better connectivity and access to high-quality facilities, and Zhang et al. (2019) found that privatized amenities further isolate wealthier individuals. Ta et al. (2021) showed that high-income groups engage in more varied activities and points of interest (POIs), whereas migrants ' activity spaces are more constrained. Research confirms that marginalized groups -especially rural and migrant minorities -must rely on low-cost, accessible activity opportunities and face disadvantages in reaching distant destinations, reinforcing their exclusion (Ta et al. 2021; Cantor et al. 2022; Tan, Kwan, and Chai 2022; Y. Shen and Luo 2023).

Another fundamental challenge to the assumption that out-of-home activities reduce segregation is that it presumes an even distribution of activity opportunities. Urban facilities that foster cross-group interactions are often scarce and unevenly distributed, however. Their spatial arrangement directly influences the likelihood of achieving social integration outside residential areas. If such facilities are distant from marginalized communities, individuals must travel a significant distance to access diverse social contexts. Suburban residents, for instance, often need to travel farther than central-city counterparts due to lower land-use density and fewer nearby activity opportunities (Y. Shen and Luo 2023).

Therefore, uneven distributions of urban opportunities, variations in mobility capabilities between different groups -such as disparities in access to transportation resources, as well as the temporal, spatial, and institutional constraints they encounter -along with differences in preferences for activity locations, collectively shape destination choices and, in turn, influence the composition of social groups present at these locations. Leaving one ' s residential

neighborhood to engage in daily activities outside the home does not automatically increase opportunities for encountering other social groups unless one travels and reaches an ideal location that attracts individuals from diverse backgrounds.

Based on this understanding, the study proposes two hypotheses:

1. Individuals need to travel a certain distance before their activity-space exposure levels significantly increase, thus gaining more opportunities for crossgroup interaction.
2. This distance varies for residents at different locations. For example, compared to residents in central-city areas, suburban residents might need to travel further to experience a significant increase in activity-space exposure.

To test these hypotheses, this study conducts an empirical analysis using cellphone data and the GBDT model, focusing on the low-income migrant population in Shenzhen.

## Research Context: Segregation of LowIncome Migrants in Chinese Cities

The demographic structure of Chinese cities differs significantly from Western cities, where sociospatial segregation is often driven by ethnic divisions. In China, socioeconomic status is the dominant factor shaping residential segregation (F. Wu and Li 2005; Kwan, Chai, and Tana 2014). Over the past decades, state-led and market-driven urbanization has transformed previously homogeneous urban spaces into diverse and stratified environments (J. Shen and Wu 2017). Market-oriented reforms have exacerbated income inequality, creating new marginalized groups, such as laid-off workers (F. Wu and Logan 2016). At the same time, remnants of China ' s socialist welfare system have introduced institutional inequalities, particularly through the hukou system (Fan 2008; Chan 2009).

The hukou system restricts rural-to-urban migrants from accessing urban benefits like public housing and health care, reinforcing their marginalization despite their crucial role in urbanization (F. Wu and Logan 2016). This institutional exclusion disproportionately affects low-income migrants, functioning as a structural mechanism of discrimination (F. Wu and Logan 2016; Du, Li, and Hao 2018; He, Qian, and Wang 2019). Due to economic and institutional barriers, low-income migrants often rely on informal housing, particularly in urban villages ( chengzhongcun ; Z. Li and Wu 2008; Y. P. Wang and Murie 2011; He et al. 2017).

In terms of employment, low-income migrants predominantly work in low-skilled service jobs (e.g., restaurant work, cleaning, hairdressing) or manufacturing. In contrast, higher income migrants and local residents occupy better paid positions in producer service industries. Low-skilled manufacturing jobs are mainly located in suburban or outer suburban areas, whereas low-paying service jobs are spread across suburban regions and near central-city residential zones. Producer service jobs, however, are concentrated in central-city areas (Zhou et al. 2021). As a result, low-income migrants face both residential and workplace segregation, significantly affecting their social inclusion. Given that workplaces are key sites of social interaction, workplace segregation is a crucial component of sociospatial inequality.

The segregation experienced by low-income migrants has drawn increasing scholarly attention (Liu et al. 2010; F. Wu, Zhang, and Webster 2013; Z. Li and Gou 2020). Reflecting the broader shift in sociospatial segregation research, recent studies have increasingly examined segregation within migrants ' daily activity spaces, rather than just their residential patterns (Ta et al. 2021; Y. Shen and Luo 2023). This study builds on this research by focusing on the activity-space segregation of low-income migrants in a specific Chinese city, offering an empirical case study to extend existing literature.

## Data and Methods

## Study Area

The research area of this study is Shenzhen, a rapidly urbanizing city located in the southern part of China (Figure 1). Located in southern China and bordering Hong Kong, the city forms part of the Pearl River Delta megacity region (Figure 1A). It was designated as China ' s first special economic zone (SEZ) in 1980. Since then, Shenzhen has developed from a brand-new city into the country ' s fourth most populous and economically competitive city, attracting a substantial number of migrants of various socioeconomic status during the past four decades. According to the latest population census conducted

Figure 1. (A -B) The location of Shenzhen and (C) its central-city and suburban areas.

<!-- image -->

in 2020, migrants constituted around 70.1 percent of the total population in Shenzhen (Shenzhen Statistics Bureau 2023).

This study divides Shenzhen into central-city areas and suburban areas (Figure 1C). Specifically, according to the latest five-year development plan document of Shenzhen, the study designates Luohu, Futian, and Nanshan Districts; Xinan and Xixiang Subdistricts in Baoan District; Minzhi and Longhua Subdistricts in Longhua District; and Bantian, Buji, Jihua, and Nanwan Subdistricts in Longgang District as central-city areas. All other regions are designated as suburban areas.

The central-city and suburban areas differ substantially in land-use patterns, particularly in terms of the types of job opportunities and density of service facilities. Figure 2 presents the densities of important public service facilities, including educational institutions (primary and secondary schools) and health-care facilities (neighborhood clinics and hospitals), as well as the commercial office buildings as an effective indicator of producer service job opportunities. The names, addresses, categories and tiers of public service facilities were acquired from the official Web site of Shenzhen Municipal Government (https://www.sz. gov.cn/cn/xxgk/sydwxxgk/). The addresses were converted to longitudes and latitudes through the application programming interface (API) of Gaode Ditu , a widely adopted map application in China (https://www.amap.com/). This study classifies the educational institutions of various categories and tiers into two major groups. One group includes all the public schools and high-tier private schools; that is, privately funded international schools, usually with high tuition costs (Figure 2A). In Chinese cities, migrants without a local hukou face greater difficulty in accessing public schools. Low-income migrants are not likely to attend high-tier private schools due to the latter ' s high cost. The other group includes all the lowand midlevel private schools, which are more accessible to low-income migrants (Figure 2B). Similarly, this study classifies the health-care facilities of various categories and tiers into two major groups. One group includes all hightier hospitals, referred to as Sanji Yiyuan , which literally means tertiary hospital in China ' s classification system (Figure 2C). The other group includes all the neighborhood clinics and lowand midlevel hospitals, which are more accessible to low-income migrants (Figure 2D). As shown in Figure 2, lowand midlevel private schools, neighborhood clinics, and low- and midlevel hospitals are more evenly distributed across the entire city compared to public schools, high-tier private schools, and high-tier

Figure 2. Spatial distributions of service facilities (including educational and health-care facilities of different tiers) and commercial office buildings.

<!-- image -->

hospitals that are more densely distributed in the central-city areas. As mentioned, the latter are usually less accessible to low-income migrants and more likely to be used by local residents.

Meanwhile, the locations of commercial office buildings were derived from the POIs data that were collected from Gaode Ditu . Similar to the high-tier public service facilities, commercial office buildings are more abundant in the central-city areas than in the suburban areas.

## Data Processing

This study uses cellphone data from 2019 to identify low-income migrant populations in Shenzhen, as well as their residential and daily activity locations. Due to the high penetration rate of mobile phones, cellphone data are closer to reflecting the actual population distribution than other types of big data, providing a high degree of sample representativeness (Yeh et al. 2020).

The data were collected on two weekdays, including 27 and 28 February 2019, by China Unicom, one of the largest cellphone operators in the city under study. The data set consists of anonymized user identification (with phone numbers rendered anonymous for privacy protection), along with timestamps and the coordinates of base transceiver stations (BTSs) that provided cellular network services. The distribution of BTSs is generally correlated with the distribution of urban built-up areas. The average distance separating BTSs was approximately 250 m. The locations of cellphone users were approximated using Voronoi polygons, constructed based on the coverage areas of these BTSs. A recorded stay is defined as a location where a user remains for more than thirty minutes. The place types for each stay (e.g., home, work locations, and nonwork activity locations) were inferred by China Unicom based on long-term observations of users ' stay patterns over the past six months. Specifically, the location where a user had the longest stay between 21:00 and 08:00 the next morning over the past six months was identified as their residential location, and the location where a user had the longest stay between 09:00 and 17:00 over the same period was identified as their work location. Any locations other than residential or work locations where the user stayed on 27 and 28 February 2019 were categorized as out-of-home nonwork activity locations.

Several socioeconomic attributes of each user, such as the prefecture-level city where a user had the longest stay for at least three days during the past seven-day Spring Festival and monthly mobile phone fees, were also inferred by China Unicom and included in the data set. The prefecture-level city where a user had the longest stay for at least three days during the past seven-day Spring Festival can be considered as their hometown. If the identified hometown was outside Shenzhen, the user was classified as a migrant. This is because, in Chinese cities, migrant populations typically return to their hometowns to celebrate the Spring Festival. Furthermore, because not all migrants belong to disadvantaged groups -for instance, some migrants might be high-skilled, high-income professionals assigned locally from other regions -this study focuses solely on migrants with lower income levels. Specifically, the study determines income levels based on the monthly mobile phone fees and the average rent of the neighborhood where the user resides, excluding users with mobile phone fees above the average (50.3 yuan) and those with housing rent above the average (97.2 yuan/m 2 ). Housing rents of 2019 were collected from Lianjia , a realestate brokerage application in China (https://www. lianjia.com/).

Additionally, this study also uses cellphone data from 27 and 28 February 2017 (both weekdays) collected by China Unicom, as well as housing rent of 2017 collected from Lianjia , as supplementary data to identify grids where the number of low-income migrants had substantially increased (i.e., by more than 50 percent) from 2017 to 2019. This was used to construct a variable as a proxy for migration duration to control for its effects. Due to the anonymization process of the cellphone data, it is not possible to track the same cellphone users across the two years. Nevertheless, the data of 2017 follow the same structure, and includes the same attributes, such as place types for each stay (e.g., home, work locations, and nonwork activity locations), as well as the city where a user had the longest stay during the seven-day Spring Festival and monthly mobile phone fees, as the data of 2019. Income levels in 2017 are also determined based on the monthly mobile phone fees and the average rent of the neighborhood where the user resides. Cellphone users with mobile phone fees above the average (49.9 yuan) and those with housing rent above the average (72.0 yuan/m 2 ) are excluded from the 2017 data set.

## Measuring Activity-Space Exposure

This section details the approach used to quantify activity-space exposure. Greater exposure implies increased opportunities for social interaction and reduced levels of sociospatial segregation. The study seeks to capture both residential exposure and individual activity-space exposure. Grids of 500-by-500m are adopted to represent the social environment surrounding an individual ' s residential or out-ofhome activity locations. Specifically, the social composition of the grid where each activity location is situated is used to indicate the exposure value of the social environment at that location.

It is noteworthy that activity-space exposure at out-of-home work and nonwork activity locations could be substantially different. Work activities tend to be more rigid in space and time. Economic and spatial divides in work locations, although less

eminent than residential segregation, is an observable phenomenon driven by industry clustering (e.g., high-income professionals often work in central business districts or technology hubs, whereas lowincome workers are concentrated in industrial zones, retail centers, or service-sector hubs). Meanwhile, nonwork activities (e.g., recreational activities) tend to be more flexible in both space and time and are less likely to be influenced by structural factors compared to those affecting residential and workplace segregation. Compared to work activities, individuals of various socioeconomic statuses have greater autonomy in choosing the locations of their nonwork activities. Given that opportunities for social interaction differ between the locations of rigid work activities and flexible nonwork activities, it is necessary to distinguish activity-space exposure for work and nonwork activities.

To begin, the proportions of different social groups within each grid are calculated separately for residential locations and activity locations. These proportions serve as indicators of the aggregated spatial distribution of social groups across the study area. The proportion of a social group x (e.g., lowincome migrants) in grid i as the residential place is denoted as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Xi is the population count of group x in grid i and Pi is the total population in grid i . Accordingly, residential exposure ( REi ) of group x to other social groups in grid i can be represented as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thereafter, the proportion of group x in grid j as an out-of-home activity location is denoted as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let there be an individual a who belongs to group x , lives in grid i , and conducts an activity in grid j . The individual activity-space exposure to other social groups for the individual a is represented using the time-weighted average group proportion in the grids as her or his out-of-home activity locations, which is denoted as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where IAE a iw denotes the individual activity-space exposure for out-of-home work activities , for individual a who resides in grid i . X a jw and P a jw are the population counts of group x and total population in grid j as one of the out-of-home work activity locations of individual a , respectively. t j denotes the duration of individual a ' s stay in grid j (i.e., a work activity location). mw denotes the number of out-of-home work activity locations for the individual a . P mw j ¼ 1 t j represents the total amount of time spent on work activities by individual a . Similarly, IAE a in denotes the individual activity-space exposure for out-of-home nonwork activities , respectively, for individual a who resides in grid i . X a kn and P a kn are the population counts of group x and total population in grid k as one of the out-of-home nonwork activity locations of individual a , respectively. t k denotes the duration of individual a ' s stay in grid k (i.e., a nonwork activity location). mn denotes the number of out-of-home nonwork activity locations for the individual a . P mn k ¼ 1 t k represents the total amount of time spent on nonwork activities by individual a .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This study only focuses on the grids where the residential exposure ( REi ) of low-income migrants to other social groups is not greater than 0.2 (i.e., at least 80 percent of residents in these units are lowincome migrants) and excludes other grids. These grids represent areas in Shenzhen where low-income migrant populations are concentrated. They are thus labeled migrants ' concentrated areas (MCAs).

## The Gradient Boosting Decision Tree Model

This study applies the GBDT model to explore the nonlinear relationship between activity-space exposure value and traveling distance. Such an analysis is conducted to determine whether or not individuals need to travel a certain distance before their

activity-space exposure levels significantly increase, thus gaining more opportunities for cross-group interaction.

The GBDT model captures complex nonlinear relationships by sequentially minimizing residual errors, making it well-suited for analyzing the dynamics of low-income migrants ' activity-space segregation and travel distances. These mobility patterns are shaped by uneven sociospatial constraints, such as facility distribution and socioeconomic barriers. One key advantage of GBDT is its ability to detect threshold distances -critical points where the effect of increased travel on social exposure shifts significantly. These turning points reveal when mobility starts to improve or no longer enhances access to diverse social environments, offering insights into conditions under which mobility promotes integration.

GBDT offers strong predictive performance, handles high-dimensional and sparse data well, and requires fewer assumptions than traditional nonlinear models. It is robust to outliers and adapts flexibly to different data types without extensive feature engineering. As a nonparametric model, GBDT can model intricate interactions without predefined functional forms. Compared to SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP), which is an interpretation method rather than a predictive model, GBDT is more efficient for forecasting while still offering interpretable results, including feature importance.

Partial dependence plots derived from GBDT outputs visualize how individual features influence predictions while holding others constant, capturing nonlinear effects clearly. Additionally, GBDT evaluates variable importance based on how often and effectively a variable is used in decision splits across all trees, highlighting which factors most strongly shape model performance.

In this study, GBDT models are established separately for the low-income migrants residing in the central city and in the suburban areas. The dependent variables are low-income migrants ' individual activity-space exposure ( IAE a i ) for work and nonwork activities, respectively. The independent variables are the average traveling distances for work and nonwork activities, respectively. Two control variables are also incorporated into the models. One is the residential exposure ( REi ) experienced by each individual. The other is having many new migrants in the residential grid, which is a binary variable taking a value of 1 or 0, serving as a proxy for migration duration. A value of 1 indicates that the grid where the individual resides has experienced a substantial increase (more than 50 percent) in migrant numbers. A value of 0 represents the opposite situation. This variable developed by comparing the cellphone data of 2019 and 2017 to identify grids where the number of low-income migrants had substantially increased by more than 50 percent are identified. Low-income migrants living in these grids are more likely to have arrived after 2017 and thus have a shorter duration of residence in the study area.

Analyses of the GBDT models and the partial dependence plots are conducted by importing the ' GradientBoostingRegressor ' class from the ' sklearn. ensemble ' module and the ' PartialDependence Display ' class from the ' sklearn.inspection ' module of the scikit-learn library, respectively, using Python 3.7 in Anaconda 3. The following sections present the results from the empirical study.

## Results

## Overall Patterns of Activity-Space Exposure

Overall, the average residential exposure ( REi ) for the low-income migrants in the MCAs is 0.129 ( SD ¼ 0.080), reflecting the limited opportunities for the low-income migrants to encounter other social groups (e.g., the local population) in their residential areas. Figure 3 shows the distribution of MCAs within Shenzhen. Compared to central-city areas, there are more MCAs in suburban areas, indicating a larger low-income migrant population in the suburbs. In particular, MCAs are more prevalent in Pingshan District, a suburban district located in the northwest of Shenzhen. Pingshan is a traditional manufacturing hub in Shenzhen, attracting many low-income migrants who work and reside nearby in factory dormitories or urban villages. Compared to MCAs in the central-city areas (0.141), the average residential exposure in suburban MCAs (0.124) is significantly lower based on a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test (Table 1).

Meanwhile, the average individual activity-space exposure for work ( IAEiw ) and nonwork activities ( IAEin ) for the low-income migrants in MCAs are 0.451 ( SD ¼ 0.184) and 0.478 ( SD ¼ 0.190), respectively (Table 1). Paired t tests reveal that the average individual activity-space exposure for both work

Figure 3. Spatial distribution of migrants ' concentration areas (MCAs).

<!-- image -->

and nonwork activities of low-income migrants is significantly higher than their residential exposure (Table 1). This suggests that although the lowincome migrants in MCAs have limited opportunities for encountering other social groups within their residential areas, they can engage with more local residents in their activity spaces through out-ofhome work or nonwork activities, thus gaining more opportunities for cross-group interaction. This finding aligns with previous research conclusions.

A notable difference in individual activity-space exposure emerges between low-income migrants living in the central city and in suburban areas. For work activities ( IAEiw ), the average individual activity-space exposure of low-income migrants living in the central-city MCAs and in the suburban MCAs is 0.467 and 0.444, respectively (Table 1). A one-way ANOVA test shows that, for work activities, the average individual activity-space exposure of central-city migrants is significantly higher than that of suburban migrants at the 0.05 level (Table 1). Similarly, for nonwork activities ( IAEin ), the average individual activity-space exposure of lowincome migrants living in the central-city MCAs and in the suburban MCAs is 0.483 and 0.4715, respectively (Table 1). As confirmed by another one-way ANOVA test, for nonwork activities, the average individual activity-space exposure of centralcity migrants is significantly higher than that of suburban migrants at the 0.1 level (Table 1). This indicates that, compared to suburban MCAs, migrants living in central-city MCAs have more opportunities for crossgroup interaction in their activity spaces. This result is consistent with existing research findings.

## Nonlinear Relationship Between Activity-Space Exposure and Travelling Distances

The preceding analysis confirms that migrants can achieve more opportunities of cross-group interaction through out-of-home activities. This study further examines the distance that the low-income migrants need to travel before their activity-space exposure at work and nonwork activities begins to substantially increase, also exploring differences between centralcity and suburban areas. This analysis is based on the fact that there is a positive correlation between individual activity-space exposure and average traveling distances, for both work ( IAEiw ) and nonwork ( IAEin ) activities. According to Table 2, significant correlations exist between individual activity-space exposure and average traveling distances within

Table 1. Statistics of residential and individual activity-space exposures

|                                                                    |     M |    SD |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|-------|
| Residential exposure ( RE i )                                      |       |       |
| The entire city                                                    | 0.129 | 0.08  |
| The central-city areas                                             | 0.141 | 0.087 |
| The suburban areas                                                 | 0.124 | 0.077 |
| Difference between the central-city and suburban areas             |       |       |
| Difference                                                         | 0.017 |       |
| Significance a                                                     | 0.006 |       |
| Individual activity-space exposure for work activities ( IAE iw )  |       |       |
| The entire city                                                    | 0.451 | 0.184 |
| The central-city areas                                             | 0.467 | 0.175 |
| The suburban areas                                                 | 0.444 | 0.187 |
| Difference between the central-city and suburban areas             |       |       |
| Difference                                                         | 0.023 |       |
| Significance a                                                     | 0.012 |       |
| Difference between IAE iw and RE i for the entire city             |       |       |
| Difference                                                         | 0.322 |       |
| Significance b                                                     | 0     |       |
| Individual activity-space exposure for nonwork activities ( IAE in |       |       |
| The entire city                                                    | 0.478 | 0.19  |
| The central-city areas                                             | 0.483 | 0.178 |
| The suburban areas                                                 | 0.475 | 0.195 |
| Difference between the central-city and suburban areas             |       |       |
| Difference                                                         | 0.008 |       |
| Significance a                                                     | 0.061 |       |
| Difference between IAE in and RE i for the entire city             |       |       |
| Difference                                                         | 0.349 |       |
| Significance b                                                     | 0     |       |

a Significance value from the one-way analysis of variance.

b Significance value from the paired t test.

MCAs in the entire city as well as in the centralcity and suburban areas, for both work and nonwork activities, at the 0.01 level.

On this basis, the study applies GBDT models to explore the nonlinear relationship between the individual activity-space exposure and average traveling distances for both work ( IAEiw ) and nonwork ( IAEin ) activities, using a partial dependence plot to identify turning points on the curves. Table 3 presents the relative importance of all the variables. Accordingly, traveling distance is identified as the most significant predictor for the models of the entire city as well as the central-city and suburban areas, contributing 52.4 percent, 74.1 percent, and 41.0 percent of the total importance for work activities, and 69.4 percent, 81.9 percent, and 55.1 percent for nonwork activities, respectively. This suggests that traveling distance is highly relevant to the individual activity-space exposure, particularly for the MCAs in the central-city areas.

Figure 4 shows the partial dependence plots of the nonlinear relationship between the individual activity-space exposure and traveling distances in the entire city as well as in the central-city and suburban areas for work activities, respectively. Overall, the individual activity-space exposure tends to increase as the traveling distance grows. For the lowincome migrants in the central-city areas, the individual activity-space exposure for work activities shows minimal change when the traveling distance is less than 2km, remaining at the lowest level. Once the traveling distance exceeds 2 km, the individual activity-space exposure value for work activities increases sharply with distance, indicating that the farther a migrant travels from their residential area, the more opportunities they have to encounter local residents at their work activity locations. When the traveling distance reaches around 8km, however, this upward trend stops, meaning that further increases in traveling distance do not

Table 2. Correlations between individual activity-space exposures and average traveling distances

|                                                                            |   The entire city |   The central-city areas |   The suburban areas |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------|----------------------|
| Pearson correlation coefficient (for work activities IAE iw ) Significance |             0.291 |                    0.364 |                0.212 |
|                                                                            |             0     |                    0     |                0     |
| Pearson correlation coefficient (for nonwork activities IAE in )           |             0.412 |                    0.5   |                0.324 |
| Significance                                                               |             0     |                    0     |                0     |

Table 3. Relative importance of variables in the gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT) models

|                                                                                 | Importance          | Importance                 | Importance             |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|----------------------------|------------------------|
| Variables                                                                       | The entire city (%) | The central-city areas (%) | The suburban areas (%) |
| Results of individual activity-space exposure for work activities ( IAE iw Þ    |                     |                            |                        |
| Average traveling distances for work activities                                 | 52.4                | 74.1                       | 41.0                   |
| Residential exposure ( RE i )                                                   | 35.3                | 18.9                       | 39.0                   |
| Having many new migrants in the residential grid                                | 12.3                | 7.0                        | 20.0                   |
| Results of individual activity-space exposure for nonwork activities ( IAE in Þ |                     |                            |                        |
| Average traveling distances for nonwork activities                              | 69.4                | 81.9                       | 55.1                   |
| Residential exposure ( RE i )                                                   | 20.7                | 12.8                       | 30.5                   |
| Having many new migrants in the residential grid                                | 9.8                 | 5.3                        | 14.4                   |

significantly change the individual activity-space exposure value for work activities. At a distance of 25 km, the individual activity-space exposure value for work activities rises slightly but then stabilizes at the distance of 30 km, showing little to no further change.

For the low-income migrants in the suburban areas, the individual activity-space exposure for work activities only changes significantly when the traveling distance exceeds 9km. In other words, if the low-income migrants travel for shorter distances that are less than 9 km, their opportunities for interaction with local residents at their work activity locations do not increase significantly. At 11km, the individual activity-space exposure stabilizes with occasional minor fluctuations.

Figure 5 illustrates the partial dependence plots for nonwork activities across the entire city, as well as within central-city and suburban areas. Similar to the findings for work activities, individual activityspace exposure tends to rise as the travel distance increases. For low-income migrants residing in central-city areas, the level of individual activityspace exposure for nonwork activities remains almost unchanged when travel distances are within 3 km, staying at its lowest level. Once the travel distance surpasses 3km, however, exposure levels increase sharply. This upward trend ceases when the travel distance reaches approximately 11 km, indicating that beyond this point, further travel does not substantially affect the exposure level for nonwork activities. At around 20 km, exposure experiences a slight increase, but after reaching 27 km, it stabilizes with no further noticeable change.

When it comes to the low-income migrants in suburban areas, a notable shift in individual activityspace exposure for nonwork activities only occurs when travel distances extend beyond 8 km, implying that when these migrants travel within a shorter range of less than 8 km, their opportunities for interaction with local residents at nonwork activity locations remain largely unchanged. At approximately 17 km, exposure levels reach a stable point, with only minor fluctuations observed thereafter.

A sensitivity analysis is conducted to ensure that the aforementioned findings remain valid using different sizes of grids to capture social environment (Figure 6). Specifically, the study replaces the original grids with 750-m-by-750-m grids (Figure 6A -D) and 1,000-m-by-1,000-m grids (Figure 6E -H), respectively, and then repeats the GBDT model analysis. The results obtained from these two

Figure 4. The partial dependence plots of the gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT) models for work activities across (A) the entire city, as well as on (B) the central-city and (C) suburban areas.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5. The partial dependence plots of the gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT) models for nonwork activities across (A) the entire city, as well as on (B) the central-city and (C) suburban areas.

<!-- image -->

alternative grids are highly consistent with those derived from the original 500-m-by-500-m grid. Using both new grids to capture social environment, individual activity-space exposure tends to increase as travel distance grows. For low-income migrants in central-city areas, exposure levels for work and nonwork activities remain nearly unchanged at their lowest levels when travel distances are below 2km and 3km, respectively. Once these thresholds are exceeded, however, exposure values for both work and nonwork activities increase sharply with distance. Similarly, for low-income migrants in suburban areas, significant changes in individual activity-space exposure for work and nonwork activities only occur when travel distances exceed 9km and 8km, respectively. These findings demonstrate that the study results exhibit high robustness with different sizes of grids.

The analytical results hold significant theoretical implications. First, a large body of studies reveal that disadvantaged groups, such as low-income migrants in urban areas, can access more opportunities of cross-group interaction by engaging in activities outside of their residential areas. This study extends this finding by further revealing that migrants have to travel a certain distance before their activity-space exposure noticeably increases (i.e., gaining more opportunities for cross-group interaction), regardless of work and nonwork activities. Second, existing studies suggest that, compared to the suburban areas, low-income migrants in the central-city areas tend to embrace more opportunities to access cross-group interaction in their activity spaces. This study adds that low-income migrants residing in the suburban areas need to travel a longer distance (9 km for work activities or 8 km for nonwork activities) before their activity-space exposure increases significantly, whereas those in the centralcity areas only need to travel 2 km (for work activities) or 3km (for nonwork activities) for a noticeable increase in the opportunities of cross-group interaction.

In other words, traveling outside of the residential neighborhoods for daily activities does not necessarily guarantee increased opportunities of cross-group interaction. The latter scenario occurs only when the traveling distance exceeds a certain threshold, which varies by urban location, with the threshold in the suburban areas being longer than that in central-city areas. In the central-city areas, the higher presence of local residents means that the low-income migrants have a greater chance of encountering locals once they leave the MCAs. In contrast, the low-income migrants in the suburban areas, on leaving an MCA, are more likely to access spaces where other migrants are present; only after traveling a certain distance are they more likely to encounter local residents. Additionally, the suburban areas are usually characterized with low density in land use. Residential locations (particularly MCAs) in the suburban areas are further from various urban activity opportunities (e.g., jobs, service facilities) that serve as important spaces for cross-group encounters and interaction. Moreover, low-income migrants tend to face economic or institutional constraints in accessing high-quality facilities, such as public schools, top-tier public schools, and high-tier hospitals. For example, low-income migrants without a local hukou face greater difficulty in accessing public schools and are not likely to attend high-tier private schools due to the latter ' s high cost. They are also less likely to work in high-paying producer service sectors. By comparison, other social groups with higher socioeconomic status are more likely to be employed in the producer service sectors and to use high-quality facilities. Unlike other types of urban opportunities, producer service sectors and high-quality facilities are primarily concentrated in central-city areas, as shown in Figure 2. This implies that local residents ' daily activities are more likely to take place in the central areas, with fewer activities occurring in the suburban areas. Thus, the low-income migrants in the suburban areas must travel longer distances to the central-city areas to have more opportunities to encounter and interact with local residents.

Evidently, the theoretical assumption that even if disadvantaged groups in cities reside in areas predominantly occupied by similar groups, they can still overcome the disadvantages of their residential areas through traveling outside to conduct daily activities is often based on the premise of an even distribution of activity opportunities. In reality, the spatial distribution of activity opportunities (especially service jobs and high-quality service facilities) is highly uneven. Consequently, some low-income migrants have to engage in long-distance travel to access such opportunities that are necessary to build and accumulate social capital, and eventually, to integrate into the local society. It is also noteworthy that lowincome migrants ' participation in long-distance travel is often hindered by insufficient mobility capabilities, which result from a lack of private vehicles and limited spatial accessibility to public transit.

Figure 6. The partial dependence plots of the gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT) models for work and nonwork activities on the central-city and suburban areas, based on (A -D) 750-m-by-750-m grids as well as (E -H) 1,000-m-by-1,000-m grids for sake of a sensitivity test.

<!-- image -->

Additionally, the empirical results indicate that activity-space exposure for both work and nonwork activities does not continue to increase indefinitely with traveling distance. Once travel exceeds a certain distance (e.g., 11km for work activities or 17 km for nonwork activities for those in suburban areas), the individual activity-space exposure for low-income migrants remains largely unchanged. This suggests that greater distance from home does not necessarily mean more opportunities for crossgroup interaction. For most low-income migrants, this opportunity might have an upper limit, potentially determined by the proportions of different groups within the city and the scale and distribution of activity opportunities. This hypothesis could be confirmed through comparative analyses across multiple cities in future studies.

Furthermore, by comparing the results of work and nonwork activities, this study further confirms that opportunities for social interaction vary between locations associated with rigid work activities and those linked to more flexible nonwork activities. As

shown in Figures 4 and 5, for low-income migrants in suburban areas, although individual activity-space exposure increases after traveling a certain distance from home, the patterns differ between work and nonwork activities. Specifically, for work activities, exposure levels rise from 0.4 to approximately 0.5 and then almost stabilize until the travel distance reaches 34 km. In contrast, for nonwork activities, individual activity-space exposure continues to increase from 0.4 to beyond 0.6. This result indicates that, compared to work activity locations, lowincome migrants experience a greater increase in individual activity-space exposure at nonwork activity locations. In other words, they have more opportunities for encounters with local residents in nonwork settings. A possible explanation for this is that, compared to work activities, individuals across different socioeconomic statuses have greater autonomy in selecting the locations of their nonwork activities, as the latter are less influenced by structural factors compared to those shaping residential and workplace segregation.

## Discussion and Conclusions

This study, using cellphone data and GBDT models, provides novel insights into activity-space segregation, emphasizing its nonlinear correlation with traveling distances. Through a focus on the lowincome migrants who resided in the migrant concentrated areas in Shenzhen, China, the study reveals that activity-space exposure (0.451 for work activities and 0.478 for nonwork activities) is significantly higher than residential exposure (0.129) for lowincome migrants, indicating that out-of-home activities allow them to engage with a broader range of social groups. This increase is conditional, though, on the travel distance exceeding specific thresholds, which vary by location and activity types. In central-city areas, migrants experience a significant increase in cross-group interaction opportunities after traveling just 2km for work activities or 3 km for nonwork activities. Conversely, migrants in suburban areas need to travel at least 9 km for work activities or 8 km for nonwork activities to achieve a comparable increase. These findings highlight the disparities between central-city and suburban areas in providing cross-group interaction opportunities. Central-city areas, with higher densities of local residents and closer proximity to urban amenities, allow migrants to encounter diverse groups with shorter travel distances. In contrast, suburban areas, characterized by lower land-use density and greater spatial separation from activity centers, require migrants to travel longer distances to reach spaces conducive to crossgroup interactions. The results also demonstrate that activity-space exposure does not increase indefinitely with distance. Once travel surpasses a threshold (e.g., 11km for work activities or 17 km for nonwork activities for those in suburban areas), further distance yields diminishing returns in exposure. This suggests that spatial mobility as a strategy for enhancing social integration has practical limits, shaped by the urban distribution of social groups and activity opportunities. The study also finds that the increase in exposure after traveling beyond the threshold distance is greater for nonwork activities, indicating that voluntary movement for nonwork activities plays a greater role in reducing segregation than workplace-driven mobility.

A major theoretical contribution of this study is identifying a specific condition behind ' mobility increases outgroup interaction opportunities, ' namely the travel distance requirement (Figure 7). Existing studies on activity-space segregation suggest that out-of-home activities can increase cross-group interactions (e.g., € Osth, Shuttleworth, and Niedomysl 2018; Hedman et al. 2021; Moya-G  omez et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021), but further scholarly investigation is needed to determine how far one must travel from home before meaningful cross-group interaction occurs. Recent studies have highlighted the role of mobility constraints and facility distribution in shaping these interaction opportunities, suggesting that a minimum travel distance is required before meaningful cross-group interaction occurs (e.g., Browning et al. 2017; Ta 2023; Chen et al. 2024; Cheng, Zhang, and Shaw 2025). This study extends this line of research by introducing the concept of a ' threshold distance '-the minimum distance individuals must travel before experiencing a significant increase in exposure to diverse social groups. The study demonstrates that cross-group interaction does not occur immediately on leaving one ' s residential neighborhood but only after surpassing a certain threshold distance, which varies by urban locations, with the threshold in the suburban areas being longer than that in central-city areas. Because the spatial distribution of socially diverse activity locations is highly uneven, long-distance travel is often necessary for marginalized

groups (particularly those residing in peripheral areas) to access socially diverse spaces that foster integration. In this case, the mobility constraints faced by marginalized groups further strengthen their role as a structural barrier to social integration.

This study also provides new insights on NEAP, which suggests that incorporating individuals ' daily mobility patterns into environmental exposure assessments generally leads to a convergence toward the average exposure level, because individuals living in neighborhoods with high concentrations of a specific environmental factor tend to experience reduced exposure to that factor when they engage in activities outside their residential areas, and vice versa (Kwan 2018). This study, through introducing a spatial mobility threshold as an important element in segregation research, provides a more nuanced understanding of how and when mobility -such as traveling beyond a threshold distance -contributes to the neighborhood effect averaging process. For example, NEAP might become particularly pronounced when the suburban migrants in this study travel more than 9km from their place of residence. Additionally, the study underscores the role of the (un)even spatial distribution of facilities and employment opportunities in shaping the extent to which mobility facilitates neighborhood effect averaging; that is, NEAP could be more pronounced if facilities and employment opportunities were evenly distributed across the urban areas. This finding suggests a potential link between urban spatial structure and NEAP, warranting further investigation.

The empirical findings have several implications for urban planning and policy. Promoting polycentric urban development by increasing land-use density and enhancing functional diversity in suburban areas holds significant potential for fostering more

Figure 7. Contributions of this study to the existing literature.

<!-- image -->

inclusive and socially integrated cities. By concentrating a wider range of functions -such as employment centers, educational institutions, health-care services, and recreational facilities -within suburban neighborhoods, cities can reduce residents ' dependence on long-distance travel to access essential opportunities and engage in cross-group social interactions. This is particularly important for suburban migrants, who often face structural disadvantages and spatial mismatches in access to urban resources. A more balanced spatial distribution of employment opportunities and high-quality public services would not only enable these populations to interact with diverse social groups within shorter distances but also help alleviate traffic congestion, reduce commuting times, and mitigate the environmental consequences associated with excessive automobile use and long commutes. In central-city areas, where public services and commercial activities are already densely concentrated, urban planning efforts should focus on creating and maintaining multifunctional public spaces that actively encourage cross-group interactions. In cases where land-use modifications in suburban areas are constrained by physical, institutional, or economic factors, however, enhancing transit accessibility becomes even more critical. Improving connectivity between suburban MCAs and central-city zones through expanded rail transit networks, increased bus service frequencies, and integrated fare systems can substantially enhance mobility. These improvements would make it easier for migrants to reach urban spaces where cross-group interactions are more likely to occur, helping to overcome spatial and economic barriers to social integration. Ultimately, a combination of land-use and transportation strategies is essential for promoting more equitable access to urban opportunities and fostering inclusive urban environments where diverse populations can interact, participate, and thrive.

This study has limitations. First, although BTS distribution generally aligns with urban built-up areas, it is noteworthy that even within urban built-up areas, central-city BTS density remains higher than in suburban areas, potentially affecting result robustness. Second, cellphone data lack socioeconomic attributes, making direct identification of social groups challenging. In particular, this study infers the user ' s hometown based on the prefecture-level city where the user had the longest stay (for at least three days) during the past seven-day Spring Festival holiday, and uses this information to identify migrants. This method cannot differentiate well between individuals who are traveling for tourism and those who are actually returning to their hometowns, however. As a result, some of the migrants identified in this study might in fact be tourists. Also, proxies such as the presence of new migrants in residential grids are used, which cannot fully reflect the actual duration of residence. Future research should adopt more systematic approaches -such as nonheuristic methods that integrate deep learning -to achieve more accurate population identification. Third, the study relies on Shenzhen as the empirical case. The city, however, already demonstrates a relatively high level of polycentricity and balanced distribution of urban facilities. Future research should conduct cross-city comparisons among cities with different urban spatial structures to verify and ensure the generalizability of the findings that help better understand travel distance and activity-space exposure dynamics. Such insights will strengthen the foundation for designing equitable, inclusive urban environments that support social integration for disadvantaged populations.

## Disclosure Statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

## References

- Abbasi, S., J. Ko, and J. Min. 2021. Measuring destination-based segregation through mobility patterns: Application of transport card data. Journal of Transport Geography 92:103025. doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2021.103025.
- Batty, M. 2013. Big data, smart cities and city planning. Dialogues in Human Geography 3 (3):274 -79. doi: 10. 1177/2043820613513390.
- Browning, C. R., C. A. Calder, L. J. Krivo, A. L. Smith, and B. Boettner. 2017. Socioeconomic segregation of activity spaces in urban neighborhoods: Does shared residence mean shared routines? RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences 3 (2):210 -31.
- Candipan, J., N. E. Phillips, R. J. Sampson, and M. Small. 2021. From residence to movement: The nature of racial segregation in everyday urban mobility. Urban Studies 58 (15):3095 -3117. doi: 10. 1177/0042098020978965.
- Candipan, J., K. Vachuska, and B. L. Levy. 2025. Neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage and child health: The role of neighborhood mobility networks. Health &amp; Place 91:103402. doi: 10.1016/j.healthplace. 2024.103402.

- Cantor, P., M. Polakowska, A. Proietti, V. Tran, J. Lebire, and L. Roy. 2022. Leisure possibilities of adults experiencing poverty: A community-based participatory study. Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy/Revue canadienne d ' ergotherapie 89 (2):103 -14. doi: 10.1177/00084174211073266.
- Chan, K. W. 2009. The Chinese hukou system at 50. Eurasian Geography and Economics 50 (2):197 -221. doi: 10.2747/1539-7216.50.2.197.
- Chen, F., S. Zhou, J. Lu, and Z. Zheng. 2024. A behavioral explanation of the activity-space segregation: Individuals ' preference of choosing an activity destination. Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics and City Science 51 (9):1995 -2011. doi: 10.1177/ 23998083241229110.
- Cheng, S., Y. Zhang, and J. Shaw. 2025. Economic inequality and the geography of activity space segregation: Combining mobile device data and census data. RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences 11 (1):132 -52. doi: 10.7758/RSF.2025.11.1.07.
- Du, H., S. M. Li, and P. Hao. 2018. ' Anyway, you are an outsider ' : Temporary migrants in urban China. Urban Studies 55 (14):3185 -3201. doi: 10.1177/ 0042098017691464.
- Ellis, M., R. Wright, and V. Parks. 2004. Work together, live apart? Geographies of racial and ethnic segregation at home and at work. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 (3):620 -37. doi: 10.1111/j. 1467-8306.2004.00417.x.
- Fan, C. C. 2008. China on the move: Migration, the state, and the household . London and New York: Routledge.
- Goodchild, M. F. 2013. The quality of big (geo) data. Dialogues in Human Geography 3 (3):280 -84. doi: 10. 1177/2043820613513392.
- Hao, P. 2015. The effects of residential patterns and Chengzhongcun housing on segregation in Shenzhen. Eurasian Geography and Economics 56 (3):308 -30. doi: 10.1080/15387216.2015.1089412.
- He, S., Y. Liu, F. Wu, and C. Webster. 2010. Social groups and housing differentiation in China ' s urban villages: An institutional interpretation. Housing Studies 25 (5):671 -91. doi: 10.1080/02673037.2010.483585.
- He, S., L. Liu, G. Yang, and F. Wang. 2017. Housing differentiation and housing poverty in Chinese lowincome urban neighborhoods under the confluence of state-market forces. Urban Geography 38 (5):729 -51. doi: 10.1080/02723638.2016.1139406.
- He, S., J. Qian, and J. Wang. 2019. Rural migrants in transitional urban China: Marginality, agency and social justice. Journal of Urban Affairs 41 (3):281. doi: 10.1080/07352166.2019.1601472.
- Hedman, L., K. Kadarik, R. Andersson, and J. € Osth. 2021. Daily mobility patterns: Reducing or reproducing inequalities and segregation? Social Inclusion 9 (2):208 -21. doi: 10.17645/si.v9i2.3850.
- Huang, Q., and D. W. Wong. 2016. Activity patterns, socioeconomic status and urban spatial structure: What can social media data tell us? International Journal of Geographical Information Science 30 (9):1873 -98. doi: 10.1080/13658816.2016.1145225.
- J € arv, O., K. M € u € urisepp, R. Ahas, B. Derudder, and F. Witlox. 2015. Ethnic differences in activity spaces as a characteristic of segregation: A study based on mobile phone usage in Tallinn, Estonia. Urban Studies 52 (14):2680 -98. doi: 10.1177/0042098014550459.
- Kamenik, K., T. Tammaru, and O. Toomet. 2015. Ethnic segmentation in leisure time activities in Estonia. Leisure Studies 34 (5):566 -87. doi: 10.1080/02614367. 2014.938773.
- Krivo, L. J., H. M. Washington, R. D. Peterson, C. R. Browning, C. A. Calder, and M. P. Kwan. 2013. Social isolation of disadvantage and advantage: The reproduction of inequality in urban space. Social Forces 92 (1):141 -64. doi: 10.1093/sf/sot043.
- Kwan, M. P. 2013. Beyond space (as we knew it): Toward temporally integrated geographies of segregation, health, and accessibility: Space -time integration in geography and GIScience. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 103 (5):1078 -86. doi: 10.1080/ 00045608.2013.792177.
- Kwan, M. P. 2018. The neighborhood effect averaging problem (NEAP): An elusive confounder of the neighborhood effect. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 15 (9):1841. doi: 10.3390/ijerph15091841.
- Kwan, M. P., Y. Chai, and Tana. 2014. Reflections on the similarities and differences between Chinese and US cities. Asian Geographer 31(2): 167 -74. doi: 10. 1080/10225706.2014.950484.
- Li, Q. Q., Y. Yue, Q. L. Gao, C. Zhong, and J. Barros. 2022. Towards a new paradigm for segregation measurement in an age of big data. Urban Informatics 1 (1):5. doi: 10.1007/s44212-022-00003-3.
- Li, Z., and F. Gou. 2020. Residential segregation of rural migrants in post-reform urban China. In Handbook of urban segregation , ed. S. Musterd, 55 -75 Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
- Li, Z., and F. Wu. 2008. Tenure-based residential segregation in post-reform Chinese cities: A case study of Shanghai. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 33 (3):404 -19. doi: 10.1111/j.1475-5661.2008.00304.x.
- Liu, Y., S. He, F. Wu, and C. Webster. 2010. Urban villages under China ' s rapid urbanization: Unregulated assets and transitional neighbourhoods. Habitat International 34 (2):135 -44. doi: 10.1016/j.habitatint. 2009.08.003.
- Luo, F., G. Cao, K. Mulligan, and X. Li. 2016. Explore spatiotemporal and demographic characteristics of human mobility via Twitter: A case study of Chicago. Applied Geography 70:11 -25. doi: 10.1016/j.apgeog.2016.03.001.
- Massey, D. S., and N. A. Denton. 1988. The dimensions of residential segregation. Social Forces 67 (2):281 -315. doi: 10.2307/2579183.
- Moya-G  omez, B., M. Ste R pniak, J. C. Garc  ı a-Palomares, E. Fr  ı as-Mart  ı nez, and J. Guti  errez. 2021. Exploring night and day socio-spatial segregation based on mobile phone data: The case of Medellin (Colombia). Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 89:101675. doi: 10.1016/j.compenvurbsys. 2021.101675.

- € Osth, J., I. Shuttleworth, and T. Niedomysl. 2018. Spatial and temporal patterns of economic segregation in Sweden ' s metropolitan areas: A mobility approach. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 50 (4):809 -25. doi: 10.1177/0308518X18763167.
- Park, Y. M., and M. P. Kwan. 2017. Individual exposure estimates may be erroneous when spatiotemporal variability of air pollution and human mobility are ignored. Health &amp; Place 43:85 -94. doi: 10.1016/j. healthplace.2016.10.002.
- Prestby, T., J. App, Y. Kang, and S. Gao. 2020. Understanding neighborhood isolation through spatial interaction network analysis using location big data. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 52 (6):1027 -31. doi: 10.1177/0308518X19891911.
- Sch € onfelder, S., and K. W. Axhausen. 2003. Activity spaces: Measures of social exclusion? Transport Policy 10 (4):273 -86. doi: 10.1016/j.tranpol.2003.07.002.
- Shen, J., and F. Wu. 2017. The suburb as a space of capital accumulation: The development of new towns in Shanghai, China. Antipode 49 (3):761 -80. doi: 10. 1111/anti.12302.
- Shen, Y., and X. Luo. 2023. Linking spatial and temporal contexts to multi-contextual segregation by hukou status in urban China. Journal of Transport Geography 107:103540. doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2023.103540.
- Shen, Y., K. Karimi, S. Law, and C. Zhong. 2019. Physical co-presence intensity: Measuring dynamic face-to-face interaction potential in public space using social media check-in records. PLoS ONE 14 (2):e0212004. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212004.
- Shenzhen Statistics Bureau. 2023. Shenzhen population census yearbook. Accessed October 15, 2024. https:// www.sz.gov.cn/cn/xxgk/zfxxgj/tjsj/tjnj/content/post\_ 10688161.html.
- Silm, S., and R. Ahas. 2014. Ethnic differences in activity spaces: A study of out-of-home nonemployment activities with mobile phone data. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 104 (3):542 -59. doi: 10. 1080/00045608.2014.892362.
- Ta, N. 2023. Toward multidimensional activity spacebased segregation research. Transactions in Planning and Urban Research 2 (2 -3):205 -16. doi: 10.1177/ 27541223231164781.
- Ta, N., M. P. Kwan, S. Lin, and Q. Zhu. 2021. The activity space-based segregation of migrants in suburban Shanghai. Applied Geography 133:102499. doi: 10. 1016/j.apgeog.2021.102499.
- Tan, Y., Y. Chai, and Z. Chen. 2019. Social-contextual exposure of ethnic groups in urban China: From residential place to activity space. Population, Space and Place 25 (7):e2248. doi: 10.1002/psp.2248.
- Tan, Y., M. P. Kwan, and Y. Chai. 2022. How Chinese hukou system shapes ethnic dissimilarity in daily activities: A study of Xining, China. Cities 122:103520. doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2021.103520.
- Tao, S., S. Y. He, M. P. Kwan, and S. Luo. 2020. Does low income translate into lower mobility? An investigation of activity space in Hong Kong between 2002 and 2011. Journal of Transport Geography 82:102583. doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2019.102583.
- Toomet, O., S. Silm, E. Saluveer, R. Ahas, and T. Tammaru. 2015. Where do ethno-linguistic groups meet? How copresence during free-time is related to copresence at home and at work. PLoS ONE 10 (5):e0126093. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126093.
- Wang, D., and F. Li. 2016. Daily activity space and exposure: A comparative study of Hong Kong ' s public and private housing residents ' segregation in daily life. Cities 59:148 -55. doi: 10.1016/j.cities. 2015.09.010.
- Wang, Y. P., and A. Murie. 2011. The new affordable and social housing provision system in China: Implications for comparative housing studies. International Journal of Housing Policy 11 (3):237 -54. doi: 10.1080/14616718.2011.599130.
- Wong, D. W. 1993. Spatial indices of segregation. Urban Studies 30 (3):559 -72. doi: 10.1080/ 00420989320080551.
- Wong, D. W., and S. L. Shaw. 2011. Measuring segregation: An activity space approach. Journal of Geographical Systems 13 (2):127 -45. doi: 10.1007/ s10109-010-0112-x.
- Wu, F., and Z. Li. 2005. Sociospatial differentiation: Processes and spaces in subdistricts of Shanghai. Urban Geography 26 (2):137 -66. doi: 10.2747/02723638.26.2.137.
- Wu, F., and J. Logan. 2016. Do rural migrants ' float ' in urban China? Neighbouring and neighbourhood sentiment in Beijing. Urban Studies 53 (14):2973 -90. doi: 10.1177/0042098015598745.
- Wu, F., F. Zhang, and C. Webster. 2013. Informality and the development and demolition of urban villages in the Chinese peri-urban area. Urban Studies 50 (10):1919 -34. doi: 10.1177/0042098012466600.
- Wu, Y., Y. Yao, S. Ren, S. Zhang, and Q. Guan. 2023. How do urban services facilities affect social segregation among people of different economic levels? A case study of Shenzhen city. Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics and City Science 50 (6):1502 -17. doi: 10.1177/23998083221140415.
- Xu, W. 2022. The contingency of neighbourhood diversity: Variation of social context using mobile phone application data. Urban Studies 59 (4):851 -69. doi: 10.1177/00420980211019637.
- Xu, Y., P. Santi, and C. Ratti. 2022. Beyond distance decay: Discover homophily in spatially embedded social networks. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 112 (2):505 -21. doi: 10.1080/24694452. 2021.1935208.
- Yeh, A. G. O., Y. Yue, X. Zhou, and Q. L. Gao. 2020. Big data, urban analytics and the planning of smart cities. In Handbook of planning support science , ed. S. Geertman and J. Stillwell, 179 -98. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
- Zhang, X., J. Wang, M. P. Kwan, and Y. Chai. 2019. Reside nearby, behave apart? Activity-space-based segregation among residents of various types of housing in Beijing, China. Cities 88:166 -80. doi: 10.1016/ j.cities.2018.10.009.
- Zhao, Y., and C. Webster. 2011. Land dispossession and enrichment in China ' s suburban villages. Urban Studies 48 (3): 529 -51. doi: 10.1177/0042098010390238.

Zhou, X., Z. Chen, A. G. O. Yeh, and Y. Yue. 2021. Workplace segregation of rural migrants in urban China: A case study of Shenzhen using cellphone big data. Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics and City Science 48 (1):25 -42. doi: 10.1177/ 2399808319846903.

ZIFENG CHEN is an Associate Professor in School of Geography and Planning at Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. E-mail: czfurban@gmail.com. His research interests include urban social geography and time geography.

YI ZOU is a Postgraduate Student in School of Geography and Planning at Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. E-mail: zouy56@mail2.sysu.edu.cn. His research interests include urban social geography and time geography.

YIMING TAN is an Associate Professor in School of Geography and Planning at Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. E-mail: tanym7@mail.sysu.edu.cn. Her research interests include urban social geography and time geography.