## PRIMARY SECTOR VALUE CHAINS, POVERTY REDUCTION, AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES IN THE PHILIPPINES*

## EDO ANDRIESSE

<!-- image -->

ABSTRACT. The insertion of Philippine agriculture and fisheries into global value chains has not contributed significantly to rural poverty reduction, in contrast to several other Southeast Asian countries. While there are pockets of downstream export successes, upstream actors face persistent precarious conditions. This comparative investigation of the relationships between value chains and rural development fills a gap in the literature on the Philippines. An analysis of four important products affecting at least 3 million households illustrates the need to focus more on upstream value-chain governance and pro-poor rural development interventions. This article shows that the integration of livelihoods and value-chain analyses has the advantage of fleshing out upstream challenges that are relevant for agri/aquabusiness performance, socio-spatial policies, and refinements of rural development theories. It is unlikely that horizontal coordination/social capital as well as associated upgrading efforts will be effective without a stronger emphasis on vertical coordination and human-capital formation. Keywords: agriculture, aquaculture, Philippines, poverty reduction, upstream upgrading, vulnerability context.

'Agriculture is the seat of poverty in the country. Seventy percent of the Filipino poor can be found in the rural areas, where the dominant source of livelihood is farming and fishing. Poverty incidence is also highest in rural areas (at 40 percent, against only 13 percent in urban areas and 3 . 9 percent in Metro Manila) and it is worst among coconut farmers and fishers.' ( Philippine Daily Inquirer 2016 a)

A gainst the background of global trends in rural-urban migration, metropolitan sprawl, industrialization policies, and subnational-governments' leapfrogging strategies for specialising in modern service industries, it is sometimes forgotten that a substantial proportion of rural populations will remain rural and, unfortunately, appears likely to remain relatively poor compared with urban dwellers. Finding a decent job in the big city is not a solution for everyone, often because of human-capital shortages (Sheng 2012 ; Andriesse 2017 ). Poverty reduction and enablement of escape from the middle-income trap cannot be achieved solely by promoting urbanization, industrialization, and the creative economy, such as advertising, software design, fashion, museums and music -industries that global cities attract to rejuvenate their economic structure.

This comparative analysis highlights the continuing relevance of agriculture and rural livelihoods to poverty reduction in the Philippines. The country has

*The author wishes to thank Mr. Yeongseob Eum for drawing the Figures.

k DR. EDO ANDRIESSE is an associate professor of geography at the department of geography at Seoul National University [edoandriesse@snu.ac.kr].

become one of the largest and best-known global suppliers of labor -for instance 600 , 000 overseas Filipina/Filipino workers (OFWs) are employed in Saudi Arabia -but relatively little scholarly work has been done on rural economic development and agri/aquabusiness value chains. Academic inquires have mainly focused on the (in)famous land reform program, as well as landed sugarcane elites from historical, anthropological, and political perspectives (Billig 2003 ; Borras and Franco 2005 ; Vista and others 2012 ; Adams 2013 ). The ways in which Philippine farmers and fisher folk are inserted in Asian/Global agri/ aquabusiness chains has been under-researched. 1 This is a gap in the literature since the huge outflow of labor from the Philippines has contributed insufficiently to rural poverty reduction (Hill and others 2007 ; Clausen 2010 ). As the quotation at the start of this section illustrates, poverty is essentially a rural phenomenon. Figure 1 shows that while the relative contribution of agriculture to the economy has declined, the absolute number of people working at least part time in agriculture has increased to 12 million.

This article compares the relationships between primary sector-value chains, exports, and rural development. In contrast to Vietnam, which has become a global agricultural and seafood powerhouse over the last thirty years -an impressive rate of development for a newly reunited country that had to start from scratch in 1975 and only started to gradually become a market economy in 1986 -the Philippines has not been able to transform agriculture and fisheries into a 'seat' of poverty reduction. In the 1970 s the Philippines was a net exporter of agricultural products and was able to be self-sufficient in rice, but since then the balance has gradually shifted towards imports. In 1994 the value of Philippine agricultural imports was US$ 2 . 4 billion, compared with US$ 2 . 1

## Labor and agriculture in the Philippines

<!-- image -->

FIG. 1 -: Labor and agriculture in the Philippines. Source Asian Development Bank, 2015

for exports; by 2014 the gap had widened, with imports valued at US$ 9 . 6 billion and exports at US$ 6 . 5 billion (CountryStat 2016 ). The empirical analysis in this article focuses on two land-based products and two marine products -bananas, coconut oil, tuna, and seaweed/carrageenan -as the contribution of production and trade in these products to rural poverty reduction remains inadequate, although the Philippines excels at the global level in terms of exports and regarding bananas and carrageenan product reputation. 2 Three research questions are addressed:

- 1 How are Philippine banana, coconut, and seaweed smallholders, and tuna fishers inserted in their respective value chains?
- 2 To what extent do product and process-upgrading efforts benefit smallholders and fishers?
- 3 How are livelihoods impacted by changing value-chain dynamics and what strategies do smallholders and fishers employ to improve living standards?

First an overview is given of literature on sustainable livelihoods and valuechain approaches, then the state of the Philippine agriculture and fisheries sectors are briefly discussed. This is followed by an investigation of value-chain dynamics, product and process upgrading, and adaptive livelihood trajectories of the four investigated products. The empirical material presented here is based on a comprehensive analysis of secondary sources as well as own primary research on the seaweed value chain conducted in 2015 and in August 2016 .

## VALUE CHAINS AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT

One of the most commonly adopted approaches to unravelling the challenges and options facing smallholders is the sustainable livelihoods approach (SLA). This approach organizes the complex issues around poverty in terms of three factors: capital's pentagon (human, natural, financial, physical, and social), the vulnerability context, and the institutional and political economy (International Fund for Agricultural Development n.d.). These three factors culminate in livelihood strategies that, in turn, determine livelihood trajectories. Based on these trajectories, smallholders consider subsequent options, changes, and improvements with respect to the capitals pentagon (the dashed line in Figure 2 ). A major outcome of livelihood research in Southeast Asia has been the observation that farming families are increasingly relying on nonfarm income (Rigg and Vandergeest 2012 ).

In recent years the investigation of livelihoods has increasingly been combined with research on global value chains (GVC). In doing so, academics and practitioners, such as nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), have responded positively to Ian Scoones who correctly pointed out that the SLA suffered from a lack of scalar dynamics and was preoccupied with the local level 3 ( 2009 )

Agri/aquabusiness GVC research seeks to follow material flows from the point of origin, inputs via farmers and fisher folk, through intermediaries,

## Integrating the SLA and the GVC approach

FIG. 2 -: Integrating the SLA and the GVC approach Source: Sumadio, Andriesee, Aprilianti and Sulyat 2017 .

<!-- image -->

processors, wholesalers, and retailers, to the consumers, and to follow the financial flows in the opposite direction. Chain governance and upgrading are important topics of research. The better chains are governed, the more cooperation there is among actors within a node (the horizontal dimension) and between actors at different nodes (the vertical dimension), the likelier it is that product and process upgrading will emerge (Mitchell and Coles 2011 ). Improving the vertical dimension has proved particularly challenging since the dominant players are often intermediaries who are not inclined to respond to the plight of impoverished smallholders. Figure 2 presents an analytical framework that integrates the SLA and the GVC approach. There are three reasons why integrating these two bodies of knowledge is theoretically sound. First, there are two important similarities between them: social capital/horizontal coordination, and institutions and political economies. As a result of earlier critiques of the local, rather isolationist, perspective of livelihoods research by protagonists

of the SLA approach there has been increasing scrutiny of the impact of institutional arrangements and unequal power relations at national and international levels. This is highly relevant to livelihood initiatives, since smallholders frequently occupy a marginal position within value chains and, indeed, in wider society. Second, orthodox value-chain analyses assume a continuous downwards flow of intermediate products, however, natural disasters can completely disrupt a value chain; including the vulnerability context takes this into account. Third, the integration of the two approaches, as presented in Figure 2 , enables the analysis of the scalar dynamics of process and product upgrading. In summary, there is a complex network of links between rural communities and global agricultural markets. Three categories often found are chains regulated by the invisible hand of the market, chains in which lead firms manage vertically integrated chains -a good example is Chiquita owning banana plantations in Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, and Panama -and chains that are heavily regulated by the visible hand of the state.

The literature on value chains and rural development has focused extensively on upgrading, the role of institutions and, increasingly, feedback mechanisms (Mitchell and Coles 2011 , Horton and others 2016 ). Upstream process and product upgrading in peripheral areas has often been difficult to achieve due to distances to urban markets, a lack of institutional support (see below), and the presence of intermediaries who are uninterested in improving the livelihoods of farmers and fisher folk. Observed processes of benefiting disproportionately from upstream actors and exploitation has led to scholarly work referring to agricultural debt-fare (Soederberg 2012 ), debt driven value chains (McMichael 2013 ) and the possibility of social downgrading (Pegler 2015 ). Nevertheless, there have also been success stories of upgrading, in situ adding value, and ultimately improvements in rural living standards. One of the most essential factors is time: 'The most successful interventions reviewed in this book benefitted from continuous support -from donors, international organizations, and national partners -over a decade or more' (Horton and others 2016 , 25 ). However, given the increasing pressures on development aid in the Global North, it is becoming more challenging to foster such long-term partnerships.

Several publications have emphasised that for any upgrading to take place, an enabling institutional environment is essential (Neilson and Shonk 2014 ; Horton and others 2016 ; Hamilton-Hart and Stringer 2016 ; Andriesse and Lee 2017 ). Indeed, if intermediaries are not inclined to initiate or facilitate process and product upgrading, nonchain actors such as government agencies and NGOs should spearhead vertical coordination efforts (Figure 2 ). Edward Challies and Warwick Murray, in a study that investigated the interactions between the raspberry value chain and the five livelihoods capitals pentagon, concluded 'that if smallholder participation in the raspberry GVC is to be sustainable, and growers' dependence on State assistance reduced in the long

run, holistic support programs are required now' ( 2011 , 55 ). Government assistance obviously implies the necessity of political will. In the context of developing countries without an effective developmental state, such as the Philippines, political will is not always available, and if there is, the central government needs to have fiscal space to allocate more money to rural development, particularly if all peripheral areas are set to be reached by valuechain interventions. Political will also implies the necessity to work with local civil society in order to facilitate the blossoming of agri/aquabusiness associations and cooperatives. Local civil society alone often cannot compensate for market failures (Sick and others 2011 ). Furthermore, fostering coevolution of institutions and actors in coastal communities requires paying special attention because of the difficulty to define, demarcate and allocate marine areas and pressures such as overfishing and mangrove forest degradation (FerrolSchulte, and others 2013 ).

Protagonists of livelihoods and value-chain research have also increasingly paid attention to the evolution of trajectories through feedback mechanisms (Figure 2 ). This is because rural communities need to continuously weigh their options and capabilities amid changing vulnerability contexts (price shocks, natural disasters) and institutional support (for example, a change in subsidies or input support, and other interventions). Jessica McClean distinguished three adaptation strategies: inactive (neglect of threats), reactive (escaping threats) and proactive (dealing with or eliminating threats) ( 2015 ). Table 1 presents an array of possibilities at the local and individual level. McClean also asked two important questions: 'Who is responsible for supporting and funding livelihood adaptations of vulnerable people? Under what circumstances are these determined?' ( 2015 , 385 ) In the case of primary sector value chains there are many possible answers: no one, only chain actors, the end-consumer in supermarkets, the government, or nonchain actors such as NGOs. Rural development initiatives are fostered through a mosaic of support mechanisms There is, therefore, no single blueprint for improving smallholders' insertion in global value chains. Tailor-made, participatory, multistakeholder, and flexible

TABLE 1 -APPROACHES TO IMPROVING LIVELIHOOD STRATEGIES AND TRAJECTORIES

|            | PROACTIVE STRATEGY                                                              | REACTIVE STRATEGY                                       | INACTIVE STRATEGY                             |
|------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Local      | Horizontal coordination Irrigation improvements Exploring new opportunities     | Seeking support from provincial authorities Mutual help | Muddling through Waiting for external support |
| Individual | Diversification Improving agricultural/ fishing practices Choosing resettlement | Out-migration Seeking external support                  | Belt tightening Waiting for external support  |

Source: McClean 2015 .

interventions appear to have the highest chances of success: 'Effective facilitation, or innovation brokerage, is crucial for the success of multistakeholder platforms, and involves not just the coordination of interactions, but network formation, technical backstopping, mediation of conflicts, advocacy, capacity building, and documentation of results' (Horton and others 2016 , 29 ). Without effective facilitation agri/aquabusiness value chains in rural areas face a significant chance of persistent upstream poverty and power asymmetries (Mitchel and Coles 2011 ; B  en  e and others 2016 ). The empirical analysis follows Challies and Murray's ( 2011 ) approach linking the value chain to the five livelihood capitals and then McClean ( 2015 ) focus on livelihood strategies and trajectories in order to create a more dynamic analysis. The next section briefly discusses the state of agriculture and fisheries in the Philippines.

## AGRICULTURE AND FISHERIES IN THE PHILIPPINES

After gaining full independence in 1946 , the Philippines was one of the most prosperous and developmentally promising Southeast Asian countries Yet since the early 1980 s, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia (and later Vietnam), have performed better and have overtaken the Philippines in terms of agricultural productivity, exports, and rural poverty reduction. A range of factors needs to be considered:

- 1 The Philippines has a population of 100 million people and the fertility rate ( 3 . 0 ) remains one of the highest in Southeast Asia. Consequently, there is a huge pressure on the labor market and unsurprisingly, millions of people work overseas.
- 2 The archipelagic geography. It is arguably more challenging than the Indonesian geography, as the islands making up the Philippines are much smaller. Indonesia's population density is 121 persons per square kilometre, whereas that of the Philippines is 307 .
- 3 Globally the Philippines ranks second highest in terms of risks associated with natural disasters (UNU-EHS and ADW 2014 ). It is both on the ring of fire (volcanic eruptions and earthquakes) and right in the middle of the Pacific Ocean typhoon belt.
- 4 While other countries in Southeast Asia have benefited from planned cross-border integration -for example the Greater Mekong Subregion and the Indonesia-Malaysia-Singapore Growth Triangle -the Philippines is only involved in the peripheral Brunei Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area (Dent and Richter 2011 ).
- 5 In the 1980 s and 1990 s, relatively few foreign investors have set up factories in urban areas. Rene Ofreneo even argues that the Philippines has experienced a process of deindustrialization ( 2015 ). Consequently, manufacturing has not been an absorber of rural-urban labor migration flows.

6 In Indonesia and Thailand, civil servants and technocrats have been given substantial autonomy to not only formulate, but also implement longer

term socioeconomic and socio-spatial policies. In the Philippines the public sector seems largely to have been captured by a rent-seeking, neo-patrimonial oligarchy, who is more interested in expanding its personal economic wealth and political influence rather than in poverty reduction, land redistribution, and rural development (Raquiza 2012 Andriesse 2017 ).

Whereas exports of Philippine sugar, traditionally the most important export crop, declined sharply in the 1980 s, Vietnam, Thailand, and to a lesser extent Indonesia, have become globally recognised agricultural and aquacultural powerhouses (Borras Jr. 2007 ). This is illustrated by data on exports of marine products, a category in which the Philippines should have a considerable competitive advantage owing to its archipelagic geography of approximately 2000 inhabited islands. Figure 3 shows that the Philippines has missed the boat, with the total value of marine exports at US$ 568 million in 2014 , while Vietnam has become, for instance, a global leader in shrimp exports.

As outlined above, this article seeks to address the smallholder livelihoods and value-chain challenges related to four specific products. The Philippines is a global leader in exports of coconut oil, bananas, tuna, and seaweed/carrageenan (Figure 4 ). Exports have risen markedly and there is considerable expertise regarding upgrading in downstream value chains. However, as subsequent sections will show, upstream value-chain development is negligible in comparison and hundreds of thousands of people involved in cultivating these four products continue to live below the national poverty line. In terms of labor, the coconut industry is the biggest. There are 3 million coconut farmers

Exports of fish, crustaceans, molluscs and aquatic invertebrates, million Us$

<!-- image -->

FIG. 3 -: Exports of fish, crustaceans, molluscs and aquatic invertebrates, million US$ Source: Comtrade, 2016 , HS Code 03 .

## National agri/aquabusiness champions, Us$millions

FIG. 4 -: National agri/aquabusiness champions, US$ millions

<!-- image -->

Source: Comtrade, 2016 , HS codes: bananas 80300 ; carrageenan 130239 ; coconut oil 151311 ; tuna 160414 .

(GMA network, 2016 ), at least 240 , 000 banana workers (Digal 2016 ), 300 , 000 tuna fishers and other people working in the tuna industry ( Philstar 2016 ), and around 100 , 000 seaweed farmers (Manila Bulletin 2017 ). 4 Simply adding up these numbers is impossible because of potential overlap. Many households cultivate two or more crops. Coconut farms are found all over the country; majorities of the other three products are grown on or sourced from around Mindanao Island.

## METHODOLOGY

Since relatively few scholars have written on the links between rural livelihoods and value chains in the Philippines, this review also includes secondary material written by consultants, nongovernmental organizations, and the Philippine media. Combining sources has led to interesting insights into the four products under study. The value chains of bananas, coconut oil, tuna, and seaweed were chosen because they are, on the one hand, export champions (Figure 4 ), but on the other hand, characterised by upstream poverty and rural hardships. As many households live in coastal areas and are dependent on marine resources, it was thought to be important to choose two land-based and two marinebased products. The secondary material included in this article mostly covers one of the following aspects: value-chain structure and economics, environmental pressures, the prospects of upgrading, rural livelihoods, or the overfishing problem in the case of tuna (and, indirectly, seaweed).

With respect to seaweed, this article also benefits from fieldwork conducted by the author in Guimaras Province in 2016 . Sixteen semistructured interviews with key informants in six barangays (Table 2 ) were conducted as well as a survey among thirty-four seaweed-growing households on the island barangay Panobolon in August 2016 (out of 40 existing seaweed growers). This barangay (the smallest Philippine administrative unit, equivalent to village or ward) was selected for the survey since it is the most suitable location for growing seaweed, having clean coastal waters. The aim of the fieldwork was to identify the challenges of seaweed growers in the context of both environmental and valuechain pressures. As such, the fieldwork was designed to study the impact of the vulnerability context (Figure 2 ). The interviews were conducted either in English or Hiligaynon; the surveys all were conducted in Hiligaynon. The author worked together with a research assistant based at the University of San Agustin in Iloilo City.

## VALUE-CHAIN DYNAMICS

The four products scrutinised in this article have a global reach and China has not, as is the case for certain other products, become the dominant export destination. The demand from the United States for Philippine-processed agricultural products has increased markedly. Banana exports have a clear East Asian orientation. The Philippine banana value chain used to be characterised by vertical integration. It remains the case that the lead players are multinationals such as Del Monte Fresh, Dole-Stanfilco, Sumitomo, and Chiquita, but since the start of the new millennium smallholders and medium-sized plantations have increased in importance. This is due to new strategies such as contract farming, as well as the implementation of land reform through the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Programme (CARP) (Carandang 2009 ). Thus the hundreds of thousands of banana-plantation workers either work for the multinationals or for domestic growers. Value-chain dynamics are complex and there are issues affecting both upstream and downstream flows, ranging from

TABLE 2 -SEAWEED GROWING BARANGAYS IN GUIMARAS PROVINCE

|            | 2010       |                 | 2016       |                 |      |               |
|------------|------------|-----------------|------------|-----------------|------|---------------|
| Barangay   | population | seaweed farmers | population | seaweed farmers | OFWs | poverty level |
| Alegria    | 1641       | 150             | 1849       | 0               | 85   | High          |
| Bubog      | 723        | 50              | 1003       | 0               | 5    | Low           |
| Sabang     | 1683       | 250             | 2102       | 100             | 110  | Moderate      |
| San Isidro | 1731       | 90              | 2210       | 50              | 18   | High          |
| Sebaste    | 2211       | 80              | 2505       | 40              | 30   | High          |
| Panobolon  | 959        | 110             | 1259       | 40              | 15   | High          |
| Total      |            | 730             |            | 230             |      |               |

Source: Own fieldwork August, 2016 and Province of Guimaras, 2016 for poverty level.

the vulnerability context (Figure 2 ) to the repercussions of China's hawkish stance on the South China Sea for international trade. It is often assumed that Mindanao is a typhoon-free island, but the impact of the late 2012 typhoon Pablo and several typhoons in 2014 indicate that the entire country should take this threat into account. This is why the Philippine government and the UN's Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) have embarked to strongly link disaster risk reduction to agriculture (FAO 2015 a).

The coconut oil chain is relatively diffuse, particularly upstream where there are 3 million smallholders selling copra, the flesh from which coconut oil is extracted, and thousands of intermediaries. Most smallholders are poor and face many problems. In Quezon province, for instance, 'poor roads and high transport cost, lack of market information, limited volume for sale, make it difficult for farmers to link favourably with markets' (Pabuayon and others 2009 , 60 ). The chain is also affected by trade volatility (Figure 3 ) and this may increase in the future if coconut becomes a genuine flex crop, that is, a crop that has 'multiple uses (food, feed, fuel, fibre, industrial material, etc.) that can be flexibly interchanged while some consequent supply gaps can be filled by other flex crops' (Borras Jr. and others 2016 , 94 ). Infamous examples of flex crops are soya, sugarcane, oil palm, and corn.

The 2013 super typhoon Haiyan (Philippine name: Yolanda) destroyed the livelihoods of many coconut smallholders and seaweed farmers in the central part of the Philippines: eastern, central, and western Visayas (FAO 2014 ; based on a survey of forty-six seaweed farmers and semistructured interviews with key informants). Climate change and the recurring El Ni ~ no phenomenon are also set to disturb primary sector value chains (Noy 2014 ; Channel News Asia 2015 ). Value-chain research must therefore pay more attention to dramatic disruptions to production and indeed to the general vulnerability context (Figure 2 ), especially in countries prone to natural disasters, such as the Philippines. As with the coconut oil chain, the seaweed chain is characterised by the large number of players. Seaweed farms in remote coastal areas are often dependent on intermediaries, for instance 'in the aftermath of the typhoon [Haiyan], many of the farmers [on Palawan island] were falling victims to loan sharks in order to buy seedlings and inputs to re-establish their farms, setting up a vicious cycle of paying high interest rates and being obliged to sell back their seaweed products at below market value' (FAO 2015 b, 9 ). As the next section makes clear, dominant intermediaries stymie upstream upgrading efforts.

The General Santos Fish Port Complex on Mindanao Island is the tuna capital of the Philippines. Its fishing port is a dynamic hub where small, medium, and large purse seiners and hand-line fishers (pump boats) offload their catch. The majority of skipjack tuna is caught in the Celebes Sea (Centrum tot Bevordering van de Import uit Ontwikkelingslanden 2012 ). The most pressing problem is overfishing. The European Union is an important destination for tuna exports (Figure 3 ) and in 2014 it warned the Philippines that action was

needed to reform the tuna industry, strengthen the regulatory framework, and curb illegal fishing with fish aggregate devices (FADs) (Al Jazeera 2014 ). Because overfishing of tuna and other species is a transborder problem in Southeast Asia, cooperation within the Association of Southeast Asian Nations is warranted (Pomeroy and others 2016 ). The next section deals explicitly with the important topic of upstream upgrading as a means of increasing revenue for smallholders, workers and fisher folk.

## UPSTREAM VALUE-CHAIN GOVERNANCE AND UPGRADING

As mentioned above, successful horizontal and vertical coordination could, in theory, culminate in process or product upgrading, and increase the number of livelihood options (Figure 2 ). Forming associations and cooperatives would enable farmers to seek higher prices, better market access, make it easier to produce, and sell more highly processed products, as well engage in lobbying (International Fund for Agricultural Development 2016 ). If farmers were to cooperate with input suppliers, intermediaries, and processors, extensive process and product innovation could be achieved. Unfortunately, vertical coordination is often hampered by the vested interests of influential landlords and intermediaries. This is a particular problem in dispersed rural value chains (Mitchell and Coles 2011 ).

Until about 2000 , large firms and large landlords that blocked meaningful upgrading for smallholders and banana 0 plntation works heavily dominated the banana value chain of the Philippines. Rather than upgrading banana-plantation workers were often exploited (Borras Jr. and Franco 2005 ). The trends towards contract farming and producing under licence have slightly improved opportunities for rural communities on Mindanao, yet process upgrading has remained a challenge. For instance, in a study of the implementation of private food standards for the Philippine banana industry, Stewart Lockie and others noted two limitations related to regulatory gaps: compliance with legal employment conditions requirements and 'questionable ways in which land has been acquired and with which nearby communities are still treated' ( 2015 , 127 -128 ). The first conclusion is not surprising given the well-known problems of enforcing regulations (institutions and political economy in Figure 2 ). The second conclusion highlights the unintended consequences of the CARP. Another unintended consequence has been observed in the coconut industry on Mindanao: medium-sized landowners have been squeezed by large plantation owners and have been compelled to give pieces of land to the poorest farmers (Adam 2013 ). Furthermore, horizontal and vertical coordination on Mindanao is hampered by continuing tensions and occasional violence. A more general issue for the 3 million coconut farmers nationwide is the challenge to produce drier copra in order to get a higher price for their product. Maria Padua laid out an upstream value chain problem in Camines Sur province in Bicol region: 'The miller measures the moisture content of the copra that it buys from

consolidators [intermediaries] and larger farmers, but consolidators do not provide this service. Consequently, small farms acting individually have no way of validating the discount imposed by the consolidators' ( 2015 , 91 ). This illustrate the importance of paying more attention to collective selling mechanisms in order to reduce the dominance of intermediaries (Mitchell and Coles 2011 ; Padua 2015 ); however, fostering horizontal coordination requires local social capital (Figure 2 ). NGOs have been active on this issue, but one cannot expect them continuously to reach out to all impoverished rural communities.

For two reasons upstream upgrading in the seaweed value chain represents arguably the greatest challenge among the four products investigated here. First, most seaweed farmers live in relatively remote coastal areas on Mindanao and the central Philippines. This hinders vertical coordination and increases the dominance of intermediaries who are able to connect farmers to market. It is therefore no surprise that fair trade arrangements are lacking. Second, the main end product, carrageenan, is produced in refineries in Cebu City and product diversification is in an early stage and proving difficult. Anicia Hurtado proposed 'adding value near crop sources: This practice would provide a higher income and diversify sources of livelihood to the seaweed farmer' ( 2013 , 110 ). Nevertheless, their distance from urban markets, and associated lack of economies of scale and scope seriously diminishes the viability of diversification initiatives. The Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC) is experimenting with new end products, yet it remains to be seen whether it will culminate in successful product upgrading.

In contrast to seaweed, the Philippine tuna value chain has attracted considerable international attention, mainly due to the pressing problems of overfishing and environmental degradation in the Coral Triangle, which encompasses marine territory of the Philippines, Indonesia, and Papua New Guinea (Pomeroy and others 2016 ). The concentration of activity in General Santos has facilitated upgrading initiatives in the tuna value chain. A detailed study of private incentive mechanisms found that upgrading initiatives had produced an improvement in tuna quality, partly as a result of horizontal coordination through the tuna fishers association and compliance with the regulations of the Marine Stewardship Council (Tolentino-Zondervan 2016 ). Most surprisingly, vertical coordination has also been initiated with the support of the International Seafood Sustainability Foundation (ISSF)'s Pro-Active Vessel Register (PVR) Tool. Fishers complying with the ISSF PVR demonstrated a clear potential to benefit from greater degrees of vertical coordination by strengthening their relations with ISSF processors and related traders further down the chain (Tolentino-Zondervan 2016 ). This shows that vertical coordination is possible, but only if all stakeholders recognise that there is room for improvement.

## ADAPTIVE LIVELIHOOD TRAJECTORIES

'Given an average landholding of 1 . 5 hectares, a one-crop rice farmer gets P 33 , 000 [US$ 710 ] per year while a coconut farmer gets P 30 , 000 [US$ 645 ]per year. This is even less than a third of the P 105 , 000 [US$ 2258 ] poverty threshold for a family of five.' ( Philippine Daily Inquirer 2016 b)

Ultimately, smallholder families seek a stable standard of living that is free of poverty. Unfortunately, the four export products considered here have not contributed sufficiently to poverty reduction and rural development. In addition, landlessness has increased in the last three decades and land fragmentation has continued (International Fund for Agricultural Development 2016 ). The average landholding today is only 1 . 29 hectares (PSA 2015 ). Although export values have risen remarkably since the beginning of the twenty-first century, there has not been a substantial trickle down of revenues to the thousands of villages at the base of the value chains. The situation is most severe in the coconut value chain, as many coconut farmers live below the poverty line (Philippine Daily Inquirer 2016 b); rice farmers and banana smallholders are usually better off. It is therefore imperative that coconut farmers take a more proactive approach to agricultural diversification (Figure 2 and Table 1 ) in order to reduce their dependency on the global coconut-oil market and reduce their exposure to the impact of natural disasters. Possible avenues for diversification are rice, corn, vegetables, and root crops (Uy and others 2011 ). There should also be more intercropping of coconut trees with other crops, as occurred in Ghana and India (Osei-Bonsu and others 2002 ; Nedunchezhiyan and others 2007 ). The Philippine Coconut Authority also proposes corn, peanuts, bananas, coffee, and pineapples as options (Philippine Coconut Authority 2016 ). Although the CARP has increased the number of rural landowners, landownership is not a sufficient condition for poverty reduction (Vista and others 2012 ; Adam 2013 ); it is also necessary to improve access to finance (Pabuayon and others 2009 ) and human capital (Figure 1 ). Finally, in areas where commercial, chemical-based agriculture has proved unviable, organic agriculture might be the way forward (Suh 2015 ). At present the main products are rice, maize, vegetables, fruits, herbs, and spices, but the number of certified producers is still small and involved only 2256 hectares in 2011 , according to Robert Salazar ( 2014 ). The prospects are moderately positive, but 'a more proactive government' is warranted 'that can steer various stakeholders toward clear alternatives, and provide the policies, institutions and resources that are needed to move forward' (Salazar 2014 ). Also, a focus that is not exclusively oriented to export market, but also to Philippine citizens would make organic agriculture more inclusive (Sahakian and others 2017 ). Coastal communities engaged in fishing and growing seaweed are slightly better off than coconut farmers, but they are still living in (near) poverty and are vulnerable to shocks. The Philippine government has declared seaweed farming an appropriate

strategy for reducing the dependency on fisheries, but growing seaweed is also a marine activity. Typhoons wash away all produce and force coastal communities to start from scratch. Proposals to stimulate marine polyculture -'the integration of finfish, molluscs, crustaceans and seaweed, commonly known as integrated multitrophic aquaculture' (IMTA) -should therefore be complemented by livelihood strategies that focus on non-marine activities (Hurtado 2013 , 111 ). Regardless of other factors, the continuing threat of depletion of tuna stocks in the Coral Triangle demands a rethinking of the growth model for General Santos and its fisheries port complex (Ferolin and Dunaway 2013 ; Business World 2014 ). A decade ago, Roehlano Briones proposed a wide-ranging institutional framework and investment program for incentive-based withdrawal from fishing, yet the evidence presented in this article shows that overfishing and poverty in coastal areas remain serious causes for concern ( 2007 ). Furthermore, farmers in coastal areas and seaweed growers continue to perceive fisheries as an alternative or fall-back livelihood strategy. These issues notwithstanding policy makers should be cautious of promoting rural-urban migration (Table 1 ) since most people lack the skills needed to find a decent job in the city or abroad (Andriesse 2017 ).

The trade-off between growing seaweed and out-migration can be illustrated by the preliminary results of a case study of seaweed growing communities in Guimaras Province, Western Visayas, an island located in the semiperiphery of the Philippine economic geography. The World Bank together with the Philippine government started a comprehensive project in August 2014 in order to give a nationwide boost to rural poverty reduction: the Philippine Rural Development Project (PRDP), which will run until May 2021 with a total project cost of US$ 664 . 59 million. The implementing agency is the Philippine Department of Agriculture. The most striking project target is to increase real household incomes by at least 5 percent increase per year (World Bank 2016 ). While it is too early to draw conclusions the first implementation efforts in Guimaras Island paint a rather bleak picture. Seaweed associations in several barangays in Guimaras have applied for PRDP funds because seaweed farmers are facing a number of challenges such as decreasing farm gate prices since 2010 , increasing seedling prices, typhoons, the El Ni ~ no phenomenon in 2010 and 2016 causing lower yields, and the political issue of municipal mayors favouring loyal constituencies when channelling PRDP funds to the barangays. Many seaweed growers have stopped growing altogether since 2010 (Table 2 ). It is therefore no surprise that many households send sons and daughters abroad to make a living and save money for remittances. The semistructured interviews and survey reveal that many households constantly deliberate the option of one or more members going abroad and becoming OFW; in fact, combining reactive and proactive approaches (Table 1 ). Banana smallholders appear to be better off than coconut farmers, tuna fishers, and seaweed growers. There are three explanations for this. First, the Asian demand for bananas has been strong and export

prices have been less volatile than for coconut oil (Figure 1 ), perhaps because coconut oil is becoming a flex crop whereby prices and demand are increasingly dependent on availability of other types of oil (Borras Jr. and others 2016 ). Second, the discussion above showed that the dominance of multinationals and the domestic landed elite has somewhat declined. This has been accompanied by considerable process and product upgrading in the upstream part of the value chain (Carandang 2009 ). Third, many smallholders proactively diversified their activities and are growing other crops or engaged in nonfarm employment (see Rola, 2011 for a longitudinal study of Bukidnon Province on Mindanao). Nevertheless, two issues still need to be addressed. Although future employment opportunities exist (see Digal 2016 ) the first issue is improving the working conditions. An investigation of the value chain for bananas destined for New Zealand concluded that workers often receive less than the official minimum wage for their work, that social security is limited, and that unionization remains virtually impossible (Center for Trade Union and Human Rights Nonoy Librado Development Foundation 2013 ). The second issue is environmental degradation: banana plantations in upland areas are the cause of soil degradation and reductions in water quantity and quality in the lowlands. Agnes Rola pointed out that although decentralisation has resulted in local initiatives central government support will remain crucial. NGOs and the wider civil society will continue to play major roles in rural development as well ( 2011 ).

## CONCLUSIONS

How can agri/aquabusiness become a cornerstone of poverty reduction? How can Philippine primary sector value chains become more inclusive? A narrow focus on rice self-sufficiency or providing financial support without adequate measures to improve productivity and ability of communities to steer their own livelihood trajectories will not suffice.

This comparative analysis of four important value chains that together affect at least 3 million households in the Philippines has illustrated the need to focus on upstream value-chain governance, leading to process and product upgrading, and aligning upstream (livelihoods) and downstream (trade and exports) interests. Influential chain actors, associations, and government agencies have successfully supported downstream operations and the Philippines has become a globally recognised exporter of bananas, coconut oil, tuna, and carrageenan, yet rural poverty, particularly among coconut farmers and fishers remains a serious problem.

Table 3 summarises the empirical results of this study, based on the integration of Figure 2 and Table 1 . Fortunately the banana and tuna value chains are witnessing upstream process and product upgrading initiatives, but more could be done. For instance, many banana smallholders and tuna hand-line fishers are still dependent on dominant intermediaries and are not involved in either horizontal or vertical coordination.

TABLE 3 -COMPARATIVE SUMMARY OF VALUE CHAIN AND LIVELIHOOD TRENDS

| SEAWEED     | smallholders + intermediaries very limited Insufficient no change evolving vulnerability impact of typhoons difficult accessibility seeking support,                                                                                                                                                |
|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| TUNA        | purse seiners + lead firms moderate reasonable slightly improved no change continuing stock depletion no change Seeking support                                                                                                                                                                     |
| COCONUT OIL | smallholders + intermediaries limited insufficient marginalization persistent poverty lack of intercropping no change muddling through,                                                                                                                                                             |
| BANANAS     | Upstream value chain stakeholders smallholders + lead firms Upgrading considerable Social capital reasonable Human capital difficult labor conditions Financial capital higher incomes Natural capital environmental degradation Physical capital improved accessibility Livelihood diversification |

The approximately 3 million coconut smallholders and their families face the greatest hurdles to achieve a stable standard of living above the national poverty line. The vulnerability context is unfavourable (typhoons, El Ni ~ no causing droughts), they are easily exploited by intermediaries owing to the asymmetry in provision of information during measurement of copra moisture content, political and institutional support is insufficient, and most smallholders do not possess the human capital needed to take control of their livelihood trajectories. Without specific policies targeting the plight of coconut smallholders in particular it will be hard, if not impossible, to reduce the overall prevalence of rural poverty. The results reinforce the findings of the centrality of the wider institutional context (Horton and others 2016 ; Hamilton-Hart and Stringer 2016 ). Weak regulatory institutions in the Philippines prevent a translation from export successes into poverty reduction. Moreover, in the case of fisheries the intensification of value chains carries the risk of environmental downgrading (Fabinyi 2016 ). While there have been some upgrading initiatives with respect to tuna, there is no evidence yet of a stabilization of fish stocks (Manila Bulletin 2017 ).

Despite overall weak institutional arrangements and power asymmetries -dominance of intermediaries and downstream actors -to bring about horizontal and vertical coordination, upgrading and to insert smallholders and fisher folk more inclusively in value chains, it is important to look ahead and continue searching for solutions, particularly in a country with few alternatives in manufacturing and services. Besides the considerable improvements documented here in the banana value chain (Table 3 ), another example is 'climatesmart farming practices' guided by 'trilateral partnerships' consisting of smallholders, NGOs, and local government units (Chandra and others 2017 ). In addition to climate issues, the projects described in the study also paid attention to low-input organic agriculture, social marketing, and domestic value chains. Policymakers should thus not be blinded by a drive to create more export champions. Bottom-up initiatives and benefiting from domestic valuechain opportunities could be suitable alternatives.

In conclusion, this article shows that the integration of livelihoods and value-chain analyses has the advantage of fleshing out upstream challenges that are both relevant for agri/aquabusiness performance, socioeconomic, and sociospatial policies. Farmers and fisher folk could benefit from future research on the ways in which vertical coordination and human-capital formation could offset limited and vulnerable financial and natural capital due to continuing economic and environmental vulnerabilities. It is unlikely that horizontal coordination/social capital as well as associated upgrading efforts and enhancing proactive livelihood strategies in peripheral (coastal) regions will be effective without a stronger emphasis on vertical coordination and human-capital formation (Table 3 ). There is also a need for in-depth research on the trade-offs between farm/fishing work and nonfarm/fishing work, between staying in the

village and migrating (temporarily) to the city, and for countries with insufficient domestic employment opportunities, between staying in the village and seeking jobs abroad (International Fund for Agricultural Development 2016 ). Rural development cannot be studied anymore by engaging only in specific territorial-based analyses, but requires integrative investigations of primary-sector value chains, labor mobility, and livelihood trajectories.

## NOTES

- 1 Recently, Andriesse and Lee 2017 and Fabinyi ( 2016 ) have conducted research explicitly linking rural coastal communities in the Philippines to Asian/Global value chains.
- 2 Firms like Shemberg and MCPI Corporation are global carrageenan exporters and are also engaged in research and development.
- 3 See Sumadio, Andriesee, Aprilianti and Sulyat 2017 for a more comprehensive discussion of this point.
- 4 The Philippine statistical authority does publish data on land use, yield, production, trade, etc, but not the number of smallholders and plantation owners.

## REFERENCES

- Adam, J. 2013 . Land Reform, Dispossession and New Elites: A Case Study on Coconut Plantations in Davao Oriental, Philippines. Asia Pacific Viewpoint 54 ( 2 ): 232 -245 .
- [Al Jazeera. 2014 . In Pictures: The Decline of Philippine Tuna. [http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/ inpictures/ 2014 / 10 /pictures-decline-philippine-tun201410693837628541 .html]](http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/inpictures/2014/10/pictures-decline-philippine-tun-201410693837628541.html)
- Andriesse, E. 2017 . Regional Disparities in the Philippines: Structural Drivers and Policy Considerations. Erdkunde 71 ( 2 ): 97 -110 .
- Andriesse, E., and Z. Lee. 2017 . Viable Insertion in Agribusiness Value Chains? Seaweed Farming after Typhoon Yolanda (Haiyan) in Iloilo Province, Philippines. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 38 ( 1 ): 25 -40 .
- Asian Development Bank. 2015 . Key Indicators for Asia and the Pacific . Mandaluyong City: Asian Development Bank.
- B  en  e, C., R. Arthur, H. Norbury, E. Allison, M. Beveridge, S. Bush, L. Campling, W. Leschen, D. Little, D. Squires, S. Thilsted, M. Troell, and M. Williams. 2016 . Contribution of Fisheries and Aquaculture to Food Security and Poverty Reduction: Assessing the Current Evidence. World Development 79 (March): 177 -196 .
- Billig, M. 2003 . Barons, Brokers, and Buyers. The Institutions and Cultures of Philippine Sugar . Honoulu: University of Hawai'i Press.
- Borras, S., Jr. 2007 . 'Free Market,' Export-Led Development Strategy and Its Impact on Rural Livelihoods, Poverty and Inequality: The Philippine Experience Seen from a Southeast Asian Perspective. Review of International Political Economy 14 ( 1 ): 143 -175 .
- -., and J. Franco. 2005 . Struggles for Land and Livelihood. Redistributive Reform in Agribusiness Plantations in the Philippines. Critical Asian Studies 37 ( 3 ): 331 -361 .
- -.,-., R. Isakson, L. Levidow, and P. Vervest. 2016 . The Rise of Flex Crops and Commodities: Implications for Research. The Journal of Peasant Studies 43 ( 1 ): 93 -115 .
- Briones, R. 2007 . Eating for a Lifetime: Filling the Policy Gaps in Philippine Fisheries. Asian Journal of Agriculture and Development 4 ( 1 ): 25 -40 .
- [Business World. 2014 . Tuna Still Top Earner for GenSan, but City Now Looks to Other Agroindustry Sectors. [http://www.bworldonline.com/content.php?section=Economy&amp;title=tunastill-top-earner-for-gensan-but-city-now-looks-to-other-agro-industry-sectors&amp;id= 92568 ]](http://www.bworldonline.com/content.php?section=Economy&title=tuna-still-top-earner-for-gensan-but-city-now-looks-to-other-agro-industry-sectors&id=92568)
- Carandang, N. 2009 . The Changing Structure of the Banana Industry in the Philippines and Its Implication on Local Workers. Forum of International Development Studies 38 : 71 -93 .
- Centrum tot Bevordering van de Import uit Ontwikkelingslanden. 2012 . The Philippine seafood sector. A value chain analysis . Centrum tot Bevordering van de Import uit Ontwikkelingslanden.

- Challies, E., and W. Murray. 2011 . The Interaction of Global Value Chains and Rural Livelihoods: The Case of Smallholder Rasberry Growers in Chile. Journal of Agrarian Change in Chile. Journal of Agrarian Change 11 ( 1 ): 29 -59
- Chandra, A., P. Dargusch, K. McNamara, D. Caspe, and D. Dalabajan. 2017 . A Study of ClimateSmart Farming Practices and Climate Resilience Field Schools in Mindanao, the Philippines. World Development . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1016 /j.worlddev. 2017 . 04 . 028
- Channel News Asia. 2015 . Seaweed Farmers in the Philippines Face Battle with El Nino. [http:// www.channelnewsasia.com/news/asiapacific/seaweed-farmers-in/ 1915838 .html]
- Clausen, A. 2010 . Economic Globalization and Regional Disparities in the Philippines. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 31 ( 3 ): 299 -316 .
- Comtrade. 2015 . UN Comtrade Database. [http://comtrade.un.org/data/] UNU-EHS and ADA 2014 . World Risk Report 2014 . [http://www.ehs.unu.edu/article/read/world-risk-report2014 ].
- CountryStat. 2016 . Database, Trade. Available at: http://countrystat.psa.gov.ph/.
- Dent, C., and P. Richter. 2011 . Sub-Regional Cooperation and Developmental Regionalism: The Case of BIMP-EAGA. Contemporary Southeast Asia 33 ( 1 ): 29 -55 .
- Digal, L. 2016 . Analysis of the Employment Generation Potential of the Cavendish Banana Value Chain in Mindanao, Southern Philippines. Paper presented at the 8 th international conference on agribusiness economics and management, Davao City, Philippines, 26 -28 October.
- Fabinyi, M. 2016 . Producing for Chinese Luxury Seafood Value Chains: Different Outcomes for Producers in the Philippines and North America. Marine Policy 63 (January): 184 -190 .
- Food and Agricultural Organization. 2014 . Philippine Coconut Farmers Struggling to Recover from Typhoon. [http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/ 212957 /icode/].
- Food and Agricultural Organization. 2015 a. Philippines Takes First Steps towards a National DRR Strategy for Agriculture. FAO Philippines Newsletter 2 : 3 -4 .
- Food and Agricultural Organization. 2015 b. Seaweed Farmers Regain Livelihoods after Typhoon Haiyan. FAO Philippines Newsletter 2 : 8 -9 .
- FAOstat. 2016 . Major Commodity Exporters. [http://faostat 3 .fao.org/browse/rankings/major\_c ommodities\_exports/E].
- Ferolin, M., and W. Dunaway. 2013 . Globalized Fisheries, Depeasantization and Debt Bondage in Philippine Seafood Exporting. International Journal of Humanities and Social Science 3 : 1 -10 .
- [GMA Network. 2016 . 'Coconut Farmers Told to Diversify Beyond Copra.' [http://www.gmane twork.com/news/story/ 443109 /money/coconut-farmers-told-to-diversify-beyond-copra].](http://www.gmanetwork.com/news/story/443109/money/coconut-farmers-told-to-diversify-beyond-copra)
- Hamilton-Hart, N., and C. Stringer. 2016 . Upgrading and Exploitation in the Fishing Industry: Contributions of Value Chains Analysis. Marine Policy 63 (January): 166 -171 .
- Hill, H., A. Balisacan, and S. Piza. 2007 . The Philippines and Regional Development. In The Dynamics of Regional Development: The Philippines in East Asia , edited by A. Balisacan and H. Hil, 1 -50 . Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar.
- Horton, D., J. Donovan, A. Devaux, and M. Torero. 2016 . Innovation for Inclusive- Value Chain Development: Highlights. In Innovation for Inclusive Value-Chain Development. Successes and Challenges , edited by A. Devaux, M. Torero, J. Donovan, and D. Horton, 3 -36 . Washington D.C.: IFPRI.
- Hurtado, A. 2013 . Social and Economic Dimensions of Carrageenan Farming in the Philippines. In Social and Economic Dimensions of Carrageenan Seaweed Farming , edited by D. Valderrama, J. Cai, N. Hishamunda, and N. Ridler, 91 -114 . Rome: FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical Paper No. 580 .
- International Fund for Agricultural Development. n.d . The Sustainable Livelihoods Approach. [http://www.ifad.org/sla/]
- International Fund for Agricultural Development. 2016 . Rural Development Report 2016 . Fostering Inclusive Rural Transformation . Rome: International Fund for Agricultural Development.
- Lockie, S., J. Travero, and R. Tennent. 2015 . Private Food Standards, Regulatory Gaps and Plantation Agriculture: Social and Environmental (Ir)responsibility in the Philippine Export Banana Industry. Journal of Cleaner Production 107 (November): 122 -129 .
- McLean, J. 2015 . Beyond the Pentagon Prison of Sustainable Livelihood Approaches and Towards Livelihood Trajectories Approaches. Asia Pacific Viewpoint 56 ( 3 ): 380 -391 .
- McMichael, P. 2013 . Value Chain Agriculture and Debt Relations. Third World Quarterly 34 ( 4 ): 671 -690

- Manila Bulletin. 2017 . The Future of the Seaweed Industry. 28 April. [http://business.mb.com. ph/ 2017 / 04 / 28 /the-future-of-seaweed-industry/].
- Manila Bulletin. 2017 . Where Have All the Fishes Gone. 24 June. [http://newsbits.mb.com. ph/ 2017 / 06 / 25 /where-have-all-the-fishes-gone/].
- Mitchell, J., and C. Coles (eds). 2011 . Markets and Rural Poverty. Upgrading in Value Chains . London and Washington D.C.: Earthscan.
- Nedunchezhiyan, M., G. Byju, and S. Naskar. 2007 . Sweet Potato (Ipomoea batatas L.) as an Intercrop in a Coconut Plantation: Growth, Yield and Quality. Journal of Root Crops 33 : 26 -29 .
- Neilson, J., and F. Shonk. 2014 . Chained to Development? Livelihoods and Global Value Chains in the Coffee-Producing Toraja Region of Indonesia. Australian Geographer 45 ( 3 ): 269 -288 .
- Noy, I. 2014 . Natural Disasters and Economic Policy for the Pacific Rim. In Oxford Handbook of the Economics of the Pacific Rim , edited by I. Kaur and N. Singh. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
- Ofreneo, R. 2015 . Growth and Employment in De-industrializing Philippines. Journal of the Asia Pacific Economy 20 ( 1 ): 111 -129 .
- Osei-Bonsu, K., K. Opoku-Ameyaw, F. Amoah, and F. Oppong. 2002 . Cacao-Coconut Intercropping in Ghana: Agronomic and Economic Perspectives. Agroforestry Systems 55 ( 1 ): 1 -8 .
- Pabuayon, I., R. Cabahug, S. Castillo, and M. Mendoza. 2009 . Key Actors, Prices and Value Shares in the Philippine Coconut Market Chains: Implications for Poverty Reduction. Journal of International Society for Southeast Asian Agricultural Sciences 15 : 52 -62 .
- Padua, M. 2015 . Small Farmer Access to Premium Prices for the Copra in the Philippines: A Case Study of the Coconut Oil Chain in Camines Sur province. Master's thesis, Lincoln University.
- Peglar, L. 2015 . Peasant Inclusion in Global Value Chains: Economic Upgrading but Social Downgrading in Labour Processes? The Journal of Peasant Studies 42 ( 5 ): 929 -956 .
- Phillipine Coconut Authority. 2016 . Production Services. http://pca.da.gov.ph/index. php/ 2015 -10 -23 -06 -25 -48 /programs].
- Philippine Daily Inquirer. 2016 a. Agriculture: The Top Priority. [http://opinion.inquirer.ne t/ 92923 /agriculture-the-top-priority].
- Philippine Daily Inquirer. 2016 b. What 5 Presidentables Missed. Proposed Action Plans for Agriculture. [http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/ 766135 /proposed-action-plans-for-agriculture].
- Philstar. 2016 . Mindanao Funding Sector Needs Funding for Export. [http://www.philstar.com/ business/ 2016 / 03 / 07 / 1560129 /mindanao-fishery-sector-needs-funding-export].
- Pomeroy, R., J. Parks, K. Courtney, and N. Mattich. 2016 . Improving Marine FisheriesManagement in Southeast Asia: Results of a Regional Fisheries Stakeholder Analysis. Marine Policy 65 (March): 20 -29 .
- Province of Guimaras. 2016 . Provincial Commodity Investment Plan 2015 -2017 . Obtained at provincial agricultural office of Guimaras.
- PSA. 2015 . Special Report -Highlights of the 2012 Census of Agriculture. 21 December. [http:// psa.gov.ph/content/special-report-highlights2012 -census-agriculture2012 -ca].
- Raquiza, A. 2012 . State Structure, Policy Formation, and Economic Development in Southeast Asia. The Political Economy of Thailand and the Philippines . Abingdon, Va.: Routledge.
- Rigg, J., and P. Vandergeest (eds). 2012 . Revisiting Rural Places: Pathways to Poverty and Prosperity . Honolulu, Hawaii: University of Hawaii Press.
- Rola, A. 2011 : An Upland Community in Transition: Institutional Innovations for Sustainable Development in Rural Philippines . Los Ba ~ nos, Phillipines: SEARCA and ISEAS
- Sahakian M., T. Leunzinger, and C. Saloma. 2017 . Uncovering Changing Prescriptions and Practices around Organic Agriculture in Metro Manila, the Philippines. Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems 41 ( 5 ): 505 -525 .
- Salazar, R. 2014 . Going Organic in the Philippines: Social and Institutional Features. Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems 38 ( 2 ): 199 -229 .
- Scoones, I. 2009 . Livelihoods Perspectives and Rural Development. Journal of Peasant Studies 36 ( 1 ): 171 -196 .

- Sheng, Y. 2012 . The Challenges of Promoting Productive, Inclusive and Sustainable Urbanization. In Urbanization in Southeast Asia: Issues and Impacts , edited by Y. Sheng and M. Thuzar, editors, 10 -77 . Singapore: ISEAS.
- Sick, D. and others, 2011 . Rural Cooperatives. In The Companion to Development Studies , 3 rd ed., edited by V. Desai and R. Potter. Abingdon, Va.: Routledge.
- Soederberg, S. ( 2012 ). The Mexican Debtfare State: Micro-lending, Dispossession and the Surplus Population. Globalizations 9 ( 4 ): 56 -575
- Suh, J. 2015 . Community Based Organic Agriculture in the Philippines. Outlook on Agriculture 44 ( 4 ): 291 -296 .
- Sumadio, W., E. Andriesse, F. Aprilianti, and A. Sulyat. 2017 . Drought and Debts: The Domestic Tea Value Chain and Vulnerable Livelihoods in Girimukti Village, West Java, Indonesia. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the Tropics and Sub-Tropics 118 ( 1 ): 69 -80 .
- Tolentino-Zondervan, F. 2016 . Comparison of Private Incentive Mechanisms for Improving Sustainability of Filipino Tuna Fisheries. World Development 83 (July): 264 -279 .
- Uy, N., Y. Takeuchi, and R. Shaw. 2011 . Local Adaptation for Livelihood Resilience in Albay, Philippines. Environmental Hazards 10 ( 2 ): 139 -153 .
- Vista, B., E. Nel, and T. Binns. 2012 . Land, Landlords and Sustainable Livelihoods: The Impact of Agrarian Reform on a Coconut Hacienda in the Philippines. Land Use Policy 29 ( 1 ): 154 -164 .
- World Bank. 2016 . Philippines Rural Development Project: P 132317 -Implementation And Status Results Report. [http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/ 450101468297304393 /PhilippinesPhilippine-Rural-Development-Project-P 132317 -Implementation-Status-Results-Report-Seque nce04 ].