## Small Business Ownership in Illinois:  The Effect of Gender and Location on Entrepreneurial Success

## Christopher D. Merrett and John J. Gruidl

Western Illinois University

Forty percent of all firms in the United States are owned and operated by women. At current growth rates, women could own 50% of the nation's businesses by the turn of the century. Women have been prompted to start their businesses for many reasons, including the desire to avoid gender-based discrimination in the workplace. But female entrepreneurs who venture out on their own must still contend with gender discrimination. This study examines female entrepreneurship in Illinois through rural versus urban comparisons of male and female business owners. We surveyed 4,200 business owners to test the hypothesis that gender and geographic location combined to hinder the entrepreneurial success of women. Business owners were asked about personal attributes including gender, work experience, education, training, and prior career status. Entrepreneurs were also asked about firm characteristics such as financing sources, number of employees, revenues, problems encountered during startup, sector of new firm, geographic location, and the importance of selected community characteristics. Our results show that rural female entrepreneurs face more obstacles to business success than their male or urban female counterparts. Key Words : entrepreneurship, gender discrimination, rural-urban comparisons, Illinois.

## Introduction

ccording  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of Chicago (1998, 1), women are 'breaking both  records  and  barriers'  as  they  start  new businesses. Consider, for example, that the number of female-owned businesses in the United States  grew  89%  between  1987  and  1997. These businesses account for nearly $1.4 trillion in  sales  and  employ  over  15.5  million  people (Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  1998,  1). Business economists have begun to document the growing numbers and economic impact of female business owners, but have not contributed to our understanding of where and why new  businesses  either  succeed  or  fail.  Economic geographers have addressed where business activities occur, but have largely ignored the geographical aspects of entrepreneurship. It is not surprising then to find that the geography  of  female  entrepreneurship,  the  topic  of this  paper,  has  been  a  largely  neglected  topic within the social sciences. A

Economic  geographers,  in  particular,  have overlooked the role of entrepreneurs (Krumme 1969; Malecki 1995), with considerable attention  being  focused  instead  on  the  firm  as  a decision-making unit (Storper and Walker 1989; Knox and Agnew 1994). In these studies, entrepreneurship is viewed as a factor of production where  the  stockholders  assume  the  primary burden of risk  (Pearce  1991,  127).  This  notwithstanding, geographers have conducted few studies that focus on the private business owner as  an  individual  decisionmaker  with  the  sole responsibility  for  financial  risk  (Lyons  1995; Malecki 1995).

The business and economic literature contains hundreds of articles on the importance of entrepreneurship  to  the  American  economy (Drucker 1985; Birch 1987), but relatively few studies examine the growing importance of female business owners. Of 227 studies published in entrepreneurship journals between 1985 and 1991, only 13 (or 6%) focused on female business owners (Brush 1992, 7). These few studies confirm that female entrepreneurs have fewer opportunities,  face  greater  impediments,  and experience higher failure rates than their male competitors  (Brush  1992,  7).  But  rarely  do these studies emphasize the impact of location, place, or space on entrepreneurial success (but see  Green  1994;  Lyons  1995;  Malecki  1995; and Oberhauser 1995).

Given  the  paucity  of  research  on  the  geographical  aspects  of  female  entrepreneurship, this study postulates that gender and location combine to hinder the success rates of rural female  business  owners  in  the  United  States. This  question  is  addressed  as  follows.  Part

one presents  a  rationale  for  conducting  research  on  female  entrepreneurs  from  a  geographical  perspective.  Part  two  outlines  the survey sample and methodology. Part three examines the results to show that female entrepreneurs,  particularly  in  rural  communities, have more difficulties than their male competitors.  Part  four  contains  concluding  thoughts about female business owners and policy prescriptions for reducing the gender gap in entrepreneurial success.

## Conceptual Approaches to Gender and Entrepreneurship

Two bodies of literature inform this study: research on entrepreneurship and gender studies. Entrepreneurship  has  played  an  important symbolic role in American society. Thomas Jefferson  argued  that  American  democracy  was founded on the ideals embodied in the industrious,  independent  yeoman  farmer  (Zelinsky 1992,  48).  As  the  United  States  became  increasingly urban, independent business owners replaced farmers as the personification of democratic values; their entrepreneurial spirit and connection to local communities provided jobs while  preventing  the  concentration  of  capital and power (Trachtenburg 1982, 75).

However, entrepreneurship is important for more than symbolic or political reasons. It contributes directly to economic growth through innovation and job creation (Schumpeter 1976, 132).  Studies  conclude  that  new  businesses generated  74%  of  the  jobs  created  between 1976 and 1984 in the United States (Malecki 1995, 316). Research also found that regional disparities  in  employment  change  are  almost entirely  caused  by  differential  rates  of  new business formation, not business closure rates, which exhibit minimal interregional difference (Malecki 1995, 316). Interest in entrepreneurship was further fueled by the findings of Birch (1987)  who  concluded  that  four  times  more jobs are created through business startups and expansion than by recruiting existing firms into the  locality  (Green  1994,  156).  Researchers such  as  Coffey  and  Polèse  (1985)  have  even argued  that  entrepreneurship  contributes  so much to economic development that the rate of new business startups serves as a bellwether of regional economic vitality (Malecki 1995, 316). A  cautionary  note  has  been  raised  recently about the number and quality of jobs created through entrepreneurship in the United States (Green 1994, 157). However, it is still clear that entrepreneurship continues to play a key role in local job creation strategies.

Jobs in the private sector can be created in a community  through  three  methods:  firm  recruitment, expansion of existing businesses, or new business startups (Green 1994). After the Second World War, state and local governments attempted to generate jobs by recruiting investment  from  outside  the  community  (Eisinger 1988). Manufacturing jobs were the primary target of recruitment because of the relatively high wages associated with this economic sector.

As the American economy shifted from manufacturing  to  a  service-based  economy,  regional  planners  adjusted  their  development strategies (Green 1994, 156). Increased emphasis was placed on expanding existing businesses and creating  new  firms,  particularly  in  the  service sector.  According  to  Eisinger  (1988),  this  shift was prompted by the perception that it was more cost-effective to create jobs locally, rather than relying  on  business  recruitment  (Green  1994, 156). An array of federal and state programs were started to promote small business formation. By the  late  1980s,  43  states  had  established  programs  to  help  entrepreneurs  start  their  own businesses. Over $700 million per year was spent on financing new business startups (Green 1994, 156). Despite the increased attention paid to the small business sector, critics argue that gender differences  have  been  ignored  in  the  rush  to promote entrepreneurship (Tigges and Green 1994). As a result, female entrepreneurs are less successful than their male competitors.

Feminist  scholars  have  argued  that  gender biases of this sort can be found throughout the business world and in the social sciences that study  business  activities  (Oberhauser  1995). They argue that generalizations about human behavior were largely drawn from men's experiences.  Feminist  geographers  began  to  challenge the masculinist view of the world in the 1970s through empirical studies revealing gender differences in society (Hayford 1974; Gruntfest  1989;  Mattingly  and  Falconer-Al-Hindi 1995). The category 'human' was deconstructed to show that women have different work and life experiences than men and that the male experience should not be extrapolated to represent the norm (Hanson and Monk 1982; Zelin-

sky  et  al.  1982;  McDowell  1983;  Mackenzie 1989; Hanson 1992).

While these studies reveal the existence  of gender differences, they do not explain the origins of gender inequality. Some feminist geographers adopted a Marxist paradigm to question whether inequality was a function of patriarchy, class, or a combination of these two structures of  oppression  (Mattingly  and  Falconer-AlHindi  1995,  430).  Feminist  standpoint  theorists  argue  that  knowledge  is  socially  constructed with a bias against female perspectives. They disavow positivist  methodologies  (such as surveys) which have traditionally been dominated  by  male  researchers  (Mattingly  and Falconer-Al-Hindi 1995, 431). Because knowledge  is  socially  situated,  standpoint  theorists attempt to portray a more 'objective' view of the world by presenting it through the eyes of those who are 'dominated, exploited and oppressed' (Moss 1995, 444).

The point is  that  there  is  a  'contradictory politics of counting' when we examine gender questions  using  positivist  methods  (Lawson 1995;  McLafferty  1995).  However,  feminist scholars increasingly agree that qualitative and quantitative  techniques  provide  insights  into the reasons and remedies for gender-based discrimination.  Just  as  early  feminist  studies  on gender inequity 'counted' how many women were ghettoized in low-wage occupations, geographers are now beginning to conduct empirical studies on the factors influencing female entrepreneurial success (Whatmore 1991).

The nascent literature on female entrepreneurs  points  to  their  increasingly  important role in the North American economy. There is a  dramatic  rise  in  the  number  of  small  businesses,  particularly  those  owned  by  women (Brush  1992).  Some  researchers  suggest  that entrepreneurial success occurs for women despite widespread wage and occupational biases in  the  marketplace (Fincher 1989; Nakamura and  Shaw  1994).  Others  suggest  that  female self-employment has increased so dramatically because of the systemic discrimination faced by women who work for others in a corporate setting (Oberhauser 1995). Entrepreneurship may offer the only route to financial independence and control over personal futures. But women who venture out on their own to avoid discrimination  often  confront  gender  bias  in  their search for startup capital, technical assistance, and  networking  contacts  (Clark  and  James 1992; Tigges and Green 1994). Female entrepreneurs also have less training and job experience than their male counterparts (Oberhauser 1993). Furthermore, women tend to be segregated into economic sectors with lower revenue-generating potential then male entrepreneurs (Glasmeier and Conroy 1994).

Yet  the  six-fold  increase  in  the  number  of female-owned firms over the past 20 years illustrates that women have had considerable entrepreneurial success. Income from these firms has grown fifty-fold during this period (Clark and  James  1992,  26).  By  the  late  1990s,  researchers suggest that women owned 40% of the firms operating in the United States (Milk 1997,  82).  At  current  growth  rates,  women could own 50% of the firms by the first decade of  the  twenty-first  century  ( Working  Women 1998, 31). New magazines such as Executive Female have emerged to cater to this increasingly important sector of the North American economy (Washer 1992). Periodicals such as Woman's Day and Good Housekeeping ,  which traditionally focused  on  the  role  of  women  in  social  and household reproduction, now include articles on females  in  the  realm  of  entrepreneurship  and production  ( Woman's  Day 1995).  The  Small Business  Administration  has  established  offices to  deal  specifically  with  female  entrepreneurs. This  growing  importance  of  female  entrepreneurship has prompted researchers to investigate more closely female business ownership (Neider 1987; O'Hare and Larson 1991).

Some suggest that women increasingly turn to entrepreneurship because owning a business may  provide  them  with  better  opportunities than working in the labor market, which has consistently paid women lower wages and hindered career advancement (Hanson and Pratt 1991). Self-employment may be a particularly attractive  option  for  women  in  rural  areas where good jobs are difficult to find and commuting to nearby cities may not be feasible (Peters  and  MacDonald  1994;  Oberhauser  et  al. 1996). Given increased entrepreneurial activity among women, it is important to examine the characteristics of female-owned businesses, particularly during the startup phase when obstacles to success can be formidable (McDermott 1993; Tigges and Green 1994).

A study of rural female entrepreneurship is especially relevant given the economic restruc-

turing that  has  recently  transformed  rural America.  Both  rural  and  urban  communities were affected by inflation, recession, the globalization  of  capital,  and  deindustrialization during  the  economic  crisis  of  the  1970s  and 1980s (Harvey 1989; Marsden et al. 1993). Rural regions have had to confront the added difficulties imposed by the farm crisis and depopulation (Davidson 1990; Glasmeier and Conroy 1994; Crump and Merrett 1998).

Rural women in the Midwest might be expected to have different entrepreneurial experiences  than  urban  women  because  of  the greater  tendency  towards  patriarchal  gender relations, social and political conservatism that eschews risk-taking or change, and an ethos of family-oriented  self-sufficiency  in  rural  communities (Cloke 1989, 1995; Oberhauser 1995; Beggs et al. 1996). Illinois provides an excellent setting  for  this  survey  because  it  ranks  45th among all states when comparing income disparity between rural and urban counties (CED 1991). Furthermore, Illinois ranks 45th among all states in the percentage of women who own their own businesses (CED 1991). Combining these two figures suggests that rural women may face great obstacles in achieving entrepreneurial success in Illinois. The purpose of this study is to examine the nature of these obstacles and how they might be ameliorated.

## Methodology: Surveying Entrepreneurs

In order to test the hypothesis that gender and location combine to hinder rural women's business success, we surveyed male and female entrepreneurs in urban and rural counties of Illinois. A list of entrepreneurs to be surveyed is difficult to generate because firms are created daily, and a complete registry of new business startups does not exist. The Dun's Market Indicator (DMI) file maintained by Dun's Marketing Services is the most complete data source at present.  Firms  to  be  surveyed  were  selected from the DMI file based on three criteria: 1) the business had a 'start date' of 1986 or later, which enabled information to be collected on the  entrepreneur  and  firm  at  startup,  2)  the business was not a branch or subsidiary of another firm, and 3) the firm was located outside the Chicago Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). The eight counties comprising the Chi- cago MSA were excluded from the survey to ensure  an  adequate  response  rate  from  rural business  owners.  Entrepreneurs  were  defined as rural if they were located in one of the 74 counties in Illinois designated as nonmetropolitan by the U.S. Census Bureau. Entrepreneurs were defined as urban if they were located in one of seven MSAs including Moline-Rock Island, Peoria, Bloomington-Normal, ChampaignUrbana, Springfield, Decatur, and the Illinois portion of the St. Louis MSA.

The initial questionnaire was mailed in June 1990  to  4,200  firms  that  met  these  criteria. Based on a review of previous studies (e.g. Pellegrino and Reece 1982; Loscocco and Robinson 1991; Brush 1992; Malecki 1995), business owners  were  asked  about  personal  attributes such as their sex, work experience, education, and training. We hypothesize that rural women have the least amount of work experience, job training, and formal education. Survey respondents were also asked about firm characteristics such  as  sources  of  financing,  number  of  employees, revenues, problems encountered during start-up, sector of new firm, location, and the importance of selected community characteristics. Again, we postulate that when compared to men and urban women, rural women experience the most discrimination in gaining access to start-up capital and technical assistance. We also expect that rural female business owners will have the lowest revenue levels, fewest employees, and the  lowest  levels  of  community  support.  Furthermore, we postulate that rural women are most likely to operate low-revenue service sector firms with the highest closure rates.

Completed questionnaires were received from 712 firms for a response rate of 17 percent. Although the response rate is low, the industrial and locational distribution of the responding firms corresponds closely to the distribution  of  all  firms  in  the  DMI  file,  providing evidence  that  the  sample  is  representative  of the population in those key characteristics. 1

A second questionnaire was mailed in June 1992 to all businesses that had responded to the first survey to measure their performance during the intervening two years. T o boost the survey response rate, two reminder postcards and a second copy of the questionnaire were mailed to those firms not responding in a timely manner.  Completed  questionnaires  were  received from 398 of the original 712 businesses. This

corresponds  to  a  56%  response  rate  for  the second survey. An intensive effort was made to determine whether non-respondents were active or 'out of business.' We determined that an additional 109 firms had gone out of business  in  between  the  surveys.  In  only  30  (or 4.2%) of the cases was it not possible to determine  whether  or  not  the  business  was  still active. We therefore had information on a total of  507  businesses  at  the  end  of  the  second survey.

Only  those  businesses  that  responded  to both  the  1990  and  1992  survey  or  that  had closed by the 1992 survey are included in this study.  Gathering  information  from  the  same set of firms at two different points in time provides  advantages  seldom  found  in  studies  of entrepreneurial  success.  Not  only  does  this methodology make it  possible  to  examine  the performance of active firms over the 1990-1992 interval, but it also allows us to determine business closure rates based on gender and location. The survey data were analyzed using chi-square, t-tests, Z-tests, and ANOVA tests to determine if our four groups of entrepreneurs (urban men, rural men, urban women, and rural women) in fact represent different populations with significantly different personal attributes, firm characteristics, and business success rates.

In  the  resulting  sample  of  507  businesses, 398 or 79% are owned by men and 109 or 22% are owned by women. The sample was almost evenly  split  between  rural  and  urban  enterprises. Ninety percent of the sample began operations between 1986 and 1989, meaning that they were three to six years old as of the 1992 survey. The following results indicate that gender and location combine to influence success among new firms.

## Survey Results

Characteristics of Entrepreneurs

The  business  literature  on  entrepreneurship stresses  the  importance  of  prior  experience with a source organization or established firm that entrepreneurs left to start their new business (Cooper 1986; Krueger 1993). Source organizations endow potential entrepreneurs with technical and market knowledge and motivate them to confront the perils of opening a new enterprise. The source organization may even be a source of financing or future partners

(Kalleberg and Leicht 1991; Gruidl and Merrett 1996).

Our  results  confirm  the  hypothesis  that women have significantly less experience with a source organization. We measure this by 1) career status prior to starting the new business, 2) the number of years of work experience in the same industry, and 3) experience in a previous business startup. Our survey results reveal that men  were  37%  more  likely  than  women  to have shifted from an established organization to start their new firm. In contrast, over onethird of all women were students, unemployed or  retired  immediately  prior  to  starting  their companies. Our  findings confirm previous studies  that  show  that  female  entrepreneurs have less prior work experience than their male competitors  (Charboneau  1981;  Tigges  and Green 1994).

When we consider location, we find that rural  women  are  more  likely  than  any  other group to have been retired, unemployed or a student prior to beginning a new business (T able 1). Only 6% of the rural females had previous experience starting their own firm. Inflexible  work  schedules  or  family  responsibilities sometimes force women to start a business to generate  income  (Brush  1992).  Occasionally, women become entrepreneurs out of necessity despite  their  lack  of  experience.  Some  rural women  have  so  few  economic  opportunities that they view starting a business as their only job alternative (Oberhauser et al. 1996).

Our survey results on the years of work experience in a source organization also reveals that female  entrepreneurs  face  a  disadvantage  in their  preparedness  (T able  2).  We  found  that women have significantly fewer years of work

Table 1 Previous Career Status by Gender and Location a

| Previous Career Status   |   % Rural Female |   % Urban Female |   % Rural Male |   % Urban Male |
|--------------------------|------------------|------------------|----------------|----------------|
| Employed                 |               54 |               50 |             70 |             72 |
| New Firm                 |                6 |               16 |              8 |              8 |
| Unemployed, Retired or   |               40 |               34 |             22 |             20 |

Table 2 Work and Entrepreneurial Experience by Gender and Location

| Entrepreneur Category   | MeanYears of RelatedWork Experience (N)   | PercentageWho Started a Business Prior toThis One (N)   |
|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| Rural Female            | 9.7 a (31)                                | 19 c (53)                                               |
| Urban Female            | 8.6 b (29)                                | 33 (60)                                                 |
| Rural Male              | 14.1 (150)                                | 40 (188)                                                |
| Urban Male              | 14.2 (149)                                | 42 (206)                                                |

- Source: IIRA Illinois Small Business Survey, 1990, 1992. a T-test indicates that the mean for rural females is statistically different than the mean of rural males and urban males at the 95% confidence level.

b T-test indicates that the mean of urban females is statistically different than the mean of rural males and urban males at the 95% confidence level.

- c Z-test indicates that the proportion of rural females is statistically different than the proportion of urban females at the 90% confidence level. Furthermore, the proportion of rural females is statistically different than the proportions of rural males and urban males at the 95% confidence level.

experience than men, a result consistent with other  studies  (e.g.  Charboneau  1981;  Tigges and Green 1994). In fact, 45% of female entrepreneurs  in  our  sample  reported  no  previous work experience in the same industry. In contrast, 45% of men reported more than 11 years of related experience. The greater experience enjoyed by male entrepreneurs allows them to develop  the  confidence,  technical  skills,  and professional  contacts  that  assist  startup  businesses (Krueger 1993). The lack of experience in a source organization particularly hinders a woman's  opportunity  to  start  technical  businesses such as those in manufacturing and construction (Clark and James 1992).

Even among men and women with similar years of experience, women have fewer of the types of skills deemed important to running a business. Females who have reached middle or senior  management  positions  have  made  the greatest gains in the least technical managerial positions,  such  as  personnel.  Comparatively few have top management experience. An estimated 40% of all managers are women, yet a 1990  survey  of  Fortune  500  and  Service  500 companies demonstrated that  fewer  than  5% were senior managers at or above the level of vice  president  (Hamilton  1993,  24).  Women point  to  their  lack  of  adequate  management and financial skills as major barriers to success as  small  business  owners  (Brush  1992).  They lack financial expertise in such areas as controlling expenses, cash flow planning, and raising capital  for  startup  and  expansion  (Pellegrino and Reece 1982, 24).

We also found that women have less previous experience actually starting businesses (as opposed to merely having work experience in the  industry).  T wenty-six  percent  of  females had started a business prior to the business they reported in this study. In contrast, 41% of the men  had  started  a  previous  business.  These other business ventures serve as an important training  ground.  Some  analysts  contend  that entrepreneurs learn from business closings and subsequently  start  other,  more  successful  enterprises  (Shapero  1982).  Our  survey  reveals that the gender difference is compounded by a non-metropolitan location. Only 19% of rural women  had  prior  experience  starting  a  new firm versus 33% of urban women. This places urban  women  at  an  advantage  compared  to their  rural  counterparts  in  their  experiential knowledge of entrepreneurship and in their access to professional resources.

Previous studies find that high levels of education  lead  to  better  marketing  and  management capabilities (Clark and James 1992). But educational differences  between male and female entrepreneurs in our study were not as influential as first hypothesized. Although women have  fewer  years  of  education  than  men,  the difference is not statistically significant. However, a significant urban-rural disparity emerged with  rural  entrepreneurs  having  significantly less  education  than  their  urban  counterparts. One interpretation of this finding could be that female entrepreneurs are at an educational disadvantage because of their location rather than gender. This sheds further light onto the complex interplay between location and gender in influencing entrepreneurial preparedness.

A final point should be made about what motivates men and women to start their own business. In our survey, respondents were asked to rank seven potential motivating factors. These factors included the desire to be self-employed, to increase personal income, to pursue a novel idea,  because  of  the  intellectual  challenge,  to better utilize one's educational skills, to live in a particular  location,  or  because  there  were  no other  job  alternatives  (Gruidl  1991).  The  results suggest that all of the respondents in our survey  were  positively  motivated  to  become entrepreneurs, i.e. they became entrepreneurs because they wanted to, not because they had

to.  Thirty-five  percent  rated  the  desire  to  be their own boss as the primary reason for starting their own business. Over 20% were motivated  by  the  desire  for  increased  income. Thirty percent were intrigued by the challenge of  running  their  own  business  or  pursuing  a novel business idea through entrepreneurship. Only 3% said they started up their business because there did not seem to be any job alternatives (Gruidl 1991, 17).

There were no significantly different motivations  based  on  gender  or  location.  These findings, while running counter to our hypotheses, are supported by other studies that identify personal challenge and self-employment as the most important motivators for female entrepreneurs (Buttner and Moore 1997). What is significant to note, however, is that while initial motivations for male and female entrepreneurs  are  similar,  their  business  success  rates are not. The next section elaborates on this important finding.

## Characteristics of Firms

Our survey results confirm that women are less likely than men to start companies in agriculture, mining, manufacturing, and construction (Table 3). Over three quarters of the women in our survey are concentrated in retail trade and consumer  services.  When  we  consider  location, rural women are more likely than urban women to enter the retail trade sector, while urban  women  have  a  relative  preference  for consumer services.

Several factors influence the economic sector chosen by female entrepreneurs. First, their more  limited  training  and  work  experience

Table 3 Economic Sector by Gender and Location a

| Economic Sector                       | % Rural Female   | % Urban Female   | % Rural Male   | % Urban Male   |
|---------------------------------------|------------------|------------------|----------------|----------------|
| Agriculture, Mining, and Construction | 5.6              | 9.5              | 30.2           | 26.9           |
| Distributive and Producer Services    | 13.9             | 16.7             | 15.1           | 30.1           |
| Consumer Services                     | 13.9             | 28.6             | 18.2           | 21.2           |
| Retail Trade                          | 66.7             | 45.2             | 36.5           | 21.8           |
|                                       | (n 5 36)         | (n 5 42)         | (n 5 159)      | (n 5 156)      |

limit  the  type  of  businesses  they  have  the knowledge  to  operate.  Second,  since  women shoulder most family care responsibilities, they may  require  a  more  flexible  work  schedule (Nelton  1992,  52).  Compounding  the  challenge presented by domestic obligations is the supposition  that  women  receive  less  spousal support for their business endeavors than men. Furthermore,  since  rural  women  often  must travel further to work than men or urban women, they  may  tend  to  favor  retail  'home-based' businesses that allow them to remain close to family  (Peters  and  MacDonald  1994).  Third, local economic opportunities may favor one industry  over  another.  The  results  suggest  that this may be a factor in the relative preference of rural women for retail trade, since rural men exhibited a similar preference.

The lack of relevant experience and family constraints mean that relatively few women are entering the traditionally male-dominated industries of agriculture, mining, manufacturing, and  construction.  The  female-dominated  industries of retail trade and consumer services are characterized by less value-added per worker, lower wages, lower revenues, and fewer capital requirements  (Tigges  and  Green  1994,  303). Companies  in  these  industries  typically  have only a few employees and do not grow rapidly. Indeed,  many  female-owned  businesses  are small operations with few (if any) paid employees other than the owner/entrepreneur (Clark and James 1992, 25).

We expect that female-owned businesses will not perform as well as firms owned by men. Information on firm performance is difficult to obtain since entrepreneurs are often reluctant to disclose profits, sales revenues, or other financial data. T wo measures of firm performance are employed by this study: sales revenues and closure  rates  (T ables  4  and  5).  The  evidence

Table 4 Gross Revenue by Gender and Location a

| Entrepreneur Category   | Frequency   |   Average Gross Revenue After OneYear ($) |
|-------------------------|-------------|-------------------------------------------|
| Rural Females           | 16          |                                    89,670 |
| Urban Females           | 16          |                                    41,337 |
| Rural Males             | 86          |                                   243,895 |
| Urban Males             | 64          |                                   353,195 |
| Average                 | -           |                                   250,965 |

Table 5 Business Closure Rates by Gender and Location

| Entrepreneur Category   | Out of Business (%)   | In Business (%)   | Total (%)   |
|-------------------------|-----------------------|-------------------|-------------|
| Rural Females           | 17 (33.3) a           | 34 (66.7)         | 51 (10.2)   |
| Urban Females           | 17 (29.3) b           | 41 (70.7)         | 58 (11.6)   |
| Rural Males             | 30 (16.2)             | 155 (83.8)        | 185 (37.1)  |
| Urban Males             | 51 (25.0) c           | 153 (75.0)        | 204 (41.0)  |
| Overall                 | 115 (23.1)            | 383 (76.9)        | 498 (100.0) |

Source: IIRA Illinois Small Business Survey, 1992.

a Z-test indicates that the proportion of rural females that have gone out of business is statistically different than the proportion of rural males at the 95% confidence level.

b Z-test indicates that the proportion of urban females that have gone out of business is statistically different than the proportion of rural males at the 95% confidence level.

c Z-test indicates that the proportion of urban males that have gone out of business is statistically different than the proportion of rural males at the 95% confidence level.

from  these  measures  supports  the  hypothesis that  female  entrepreneurs  are  less  successful than male business owners. The results further suggest that in the case of sales revenues, gender is more important than location in determining firm success.

Female  entrepreneurs  generate  dramatically lower revenue than their male counterparts, in part because women are concentrated in the retail trade and consumer service sectors. 2  The differences  are  noteworthy,  as  rural  women  earn only  37%  of  the  revenues  generated  by  rural men. Urban women generate only 12% of the revenues earned by urban men. Clearly, gender plays  a  pivotal  role  in  the  well-being  of  these businesses. Location might have an impact, although the rural-urban differences could not be established statistically with the small sample size in this instance. Only 40% of the sampled entrepreneurs responded to the questions on revenue, thus limiting the power of the statistical tests.

Since revenues are measured only for active firms, it is critical to examine the survivability of firms over time. Our findings reinforce the importance of gender in influencing firm success. Approximately 31% of the female-owned businesses closed between 1990 and 1992, compared to only 21% for men during the same period.  There  are  several  possible  explanations for this. First, retail trade and consumer service businesses,  those  dominated  by  women,  have high  closure  rates.  Businesses  in  these  sectors tend  to  be  undercapitalized,  marginally  profitable,  and  vulnerable  to  competition  from  large chain stores (Clark and James 1992). Second, as our earlier findings indicate, women tend to have less preparation than men in a previous organization or starting their own business. This limits their knowledge in critical skills such as management and marketing, and reduces their access to professional contacts. Third, some women may have used the business as a short-term vehicle to supplement household income. After satisfying this goal, they may decide to retire or re-enter the labor force (Clark and James 1992).

Although gender dominates the differences, location also plays a role in firm success as measured by the closure rate. Fully one-third of the rural businesses owned by women went out of business during the study period. This was significantly greater than the 16% of the rural men who went out of business. In contrast, the gender difference in urban closure rates was small (29% for women versus 25% for men) and statistically insignificant. This suggests that gender relations are manifested differently in rural versus urban areas. The reasons for this difference are unclear, but merit further investigation.

As  hypothesized  earlier  in  the  paper,  it  is possible  that  there  are  still  significant  differences in the way that rural versus urban communities are socially constructed. As the data in Table 5 suggest, gender differences in rural communities persist, while gender does not have a significant impact on urban entrepreneurial success. One way to examine the higher business failure rates for rural women is to consider how men and women appraised their potential to do business in their respective communities (T able 6). As T able 6 suggests, there is an intricate interplay between gender and location in the appraisal of potential business success. A pairwise Z-test was conducted that confirms that rural entrepreneurs were more pessimistic than business owners in urban areas. But this generalization  does  not  adequately  summarize  the results. In detail, when we looked at who was more likely to rate their business potential as either poor or fair, we found that rural females were significantly more pessimistic than urban males, rural males were more discouraged than urban females, and rural males were less optimistic than urban males. We then found that urban males were significantly more likely to rate their  business  potential  as  average  when  compared to rural females, rural males, and urban females. In the final category (rating of good or excellent), we found that urban males were sig-

Table 6 Appraisal of Community Business Potential by Gender and Location a

| Rating of Business Potential   | %Rural Female   | %Rural Male   | %Urban Female   | %Urban Male   |
|--------------------------------|-----------------|---------------|-----------------|---------------|
| Poor or Fair                   | 61.8            | 59.1          | 42.5            | 32.7          |
| Average                        | 17.6            | 24.0          | 25.0            | 43.5          |
| Good or Excellent              | 20.6            | 16.9          | 32.5            | 23.8          |
|                                | (n 5 34)        | (n 5 154)     | (n 5 40)        | (n 5 147)     |

Source: IIRA Illinois Small Business Survey, 1992. a Z-test indicates that the proportions for the following business types within the indicated categories are statistically different at the 95 % confidence level (pair-wise tests).

Poor or Fair Rating

Rural females and urban males Rural males and urban females Rural males and urban males Average Rating Rural females and urban males Rural males and urban males Urban females and urban males

Good or Excellent Rating

Rural males and urban males nificantly more optimistic than rural males. No other differences were found to be significant.

At one level of analysis, these results confirm our hypothesis that gender and location combine to  influence  entrepreneurial  success.  However, our  final  table  generated  results  that  we  could not have predicted. Their complexity attests to the fact that a more nuanced approach may be needed to augment this statistical analysis.

## Conclusions

Entrepreneurship is a key element in any local economy because of the job and income opportunities  it  creates.  We  acknowledge  that  our study is based on a limited sample size in a particular state. However, we also submit that our study confirms previous studies on the gender differences  in  entrepreneurial  success.  Our study goes further to point out that geographical  location  compounds  the  fact  that  women have less work and entrepreneurial experience, have developed fewer of the appropriate managerial  and technical skills, and are segregated into the lowest paying economic sectors. These external handicaps translate into higher business failure rates and lower revenues for rural female entrepreneurs.

What is not entirely understood are the factors that create this situation. Is it the remoteness of rural women and their lack of access to training and business opportunities? Or is it the culture of rural communities that limits women's access  to  these  opportunities?  Future  studies might examine rural locations by distance from a metropolitan center or by the economic base of the communities in which the entrepreneurs are located. Also, by adopting a stance akin to the  feminist  standpoint  theorists,  a  more  detailed  and  gender  sensitive  understanding  of the goals of women in starting businesses might improve our understanding of 'success.'

A more detailed examination of what motivates women to start a business is needed here. As  Clark  and  James  (1992,  34)  note,  many women start businesses to generate profits, but only modest profits. A small business provides added  household  income  and  increased  personal autonomy. On the other hand, it is less likely to interfere with family responsibilities as would the operation of a fast-growing firm that generates  substantial  revenues  and  employs many  workers.  Unfortunately,  entrepreneurs who mute the growth of their firms open themselves  up  to  increased  business  failure  rates (Clark  and  James  1992,  34).  Slow-growing firms are less likely to secure financial credit for support during slow times or venture capital for business  expansion.  This  fact  helps  to  explain the lower revenues generated and higher failure rates experienced by female entrepreneurs.

The point is that we defined success according to business closure rates and revenues generated. However, it is quite possible that an alternative  standard  that  prioritizes  a  balance between  production  and  household  reproduction is more valid when comparing what success means to male versus female entrepreneurs.

Our final  thoughts  turn  to  the  policy  prescriptions that come out of our study. Earlier in the paper, data was presented showing some of the  reasons  why  men  and  women  start  their own businesses. For the most part, people start businesses  for  personal  gain  and  intellectual achievement.  And  these  motivations  did  not vary significantly by gender or location. But the  survey  results  show  that  rural  women have  higher  business  failure  rates.  Furthermore,  rural  entrepreneurs  tend  to  be  more pessimistic about their potential to operate a successful business in their community. The challenge  then  is  to  address  the  actual  and perceptual  obstacles  that  hinder  female  entrepreneurial success.

Women  can  only  achieve  greater  success  if

some of the structural impediments are removed from the marketplace. It is likely that if the structural impediments are reduced, women will view their  entrepreneurial  chances  more  optimistically. Herein lies the problem. Sectoral segregation of women into the consumer services and retail  trade  cannot  be  reduced  through  nonmarket strategies. In an era when affirmative action  has  come  under  close  scrutiny,  increased non-market remedies such as preferential credit and  tax  policies  become  politically  untenable. That means that local communities and regional organizations need to take a greater leadership role in promoting the success of businesswomen.

One of the most important factors helping entrepreneurs  achieve  success  is  a  network  of business acquaintances that can provide encouragement, technical assistance, access to credit, and  business  leads.  But  networks  established during the startup phase may not persist after the business starts operations. Female managers report being excluded from important maledominated networks in large firms (Hamilton 1993). A similar situation exists for female entrepreneurs within a local business community where sources of help and credit available during the startup phase decrease or vanish after they begin operations (Hisrich and Brush 1983).

Supportive  relationships  forged  during  the business startup phase can be sustained through innovative mentor programs. The Illinois Women's  Network  for  Entrepreneurial  Training (IWNET)  program  was  introduced  through the efforts of the Illinois Small Business Development  Center  Network.  Modeled  after  the national  WNET  program  operated  by  the Small Business Administration, the IWNET is designed to help new female business owners by linking them with successful women entrepreneurs. Established female business owners provide  moral  and  technical  support  to  their proteges.

A grassroots response to the obstacles blocking rural female entrepreneurial success has begun to emerge on the Internet (Mannix 1996). Website technology is helping rural female entrepreneurs overcome the friction of distance imposed by their remote locations. Internet sites have been developed by women exclusively for women to provide sample business plans, advice for seeking startup capital, market analysis, business leads, and a supportive network of fledgling and experienced entrepreneurs (Nyberg 1997).

More formal collaboration between female entrepreneurs could be promoted by forming 'New  Generation  Cooperatives'  to  produce and market their products. By incorporating as a  closed-membership producer cooperative, a fledgling entrepreneur can achieve several goals that would be difficult to attain as an individual. First,  the  cooperative  would  provide  economies of scale for the purchase of inputs. Second, the cooperative could rent retail space and provide technical assistance that could not be purchased individually. Third, the cooperative might be able to gain access to credit that might otherwise be denied to an individual entrepreneur. Furthermore, these advantages can occur with only negligible reduction in individual autonomy for the female business owner. Examples of producer cooperatives include the arts and crafts cooperatives in Appalachia and the rural Midwest (Oberhauser 1995).

We originally  conjectured  that  gender  and location  combine  to  hinder  female  entrepreneurial  success.  Our  results  confirm  this  hypothesis in expected and unexpected ways. It is clear that rural females are constrained by gender  bias  and  location,  but  it  is  also  apparent from a growing body of literature that female entrepreneurship is providing increased financial and personal independence for women in both rural and urban communities. Innovative female business networks, new generation cooperatives,  and  Internet  technology  represent modest yet promising steps, narrowing the gender and geographic gap in entrepreneurial success.

## Notes

1 A limitation of the DMI data is that the 'start date' is not necessarily the date the company began operations.  It  may  reflect  the  date  that  ownership changed. A sample of 200 firms were screened by phone to determine the actual date that operations began. The results indicated that nearly one-half of the firms had actually started prior to 1986. This estimate  of  the  percentage  of  firms  with  inaccurate start dates is similar to that found in other research using the DMI data (e.g., Reynolds and Freeman 1987). Since the questionnaire was specifically addressed to 'those responsible for starting the company,' proprietors of older firms were not likely to complete  the  questionnaire.  Therefore,  the  response rate understates the actual percentage of recent entrepreneurs completing the questionnaire.

2 Even within the retail trade and consumer service sectors, the sales of female-owned businesses lag behind those of men, suggesting that differences in experience and training may also be crucial. Due to

the reduced number of observations, the results are not statistically significant.

## References

Beggs, John, Valerie  Haines,  and  Jeanne  Hurlbert. 1996.  Revisiting  the  rural-urban  contrast:  Personal networks in nonmetropolitan and metropolitan settings. Rural Sociology 61(2): 306-25.

Birch, David. 1987. Job Creation in America: How Our Smallest  Companies  Put  the  Most  People  to  Work. New York: Free Press.

Brush, Candida. 1992. Research on women business owners: Past trends, a new perspective and future directions. Entrepreneurship:  Theory  and  Practice 16(4):5-30.

Buttner, Holly, and Dorothy Moore. 1997. Women's organizational  exodus  to  entrepreneurship:  Selfreported motivations and correlates with success. Journal of Small Business Management 35(1):34-46.

- Corporation  for  Enterprise  Development  (CED). 1991. The  1991  Development  Report  Card  for  the States. Washington, DC: Corporation for Enterprise Development.
- Charboneau,  Jill.  1981.  The  woman  entrepreneur. American Demographics June:21-3.
- Clark, Thomas, and Franklin James. 1992. Womenowned businesses: Dimensions and policy issues. Economic Development Quarterly 6(1): 25-40.
- Cloke,  Paul.  1989.  Rural  geography  and  political economy. In New Models in Geography, Vol. 1, ed. Richard Peet and Nigel Thrift, 164-97. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
- ---. 1995. Rural poverty and the welfare state: A discursive transformation in Britain and the USA . Environment and Planning A 27:1001-16.
- Coffey, William, and Mario Polèse. 1985. Local development: Conceptual bases and policy implications. Regional Studies 19:85-93.
- Cooper, Arnold. 1986. The role of incubator organizations in the founding of growth-oriented firms. Journal of Business Venturing 1:75-86.
- Crump,  Jeff,  and  Christopher  D.  Merrett.  1998. Scales of struggle: Economic restructuring in the American  Midwest. Annals  of  the  Association  of American Geographers 88(3):496-515.
- Davidson, Osha. 1990. Broken Heartland: The Rise of the Rural Ghetto. New York: Anchor Books.
- Drucker,  Peter.  1985. Innovation  and  Entrepreneurship: Practice and Principles. New York: Harper and Row.
- Eisinger, Peter. 1988. The Rise of the Entrepreneurial State. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago.  1998.  Womenowned business: Breaking both records and profits. Profitwise Profiles 4 (December):1-4.

Fincher, Ruth. 1989. Class and gender relations in the local labor market and the local state. In The Power  of  Geography:  How  T erritory  Shapes  Social Life ,  ed.  Jennifer  Wolch  and  Michael  Dear,  91117. Boston: Unwin Hyman.

- Glasmeier, Amy, and Michael Conroy. 1994. Global Squeeze  on  Rural  America:  Opportunities,  Threats, and Challenges from NAFTA, GATT, and Processes of Globalization. State College, PA: The Institute for Policy Research and Evaluation.

Green, Gary. 1994. Is small beautiful? Small business development in rural areas. Journal of the Community Development Society 25(2):155-71.

Gruidl, John. 1991. New Businesses in Downstate Illinois. Macomb: Illinois Institute for Rural Affairs.

Gruidl, John, and Christopher Merrett. 1996. A profile of female-owned business start-ups in downstate Illinois. Rural Research Report 7(2):1-8.

Gruntfest,  Eve.  1989.  Geographic  perspectives  on women. In Geography in America , ed. Gary Gaile, and  Cort  Willmott,  673-83.  Columbus,  OH: Merrell Publishing Company.

Hamilton, Patricia. 1993. Women in business: Running in place. D&amp;B Reports March/April:24-6.

- Hanson,  Susan.  1992.  Geography  and  feminism: Worlds  in  collision? Annals  of  the  Association  of American Geographers 82: 569-86.
- Hanson, Susan, and Janice Monk. 1982. On not excluding half of the human in human geography. Professional Geography 34:11-23.
- Hanson,  Susan,  and  Geraldine  Pratt.  1991.  Job search and the occupational segregation of women. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 81(2):229-53.
- Harvey, David. 1989. The Condition of Postmodernity. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
- Hayford,  Alison.  1974.  The  geography  of  women: An historical introduction. Antipode 6:1-19.
- Hisrich,  Robert,  and  Candida  Brush.  1983.  The woman  entrepreneur: Management  skills  and business problems. Journal of Small Business Management 17 (May):30-7.
- Illinois Institute for Rural Affairs (IIRA). 1990. Illinois Small Business Survey. Macomb: Illinois Institute for Rural Affairs.
- ---. 1992. Illinois Small Business Survey. Macomb: Illinois Institute for Rural Affairs.
- Kalleberg, A., and K. Leicht. 1991. Gender and organizational  performance:  Determinants  of  small business survival and success. Academy of Management Journal 34 (1):136-61.
- Knox, Paul, and John Agnew. 1994. The Geography of the  World  Economy ,  2nd  ed.  New  York:  Edward Arnold.
- Krueger, Norris. 1993. The impact of prior entrepreneurial  exposure  on  perceptions  of  new  venture  feasibility  and  desirability. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice 17(4):6-21.
- Krumme, Gunter. 1969. T oward a geography of enterprise. Economic Geography 45:30-40.
- Lawson, Victoria. 1995. The politics of difference: Examining the quantitative / qualitative dualism in post-structuralist feminist research. Professional Geographer 47(4):449-57.
- Loscocco, Karyn, and Joyce Robinson. 1991. Barriers  to  women's  small  business  success  in  the United States. Gender and Society 5(4):511-32.

- Lyons, Donald. 1995. Changing business opportunities: The geography of rapidly growing small U.S. private  firms,  1982-1992. Professional  Geographer 47(4):388-98.
- Malecki, Edward. 1995. Technology and Economic Development. New York: John Wiley.
- Mannix, Margaret. 1996. The wise web knows all, tells all. U.S. News &amp; World Report October 28:87-8.
- Marsden,  T erry,  Jonathan  Murdoch,  Philip  Lowe, Richard Munton, and Andrew Flynn. 1993. Constructing  the  Countryside. Boulder,  CO: Westview Press.
- Mattingly,  Doreen,  and  Karen  Falconer-Al-Hindi. 1995. Should women count? A context for the debate. Professional Geographer 47:427-35.
- McDermott,  Kevin.  1993.  The  boom  in  women's business  goes  on-and  on. D&amp;B Reports March/ April:16-9.
- McDowell, Linda. 1983. T owards the understanding of the gender division of urban space. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 1:59-72.
- Mackenzie, Suzanne. 1989. Restructuring the relations of work and life: Women as environmental actors, feminism as geographic analysis. In Remaking Human Geography , ed. Audrey Kobayashi and Suzanne Mackenzie, 40-61. Boston, MA: Unwin Hyman.
- McLafferty, Sara. 1995. Counting for women. Professional Geographer 47(4): 436-42.
- Milk,  Leslie.  1997.  She's  the  boss. Washingtonian 33(2):82-5.
- Moss,  Pamela.  1995.  Embeddedness  in  practice, numbers in context: The politics of knowing and doing. Professional Geographer 47(4):442-49.
- Nakamura,  Alice,  and  Kathryn  Shaw.  1994.  Overview for special issue on women's work, wages and well-being. The Journal of Human Resources 29(2): 203-22.
- Neider, Linda. 1987. A preliminary investigation of female entrepreneurs in Florida. Journal of Small Business Management 19( January):22-9.
- Nelton, Sharon. 1992. One woman's solution. Nation's Business August:52.
- Nyberg,  Deb.  1997. Women  in  Business:  Cyberspace Field of Dreams. Gridley, IL. http://www.fodreams. com/home.html
- Oberhauser, Ann. 1993. Industrial restructuring and women's homework in Appalachia: Lessons from West Virginia. Southeastern Geographer 33(1):23-42.
- ---. 1995. Towards a gendered regional geography: Women and work in rural Appalachia. Growth and Change 26 (Spring): 217-44.
- Oberhauser, Ann, Lillian Waugh, and Chris Weiss. 1996. Gender analysis and economic development in West Virginia. The West Virginia Public Affairs Reporter 13(2):2-13.
- O'Hare, William, and Jan Larson. 1991. Women in business:  What,  where,  why? American  Demographics July:34-8.
- Pearce,  David,  ed.  1991. The  MIT  Dictionary  of Modern Economics , 3rd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Pellegrino, Eric, and Barry Reece. 1982. Perceived formative and operational problems encountered by female entrepreneurs in retail and service firms. Journal of Small Business Management 20:15-24.
- Peters,  Alan,  and  Heather  MacDonald.  1994.  The worktrips  of  rural  nonmetropolitan  women  in Iowa. Growth and Change 25(3):335-52.
- Reynolds,  Paul,  and  Steve  Freeman.  1987. 1986 Pennsylvania New Firm Survey. Washington, DC: Appalachian Regional Commission.
- Schumpeter, Joseph. 1976 [1950]. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York: Harper and Row.
- Shapero, Al. 1982. The social dimensions of entrepreneurship.  In Encyclopedia  of  Entrepreneurship , ed. C. Kent, D. Sexton, and K. Vesper, 72-90. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
- Storper,  Michael,  and  Richard  Walker.  1989. The Capitalist Imperative: T erritory, T echnology, and Industrial Growth. New York: Basil Blackwell.
- Tigges, Leann, and Gary Green. 1994. Small business  success  among  men-  and  women-owned firms in rural areas. Rural Sociology 59(2):298-310.
- Trachtenburg, Alan. 1982. The Incorporation of America: Culture and Society in the Gilded Age. New York: Hill and Wang.
- Washer, Louise. 1992. The new revolutionaries. Executive Female September:58-61.
- Whatmore,  Sarah.  1991. Farming  Women:  Gender, Work and Family Enterprise. London: Macmillan.
- Woman's  Day. 1995.  Business  is  booming.  August 8:18.
- Working  Women .  1998.  The  entrepreneurial  era. 23(7):31-4.
- Zelinsky, Wilbur. 1992. The Cultural Geography of the United States , Rev. ed. New York: Prentice-Hall.
- Zelinsky, Wilbur, Janice Monk, and Susan Hanson. 1982. Women and geography. Progress in Human Geography 6:317-66.

CHRISTOPHER D. MERRETT (Ph.D. University of Iowa) is Associate Professor of Geography at the Illinois Institute for Rural Affairs, Western Illinois  University,  Macomb,  IL  61455;  e-mail:  cdmerrett@ wiu.edu. His research interests include regional development, social theory, and the political economy of international trade.

JOHN J. GRUIDL (Ph.D. University of Wisconsin) is Associate Professor of Economics at the Illinois  Institute  for  Rural  Affairs,  Western  Illinois University, Macomb, IL 61455; e-mail: JJ-Gruidl@ wiu.edu. His research interests include the study of entrepreneurship,  local  development  policy,  and community development.