<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rtpg20

## An Indicator Framework for Resilient Agroecosystems in Ontario, Canada

## Bryan Collins

To cite this article: Bryan Collins (2025) An Indicator Framework for Resilient Agroecosystems in Ontario, Canada, The Professional Geographer, 77:4, 460-473, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2025.2506793

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2025.2506793

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

View supplementary material

Published online: 03 Jun 2025.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 142

View related articles

View Crossmark data

+

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## An Indicator Framework for Resilient Agroecosystems in Ontario, Canada

Bryan Collins

<!-- image -->

SUNY Oneonta, USA

Southeastern Ontario presents a unique agricultural landscape in which both alternative and conventional farms operate. Each category of farm experiences a wide range of environmental and socioeconomic shocks and stresses that threaten each farm ' s longevity, raising questions about what constitutes resilient agriculture. Yet in Ontario there presently exists no unifying framework for building agricultural resilience. In response, this project mobilizes an analytical framework based on resilience indicators to create a qualitative method for assessing farm sustainability. Implementing this framework in the study area of Inverary, South Frontenac, semistructured interviews based on resilience indicators were conducted with both alternative and conventional farmers. The interviews enabled us to identify primary issues experienced at the farm level and account for the ways that their operations are structured to mitigate risks and achieve valued outcomes. Our research found that diverse farmers are facing overlapping threats but are prioritizing different responses to those threats by relying on distinct indicators of resilience. Key insights after using the indicator framework are summarized to create a deeper understanding of agricultural resilience in the province. Key Words: policy, qualitative research, resilience, rural studies, sustainable agriculture.

R esilience terminology has crept into governmental platforms within Canada, although it is often not clearly defined. The Pan-Canadian Framework on clean growth and climate change includes a broad section on adaptation and resilience, referring often to the agricultural industry. Despite being mentioned frequently in the report, resilience is never discussed, other than how embracing it will help communities move forward. Core concepts in the report include incorporating scientific information with traditional knowledge, investing in resilient infrastructure, and focusing on vulnerable regions of the country (Government of Canada 2018). At the provincial level, the Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food, and Rural Affairs (OMAFRA) broadcasts little in the way of resilient thinking in their sustainable farming information guides. Infrequent mentions of the term use it as a loose adjective to depict a broadly defined goal, such as achieving ' resilient agriculture. ' The ministry is much more oriented toward economic development, highlighted by the its mandate to promote ' a more competitive and productive agri-food and agriproduct sector ' (OMAFRA 2013).

However useful, generally there is no uniformity on these issues between the different levels of government in Canada. Furthermore, there is a clear gap between debates on resilience in the academic world compared to the governmental policy world. Other stakeholders in the space of agriculture include farmers, those in private industry that sell to farmers, and those in other agricultural organizations such as the Ecological Farmers Association of

<!-- image -->

Ontario (EFAO) or the National Farmers Union (NFU). A framework that brings in resilience and examines farms through the lens of a coupled socialecological system, by combining biophysical, political, and socioeconomic factors, will improve on the ways in which we think about resilience compared to previous efforts made by organizations throughout Ontario. Therefore, the objective of this research is to introduce an analytical framework for assessing agroecosystem resilience in in rural Ontario, Canada.

The view of resilience presented here stems from the definition set forth by Folke et al. (2010), defining resilience as ' The capacity of a system to absorb disturbance and reorganize while undergoing change so as to still retain essentially the same function, structure, and feedbacks, and therefore identity, that is, the capacity to change in order to maintain the same identity ' (20). This definition is apt for examining social-ecological farming systems in Ontario given the diversity of farming identities in the province (Smith 2015) as well as the multitude of disturbances present that are forcing farmers to change (Caldwell et al. 2022). Using this framework, this work assesses farmer approaches toward resilience aimed to ensure that their farms maintain their identity when confronted with disturbances. Farm identities are the collection of values, goals, and meanings that drive the production system forward (Letourneau and Davidson 2022). Studies that measure the social-ecological resilience of farms are currently quite rare, including in Ontario, but possess great potential for further informing agricultural policy (Darnhofer 2014; Jacobi et al. 2015). Although

the results from the pilot assessment are useful for analyzing the resilience of the agricultural landscape in Ontario, the key contribution of this project is to demonstrate that this framework can be applied in other geographic contexts to better understand the resilience of agricultural systems at the farm level.

This research first examines a range of existing frameworks and indicators used to assess farm resilience in ways that incorporate socioeconomic, environmental, and cultural characteristics. It then synthesizes these frameworks to create an approach suited for agriculture in this project ' s study area, Inverary, Ontario, and apply this comparatively across the divide between alternative and conventional farms. Both farm types are in different positions to manage shocks and stresses -both socioeconomic and environmental -underscored by their relative size and specialization.

Farms classified as conventional are those that make use of chemical input-based systems, work with mechanization to achieve economies of scale, and are strongly embedded in agri-business markets, both as consumers of external inputs and for the distribution of outputs (Therond et al. 2017). Conversely, farms classified as alternative typically adopt strategies for prioritizing environmental health of the farm. One strategy is to substitute chemical inputs with more environmentally friendly inputs (i.e., organic inputs such as manure for fertilizer) in efforts to preserve ecosystem and human health. These farms often tend to pursue biodiversity-based farming systems, which seek to substitute external inputs with ecosystem services to maximize biodiversity and integration of resources on the farm. Alongside this alternate approach to farming systems, alternative farms often seek to target local markets for distribution.

More broadly, this research fits into a renewed focus on agricultural sustainability at both regional and global levels, in part owing to concerns about the contribution of agriculture to greenhouse gas emissions as well as its potential vulnerability to climate change impacts. The global food system contributes to between 21 percent and 37 percent of greenhouse gas emissions, drawing attention from policymakers at all scales of government (Mbow et al. 2019). The conflict between maximizing economic potential and minimizing environmental impact is perhaps the primary issue of the debate over agricultural sustainability (McNeill 2019). This conflict, amplified by decreased availability of water and harsher socioeconomic conditions, including reduced incomes and rising land prices, among farmers globally and in Canada, puts debates around agricultural sustainability at a defining moment (United Nations 2013; Caron et al. 2018; Lawley 2020). Although addressing these challenges is important, this study is more limited to analyzing the ability of distinct farms ' operations to withstand shocks and stresses.

## Methodology

Situating This Framework Within Resilience Theory

We have operationalized the theoretical frameworks existing in the agroecosystem resilience literature to design a resilience framework that assessed individual farmers ' attempts to maintain their farm identity while facing shocks and stresses. Key existing frameworks include Meuwissen et al. (2019), which offers a methodology to assess both specified and general resilience at the farm level, and the SHARP þ protocol used by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO; Hern  andez Lagana, Phillips, and Poisot 2022), which offers a step-bystep resilience assessment tool specifically designed for farmer response to climate change. Both assessments use indicators and an integrated holistic approach, using both qualitative and quantitative methods. Meuwissen et al. (2019) presented a comprehensive methodology using multivariate statistical analysis, econometrics and modeling, visualization, system dynamics, structured surveys and workshops, and qualitative interviews with multiple stakeholders. The SHARP þ protocol presents a structured questionnaire consisting of thirty-five modules, with each module containing -between five and ten questions. Although these assessments offer an excellent starting point for conducting a comprehensive view of resilience, they require substantial time, labor, and planning. In response, this research proposes an assessment framework that can be conducted by a small team where the primary data collection method is through semistructured interviews without relying on quantitative or statistical methods.

The assessment framework uses a four-step process. First, we characterize the farming system by asking the resilience ' of what?, ' a concept promoted by Carpenter et al. (2001) and Cutter (2016) to help eliminate vagueness and provide a stronger assessment of the diverse needs and resources of each farm. Second, we ask resilience ' to what?, ' where we inquire into what specific shocks and stresses each farmer faces. Third, we ask about resilience ' for what purpose?, ' to identify overarching goals of diverse stakeholders within the study area. Fourth, we introduce resilience indicators to reconceptualize ways that farmers are enhancing resilience on their farm. This process borrows from the process put forth by Meuwissen et al. (2019), keeping aspects that are more applicable to a qualitative smaller scale analysis.

Asking Resilience of What, Resilience to What, and Resilience for What Purpose?

We introduce a specified resilience framework as opposed to a general resilience framework. Specified resilience identifies resilience of specific aspects of a farming system to specific kinds of shocks, whereas general resilience identifies resilience of broader systems to all kinds of shocks (Folke et al. 2010). For example, specified resilience would address how a farm ' s financial matters are resilient to supply chain disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, taking this approach requires understanding the baseline characteristics of each farming system -asking resilience of what -before understanding what each farm is building resilience toward -asking resilience to what. To learn about the resilience of what for each farming system, we have identified five key farm characteristics from the food system resilience literature (Table 1; Jacobi et al. 2018). These five categories provide a wideranging index of characteristics for each farm, where we can then ask specifically about resilience to those characteristics through semistructured interviews.

Determining resilience to what required asking about the specific shocks and stresses each farmer faced. Questions posed to farmers covered both socioeconomic and environmental threats. The interview questionnaire is found in the Appendix. Overall, twenty-two interviews with farmers took place. All the farms are located in the Inverary region of southeastern Ontario, which is a farming community that is composed of both alternative and conventional farms. Six conventional farms and five alternative farms participated, each agreeing for an initial interview to discuss the goals of the project and agreeing for a second longer interview by answering the questions in the questionnaire. Semistructured interviews provided freedom for farmers to speak toward issues they felt were most important to them (O ' Keeffe et al. 2016). Initial interviews often lasted -fifteen to twenty minutes and the questionnaire interviews typically lasted between thirty and sixty minutes, but this was flexible depending on the interviewee and how much time and information they wanted to share. Some interviews spanned more than ninety minutes to two hours.

Determining resilience for what purpose required interviewing nonfarmer stakeholders. Interview templates with nonfarmer stakeholders were designed to learn more about what the interviewee ' s organization does, to learn how they interact with farmers and influence the agricultural space in Ontario, and to provide information and anecdotes about what they see as the key issues for farmers in the past and moving forward -in essence, to materialize resilience for what purpose in the study area. Interviews with provincial representatives with OMAFRA were designed to reveal a crucial outlook on agroecosystem resilience in the province and to see if what is being highlighted by the government matches what is highlighted by farmers. Employees from OMAFRA were interviewed to assess their views. Likewise, organization representatives from the Ontario Federation of Agriculture (OFA), the EFAO, Frontenac County Manager of the Economic Development Office, and the manager of the region ' s largest agricultural machinery dealer were interviewed to provide valuable information on how their respective organizations play a role in shaping agricultural policies and practices in the province.

## Resilience Indicators

After asking resilience of what, resilience to what, and resilience for what purpose, we sought to explore each farm ' s capabilities for boosting their specific resilience to the threats they face. Commonplace with agroecosystem resilience assessment is using indicators to demonstrate resilience-enhancing attributes (Biggs et al. 2012; Cabell and Oelofse 2012; Jacobi et al. 2018; Meuwissen et al. 2019; Tittonell 2020). Although a multitude of indicators are applied in diverse resilience assessments, we have selected six for our framework. These six indicators can be captured through semistructured interviews, whereas many others found throughout the literature cannot be easily measured through qualitative methods. We sought questions that allowed interviewees to provide open-ended responses for elaboration on the connections between characteristics and indicators. The relationship between question number, characteristic, and indicator is listed in the fourth column of Table 1. Not having quantitative indicators is a limitation that prevents this assessment framework from being a holistic outlook into resilience, but it does allow this assessment to be performed solely through using a qualitative methodology.

Processing the data first required transcribing the interviews and then performing thematic analysis through open coding by linking key ideas to one or more of the eleven characteristics and indicators. Axial coding then helped thematically group key ideas together and help compare results across participants, such as finding what types of farms tend to operate in ways that prioritize certain indicators over others. Thematic analysis linked farmer responses to threats they face to our selected indicators. Thematic analysis is a commonly used analysis method for deriving relationships in qualitative data (Terry 2017) and has been used in similar scoping qualitative research to interpret semistructured interview data from farmers (Whitton and Carmichael 2024). We tracked how many farms were enacting management practices that linked to each indicator to see if there was a significant difference in the ability to respond to threats between each farm and farm types. Because this study does not make use of quantitative modeling

Table 1 Descriptions of five key characteristics to support farm resilience and six resilience indicators to be used in this study

| Characteristics to support farm resilience           | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | What to look for when conducting interview                                                                                                                                                | Corresponds to question # in farmer questionnaire   | For reference                                                     |
|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Natural capital                                      | The natural resources within the system ' s boundaries                                                                                                                                                                                               | Land ownership, crops grown, livestock metrics, soil metrics, and access to water                                                                                                         | 2 - 6                                               | Cabell and Oelofse (2012), Brand (2009),                          |
| Human capital                                        | The capabilities of education, experience, and involvement of all humans involved in the agroecosystem to support                                                                                                                                    | Education, experience, health, and involvement of family members and laborers                                                                                                             | 1, 9                                                | Tittonell (2020) Ifejika Speranza (2013), Jacobi et al. (2018)    |
| Financial capital                                    | the system The general well-being of financial matters related to the agroecosystem                                                                                                                                                                  | Expenditures, debts, loans, and other financial supports                                                                                                                                  | 12 - 17, 21 - 24                                    | Cabell and Oelofse (2012), Teixeira et al.                        |
| Social capital                                       | The connectivity between the farm and social groups and networks                                                                                                                                                                                     | Bargaining power, decision- making autonomy, membership in off-farm networks                                                                                                              | 9, 29 - 31, 34 - 38                                 | (2018) Tittonell (2020), Ifejika Speranza (2013)                  |
| Physical capital                                     | The physical infrastructure and technological systems to support the farming system                                                                                                                                                                  | Sufficient housing and storage for materials and machinery, waste management, electric and gas reliability, access to                                                                     | 8, 29                                               | Bizikova et al. (2019), C  ordoba et al. (2020)                                                                   |
| Resilience indicators Reflective and shared learning | The ability to learn from multiple experiences; reviewing past experience to be able to be more prepared and adapt to future changes; decisions made proactively instead of reactively; ability to learn from multiple sources of                    | Knowledge sharing among farmers, willingness to change and adapt, eagerness to improve knowledge of agroecosystem functions                                                               | 18 - 19, 24 - 28, 33                                | Tittonell (2020), Jacobi et al. (2018), Cabell and Oelefse (2012) |
| Spatial diversity                                    | knowledge General diversity on the farm, as well as maintaining diverse response to disturbance plans                                                                                                                                                | Biodiverse crops, diverse seed systems, and diverse markets explored                                                                                                                      | 4 - 8, 10 - 11, 20 - 22                             | Rotz and Fraser (2015), Jacobi et al. (2018), Biggs et al.        |
| Temporal diversity                                   | Diversity on the farm across time                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | The farm is operating through multiple seasons or only one season; time is given to allow soils to restore                                                                                | 20 - 22                                             | (2012) Tittonell (2020), Janssen, Anderies, and Ostrom (2007)     |
| Response diversity (redundancy)                      | Components in the agroecosystem overlap in function and compensate for each other in case components break down or                                                                                                                                   | nutrients Polyculture, equipment for various crops, resources are acquired from multiple sources (seeds, water, machinery)                                                                | 4 - 8, 10 - 11, 34 - 37                             | Tittonell (2020), Biggs et al. (2012)                             |
| Self-regulation and connectivity                     | become obsolete Components within the agroecosystem are connected and integrated; a self-regulated system has feedback mechanisms that reduce need for external inputs and uncouple the system from external shocks (i.e., supply chain disruptions) | Crops grown together are mutually beneficial, farm is connected to wider ecosystem, such as attracting pollinators and fostering integrated ecological functions; uses ecosystem services | 25 - 28                                             | Tittonell (2020), Biggs et al. (2012)                             |
| Local knowledge                                      | Local knowledge systems are sought out and considered when making decisions about the agroecosystem                                                                                                                                                  | Use of legacy and heirloom seeds, involvement of elders and indigenous knowledge systems in management practices                                                                          | 29 - 32, 36 - 38                                    | Tittonell (2020), Cabell and Oelefse (2012)                       |

or statistical analysis, we focused on indicators that can be captured through farmer narratives. Quantitative assessments that feed into modeling or statistical analysis might include indicators related to specific land use-trends, such as percentage of arable land that uses synthetic pesticides, or related to farmer income, such as the proportion of income from farming relative to total household income (Zong et al. 2022).

## Results and Discussion

Resilience ' of What ' in Alternative and Conventional Agricultural Systems

This section assesses the resilience of the participating farms by synthesizing both alternative and conventional farms ' resilience of what, to what, and how they are building resilience by linking their actions on the farm to our assessment ' s indicators. We also review Inverary ' s resilience ' for what purpose ' by summarizing nonfarmer stakeholders ' perspectives on resilience in the region. There is a clear divide in scale, goals, and practical approaches when assessing the five selected characteristics between alternative and conventional farm types. These approaches feed into our resilience framework by characterizing resilience ' of what. ' After analyzing the coded transcripts, dominant patterns emerged, which are summarized in the top portion of Table 2.

## Resilience ' to What '

All farmers interviewed in the study area of Inverary described the main environmental and socioeconomic shocks and stresses their farms were facing, threatening their farms ' identity. Notably, there was strong overlap in the types of threats that were expressed by farmers. These threats are summarized in Table 3. The two most pronounced threats that were put forth by every farmer interviewed were drought and rising input costs. In 2016, there was an extreme drought in southeastern Ontario. Crop farmers recalled that the drought devastated their yields and dairy farmers recalled that the drought led to heat stress on their cows. Every farmer also noted the harsh impact of rising input prices, which peaked during the growing season of 2022. Increased costs for fuels, fertilizers, and machinery, as well as general inflation, reduced profit margins for all farmers interviewed.

## Thematic Analysis of Farmer Interviews

All farms face similar threats, but some farms choose to direct their attention and resources to some threats more than others in efforts to maintain their farm ' s identity. Creating beneficial responses to socioeconomic shocks and stresses often relied on the human capital and social capital of the agroecosystem, whereas creating beneficial responses to environmental shocks relied heavily on natural capital. The top portion of Table 2 demonstrates the difference in characteristics and resources between the two types of farm groups assessed, whereas the bottom portion provides examples of how farms within each category are directing their resources to build resilience into their operation. We relate these examples to our selected indicators to further uncover patterns in the Inverary agricultural space.

Keeping their farm functioning over time and generating intergenerational renewal is extremely important to all the farm owners surveyed. The two key resilience indicators found for improving the longevity of the farm were (1) using reflective and shared learning, and (2) integrating local knowledge systems into the farm management plan. Reflective and shared learning, expressed through trial-anderror tactics as well as planned experimentation, were common themes discussed to continually adapt to changing environments. Reflecting on what has happened within the agroecosystem in the past and adjusting how things work to proactively anticipate future environmental conditions also ensures the farmers are continually expanding their knowledge base and skill set. Additionally, alternative farms have identified the benefit of integrating local knowledge systems into their agroecosystem through understanding the importance of growing locally adapted and high-quality products.

Although alternative farms form the minority of agricultural operations in the study area, they do have a strong social presence because of their heightened emphasis on connecting with their local community, given that their community members are predominantly buying their products. All of the participating farms had a unique specialty and are therefore facing different industry-specific risks. They also face common risks, however, and their responses to these risks follow a generally unified pattern. Major focuses included (1) building natural capital in their system, (2) keeping operations and markets local, and (3) integrating local knowledge concepts into operations. The majority of alternative farms noted having strong connections to provisioning their seeds from local nonprofit organizations like the Kingston Area Seed Saving Initiative, a prime example of integrating local knowledge into operations.

Alternative farms identified that having strong and reliable access to local labor allowed them to cope better during the turmoil associated with the pandemic. Strong social capital to source labor during the pandemic boosted response diversity, as alternative farms were able to keep functioning at near full strength, compared to conventional farms that relied on labor programs that were disrupted.

)

Continued

(

| alternative and conventional farms Dominant observations in conventional farms land is more likely to be rented, there are fewer varieties in are generally specialized operations. There appears to be a though. from farming families. Farm labor is more likely to be like the Seasonal Agriculture Worker Program. large expenditures and debts and are frequently seeking and increased input costs are putting high financial Many farmers need to find a secondary job to support on- with other farms in the region, but there is little or other social networks. Despite this, there is a strong many of which dissipated over the COVID-19 to buy and more costly to upkeep with repairs and fuel. less diverse machinery, but larger operations require more management of the logistics of waste management and Examples observed from conventional farms                                                                                                                                                                                                  | (a) Farmers continually discuss new AI techniques with each other to improve their herd, which has been a long-term goal and avoids reliance on biased input dealers. (b) The primary operator doesn ' t try risky new enterprises. (c) Strong investment into learning about long-term livestock health from neighboring farmers to avoid relying on veterinarians. (d) Awareness of the inherent risk of continuing to participate in global markets. (e) New reflections into setting aside time to rest throughout the year has allowed the primary operator to completely reset and rediscover their motivation for farming. (a) One farm has diversified away from solely producing grains for export. The farm has expanded to grow new commodities like tomatoes and mushrooms. (b) Uptake of precision agriculture methods to better plant and organize their field, allowing them to switch their crops year over year. (c) Three dairy farms have enacted a hybrid specialization model to start growing cash crops.   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| indicators across both Farms have larger acreage, crops and livestock, and they trend of shifting away from specialization, Farmers are more likely to come sourced through work programs Farms are more likely to have financial support. Decreased incomes strain on farming operations. farm income. Farms have high connectivity connectivity with nonfarmers desire to rekindle these networks, pandemic. Machinery is more expensive Specialized operations require storage space, electricity, and product transport. Ratio of farms                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 5/6 5/6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| both resilience characteristics and resilience observations in alternative farms land is more likely to be owned, there is more variety of livestock, and they are generally diversified operations. to enter farming later in life and come from a nonfarming likely to be sourced locally and rely on volunteer work. to have large expenditures, but there are fewer supports and available if needed. Some farmers did not track financial matters to that they are lifestyle farmers or already have an established career. connectivity with other similar-minded farmers, nonfarmers, and networks in the region. Farmers attempt to have a strong voice in with selling products given they are selling locally. reduce machinery use, but there is a wide range of machinery diversified operations. Smaller operations lead to fewer waste management and storage. Whereas some farmers do not because they sell directly from their farm, other farms must transportation when they sell to local businesses. farms Examples observed from alternative farms | (a) Trial and error are the key to learning on the farm and opening up new opportunities. (b) The farm is making the ethical choice to never raise prices to keep prices reasonable for those reliant on their products. (c) The farm is comanaged in a cooperative way by 3 owners who have a shared long-term vision. (d) Awareness of the increased importance of maintaining farmer health. (e) The health of the farm ' s cows is now prioritized above all else in the system, after cow health was a limiting factor in years past. (a) Selling multiple products allows for adapting to shifting environmental conditions. (b) The farm uses permaculture methods, where numerous crop types are grown together to mirror a natural ecosystem. (c) Growing diverse crops replenishes soil nutrients.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Resilience assessment highlighting Characteristics to support farm resilience Dominant Natural capital Farms have smaller acreage, in crops grown or types Human capital Farmers are more likely family. Farm labor is more Financial capital Farms are less likely loan programs a high degree, given primary nonfarming Social capital Farms have high other social bargaining power Physical capital There is a desire to on the farms due to requirements for need transportation manage                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Ratio of 5/5 3/5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Table 2 Resilience indicators                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Reflective and shared learning Spatial diversity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

Table 2 Resilience assessment highlighting both resilience characteristics and resilience indicators across both alternative and conventional farms

| Examples observed from conventional farms   | Very little, if any, evidence of this indicator being present.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Three farms used to only be dairy and have now transitioned to growing crops solely as a supplement to bring in extra income to keep the farm afloat under duress, such as when dairy prices decrease.                                                                                        | Very little, if any, evidence of this indicator being present.                                                                                                                             | (a) Strong long-term integration with local farmers paid off when they assisted the farm during its biggest disaster. (b) Active in the political process by being chairman of the local Dairy Farmers of Ontario chapter. (c) Political involvement helps influence real-world change, even if the influence is dwindling. (d) Major planning into farm succession by charting out exactly what stake each family member has in the farm. This planning ensures that each stakeholder knows exactly who owns what, providing more comfort to everyone involved.                                                                                                                            |
|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Ratio of farms                              | 0/6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 3/6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 0/6                                                                                                                                                                                        | 4/6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Examples observed from alternative farms    | (a) Livelihood diversification through new efforts toward eco-tourism. (b) The farm has expanded to work year-round. (c) Needs for labor costs are often offset from volunteers in the local community and the WOOF volunteer program that work year-round. (d) Focus on local food markets rather than national markets to keep consistent demand throughout the | year. (a) Only a fraction of the land is used for food production, with the rest set aside as an insurance policy for long-term stresses. (b) Equipment is sourced from multiple locations, including overseas. (c) Local sourcing of labor allowed the farm to keep operating at nearly full | strength during the pandemic. 4/5 (a) A fully integrated orchard that incorporates pigs and chickens through holistic resource management. (b) The cows are now strongly integrated into a | more balanced agroecosystem. (c) Owners have spent lots of time building relationships with the people they sell to reduce middle-man costs. (d) Integrated pest management has been introduced to biologically control for pests rather than rely on pesticides. (a) Connection with local seed saving groups to grow their high-quality and locally adapted seeds. (b) Strong willpower to keep the farm running for as long as possible due to the legacy and connection the family members have with the land. (c) Engagement with younger generations and women in agriculture. (d) Using the farm as a showcase to invite people from across the community to tour and provide input. |
| Ratio of farms                              | 4/5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 3/5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                            | 4/5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Resilience indicators                       | Temporal diversity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Response diversity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Self-regulation and connectivity                                                                                                                                                           | Local knowledge                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Table 3 Selection of key short-term and long-term shocks and stresses described by farmers interviewed in southeastern Ontario

|               | Short-term shocks                                                | Long-term stresses                                           |
|---------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| Environmental | Extreme weather events (droughts, strong rains, hail, floods)    | Climate change                                               |
|               | Outbreaks of pests                                               | Soil degradation                                             |
|               | Outbreak of disease                                              | Decline of biodiversity and pollinators                      |
| Socioeconomic | Price volatility of inputs and outputs                           | Liberalized markets introducing new competitors              |
|               | Decline in income                                                | Increased scarcity of resources, particularly water and land |
|               | Decline in availability of laborers                              | Less social connectivity between farmers                     |
|               | Disruptions due to the pandemic                                  | Shifts to specialization                                     |
|               | Rising land prices                                               | Less government support                                      |
|               | Loss of autonomous decision-making                               | Lack of generational renewal                                 |
|               | Mental and physical fatigue associated with working longer hours | Aging rural population with shortage of upcoming farmers     |
|               | Stress about short-term farm ownership                           | Loss of knowledge and skills                                 |

Alternative farms also found that building social capital within their community offset the need for seeking extra hired help, as well as using those community connections to better navigate economic challenges by sharing useful knowledge among their networks. They also described the benefit of increasing their temporal diversity, setting up their agroecosystem so that it is functioning and bringing in income for as many months of the year as possible. One farm used strong natural capital, represented by a picturesque apple orchard, and social capital, represented by integration into community networks such as providing field trips for local schools, to make ecotourism a central part of their income during the farm ' s offseason. This is a prime example of natural and social capital characteristics influencing one of the selected indicators.

Although the sampled alternative farms match up well with many of the selected indicators of resilience, there are still limitations to this form of farming. The first limitation is the systemic struggle to make this form of farming a reasonably profitable way to make a living. It was noted in the interviews that most farmers who farm this way require a direct household member with a secure second job, although this type of split livelihood was in no way confined solely to alternative agriculture. Some alternative farmers who do not require a second job are in a financial position where they are not currently relying on producing a steady income. Farmers in this situation might be retired or pursuing alternative farming more as a hobby than as a job to make a living because they are already financially comfortable. Overall, there is a diversity of financial situations for these types of farmers. There are farmers who operate as a business for profit and do not require second jobs, there are farmers who are reliant on diversified streams of income, and there are farmers who have built financial capacity from their previous careers to have flexibility in their operations.

Conventional farmers ' responses to financial and labor issues generally relied on using new technology to increase efficiency on the farm. Efficiency through mechanization was identified to both save money by using fewer inputs and reduce reliance on labor by introducing automation. All of the surveyed dairy farms have either upgraded to robotic milking systems or, in the case of one farm, have started using heat and motion tracking collars for their livestock. All dairy farms also have heavily relied on artificial insemination (AI) breeding to develop stronger and more productive animals, which has been noted by all to be a useful endeavor. Each farm also makes use of new technology through relying on genetically modified organism (GMO) seeds for their cash cropping operations. Improved efficiency is especially desirable for these farmers given their strong reliance on high-input farming. Knowledge of new technology was primarily initiated through informal network discussions between dairy farmers. Several dairy farmers mentioned that they learn about which technologies are useful and which are not by sharing knowledge with each other. One farmer specifically noted this as being critical, citing examples of how input dealers are not the best source of finding accurate unbiased information for new technology.

Whereas conventional farms are generally responding in a uniform way to short-term socioeconomic threats, long-term threats are being handled differently. To deal with shifting liberalized markets, some farms have shifted toward specialization and other have shifted toward diversification. Other farms are settled in between. For example, one farm is continually diversifying their farm away from solely cash cropping by introducing new ventures through greenhouses and growing several different products to be sold both locally as well as overseas. This diversification is a result of the farmer ' s hesitancy to continue participating in global markets owing to price volatility. Conversely, another farm is specializing in sheep production and

has no intentions of diversifying away from this mission. Everything on the farm is designed to support lamb production, as it is their only income. This relies on expanding urban markets that purchase their product, but issues will arise if those markets decline.

Four other conventional farms are working on a hybrid specialization model. On each farm, dairy is the focus and most of the farm ' s operation works toward supporting the cows. Each farm within the last -ten to fifteen years, however, has diversified into growing cash crops as a secondary feature to earn supplemental income. Although not the focus of the farm, this diversification adds a cushion toward both short-term shocks through seasonal market disruption and long-term stresses if market forces or political forces, such as the disappearance of supply management, start to favor cash cropping over dairy farming. Diversification in this vein introduces spatial diversity, which was nonexistent prior to diversifying. Although these farms have pivoted from solely producing dairy products, the farmers still maintain that they are dairy farms. In essence, their identity as dairy farms is preserved because they now have extra incomes from cash cropping to support their dairy endeavors. Shifts in farming approach toward hybrid specialization strongly rely on natural capital, primarily by having the land to plant new crops. Of the three dairy farmers who have recently started growing cash crops, one farmer already owned the land to be set aside for growing crops, whereas the other two had to start renting land to begin their cash crop endeavor. Financial capital in the form of investment, as well as upgrades to physical capital were also precursors toward hybrid specialization. Investing in these capitals to create this new farming model resulted in examples of the farms demonstrating spatial diversity and response diversity by having a more spatially diverse farm that produces multiple products, as well as earning supplemental income to be used to address future threats.

In contrast to alternative farms, conventional farms are more uniform in their approaches to resilience building. This is likely due to their participation in conventional food systems that provide farmers with less autonomy over farm operations and, therein, restricting their potential resiliencebuilding pathways. The dominant short-term issue voiced by these farmers was rising prices for the inputs that they have become dependent on, such as fertilizers, fuels, and seeds. Equally, farmers have felt overworked because of the extreme difficulty in finding reliable sources of farm labor. These two issues combined have prompted a strong response in the form of searching for ways to improve efficiency on the farm at all costs. Efficiency reduces costs by using fewer inputs, which saves money, and efficiency also reduces the need to find labor by integrating automation into the system. Efficiency through mechanization, however, reduces resilience in agricultural systems because it leads to homogenized production and results in fewer people involved to make decisions or contribute their knowledge (Hendrickson 2015; Bennett et al. 2021).

Where these conventional farms diverge is how they approach long-term stresses. For the farms who diversified, the farmers noted the benefit of having multiple income streams to buffer against market volatility. The farm that diversified the most noted they can by virtue of having the financial resources -including stable access to bank credit -try out new ventures. The other farms maintain a focus on dairy in part because dairy is what they know best, so they do not want to risk moving away from their primary areas of expertise. Additionally, the infrastructure for dairy is so demanding that pivoting away from it would require a degree of operational flexibility that many conventional farmers do not possess.

One common theme in dealing with several of the threats in Table 2 was reliance on the ' family farm ' aspect of each farm by using existing social capital to integrate local knowledge and reflective and shared learning values into the farm management plan. Whereas the tightening of operating costs is threatening the longevity of each farm, the internal local knowledge possessed by each family acts to keep motivation high to carry on the family farm ' s tradition. All farmers noted that farms are going out of business in their region, but they all still argue that there exists a sense of farming community. Each farmer has strong social capital where they have existing relationships with several other farmers in the region, which offers several benefits both in the short term and long term. Short-term issues that rely on strong social capital, such as needing help with machinery or someone to watch the farm while the primary operator takes some time off, or long-term issues such as maintaining a presence in local agricultural organizations to lobby for long-term health of the area, were all highlighted by farmers as solutions toward preserving the longevity and intergenerational potential of family farms.

## Resilience for What Purpose

The dominant political organization in shaping the current agricultural landscape in the province is OMAFRA. In addition, the OFA and EFAO contribute to the state of agriculture in the province by lobbying on behalf of their members. In Inverary, the Frontenac County Office of Economic Development works directly with farmers, promoting the business space they work in. Finally, input and machinery dealers maintain an influence into agricultural futures through the products they push to their consumers. The result is an entanglement of ideologies and competing interests that portray an

Table 4 Primary organizations in the southeastern Ontario agricultural space as well as a key from representatives from each organization of their vision for Ontario agriculture

| Organization                                                      | Role in framing agricultural policy in Inverary or Ontario                                                                                                                                                                                | Key quote on vision for Ontario agriculture from selected interviewee                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Ontario Federation of Agriculture (OFA)                           | A provincial organization to support Ontario farmers both on smaller scale issues as well as weighing in on broader top-down policy debates such as land-use policy, rural agribusiness development, and international trade discussions. | ' The OFA ' s 2021 - 2026 strategic priorities are 1: sustainability, 2: consumer trust, 3: farm viability, and 4: farmers as advocates. Despite sustainability being listed as the number one priority, not all OFA farming members are buying into the recent debates around sustainability. However, it is increasing year over year. The overarching mindset toward sustainability is surviving financially in order for the farm to survive and be passed down intergenerationally. ' (Interview,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Ecological Farming Association of Ontario (EFAO)                  | The organization works directly with farmers to enhance community resilience by bringing like-minded farmers together to create unique solutions for building more ecologically friendly farms.                                           | December 23, 2023, Manager of Member Services) ' Farmers are slowly changing to better understand and adopt practices that improve sustainability and resilience. However, it is slow, and we need to change faster because we are on a timeline (with respect to impending climate variability becoming more of a destructive force). The level of change needs to be quicker, and therefore incremental steps are not powerful enough. Transformative change may be the only realistic option, and that starts with giving farmers autonomy over their own land. Autonomy is necessary to improve environmental characteristics on your land, which can ' t be done when you are renting. ' (Interview, October 28, 2022, Communications Manager)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Frontenac County Office of Economic Development                   | The office works closely with several farmers in the area to identify market trends and support business development.                                                                                                                     | ' I think we need both family farms and scaled up farms. Both have a purpose in the food system. Frontenac County will continue to be positioned as a place for small-scale agriculture to thrive, where we encourage direct-to-consumer sales and diversified farm approaches, and looking at ways of farming that are more sustainable for the family that is farming. We will also follow the trend that is taking place in southwestern Ontario where farms are now companies and they have employees and teams, but they are more effective at maintaining certain standards and qualities of outputs. This is a new way of thinking for over here (Frontenac County). ' (Interview, January 27, 2023, Economic Development Manager)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Kingston Green Tractors                                           | The largest agricultural product store in the region, selling equipment and machinery to farmers in the greater Kingston and Frontenac Arch area.                                                                                         | ' The future of agriculture in the region will rely on technology to keep expanding to provide farmers with data. They can use this data to make better decisions and increase efficiencies. Having data to make better decisions will save cost, time, and resources. The biggest limitation to growth is lack of manpower, especially in southeastern Ontario. ' (Interview,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food, and Rural Affairs (OMAFRA) | The governing body for implementing guidance and policy for the province ' s agriculture and rural sectors.                                                                                                                               | October 18, 2022, Branch Manager) ' OMAFRA ' s primary goal is to ensure to Ontario ' s communities that the government knows and is aware that agriculture is a critical sector to provincial operations and well-being and is available to provide tools and resources to support rural businesses. ' (Interview, November 18, 2022, Agriculture and Rural Economic Development Advisor) ' OMAFRA supports all forms of agriculture. They don ' t lean one way or the other, but there is support for the greenhouse sector. There are specific funding schemes for this technology, such as the greenhouse competitiveness and innovation initiative, which raised funds for improving efficiency of greenhouse systems and increasing productivity. ' (Interview, November 30, 2022, Agricultural Development Specialist) ' There are incentives within OMAFRA ' s mission to support technological advancement, such as a new funding program for farms and food processors. These solutions are less about upgrading to precision agriculture, but more about improving labor efficiencies. There still is OMAFRA support for precision agriculture, with research for it being funded by OMAFRA in cohort with U of Guelph. ' (Interview, November 16, 2022, Sustainability Specialist) |

uncertain pathway for the future of Ontario agriculture (Table 4).

On one side of the debate, OMAFRA, the OFA, and input dealers are promoting one path -prioritized by boosting farmer incomes through new technological advancements -whereas the other organizations interviewed are promoting a second path -one that values building resilience through advocating for local food systems and assisting small farms. The effect is that both alternative and conventional farmers believe their farming operation qualifies as resilient. Alternative farmers believe they are farming with resilient qualities that are framed by the organizations they interact with, and vice versa for conventional farmers. Notably, interactions between organizations and farms are quite stratified by farm type. Interviewees from both the EFAO and local County Office of Economic Development stated they primarily interact with alternative farms. Conversely, every conventional farmer interviewed is a member of the OFA.

Interestingly, almost every farmer ' s response to what they hope to do to respond to threats (interview question 33) matched what is being put forth by the organizations that farm type tends to interact with. Alternative farmers ' primary responses revolved around protecting natural capital and keeping a small-scale local focus, which are also the visions put forth by the EFAO and County Office of Economic Development. Conventional farmers ' responses all described the importance of improving efficiency and making use of new technology, which are responses also promoted by the OFA, OMAFRA, and local input dealers. This acts as a barrier toward adaptation, as each farm type ' s vision of responding to threats matches that of the organization with which they interact. Because the study area ' s resilience ' for what purpose ' is divided, this poses issues for creating a unified vision of resilience. Both the EFAO and County Office of Community Development claimed efforts of enhancing outreach to conventional farmers to help bridge this gap.

## Conclusion

This pilot study in Inverary, Ontario, that used our resilience assessment revealed several conclusions, including uncovering the goals and approaches of diverse farming types (resilience ' of what ' ), the key environmental and socioeconomic threats that both alternative and conventional farmers face (resilience ' to what ' ), and the visions for resilience promoted by nonfarmer stakeholders in Inverary ' s agricultural space (resilience ' for what purpose ' ). Then, farmer operations were assessed and compared to select resilience indicators. Although most farms displayed some traits that linked to the indicators, thematic analysis revealed insightful patterns. Both farm types strongly rely on reflective and shared learning to best respond to threats. Both farm types also recognized the importance of integrating local knowledge systems by connecting with their community for assistance in times of need. We observed that alternative and conventional farmers are enacting different methods to build resilience into their operation. Although alternative farms exhibited traits of temporal diversity and self-regulation, there was little to no evidence of conventional farmers exhibiting these traits.

This study ' s findings matter not only for the localized context of Inverary, but also for the broader goal of inquiring into the state of agricultural resilience in Ontario agriculture. Farmers tended to align their actions with the values and information provided by their affiliate networks -whether alternative or conventional. This suggests that nonfarmer stakeholders play a critical role in shaping how resilience to environmental and socioeconomic threats is understood and practiced. Yet, these nonfarmer stakeholders operate within divergent ideologies, which results in fractured visions of agricultural futures. Without shared meanings of resilience, and given that divergent ideologies have competing values and priorities, movements to support long-term agricultural sustainability risk ineffectiveness. Particularly concerning is the evidence of key traits fundamental to resilience theory being absent from conventional farming structures in the area. The coping mechanisms used by conventional farms might be effective in the short term. The absence of resilience indicators, though, such as temporal diversity and self-regulation, compromise the farm ' s abilities to maintain its identity under compounding environmental and socioeconomic stresses. The absence of these indicators might also suggest an inherent incompatibility between the principles of conventional farming and the resilience indicators proposed in this study.

Given the diversity of interpretations of agricultural success in this study, we propose a critical need for consensus building among nonfarming stakeholders to establish a common set of definitions and frameworks for resilience in Ontario agriculture. The indicator framework we have developed offers a scalable tool that could be applied across other regions to capture relevant knowledge while maintaining conceptual consistency. This framework also provides a foundation for evidence-based policy that supports resilience as a dynamic process that is shaped by ecological conditions, social relationships, and institutional support. Ignoring these dynamics risks reinforcing systems that are economically effective in the short term but unsustainable in the long term. /H17039

## Disclosure Statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

- Bennett, E. M., J. Baird, H. Baulch, R. Chaplin-Kramer, E. Fraser, P. Loring, P. Morrison, L. Parrott, K. Sherren, K. J. Winkler, et al. 2021. Ecosystem services and the resilience of agricultural landscapes. In Advances in ecological research , Vol. 64, ed. D. A. Bohan and A. J. Vanbergen, 1 -43. New York: Academic Press.
- Biggs, R., M. Schl € uter, D. Biggs, E. L. Bohensky, S. BurnSilver, G. Cundill, V. Dakos, T. M. Daw, L. S. Evans, K. Kotschy, et al. 2012. Toward principles for enhancing the resilience of ecosystem services. Annual Review of Environment and Resources 37 (1):421 -48. doi: 10.1146/annurev-environ-051211-123836.
- Bizikova, L., P. Larkin, S. Mitchell, and R. Waldick. 2019. An indicator set to track resilience to climate change in agriculture: A policy-maker ' s perspective. Land Use Policy 82:444 -56. doi: 10.1016/j.landusepol.2018.11.057.
- Brand, F. 2009. Critical natural capital revisited: Ecological resilience and sustainable development. Ecological Economics 68 (3):605 -12. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2008.09.013.
- Cabell, J. F., and M. Oelofse. 2012. An indicator framework for assessing agroecosystem resilience. Ecology and Society 17 (1):18. doi: 10.5751/ES-04666-170118.
- Caldwell, W., S. Epp, X. Wan, R. Singer, E. Drake, and E. C. Sousa. 2022. Farmland preservation and urban expansion: Case study of southern Ontario, Canada. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 6:777816. doi: 10. 3389/fsufs.2022.777816.
- Canada House of Commons. 2018. Toward a resilient Canadian agriculture and agri-food system: Adapting to climate change. Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture and Agri-Food, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
- Caron, P., G. Ferrero y de Loma-Osorio, D. Nabarro, E. Hainzelin, M. Guillou, I. Andersen, T. Arnold, M. Astralaga, M. Beukeboom, S. Bickersteth, et al. 2018. Food systems for sustainable development: Proposals for a profound four-part transformation. Agronomy for Sustainable Development 38 (4):41. doi: 10.1007/s13593-018-0519-1.
- Carpenter, S., B. Walker, J. M. Anderies, and N. Abel. 2001. From metaphor to measurement: Resilience of what to what? Ecosystems 4 (8):765 -81. doi: 10.1007/ s10021-001-0045-9.
- C  ordoba, C., C. Trivi ~ no, and J. Toro Calder  on. 2020. Agroecosystem resilience. A conceptual and methodological framework for evaluation. PLoS ONE 15 (4): e0220349. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0220349.
- Cutter, S. L. 2016. Resilience to what? Resilience for whom? The Geographical Journal 182 (2):110 -13.
- Darnhofer, I. 2014. Resilience and why it matters for farm management. European Review of Agricultural Economics 41 (3):461 -84. doi: 10.1093/erae/jbu012.
- Folke, C., S. R. Carpenter, B. Walker, M. Scheffer, T. Chapin, and J. Rockstr € om. 2010. Resilience thinking: Integrating resilience, adaptability and transformability. Ecology and Society 15 (4):20. doi: 10.5751/ES-03610-150420.
- Hendrickson, M. K. 2015. Resilience in a concentrated and consolidated food system. Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences 5 (3):418 -31. doi: 10.1007/s13412015-0292-2.
- Hern  andez Lagana, M., S. Phillips, and A. Poisot. 2022. Self-evaluation and holistic assessment of climate resilience of
- farmers and pastoralists (SHARP) . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
- Ifejika Speranza, C. 2013. Buffer capacity: Capturing a dimension of resilience to climate change in African smallholder agriculture. Regional Environmental Change 13 (3):521 -35. doi: 10.1007/s10113-012-0391-5.
- Jacobi, J., S. Mukhovi, A. Llanque, H. Augstburger, F. K € aser, C. Pozo, M. Ngutu Peter, J. M. F. Delgado, B. P. Kiteme, S. Rist, et al. 2018. Operationalizing food system resilience: An indicator-based assessment in agroindustrial, smallholder farming, and agroecological contexts in Bolivia and Kenya. Land Use Policy 79:433 -46. doi: 10.1016/j.landusepol.2018.08.044.
- Jacobi, J., M. Schneider, P. Bottazzi, M. Pillco, P. Calizaya, and S. Rist. 2015. Agroecosystem resilience and farmers ' perceptions of climate change impacts on cocoa farms in Alto Beni, Bolivia. Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems 30 (2):170 -83. doi: 10.1017/ S174217051300029X.
- Janssen, M. A., J. M. Anderies, and E. Ostrom. 2007. Robustness of social-ecological systems to spatial and temporal variability. Society &amp; Natural Resources 20 (4): 307 -22. doi: 10.1080/08941920601161320.
- Lawley, C. 2020. Potential impacts of COVID-19 on Canadian farmland markets. Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics/Revue Canadienne D ' agroeconomie 68 (2):245 -50. doi: 10.1111/cjag.12242.
- Letourneau, A. M., and D. Davidson. 2022. Farmer identities: Facilitating stability and change in agricultural system transitions. Environmental Sociology 8 (4):459 -70. doi: 10.1080/23251042.2022.2064207.
- Liu, W. T. 2014. The application of resilience assessment -Resilience of what, to what, with what? A case study based on Caledon, Ontario, Canada. Ecology and Society 19 (4):21. doi: 10.5751/ES-06843-190421.
- Mbow, C., C. Rosenzweig, L. G. Barioni, T. G. Benton, M. Herrero, M. Krishnapillai, E. Liwenga, P. Pradhan, M. G. Rivera-Ferre, T. Sapkota, F. N. Tubiello, and Y. Xu. 2019. Food Security. In Climate change and land: An IPCC special report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems . Accessed May 30, 2025. https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2019/ 11/08\_Chapter-5.pdf
- McNeill, D. 2019. The contested discourse of sustainable agriculture. Global Policy 10 (Suppl. 1):16 -27. doi: 10. 1111/1758-5899.12603.
- Meuwissen, M. P. M., P. H. Feindt, A. Spiegel, C. J. Termeer, E. Mathijs, Y. d Mey, R. Finger, A. Balmann, E. Wauters, J. Urquhart, et al. 2019. A framework to assess the resilience of farming systems. Agricultural Systems 176:102656. doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2019.102656.
- O ' Keeffe, J., W. Buytaert, A. Mijic, N. Brozovi  c, and R. Sinha. 2016. The use of semi-structured interviews for the characterisation of farmer irrigation practices. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 20 (5):1911 -24. doi: 10.5194/hess-20-1911-2016.
- Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food, and Rural Affairs (OMAFRA). 2013. Published results-based plan 2013e14. Guelph, ON, Canada: OMAFRA.

- Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food, and Rural Affairs (OMAFRA). 2018. Canada-Ontario environmental farm plan . Guelph, ON, Canada: OMAFRA.
- Rotz, S., and E. D. G. Fraser. 2015. Resilience and the industrial food system: Analyzing the impacts of agricultural industrialization on food system vulnerability. Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences 5 (3):459 -73. doi: 10.1007/s13412-015-0277-1.
- Smith, P. G. R. 2015. Long-term temporal trends in Agrienvironment and agricultural land use in Ontario, Canada: Transformation, transition and significance. Journal of Geography and Geology 7 (2):32 -55.
- Teixeira, H. M., L. Van den Berg, I. M. Cardoso, A. J. Vermue, F. J. J. A. Bianchi, M. Pe ~ na-Claros, and P. Tittonell. 2018. Understanding farm diversity to promote agroecological transitions. Sustainability 10 (12): 4337. doi: 10.3390/su10124337.
- Terry, G., N. Hayfield, V. Clarke, and V. Braun. 2017. Thematic analysis. In The Sage handbook of qualitative research in psychology , ed. C. Willig and W. S. Rogers, 17 -37. London: Sage.
- Therond, O., M. Duru, J. Roger-Estrade, and G. Richard. 2017. A new analytical framework of farming system and agriculture model diversities. A review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development 37 (3):1 -24. doi: 10.1007/ s13593-017-0429-7.

## Appendix

Interview Template for Farmers

## Section 1. General Characteristics of the Farm

1. How long have you and your family been in the farming business? How did you learn to farm?
2. Can you describe your current farming operations in terms of how much land you operate and what crops/livestock or other products you grow?
3. Land size (owned vs. rented in þ rented out)
4. Crops (acres, cultivation strategies)
5. Livestock (types and numbers)
6. How has this changed over the past ten years?
7. Why do you focus on these crops/livestock as opposed to other options?
8. What machinery do you rely on to farm in this manner?
9. What is the workforce on the farm? Do hired workers have the skills and experience that you are looking for? Have you ever had trouble finding qualified workers?

## Section 2. Markets

10. From whom do you buy inputs -seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, machinery?
2. Tittonell, P. 2020. Assessing resilience and adaptability in agroecological transitions. Agricultural Systems 184: 102862. doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2020.102862.
3. United Nations (UN). 2013. Technical support team (TST) issues brief: Sustainable agriculture. United Nations General Assembly Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals. Accessed May 30, 2025. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/ 1554TST\_compendium\_issues\_briefs\_rev1610.pdf
4. Whitton, J., and A. Carmichael. 2024. Systemic barriers preventing farmer engagement in the agricultural climate transition: A qualitative study. Sustainability Science 2024:1 -14. doi: 10.1007/s11625-024-01504-7.
5. Zong, X., X. Liu, G. Chen, and Y. Yin. 2022. A deepunderstanding framework and assessment indicator system for climate-resilient agriculture. Ecological Indicators 136:108597. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2022.108597.

BRYAN COLLINS is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography and Environmental Sustainability at SUNY Oneonta, Oneonta, NY 13820. E-mail: bryan.collins@oneonta.edu. His research interests include movements toward sustainable agricultural systems in the United States and Canada, as well as the issue of equitable land access for farmers.

11. And where do you sell output to?
12. How volatile are market prices at present? How do you seek to maximize the price you receive for your output?
13. What crops/products can you make the biggest profit margins on?
14. What crops/products provide the most reliable income stream?
15. How important is readily available credit for your farming operations? Are there ways to get subsidized credit for farmers?
16. A lot of Ontario farmers are reported to have seen escalating levels of debt over the past decade?
17. Is that something you think afflicts farmers in this region? If so, why is debt a growing problem?

## Section 3. Risks

18. What would you consider to be the three biggest short-term risks that you face at the beginning of a season? In other words, what are the three things that most keep you up at night when considering the immediate season ahead?
19. And what would you consider to be the three biggest medium or longer-term risks that you face -i.e. stuff that will manifest over the coming five to ten years?

## Section 4. Off-Farm Income

20. What kinds of income streams do you have aside from direct farming activities?
21. How important are these for your yearly household income?
22. In your opinion, how important has off-farm income become for farmers in this region?

## Section 5. Environmental Stresses and Risks

23. What would you say are the key environmental risks your farm currently faces?
24. Over the past years, a number of farmers have noted the possibility of drought as a serious threat. Have you experienced climate variability of this nature? If so, how does it affect your operations?
25. Are your operations entirely dependent upon rainfall, or do you have any forms of irrigation?
26. When growing crops, how are you dealing with pests?
27. Do you monitor your soil quality? Are there any actions you take to aid soil health?
28. How do you manage waste on the farm?

## Section 6. Learning, Information Sharing, and Sources of Support

29. Other than your own experience, are there any particular sources you go to learn new approaches, technologies, or problem-solving?
30. Do local farmers have networks to share information -formal or informal?
31. How do you learn about what seeds, technologies, and inputs to buy? From other farmers or input dealers?
32. What do you make of the emphasis on farming for local markets? Have you noticed a shift on moving from national markets to local markets?
33. If you could change anything about your farm to reduce stresses or risks, what would you change? What are barriers that would prevent you from making this change?
34. Do you or any farmer you know participate in farmers ' unions? Do you think they provide any benefits?
35. Do you or other farmers around here participate in crop insurance programs or something of that nature?
36. Do you engage much with OMAFRA or government agencies? Do they offer any supports for farmers? Are they responsive to farmer needs?
37. How about the OFA or other farmer associations?
38. Do farmers still share knowledge among each other? Is there still a sense of farming community in this area?

## Interview Template for Input Dealers

1. What are the biggest stressors that farmers are facing currently?
2. Are you noticing farmers relying on your services more often than in the past?
3. What new products are farmers using?
4. How closely do you work with farmers to identify products that would be useful to them?
5. How do you recommend specific products to farmers?
6. Do you collaborate with other agricultural organizations?
7. What do you feel is the key to agriculture becoming more sustainable in this region over the next decade?

## Interview Template for Agricultural Organizations

1. What is the general role that your organization has in assisting farmers in the region?
2. What are the biggest economic stresses that farmers are facing currently?
3. What are the biggest environmental stresses that farmers are facing currently?
4. How are these stresses going to change in the future?
5. How are you planning on dealing with these stresses? Are there any barriers your organization may face that would interfere with these plans?
6. Do you feel that your organization, other agricultural organizations, and farmers have a shared vision of what are the biggest threats they face?
7. Do you feel that your organization, other agricultural organizations, and farmers have a shared vision of how to best deal with these threats?
8. What are some important policies recently implemented and what has been their impact?
9. How do you view the state of agriculture in Ontario and how do you foresee it changing in the future?