ROBERT  CROMLEY (Ph.D.  Ohio State  University)  is  Professor  in  the  Department of  Geography at the University of  Connecticut,  Storrs, CT 06269. His research  interests include socioeconomic applications of  GIS and computer cartographics.

ELLEN  CROMLEY  (Ph.D.  University  of  Kentucky)  is  Associate  Professor  in the  Department of Geography at the University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269. Her research  interests  include  medical care  delivery systems, medical  mapping,  and  socioeconomic applications of  GIS.

## Tolerance and Rejection: The Vote on Colorado's Amendment Two

## Richard K. Ormrod and David B.  Cole

University of Northern Colorado

Colorado's 1992 vote  on Amendment Two was  the first meaningful, broad-based test  of  attitudes  on gay  rights within the United States. Analysis of voting results distinguishes places of  tolerance from places of rejection. Social differences separating  these  places  reflect typical contrasts  between 'traditionalists' and  'modernizers' found  in cultural  conflicts  at  the  national  level.  Places  showing  support  for  gay  rights  are  recreational-based  mountain communities, urban  areas, and  university communities. Those showing opposition  are rural, agriculturally hascd communities. Suburban areas produced  a  more  ambivalent vote. Key Words:  gay rights, votes, social spaces, Colorado.

e  1990s have  emerged  as  a  decade  of T continuing values  clashes,  punctuated  by local and  national conflicts over  women's rights, abortion, the place of religion in schools,  and  homosexual  rights,  among other issues.  Emerging  social  movements  pursuing cultural  change  are  colliding  with  forces  of reaction and tradition. A well-publicized  example of such a confrontation is the 1992 vote in Colorado  on Amendment  Two,  an  initiative that forbids any government entity within the state to  enact laws  or ordinances that protect persons  from  discrimination based  on  sexual orientation. Amendment Two was, in effect, a statewide referendum on  the issue of  gay rights.  T h e  initiative passed  by  a modest margin,  with  53.4%  of  the  voters  in  favor.  Its passage generated immediate reaction and controversy throughout the counny, including denunciations by  opponents, praise  from supporters, a boycott of Colorado by national gay and lesbian groups, and cancellation or relocation  of  many  national  conventions  originally set in Colorado.

This highly visible  episode presents  an opportunity to explore the social and geographic context within which such a political  struggle occurs.  At  the  state level  the vote produced  a clear victory for the initiative's proponents, but at the local  level  outcomes were more uncertain,  with  the  vote  varying  widely  (Fig. 1). Colorado  is a composite  of  many  smaller places,  each with its  own mix of residents and opinions. For each place,  the vote on Amendment Two reports the locally dominant opinion. The variations in this vote allow place-byplace  comparisons of both prevailing  attitudes on gay rights and related background characteristics.

The goal  of  this  study  is  to  describe  and explain the social patterns associated with local differences  in  the  vote  on Amendment  Two. Recent studies in electoral geography have advanced  the  argument  that social  spaces  both reflect the effects of societal forces at work and in  turn  shape  and  direct  those  forces  (e.g., Eamon  and  Elliot  1994;  Duncan  and  Epps 1992; Hodge  and  Staeheli  1992).  Social  and

Figure 1: Vote on Amendment  Two, Colorado,  1992.

<!-- image -->

political attitudes, such as those regarding  gay rights, are one important artifact of such interaction, and it is expected that voting contrasts in Colorado will be found to be systematically related  to  the  social  character  of  the  places examined. The primary aim of this paper is to identify  the  kinds  of  places  in  Colorado  in which voters  demonstrated  tolerance  for  homosexuals  and  gay  rights,  and  the  kinds  of places in which they did not. In short, is there a coherent and demonstrable social geography that lies  behind and  informs  the  vote  on Amendment  Two,  and if so, what  are its distinguishing  features,  and  what  is  its  cultural history?

Colorado's vote offers a unique opportunity to  pursue  such  questions.  In  many  ways  the vote is  a bellwether of attitudes on gay rights, with the state likely to mirror the nation. This vote was the first meaningful, broad-based test of views on gay rights. It is noteworthy for the range of  citizens who voted, as well as for the scope  of  its  possible  ramifications.  Previous votes on gay rights have occurred primarily at the county or municipal levels, with both their potential  electorate  and  effects  confined  to a limited  setting  (Adam  1987, 125). An  earlier state-level vote, a  1978 California initiative on the  employment  of  homosexual schoolteachers, although viewed by some as a vote on gay rights,  presented  voters  with  a  relatively nar- row  question.  In  contrast,  Amendment  Two has the ability to touch the lives of  every person in  every place in the state and provides a precedent  for similar initiatives in other states. Colorado's vote  was  the  first  to  clearly place the  basic  issue  of  gay  rights  before  such  a broad spectrum of citizens.

## Social and Political Context

The gay and lesbian rights movement is a welldeveloped, mature political movement that has made  important  gains  at local, national,  and international  scales (Nava and Dawidoff  1994; Cruikshank 1992; Adam  1987). It is also a part of  a larger set of  'new' social-political movements  pursuing  either  more  complete  civil rights for specific constituencies or fundamental  changes in  traditional  social arrangements or practices (Aronowitz 1992, 11; Cruikshank 1992,  118; Epstein  1991, 46).  These  include the  civil  rights,  antiwar, antinuclear, women's liberation,  ecological,  and  consumer  movements, among others.

For these movements, and the political confrontations  they  generate,  places  are  important.  Places  provide  the  social  spaces within which movements germinate and grow. Their emergence  depends on the availability of  settings within which a potential action group can live  and  operate  freely.  Such spaces allow the

unrestricted social  interaction necessary for the creation of independently defined social identities,  the  recognition  of  common  interests, and the emergence of a community willing and able  to  act  together  in  advancing a  political agenda (Epstein 1991, 240-42; Adam  1987, 6; Evans and Boyte 1986, 17-19).  They are critical to the creation and survival of a movement. Conversely, social spaces also provide bases for opposition. Places with concentrations of  persons  who  oppose  the  goals  and  values  of  a social  movement  often act as centers  and sources of  resistance to it.

The vote on Amendment  Two outlines an incipient  geography  of  such  social  spaces.  It identifies the kinds of  places within Colorado (and perhaps beyond) likely to provide support for  the  emergence  of  gay  self-awareness and group identity, and likely to provide a political power  base  for  a  local  gay  rights  movement. The vote also reveals the nature  of  the places where  gay  rights  are  most  emphatically  rejected, places where the political power base of the opposition is formed.

Such patterns  are  an  important  framework for  the  political  struggle  over  gay  rights  and have implications beyond the local scene. The gay rights movement is only one of a number of  similar movements that have apparently become embroiled in a continuing national 'cultural  civil  war.'  Gitlin  characterized  this  as  a struggle  between  'traditionalists'  and  'modernizers' (Steinfels 1988),  while Hunter (1991) has labeled the  protagonists  'cultural conservatives' and 'progressives.'  Modernizers (progressives) pursue  social  and  economic  'progress' and  accept  change  as  an  essential  requirement for achieving this goal, while traditionalists (cultural conservatives)  value the status quo and follow a  path  of social conservatism (Luebke 1990;  Eamon and Elliott 1994).  These  competing  moral  visions  have deep historical roots and go beyond such immediate political distinctions as liberal-conservative or Democrat-Republican (Hunter 1991). The growing influence of  tradition  on many people's lives  may  reflect a  response to the postmodern world, with its increasing pace of  change  and  volatility  (Harvey  1989, 29192).

The  modernizer-traditionalist  conflict  reflects a major cleavage in contemporary American culture and society and is seen in the drawing up of  sides in a number of  confrontations,  including  elections  and  debates  over school prayer, abortion, and affirmative action, among others. For example, Ronald Reagan's nomination  of  Robert  Bork  to  the  Supreme Court  produced  support  from  the  American Conservative Union, the National Association of Evangelicals, and the National Right to Life Committee, and opposition from the National Association  for  the  Advancement of  Colored People, the National Organization for Women,  Planned  Parenthood,  and  the  National  Gay  and  Lesbian Task Force,  to  name just some of the groups taking a formal position  (Steinfels 1988).

Leubke (1990) describes similar alignments in  recent  North  Carolina  political  struggles, with the competing ideals of traditionalism and modernism dividing both  candidates and voters. In that state, traditionalists are often found in  small  towns  and  rural  areas,  engaged  in agriculture and traditional industries, and associated with fundamentalist Protestantism. They  typically  favor  traditional  social  roles, including patriarchal families, and oppose big government, government regulation, taxes, public education, and egalitarian social movements  (Leubke  1990, 19-20).  Modernists  are more  secular, urban-based,  often  newcomers to  their  places  o f   residence,  and  better  educated.  They  tend  to  favor  economic  growth and  development, improved public education, social change, an active government, and taxes to provide an  efficient infrastructure  (Leubke 1990, 20-21). In  a  study of  North  Carolina's 1990  senatorial  election,  Eamon  and  Elliott (1994) find  these  differences reflected in  the political behavior  of  the  state's voters  and  in the geographic patterns of its votes.

The  distinction  between  modernizers  and traditionalists captures important cultural divisions within American society and can be used with  caution  to  interpret  the  experiences  of many of  the  'new' social movements. Adam (1 987), in his comparative historical sociology of  the  gay  and  lesbian  movement,  ties  the conflict over homosexuality to this model. In particular, he identifies three conspicuous components of the opposition: (1) a number of single-issue groups defending a range of traditional  social  arrangements,  such  as  antiabortion,  anti-ERA,  and  anti-gun  control  groups; (2) evangelicals who are committed to an ide-

ology  of  general  social  conservatism; and  (3) capitalist activists, from both the small business and the corporate communities, who generally oppose state regulation  of business and social relationships (Adam  1987, 108).

Although each of these components follows its own specific motivations, they all are committed  to maintaining traditional  social values and relationships and see change as threatening  the  social  order  and  their  own  place  in society. According to Adam  (1987,  108-109), these  groups  are  not just  anti-homosexual in nature,  but  tend  to  oppose  any movement  or trend  that  seeks  to  redefine  existing  social structures  and  patterns.  They  can  be  found opposing many women's rights initiatives,  pornography,  abortion  rights,  sex  education,  the teaching of evolution, and the enlargement of civil rights, among other things.

Adam uses these interrelated  social agendas to explore the demographic profiles of persons likely  to  oppose  or  support  gay  rights.  He compares  the  profiles  of  participants  in  the pro-family movement with those of supporters and  opponents  of  selected women's  and  gay issues, including the Equal Rights Amendment and a vote on  a gay  rights  ordinance in Eugene, Oregon, and finds a number  of  consistencies (Adam  1987, 11  1-13).  His comparisons  suggest  that  persons  likely  to  oppose homosexuality and  gay  rights  are  disproportionately white, older, married members of traditional families, female, less educated and low income, Evangelicals and fundamentalists who attend  church  regularly,  and  living  in  rural areas.  In  contrast,  supporters  are  more  often younger, single, well educated, skilled workers or professionals, unreligious,  male, nonwhite, and living in urban centers.

These  profiles  are  highly  generalized  and represent  the  'average'  characteristics  of a large number of persons. Although such profiles are not valid  descriptions of individuals,  they  do define group  traits.  In particular, they summarize those characteristics  most consistently associated with sentiments on homosexuality, gay rights, and social change in general. As such, they are important elements of  the  social  and  attitudinal  context  within which  gay  rights  confrontations  occur. They also identify characteristics likely to show geographic  variation.  Presumably,  these  descriptors are as germane to Colorado as they are to the  national  scene  and  will  be  used  here  to guide  the  analysis  of  the  Amendment  Two vote.  At  the  same  time,  their  use  will  test whether this assumption is justified.

## Methodology

Voting  data  are  available  in  aggregate  form only, which sets limits on their use. Because of ecological problems, they are considered weak indicators  of  the  dynamics of  individual decision  making. However, vote  counts  do  effectively summarize the  trend  of  decisions made at each place reported  and allow the identification  of  spatial  patterns  in  voting  outcomes. These  patterns,  in  turn,  generally  correlate well with important social characteristics of the places  involved,  identifying  real  associations and a meaningful geography.

Voting results are reported  at two levels, for entire counties and for precincts within counties.  Both  scales were  used  in  exploring  the links between place character and voting. The first  encompasses the  entire state,  comparing outcomes  among  all  Colorado  counties;  the second considers a more local scale, looking at differences among census tracts within two selected counties. Because of their size, counties are  weak  representatives  of  the  social  spaces within  which  most  persons  experience  their lives, while census tracts are closer in scale to such  spaces.  Data are  readily  available  for counties,  yet  quite  costly  to  organize  at  the tract  level. It was  felt that selective analysis at both scales,  with a comparison  of results, would be a reasonable compromise given these constraints.

The first part of the analysis compares counties  across  the  state. A number  of  social and demographic  indicators  thought  likely  to  be linked  to  attitudes  on  homosexuals  and  gay rights  were  identified and  developed for  each county  from  information  found  in  the  1990 census:  educational  levels,  income,  age  patterns, occupational  structure  and  economic base, sex ratios, residential mobility, household type,  ethnicity, rurahrban character, and  religious affiliation (Table 1). Specific indicators were suggested by  the  generalized profiles  of gay rights proponents and opponents discussed above.  For  example, sex  ratios  (SEXRATIO) attempt  to  capture  possible effects of  gender differences, while residential mobility (NEW-

COMER)  and  local  importance  of  tourism (RECREAT) both assess the impact of the local presence of  outsiders.

A measure of  religious affiliation was developed  for  each  county  using  data  on  church membership from Churches and  Church Membership i n the  United States, 1990 (Bradley et al. 1992). The specific measure used  consists of the percentage of persons in each county who are members of congregations whose members most  consistently report  strong negative attitudes toward  homosexuality. As noted  earlier, fundamentalist beliefs are  typically associated with negative attitudes on gay rights. This presumption  is  supported  by  findings  from  the National  Opinion  Research Center's General Soci a l Survey (1990,  1991,  1993): 66.5% of non-fundamentalist  respondents  felt  that  homosexuality was 'always wrong,' while 85.9% of those persons who identified themselves as fundamentalist  felt  this  way.  The  congregations included in the religious affiliation measure  (FUNDAMEN) were identified using information  from the General Social Survey that links  individual respondents' attitudes  toward homosexuality with  their religious affiliations. Denominations were included if they could be readily  identified  in  the  church  membership report (Bradley et al.  1992) and if they had at least 86% of their sampled members reporting homosexuality as 'always wrong.'

Multiple regression was used to identify associations and measure their importance. Factor  analysis with  varimax  rotation  was  used prior  to  regression  to  reduce  the  amount  of redundancy  present  in  the  original variables. We find that the use of composite factors provides more complete and meaningful descrip-

Table 1 Social Indicators,  1990

| Variable Name                                                                                                          | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| BLACK BLUECOL DEGREES FAMILY FUNDAMEN HISPANIC INCOME NEWCOMER NODIPLOM NONFAMLY OLDER PROFESNL RECREAT RURAL SEXRATIO | Percent of total persons who are black Percent of employed persons, 16+. in blue-collarlobs Percent of persons, 18+. with bachelor's degree or higher Percent of total persons in family households Percent of total persons in selected fundamentalist congregations Percent of total persons who are of Hispanic origin Median household income in 1989 Percent of persons, 5+. living in different county in 1985 Percent of persons, 18+. with no high school diploma Percent of total persons in nonfamily households Percent of total persons who are 65+ Percent of employed persons, 16+. in professional lobs Percent of vacant housing classified as seasonal Percent of total persons living outside urbanizedareas Sex ratio' number of males per 100 females |

tions  of  place  character  than  do  the  simpler, more  diffuse initial variables. The factor data were  compared  to  the  vote  on  Amendment Two, using stepwise multiple regression. Because orthogonally rotated  factors are statistically  independent,  the  stepped  procedure  is not needed to control for multicollinearity but does  produce  a  simplified final model  with  a clear  ranking  of  the  relative  importance  of each relevant factor. Inclusion of a factor in the final  model  is based  on  its  statistical  significance level alone.

The same procedure was used  at the intracounty  level,  with  some  modifications made necessary by the change in scale. Not all of the 16 original social indicators were  used; some were deemed not relevant or not likely to be important  to  the  specific  counties  examined and were excluded from the analysis. Also, information  on  church  membership  for  intracounty  places  is  not  available. An  additional problem  is  that votes within  counties  are reported  at the  precinct  level, while  social and demographic data from the census are available for census tracts. The boundaries for these two types  of  data  units  typically  do  not  coincide and the data sets had to be reconciled before a comparison  could  be  made.  For  this  study, census tracts were used as the unit of analysis. Desired social indicators could be  derived directly  from  the  census, but  the  vote  for  each tract  had  to  be  estimated  from  precinct  returns. Estimates were made through the use of a geographic information system, which compared  the  locations  of  precincts  to  the  locations of census tracts and assigned votes based on relative congruence.

Factor  analysis  produced  7  interpretable  rotated  factors  that  effectively summarized  the patterns  found  in the  16 initial variables (Table 2). County factor scores were entered into a  stepwise  multiple  regression,  with  the  percentage of  persons voting in favor of  Amendment Two in each county (PCNTYES) as the dependent  variable. A 'yes' vote  represented opposition  to  gay  rights.  Four  of  the  factors were  found  to  be  statistically significant (Table 3): socioeconomic trend (Factor  l), household  pattern  (Factor 3), relative  number  of Hispanics (Factor 6), and degree of tourist orientation  (Factor  7).  Together  these  characteristics  account  for  about  two-thirds (R2 = 67%) of  the variation  in voting.  Factor 1 explains 36% of  the variation in the vote, while Factor 3 explains an additional 2 1 % (Table 3). These two factors dominate the social geography of  the vote. Factor  1 identifies a county's socioeconomic  character,  which can range from  'dynamic,'  with  many  newcomers,  a young  population,  high  levels  of  education, high  incomes,  and  many  persons  in  professional occupations, to  'static,' with  few newcomers,  an  aging  population,  low  levels  of -education,  and lower incomes. Factor 3 identifies  a  county's  pattern  of  household  types, which range  from  those  dominated  by  family households  to  those  with  many  nonfamily households. In general, votes  in  dynamic, nonfamily  household  counties  went  strongly

Table 2 Factor  Identities: State Level

| Variable       | Rotated Loadings'   | Rotated Loadings'   | Rotated Loadings'   | Rotated Loadings'   | Rotated Loadings'       | Rotated Loadings'   | Rotated Loadings'   |
|----------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|-------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Factor         | 1                   | 2                   | 3                   | 4                   | 5                       | 6                   | 7                   |
| OLDER          | -.87                | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                       | -                   | -                   |
| INCOME         | 87                  | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                       | -                   | -                   |
| PROFESNL       | .86                 | -                   | -                   | -                   | - -                     | -                   | -                   |
| DEGREES        | .83                 | -                   | -                   | -                   |                         | -                   | -                   |
| NODIPLOM       | -.a1                | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                       | -                   | - -                 |
| BLUECOL        | - 78                | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                       | -                   | -                   |
| NEWCOMER       | 78                  | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                       | -                   |                     |
| BLACK          | -                   | 91                  | -                   | -                   | -                       | -                   | - -                 |
| URBAN          | -                   | 82                  | -                   | -                   | -                       | -                   |                     |
| RURAL          | -                   | - 58                | -                   | -                   | -                       | -                   | .52                 |
| FAMILY         | -                   | -                   | 88                  | -                   | -                       | -                   | -                   |
| NONFAMILY      | -                   | -                   | 4 6 -               | -                   | -                       | -                   | -                   |
| SEXRATIO       | -                   | -                   |                     | -92                 | -                       | -                   | -                   |
| FUNDAMEN       | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   | -.94                    | -                   | -                   |
| HISPANIC       | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                       | -.94                | -                   |
| RECREAT        | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                       | -                   | a7                  |
| Interpretation | Socioeconomic Trend | Black Presence      | Household Type      | Sex Ratio           | Fundamentalist Presence | Hispanic Presence   | Tourist- Oriented   |

against Amendment  Two, while static, family household counties  showed  strong  support for  it.  Many  counties  possess  a  mixture  of these  two  patterns  and  their  vote  varied  accordingly.

Several characteristics were found not to be associated with  the vote,  including  a  county's sex  ratio  and  the  relative  presence  of  blacks and  fundamentalists. Blacks  were  expected to support  gay  rights  in  Colorado,  having often formed  equal  rights  coalitions in  the  past  in other  settings  (Adam  1987,  164-165).  Their apparent lack of  association with  the vote  on Amendment  Two  is  probably  explained  by their  high  degree  of  concentration  in  a  few urban  counties (91.4% found inside only 4 of Colorado's 63  counties). At  the  county level, blacks  do  not  possess  enough  place-to-place variation  to  show  a  systematic effect  on  the vote.  Perhaps  more  surprising  is  the  lack  of association  between  the  presence  of  fundamentalists, a characteristic that shows considerable  variation  among  counties,  and  voting outcomes. Two  possible  explanations for  this result come to mind. One is that, at this scale, religious affiliation is deeply intertwined  with other, more important social characteristics-a condition  suggested  by  the  complex  opponendsupporter profiles discussed earlier-with these other characteristics more strongly linked to voting patterns than church membership.  Another possibility is that  responses given in  public  opinion  polls  are poor  guides to actual behaviors, such as voting.

Table 3 Final Multiple Regression Model,  State Level

| Included Factor   | Regression Coef IbJ   | BETA Coef   | Factor Interpretation         |   R2' |   Increase in R2 |   Probability' |
|-------------------|-----------------------|-------------|-------------------------------|-------|------------------|----------------|
| Factor 1          | -6 6                  | - 60        | Ascending socioeconomic trend |    36 |               36 |            000 |
| Factor 3          | 5 1                   | 46          | Family households             |    57 |               21 |            000 |
| Factor 7          | -2 9                  | - 27        | Tourist-oriented              |    64 |               07 |            001 |
| Factor6           | 1 7                   | 16          | Non-HisDanic                  |    67 |               03 |            045 |

*In all cases, the adjusted R2 i s within .02 o f Rz

'*.OF significnnn level

The emergence  of  two  strong explanatory variables-Factors 1 and  3-allows the  identification  of  a  limited  number of  recognizable and  definitive  county  types  closely  linked  to major contrasts in the vote. Partitioning cluster  analysis was  used  to distinguish these sets of  counties  and summarize  their  character. Classifications  with  two  to  four  clusters  were considered,  but a comparison of cluster membership,  as well as group means and variances for  the  criterion  variables, established that three  groups  provided  the most  interpretable description  of  county  types  (Table  4).  T h e relevance  of  these  three  types  was  confirmed by comparing group membership with the vote on Amendment Two (PCNTYES), a variable not  used  in  the  clustering  process.  Factor  1 contributed most  to  the separation of  groups (F ratio = 61.7, p = .OOO), followed by Factor 3 (F ratio = 43.5,  p = .OOO).

The groupings effectively capture and summarize  the  interplay  of  key  elements  in  the social  context  of  the  Amendment Two vote. They also begin to reveal the social geography of the vote (Fig. 2).  Type 1 counties are those that show limited change ('static') and possess a balance between family and nonfamily households  (Table  4).  Most are  found  in the rural areas of the state's eastern plains. Type 2 counties,  concentrated  in  the  mountains  west of  Denver and including Denver  County, are dynamic places undergoing growth and change

Table 4  Cluster identities

| Variable   | Group Mean           | Interpretation                  |
|------------|----------------------|---------------------------------|
| Factor 1   | Type 1 Counties - 80 | Balanced household Trend static |
| Factor 3   | 07                   | types                           |
| Factor 1   | 83                   | Trend dynamic                   |
| Factor 3   | -1 44                | Nonfamily household types       |
| Factor 1   | 82                   | Trend dynamic                   |
| Factor 3   | 79                   | Family household types          |

and contain many nonfamily households. Type 3 counties are also dynamic,  but  with a stronger presence of family households.  Many are  suburban  counties  near  Denver.  Type  1 counties are those most  likely  to  support Amendment Two (average  vote,  65%  'yes'), while  Type  2  counties  most  consistently opposed  it  (average  vote,  59%  'no').  Type  3 counties are more  ambiguous,  with some voting moderately in favor and others moderately against (average vote, 55% 'yes').  These groupings provide  a  framework for the selection  of  the  counties  to  be  used  in  the  intracounty analysis.

## lntracounty Patterns

State-level patterns, based on the use of county data units, present a broad view of attitudes on gay rights. But people typically sort themselves out socially at a more local scale, with sharper contrasts expected between neighborhoods than  counties. Consequently,  analysis  of  the vote  was  also  undertaken  at the  intra-county level. Two contrasting counties, one a Type  1 county, the other a Type 2, were selected  for scrutiny.  T h e   first  is  Weld  County,  located northeast  of  Denver;  the  second  is  Denver County.  Weld  County  is  large  in  area  and shows  considerable  internal  diversity.  It  includes  strongly  rural,  agricultural  areas,  with other parts reaching into the expanding urban

0 I\_

strong support in the county's rural  and small town  areas. Ten social indicators,  considered potentially relevant and useful within the county context, were used to delimit the social geography behind the vote. Factor analysis revealed  four  interpretable  rotated  factors  that summarize the variation present  in these indicators (Table 5). Two factors, household character  (Factor 2) and  the  relative  presence  of Hispanics (Factor 4) are statistically related to the county's  vote, together  accounting  for 71.5%  of  its variation (Table 6).  In  the social mix  of  Weld  County's census  tracts,  neither social  class  differences  (Factor  l), based  on educational  and  occupational  measures,  nor age differences (Factor 3) were useful in identifylng contrasting  amtudes on gay rights.

The vote in most  tracts shows a  consistent anti-homosexual bias. Those where the initiative was  defeated were exceptional and  in the

Figure 2: County types, Colorado.

<!-- image -->

fringe around metropolitan Denver. The county seat, Greeley, is a  small city and contains a medium-sized state university, the University of  Northern  Colorado. A majority  of Weld County voters showed opposition to gay rights,  voting  59%  in  favor  of  Amendment Two.  Denver  County,  containing  the  state's largest city, holds more voters than  any other Colorado county. It is heavily urban in character, showing strong social contrasts  among its parts.  In  Denver  County,  60% of  voters  rejected Amendment Two.

## Weld County

Although  the Amendment Two vote in Weld County showed widespread anti-gay rights attitudes, not all places within the county passed the initiative. For example, in parts of Greeley, the county's major urban center, it went down to defeat  (Fig. 3). In contrast,  it  received

Table 5 Factor Ident/t/es Weld County

| Variable Factor   | Rotated Loadings'   | Rotated Loadings'   | Rotated Loadings'   | Rotated Loadings'   |
|-------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Variable Factor   | 1                   | 2                   | 3                   | 4                   |
| PROFESNL          | 94                  | - -                 | -                   | - -                 |
| DEGREES           | 91                  | -                   | - -                 | -                   |
| BLUECOL           | - 85                |                     |                     | -                   |
| INCOME            | 59                  | 58                  | -                   |                     |
| NODIPLOM          | - 54                | -                   | - -                 | - 82 -              |
| FAMILY            | -                   | 97                  |                     |                     |
| NEWCOMER          | -                   | - 92                | -                   | -                   |
| NONFAMILY         | -                   | - 71                | - 60                | -                   |
| OLDER             | -                   | -                   | -98                 | -                   |
| HISPANIC          | -                   | -                   | -                   | - 92                |
| Interpretation    | Social Class        | Household Character | Age Pattern         | Hispanic Presence   |

'

Figure 3 : Vote on Amendment  Two, Weld County, 1992.

<!-- image -->

minority.  But  it  is  these  minority  tracts  that most  clearly  reveal  the  characteristics associated with a majority vote for the tolerance  of homosexuality. Amendment Two was defeated in  only 6 of  Weld  County's 3 3 census tracts, all  located  within  Greeley  (Fig. 3). Three of these  tracts  have  strong  negative  scores  on Factor  2,  indicating they  contain  many  transient, nonfamily households. In fact, these are primarily student residential areas around  the University  of  Northern  Colorado.  In  Weld County, NEWCOMER correlates very highly (r = .91) with the presence of college students. Also,  three  'defeat'  tracts  score  highly  and negatively on Factor 4, showing a strong Hispanic presence. One of these was also included in  the  student  group.  The  sixth  tract  where Amendment Two was  defeated did  not  share these  characteristics. It shows a  low Hispanic presence  and  only  a  moderate  share  of  students. It is adjacent to the university, however, and  its vote may reflect that association.

ready to accept alternate lifestyles. They typcally have  not started  families nor  invested in long-term neighborhood commitments,  and consequently  do  not  feel  threatened  by  the social change implied in the acceptance of homosexual  lifestyles.  Hispanics,  on  the  other hand, may be showing support for homosexuals out of  empathy, viewing them as a  marginalized group experiencing much of the same social  discrimination  that they,  themselves, face. In other places, Hispanics and other minorities have readily formed political coalitions with homosexuals in order to advance common social agendas (Adam  1987, 164-165). In the case  of  Weld  County,  tracts  dominated  by these two groups and their values emerged as isolated islands within a sea of more traditional attitudes.

## Denver

College  students  are  more  likely  to  hold 'modernizer'  attitudes  than  are  many  others in the population, and they are generally more

Denver County represents the heart of a large metropolitan  region,  an  area  containing  well over  a  million persons. It shows much of the variety  expected  in  an  older  central  city, including decaying, low-income neighborhoods,

Table 6 Final Multiple Regression Model, Weld County

| Included Factor   | Regression Coef (bl   |   BETA Coef | Factor Interpretation   |   R2' |   Increase in R2 |   Probability'' |
|-------------------|-----------------------|-------------|-------------------------|-------|------------------|-----------------|
| Factor 2          | 5 2                   |          66 | Family households       |    44 |               44 |             000 |
| Factor4           | 4 1                   |          52 | Non-Hlsoanic            |    72 |               28 |             000 |

Table 7  Factor Identities: Denver County

| Variable       | Rotated Loadings*   | Rotated Loadings*   | Rotated Loadings*   | Rotated Loadings*   | Rotated Loadings*   | Rotated Loadings*   |
|----------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Factor         | I                   | 2                   | 3                   | 4                   | 5                   | 6                   |
| NODIPLOM       | - 88                | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| HISPANIC       | - 87                | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| DEGREES        | 83                  | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| INCOME         | 70                  | 55                  | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| PROFESNL       | 62                  | -                   | -                   | -                   | 67                  | -                   |
| BLUECOL        | - 53                | -                   | -                   | -                   | - 76                | -                   |
| NONFAMILY      | -                   | -95                 | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| FAMILY         | -                   | 92                  | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| OLDER          | -                   | -                   | - 97                | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| BLACK          | -                   | -                   | -                   | - 98                | -                   | -                   |
| NEWCOMER       | ~                   | -                   | -                   | -                   | -                   | - 80                |
| Interpretation | Social Class        | Household Type      | Age Pattern         | Black Presence      | Jobs                | Residential Change  |

areas of social and economic transition, gentrifylng districts, and stable, middle-class  and upper-income  neighborhoods,  among other elements.  Furthermore,  although  Denver  is  surrounded by suburban counties, it still possesses some  of  its  own  new  growth  areas  near  its edges. In contrast to less urban Weld County, Amendment  Two  was  defeated  in  Denver County.

As expected, attitudes  on  gay rights  varied within the county, reflecting the diversity  of its social geography  (Fig. 4). Relatively clear-cut regions  of  opposition  and  support  emerged, with  strongest  opposition  to  the  amendment concentrated  in the area south and east of  the central  business  district  (CBD)  and  greatest support found in the county's southwest sector. Eleven indicators were used  to explore the social  geography  behind  this  pattern.  They included  the  same  ten  used  for  Weld  County, plus one that had not been used, BLACK (Table  1). In  contrast  to  Weld  County,  Denver County  contains  a  relatively  large  AfricanAmerican  population  (46%  of  the state's  total)-a group large enough to have  a measurable effect on the intra-county  vote.

Factor analysis produced 6 interpretable rotated  factors  that  summarized  the  variation present  within  the 11 social  indicators  (Table 7). Three factors are  significantly associ-

Figure 4: Vote on Amendment  Two, Denver;  1992.

<!-- image -->

Table 8 Final Multiple  Regression Model, Denver County

| Included Factor   | Regression Coef (b)   | BETA Coef   | Factor Interpretation   |   R2* |   Increase in Rz |   Probabilitv' |
|-------------------|-----------------------|-------------|-------------------------|-------|------------------|----------------|
| Factor 2          | 5 4                   | 60          | Family households       |    34 |               34 |            000 |
| Factor 6          | - 4 3                 | ~ 37        | Fewer newcomers         |    48 |               14 |            000 |
| Factor 4          | 1 6                   | 17          | Fewer blacks            |    51 |               03 |            009 |

'In all cases, the a+sted R2 rs within .02 o f R '

'.OF significance level

ated  with  the  vote,  together  accounting  for 5 1 % of the variation present (Table 8). This is the lowest level of explanation produced among the three cases examined. The statistically significant factors include household type (Factor 2),  amount of  residential change (Factor  6), and  relative  number  of  blacks  (Factor 4).

Household type is the most potent predictor (Table 8) and shows a clear geographic pattern. The area with the strongest and most consistent vote against Amendment Two, south and east of the CBD, is the region with the heaviest concentration  of  nonfamily households. This 'singles'  region is composed of several distinctive  parts,  including  recently  built  downtown apartment  complexes  catering  to  unmarried professionals, the  gentrified  Capital  Hill  area with  a  significant gay  population,  and  innercity, young-adult  neighborhoods  occupied by college students (attending nearby Metropolitan State College and the University of  Colorado, Denver),  recent graduates beginning their  careers, or others  attracted  by  an urban lifestyle.  Of  course,  this  area  is  not  entirely nonfamily, but family households located here often do not include children. In contrast, the part  of  the  city  with  the  strongest  and  most consistent 'yes' vote,  the  southwest sector, is an  area  with  many  family  households,  often with children present.

Geographic  patterns  of  residential stability, the  second  strongest  explanatory factor, vary more widely throughout the city, and their link with the vote is problematic. The multiple regression model for Denver suggests that tracts with many newcomers were more likely to vote in  favor of  the amendment,  a  pattern  that reverses  the  relationship  found  both  in  Weld County and at the state level. In large part, this apparent  contradiction  is  a  product  of the model itself. NEWCOMER, the primary constituent of  Factor  6, also loads moderately on Factor 2 (loading = -.49).  Factor 2 , the strong- est  explanatory variable, takes  precedence  in the  regression  model,  indicating  that  places with  nonfamily  households  (NONFAMILY) and, to  some  degree,  newcomers  (NEWCOMER) tended  to  oppose the amendment. Factor 6, representing  a  further dimension of NEWCOMER, then shows an opposite association with  the residual variation. This shifting relationship  apparently reflects the  mixed nature of newcomers to Denver. For example, in  Denver,  NEWCOMER  correlates  significantly with both college students (r = .41) and migrants  from  nonurban  source  regions  (r = .49),  characteristics with  contrasting  associations to  gay rights.

It is  noteworthy that  the presence of blacks is  linked  to  opposition  to  Amendment  Two. This is  not  unexpected given  the past history of political coalitions  among  homosexuals, blacks,  and  other  marginalized  groups  noted earlier. In the present case, a number of prominent African-Americans spoke out against the amendment,  including Jesse Jackson,  Coretta Scott  King,  and  Wellington  Webb,  Denver's mayor. In Denver County, for the first time in this  analysis, blacks  represent  a  large enough segment  of  the  voters  to  show a  statistically significant, although  limited, influence on the vote. In general, blacks in Denver are concentrated  east of the CBD, areas that consistently opposed Amendment Two.

In  contrast  to  blacks, the  presence of  Hispanics did not show up as a significant element in  Denver's  vote,  which  is  surprising  given their association with both the state-level vote and Weld County's vote. It appears that ecological limitations in the data obscure the role of this group, as was the case with newcomers. Denver's apparent  social patterns  are  at  least partly shaped by  data aggregation undertaken by  the  Bureau  of  the  Census.  Furthermore, when  the  county's social indicators are factor analyzed, Hispanics are grouped in a  broader social  class measure. As a  group,  they occupy

one end  of the  scale, strongly  associated with lower  educational  attainment,  blue-collar  occupations, and low incomes. At  the other end of the scale are non-Hispanics, linked to higher educational levels, professional occupations, and higher incomes. It appears, in light of  the state level results, that persons  at both ends of this scale may have voted in support of gay rights. Such a pattern would eliminate any variation  in  voting  associated  with  the  social class measure, masking the effect of Hispanics on the vote.

In  general,  the  high level  of  complexity found in Denver County social patterns makes the link between social characteristics and voting behavior less  clear-cut  than  for  the  other cases examined. As  noted,  this  is  reflected in the  lower  level  of  explanation  achieved  for Denver-an R2 of 51, compared with .67 and .72  for  Colorado  and  Weld  County,  respectively.

## Conclusions

A basic  premise  of  this  study  has  been  that place-to-place  voting  differences  on  Amendment  Two  mirror  important  dimensions  of Colorado's  social  geography.  Selected  social indicators were  used  to  define  the  basic  elements  of  that  geography,  which  were  then compared to voting outcomes. That comparison,  undertaken in three separate  settings, found  that  places  favoring  the  amendment could  be  readily distinguished from those opposing it.

The geographic contrasts are clear, but  the places  explored do not readily reduce into lists of relevant social indicators. Ecological limitations arising from data aggregation effects and scale differences blur  the  contributions of  individual  indicators.  It  is  more  useful,  and  revealing, to view  places  as  composites of  many elements whose mixes reflect distinctive social histories. With this in mind, it is worth looking more closely at the county types identified earlier  in  the  analysis of  the  statewide vote  (Table  4).  These types serve as backdrops to the attitudes on homosexuality and gay rights prevailing in Colorado at the time of the election and provide an effective summary of the social geography behind the vote (Fig. 2). They also invoke the social dynamics that may be critical to  the  formation  and  survival  of  those  atti- tudes.  The  two  county  examples  link  these county  types  to  similar  places  at  the  intracounty level.

As  noted,  places  harboring  strong  opposition  to the initiative, and thus  displaying support  for  gay  rights,  are  places  experiencing conspicuous  demographic  and  social  change, with  many newcomers among their residents. The mountain counties in this group (Type 2 counties) have  expanding economies based on high-quality  recreational  and scenic amenities that attract affluent tourists  and  seasonal visitors from across the nation and internationally. They include such well known jet-set destinations as Aspen, Telluride, Vail, and Steamboat Springs (Pitkin, San Miguel, Eagle, and Routt Counties). Both visitors and new residents are drawn  from  out-of-state  as  well  as  in-state sources,  creating  a  very  cosmopolitan  mix  of social backgrounds and attitudes. Many of the newcomers  attracted  by  the  expanding  economic  opportunities  and fashionable lifestyles of these mountain locations are relatively young, well-educated, and single. Their social and  economic  status  is  not  closely  linked  to traditional social  arrangements. In parallel fashion,  those parts of  Denver  that  voted strongly  against  the  amendment  also  contain concentrations of well-educated, single professionals.

A rather different type of place in Colorado that shows a similar mix of characteristics is the university  community. At  the  state  level, this type of place is represented by Boulder County, home  of the University of  Colorado, and  Larimer  County,  with Colorado  State University. University-dominated  places  contain a fluid, cosmopolitan mix of residents who are  attuned  to  new  ideas  and  change.  The tendency of university communities to support gay rights was  also evident in both  Weld  and Denver Counties, where census tracts with significant numbers  of  college students generally opposed Amendment Two.

In  contrast,  places strongly opposed  to gay rights  are  almost  without  exception rural  in character,  with  few  newcomers and  an  aging population. Most counties of this nature (Type 1) are found on Colorado's eastern plains, with others scattered around the San Luis Valley in the  south  and  the  Grand  Valley  in  the  west (Fig. 2).  Their agricultural base  is reflected in the prevalence of  blue-collar occupations and

lower  incomes.  They  show  little  economic growth and are losing many of their younger residents to out-migration. This out-migration is  responsible  for  the  higher  median  age  in these places, their lower educational levels, and their limited number of nonfamily households. Generally, young, single, better-educated  persons leave and are not replaced by newcomers. These  migration  patterns  ensure  that  traditional social patterns and attitudes persist within these communities. A parallel pattern is found  within  Weld  County  at  a  more  local scale, with socially stable, agriculturally based rural census tracts showing the strongest support for the amendment (Fig. 3).

Type 3 places are less extreme in their voting patterns  and show a  greater  mix  of social characteristics.  At the state level, these counties are predominantly the  suburban counties surrounding  Denver  (Fig.  2).  They also include some growing rural, but nonagricultural, counties in the state's far northwest and southwest  corners.  Like Type  2  counties, they  are fluid communities with younger, well-educated populations, but tend to be dominated by family  households. At  the  intra-county level,  this type  of  place  is  represented  in  Weld  County by  many  of  the  census tracts  in  and  around Greeley  and  in  Denver  by  the  family-dominated  tracts  in  the  southwest.  These  places recorded weaker opposition to gay rights than Type  1 places,  yet  many passed  Amendment Two. In fact, the vote in these  densely populated  places  may  have  decisively determined the election's final outcome.

In  many ways  Colorado's vote  was  consistent with national social and cultural trends. It reflects the basic traditionalist-modernizer split  discussed  earlier  and  supports  the  presumption that many contemporary social movementS share  common  constituencies  of opposition and support. Within Colorado the closest  parallels  are  found  at  the  extremes, within Type 1 and Type 2 places. These places show many of  the  contrasting  characteristics that  Adam  (1987,  111-13) suggests  separate gay rights supporters from opponents, including economic,  educational,  age,  household type, ruralhrban, and ethnic differences.

On the other hand, some expected associations were not confirmed by  this analysis. For example, measures of gender differences (SEXRATIO) and  religious affiliation  (FUN-

DMEN) were not found to be  significantly linked with voting differences. Although these characteristics  may  not  be germane  to  gay rights  voting, their exclusion  might  reflect shortcomings in the data, such as variable specification or level of aggregation. Also, one of Adam's  (1987,  108)  opposition  groups,  the capitalist  activists, lacks a  clear-cut  demographic identity  that can be  readily connected with specific places and could not be matched to voting patterns. Still,  both religion and capitalist  activists  played  a  role  in  the  election. Their presence may  be  seen in  Colorado  for Family  Values  (CFV),  the  organization  that created Amendment Two and placed it on the ballot.  CFV is  a  coalition  of  both  large  and small businessmen and religious activists.

While the state's Type 1 and Type 2 places reflect traditionalist-modernizer  distinctions in a  rather  straightforward way,  the  position  of Type  3  places  is  more  problematic,  and  intriguing. Their character and voting lie somewhere in between, reminiscent of the 'political middle' identified by Day and Jones  (1994) in their  analysis  of  recent  Texas elections. That study  suggests that,  while  extreme ideologies may  set  the  frame  for  political  debate,  it  is voters  in  the  middle  ground  who  ultimately decide  the  election  outcome.  Type 3 places may represent Colorado's 'political  middle' in regard to the Amendment Two vote. The ambivalence  of  attitudes  shown  by  the  votes  in these places  also offers support for  Steinfels's (1988,  81-82) argument  that,  in  fact,  most Americans are  'civilians' in  the  cultural  civil war. That is, they are not wholeheartedly committed to either position, but are torn by shifting loyalties to both  sides. It appears that,  although the traditionalist-modernizer  model pinpoints  a  fundamental conflict in American society, it overstates the degree of polarization actually  present  and  overlooks  an  important bloc  of  voters  whose  opinions  are  not  fixed. They may represent a critical mass in an election,  whose votes can be  captured by  the side that offers the most persuasive arguments.

In  Colorado, such uncommitted voters may be  typical of Type 3 places. The ambivalence in their vote probably represents the responses of middle-class Americans who value tolerance yet  who  are  distraught  over  a  wide  array  of social stresses,  many of which seem to threaten their children's  well-being. Although this

study does not  seek to  explain the  success of Amendment  Two  or  the  individual  decision making involved in voting,  it is worth  noting that  Type 3 places  became  a  critical  battleground  in  preelection campaigning.  Rather than  rely  on  their  own  religion-based  objections to homosexuality, CFV and its allies emphasized secular issues, arguing that gay rights pose a threat to the family and 'family  values.' Homosexuality was  portrayed  as  representing a particular danger to children, and such arguments may have been compelling to many voters in Type 3 places. By packaging widely held social fears, anti-gay rights activists appealed to a broadened voter base, including many welleducated persons who may have dismissed religion-based arguments. Whether this strategy gained the passage of Amendment Two is uncertain  and beyond  the  scope of  this analysis. It is  clear, however,  that  Colorado's  Type 3 places  were  pivotal  spaces  in  the  gay  rights conflict. Their role in the politics of gay rights merits additional study.

The  vote  on  Amendment  Two,  the  first broad-based referendum on gay rights, yielded a victory for the opposition, yet the measure's legal  future  remains  unclear.  Overturned  by the  state  supreme  court in  1994, it now  lies before  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court. Meanwhile, the social and political struggle over gay rights proceeds. Since the  1992 vote on Amendment Two,  similar  anti-gay  rights  initiatives  have been  placed  on  other  state,  county,  and  city ballots. For example, during the 1994 election, Oregon  and  Idaho  voters  turned  down  such statewide  measures, while  voters  in  Florida's Alachua  County  and  Oregon's  Grants  Pass (city) and Lake County passed  comparable local  measures.  Although  versions  of  Amendment Two were defeated in both Oregon and Idaho,  the  margins  of defeat  were  narrow. Such close votes indicate a  deeply divided society,  caught  between  the  opposing  forces of modernity and tradition.

## Literature Cited

Adam, Barry D.  1987. The &amp;se of  a  Gay and  Lesbian Movement. Boston:  Twayne  Publications,  G.  K. Hall.

Aronowitz,  Stanley.  1992. The Politics of  Identity. New York: Routledge.

Bradley, Martin  B.,  Norman M. Green, Jr.,  Dale E. Jones, Mac Lynn, and Lou McNeil. 1992. Churches  and Church  Membership  in  the  United States,  1990. Atlanta: Glenmary Research Center.

Cruikshank,  Margaret.  1992. The  Gay and  Lesbian Liberation Movement. New York: Routledge, Chapman &amp; Hall.

Day, Frederick A., and Alice L. Jones.  1994. A portrait  of  modern  Texas  politics: The regional  geography of the 1990 governor's race. Social Science 30~ma13 1(2): 99-1 10.

Duncan,  C. J., and W.  R. Epps.  1992. The demise of 'countrymindedness.' Political  Geography 1 l(5) 430-48.

Eamon, Thomas F., and David Elliott.  1994. Modernization  vs.  traditionalism  in  North  Carolina Senate  races:  Hidden  hope  for  the  Democrats? Social Science Quarter4 75(2): 354-67.

Epstein, Barbara.  1991. Political Protest  and  Cultural Revolution. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Evans,  Sara  M.,  and  Harry  C.  Boyte.  1986. Free Spaces, the Sources o f Democratic Change i n America. New York: Harper and Row.

Harvey, David. 1989. The Conditions of Postmodernity. Oxford: Basil  Blackwell.

Hodge, David. C., and Lynn A.  Staeheli. 1992. Social  relations  and  geographic  patterns  of  urban electoral  behavior. Urban  Geography 13(4): 30733.

Hunter, James  D.  1991. Cultzlre Wars: The Struggle t o  Defne Amwica. New York: Basic Books.

Luebke, Paul.  1990. Tar Heel Politics: Myths and  Realities. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

National Opinion Research  Center. 1990,  1991, 1993. General  Social  Survey.s [machine-readable data  file].  Chicago: NORC.

Nava, Michael  and Robert  Dawidoff. 1994. Created Equal. New York: St. Martin's Press.

Steinfels, Peter.  1988. Liberal  politics, conservative sentiment. Dissent 35(1): 81-87.

RICHARD K. ORMROD is Professor of Geography at the University of Northern Colorado, Greeley,  CO 80639. His  research interests  include migration,  diffusion processes, and cultural and social change.

DAVID B.  COLE is Professor of Geography at the University of Northern  Colorado,  Greeley,  C O 80639. His research interests include urban redevelopment, social change, and geographic education.