## A Vulnerability Interpretation of the Geography of HIV/AIDS in Ghana, 1986-1995*

## Joseph R. Oppong

University of North T exas

Tenyears after the human immuno-deficiency virus (HIV) was first reported in Ghana, it continues to spread throughout the country following patterns that are rare in other African countries. HIV is seen in twice as many females as males, more frequently in rural than urban regions, and regions with high rates of polygamy have significantly lower rates. The evidence presented in this paper shows that HIV diffusion patterns probably reflect the spatial distribution and social networks of vulnerable social groups. While information-based campaigns are still necessary in the fight against HIV/AIDS, they fail to enable or empower vulnerable people to protect themselves against infection. Key Words: HIV/AIDS, Ghana, vulnerability, empowerment, polygamy, Islam, rural-urban.

## Introduction

M ore than twenty million persons were living with HIV/AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa in December 1997, about two-thirds of the world's total, and an estimated 7.4% of all persons aged between 15 to 49 were infected with HIV (UNAIDS and WHO 1997). While the devastating impact of AIDS, the disease associated with the late clinical stage of HIV infection, has generally been felt throughout the African continent, particularly in southern Africa, considerable variations exist among  and within countries. In the so-called 'main AIDS belt,'-Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Western Kenya, Western T anzania, parts of Eastern Zaire, Malawi, Zambia, Zimbabwe, and Botswana-HIV-seropositivityrates of20%to30% are common in the general adult population of large urban areas and 5% to 20% is observed in rural areas (Caldwell 1995). By early 1997, the Government of South Africa estimated that 2.4 million South Africans were living with HIV (UNAIDSandWHO1997).InWestAfrica,the epidemic has traditionally been most severe in Côte d'Ivoire where pregnant women report a rate of 14.8% (Health Studies Branch 1995). However, Nigeria, where the National AIDS Program estimates that 2.2 million people were living with HIV by December 1997 (UNAIDS and  WHO 1997), is quickly emerging  as  a trouble spot. Much smaller seropositivity rates are observed in other West African countries, and, usually, among high risk groups such as sex workers, their long-term partners and customers. The highest rates are observed in major urban areas, typically the largest cities. This is the case in Burkina Faso, Mali, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone, but not Ghana. Ghana has a comparably low HIV/AIDSrate,andthe majorareas of infection are rural, not urban.

In the early stages of the epidemic in SubSaharan Africa, the populations most rapidly andmostheavily affected in most countries were in urban areas, and seroprevalence levels fell with declining urban size (Caldwell 1995). T oday, urban areas and trading centers generally continue to show much higher prevalence rates than rural areas, but in some places rural infection rates are approaching those in urban populations. This is particularly true in rural areas that have strong links (expressed in major population flows) with major urban centers (Kalipeni 1997). Thus, the spread of HIV/AIDS in SubSaharan Africa usually follows a hierarchical diffusion pattern, spreading from the most urban to more rural areas (Gould 1993). In contrast, Ghana's pattern is quite unusual. Rural regions have higher rates than the most urban region, and diffusion appears to follow a contagious, rather than a hierarchical, diffusion pattern.

Africa' s AIDS pandemic has been dubbed Pattern T wo to distinguish it from Pattern One, the epidemiological pattern prevailing in Europe

*This research was funded by a Research Initiation Grant from the University of North T exas. The author acknowledges the comments of David Williamson, Ezekiel Kalipeni, and anonymous reviewers of the Professional Geographer on earlier drafts of this paper.

and the United States (Chin 1990; Mann et al. 1992). In Pattern One, the sex ratio of AIDS cases is much higher for men with transmission occurring  predominantly among homosexual and bisexual men. For example, in the early and mid-1980s the sex ratio of US AIDS cases was 16:1 male to female, but in 1992 it was closer to 8:1 (Mann et al. 1992; Hunt 1996). In Pattern Two, where transmission is primarily heterosexual, 50% of cases are usually found in women resulting in a 1:1 male-female ratio or slightly higher rates in men (Chin 1991; Hunt 1996). ThispatternemergesbecauseHIVtransmission to men with multiple sexual partners predominates  initially,  and  the  infection increasingly spreads to women as the  epidemic  matures (Health Studies Branch 1995). Ghana's pattern is highly unusual; it resembles a Reversed Pattern One. Since the beginning of the epidemic, the number of infected females has always been multiple times the number of males. By the end of 1996, twice as many womenasmenhadAIDS.

Polypartner sexual activity is implicated in the spread of HIV/AIDS throughout the world. In Africa, polygamy is identified as an important factor in the spread of the virus. According to Rushing (1995), it is the only relevant factor. Similarly, on Malawi, Kalipeni states that 'the first and foremost practice that is implicated in the proliferation of the disease is polygamy in all its forms' (Kalipeni 1997, 26). Appropriately, AIDS awareness and prevention programs have emphasized lasting, monogamous sexual unions to prevent HIV infection. Thus, areas with high rates of polygamy are expected to have high HIV/AIDS rates. Surprisingly, in Ghana, regions with very high polygamy rates have unusually low HIV/AIDS rates, in fact, much lower than regions with low polygamy rates.

Understanding these unusual patterns of Ghana's HIV/AIDS epidemic is important if programs designed to curb further spread are to be effective. Research presented in this paper uses a vulnerability framework to examine the changing geography of HIV/AIDS infection in Ghana from 1986 through 1995. Data from the Ghana AIDS Control Program (GACP) and seroprevalence data from the United States Bureau of the Census are used in an attempt to explain these distinct patterns of Ghana's HIV/AIDS  problem, namely: 1. HIV/AIDS spread in Ghana appears to follow a contagious, rather  than  a hierarchical,  diffusion  pattern;

2. Commercial sex may be a major factor that helps to explain the unusually high female-male ratio; and 3. Polygamy alone may not be a very important factor in explaining the geography of HIV/AIDS in Ghana. The paper begins with a brief outline of the  vulnerability conceptual framework after which the geographic and temporal variations of HIV/AIDS in Ghana are presented and explained.

## Vulnerability Theory and AIDS

Vulnerability theory posits that adverse life circumstances such as hunger and disease do not affect  social  groups  uniformly.  For example, while all human beings are biologically susceptible to HIV infection, certain social and economic factors place some individuals and social groups in situations of increased vulnerability (Parker 1996). Economic need may drive vulnerable groups of people to risky survival activities such as commercial sex work that makes them a 'population at risk' (Watts and Bohle 1993). In fact, behavioral interventions based solely on information and reasoned persuasion are insufficient to produce risk-reducing behavior change among vulnerable social groups (Aggleton 1996; Parker 1996). The geographical distribution of such vulnerable populations and their social interaction patterns may suggest the geography of HIV/AIDS infection. AIDS as a global problem has unique local expressions that reflect the spatial distribution and social networks of vulnerable social groups. Consequently, unraveling the factors responsible for vulnerability to HIV/AIDS for different social groups is crucial if prevention and control programs are to be effective.

## HIV/AIDS Data Sources and Problems

Determining the exact magnitude of the HIV/AIDS pandemic in Sub-Saharan Africa is extremely difficult (Barnett and Blaikie 1992). A dearth of accurate diagnostic equipment and the fact that many rural residents do not use the primarily urban-based biomedical health care facilities, where diagnostic equipment is based, are major problems. T wo important sources of HIV/AIDS data are national data reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) and seroprevalence data  provided  by  the Health

Studies Branch of the Center for International Research in the United States Census Bureau (from now on Health Studies Branch)HIV/AIDS Surveillance Data .

With rare exception, surveys of HIV seroprevalence are not based on national samples (Health Studies Branch 1995). Consequently, due to sample size, nonrepresentative samples, and geographic and testing bias, every seroprevalence estimate is defective if generalized beyond its sample population. Furthermore, testing itself is problematic. The ELISA test, which was the predominanttesttodetermineseropositivity during the early years of the epidemic, produces some false positives, and test results must be confirmed by a second test, usually the Western Blot (Health Studies Branch 1995). Where both HIV-1 and HIV-2 are present, reporting only one results in undercounting, while reporting bothmayproducedoublecountinginthosewith joint infection. Since people can carry the virus for a long time without knowing it while inadvertently infecting others, reported cases are mere estimates of the total number of real cases and underreporting is inevitable.

National data reported to WHO is also problematic. Differences between countries in adequacy of testing facilities and reporting practices, varying definitions of what constitutes a case of AIDS, and political distortions of data, make national data reported by WHO incomplete (Mann et al. 1992). For example, some African governments may conceal the real dimensions of the AIDS problem out of a sense of shame and concern that the real figures would drive investors and tourists away. Many doctors with experience across the continent estimate that actual HIV/AIDS cases are 80% to 90% underreported (Gould 1993). Nevertheless, while national data do not reflect the current status  of the  epidemic, they portray general trends such as intra-country variations.

This study is based on national AIDS data reported by the Ghana AIDS Control Program (GACP), also published by WHO (1995), and HIV/AIDS Surveillance Data provided by the Health Studies Branch. GACP reports a summary figure of AIDS patients without distinguishing between HIV-1 and HIV-2. Cumulative incidence rates for AIDS were calculated for each region using the annual total AIDSfigure from the GACP and WHO. While imperfect, this data is the most complete record of AIDS available for Ghana. GACP has an ongoing surveillance program providing voluntary testing and screening of blood donors and pregnant women. HIV testing facilities are available in most district hospitals throughout the country, all regional centers and large cities. Due to this, seroprevalence data presumably underestimate HIV rates in rural areas. Pregnancybased HIV/AIDS screening services, for example, probably underestimate rural HIV/AIDS prevalence. In a sample of 2,168 babies delivered in 1993, 46% of urban mothers received prenatal care from doctors compared with  14% for rural women (Ghana  Demographic and Health Survey 1993). Given this disparity in access to  prenatal care services, fewer rural women are likely to be screened. It is precisely for this reason that the higher seroprevalence rates observed in rural areas should not be discounted. It would seem that constructing a plausible, even if scaled-down, picture of the dimensions of the epidemic from national reports, and the HIV/AIDS Surveillance Data Base is feasible. Consequently, data presented here suggest current patterns and trends and should not be assumed to describe the current situation.

Sociodemographic data on urbanization and polygamy rates used in this study are from the GDHSof1993.The1993GDHSisanationally representative survey of 4,562  women  aged 15-49 and 1,302 men aged 15-59. The GDHS was conducted by the Ghana Statistical Service with technical assistance provided by Macro International Inc., through a contract with the United States Agency for International Development. The express purpose of the GDHS is to furnish reliable and up-to-date information on key variables and indicators of social development for the country. Other data were obtained from the Ghana Living Standards Survey (GLSS 3) (Ghana Statistical Service 1995).

## General Characteristics of HIV/AIDS in Ghana

Ghana is bounded on the west by Côte d'Ivoire, on the north by Burkina Faso, on the east by T ogo, and on the south by the Atlantic Ocean. Administratively, the country is divided into ten regions. The southern parts of the country, including Greater Accra Region, Eastern, Central, Western, Ashanti and Volta

(Fig. 1), are more developed compared with the northern parts of the country. With 88% urban population, the Greater Accra Region, containing Accra, the primate city and national capital whose 1997 population was estimated to be 1.9 million (de Blij and Muller 1997) and T ema, a major seaport, is the most urban of the ten regions. Ashanti Region, with Kumasi, the secondlargest city of Ghana as its capital, is the next most urbanized region.

At the end of 1996, Ghana reported a total of 20,859 AIDS cases (Hotard et al. 1998). When HIV was first detected in Ghana in 1986, 63 of the initial 72 cases were found in women, a 7:1 female-male ratio (Perdigao et al. 1996). Almost 98% of the cases were found in people with a history of recent residence or an extended visit outside the country, particularly

Figure 1: Cumulative incidence of reported AIDS cases 1986.

<!-- image -->

former residents of Côte d'Ivoire. Seroprevalence of the general population is low compared withCôted'Ivoire.Outofatotalof14,362blood donors tested in 1990, seroprevalence of HIV-1 was 2.2%, while HIV-2 was 0.6% (Health Studies Branch 1993). Reported infection  levels among commercial sex workers increased from 25.2%in1987to37.5%in1991(HealthStudies Branch 1996a). Prevalence of infection in males attending a sexually transmitted disease clinic in Accra in 1988 was 2.1, but in 1991 it had quadrupled to 8.6%. HIV prevalence among pregnant women ranged from 1.6% to 2.8% in 1995. Studies of pregnant women in the Eastern and Ashanti regional capitals in 1992 reported infection levels of 3.2% and 4.2% respectively. However in Agomanya, a rural district of the Eastern Region, prevalence among pregnant women was 18% (Table 1) (Health Studies Branch 1996b).

The peak age for male AIDS cases is 30 to 34, while for females, it is 25 to 29 (Fig. 2). More than 90% of all AIDS cases occur in adults aged between 20 to 54, but less than 2% occur in children aged 0 to 14. Finally, while in 1986, 97.6% of new cases were found in people with a history of a residence or extended visit outside the country,  in  1992, the figure was  40.2% (Ghana Ministry of Health Epidemiology Division 1992). This trend suggests a maturing of Ghana's AIDS epidemic and a spread from the original core of high risk, migrant, commercial sex workers into the general adult population as an endemic problem.

## Sex-Ratio of AIDS Patients

Based on GACP data, from the initial femalemale ratio of 5:1 in 1986, the sex ratio of AIDS patients may be gradually converging toward a 1:1 female-male ratio (Fig. 3). Currently, unlike other parts of Africa, AIDS in Ghana strikes twice as many females as it does males (Fig. 4). For the whole country, 16,690 AIDS cases were reported by December 1995-5,383 male and 11,307 female (WHO 1995). While this is probably an underestimate, the 2:1 ratio is not a mere artifact of the data collection process. Ghana' s Reverse Pattern One HIV/AIDS epidemic is now noted by many researchers who attribute it to returning female commercial sex workers. For example, Hotard et al. (1998) attribute 'the spread of HIV to and within Ghana' to returning Ghanaian female commercial sex workers in neighboring Côte d'Ivoire. Caldwell (1995, 300)

Figure 2: Age-sex breakdown of reported AIDS cases 1986-1995.

<!-- image -->

observed that due to the 'large number of sex workers returning infected from Abidjan,' an AIDS epidemic in Ghana seemed inevitable. Decosas et al. (1995) note that more than half of all professional commercial sex workers in Abidjan are Ghanaian, many from the Krobo tribe in the Eastern Region of Ghana. Moreover, '80% of those who are still working as commercial sex workers in Abidjan are infected with HIV' (Decosas et al. 1995, 827). A review of epidemiologic data collected from 1987 to 1993 by Project RETRO-CI in Côte d'Ivoire concluded that due to the initial concentration of HIV in a core group of female commercial sex workers, many of whom originate from neighboring countries, migration of sex workers is likely to have contributed to the spread of HIV infection in West Africa (Djomand et al. 1995). In fact, seroprevalence among sex workers in Abidjan was 86% in 1995. Thus, Ghana's initially high rate of HIV/AIDS among females may be directly linked to commercial sex work in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire. As Decosas (1996,  276) puts  it, almost all the Ghanaian prostitutes in Côte d'Ivoire are infected with HIV and many are returning home sick and destitute.

Regional variations in Ghana's female-male ratio are also revealing (Fig. 4). In the Eastern Region, the female-male ratio is 5:1 and most regions have higher female ratios except Upper East and Upper West with 0.7:1 and 0.8:1 respectively. The persistently high female-male ratio, particularly in the Eastern Region, seems to lend  credence to the migrant sex worker thesis. It appears that migration ties between Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana, specifically Abidjan and the Eastern Region of Ghana, funnels the high rates among sex workers in Côte d'Ivoire into Ghana (Decosas 1996; Hotard et al., 1998).

## Polygamy and HIV/AIDS in Ghana

Polygamous behavior is considered a major factor in the spread of HIV/AIDS in Africa. Consequently, areas with high rates of formal polygamy are expected to have high rates of HIV/AIDS. Using data from the 1993 GDHS, the relationship between polygamy and HIV/AIDS  was  examined.  GDHS measured polygamy by asking married women whether their husbands had other wives and, if so, their number. Overall about 28% of married women in Ghana were in polygamous unions (T able 2). However, contrary to expectation, the regions

Figure 3: Sex ratio of reported AIDS cases 1986-1992.

<!-- image -->

Table 1 Seroprevalence of HIV in Pregnant Women in Selected Regions (1992).

| Region        | Urban/Rural   |   Number Tested |   Number Positive |   Prevalence % |
|---------------|---------------|-----------------|-------------------|----------------|
| Greater Accra | Urban         |             500 |                 6 |            1.2 |
| Eastern       | Rural         |             412 |                74 |           18   |
| Ashanti       | Urban         |             455 |                21 |            4.6 |
| Brong Ahafo   | Urban         |             500 |                20 |            4   |
| Brong Ahafo   | Rural         |             500 |                20 |            4   |
| Upper East    | Urban         |             505 |                 9 |            1.8 |
| Upper West    | Rural         |             315 |                 3 |            1   |

Source: 1992 Annual Report of Epidemiology Division. Ghana Ministry of Health.

with the highest rates of polygamy had the lowest rates of HIV/AIDS as reflected by the Spearman rank correlation coefficient of -0.927 (p &lt; .01). Not only did the Eastern Region have the least polygamy, but the region with the highest polygamy, the Northern Region with 44%, had the lowest AIDS rate. A 1994 serosurvey of 1,264 pregnant women in the region showed a seroprevalence of 1.6% (Health Studies Branch, 1996b) while a similar survey among pregnant women in the Eastern Region reported a high prevalence of 18% (Decosas 1995; Health Studies Branch 1996b). HIV infection rates among pregnant women provide the most representative  picture of HIV infection,  and fre- quently, are considered surrogates for the general population (Mann et al. 1992). Based on this, the data does not provide evidence to support a direct positive link between formal polygamy and HIV/AIDS rates in Ghana.

## Urbanization and HIV/AIDS

ThroughoutSub-SaharanAfrica,HIVinfection is higher in urban areas (Berkley 1992), particularly in capital cities (Bongaarts and Way 1989). Chin (1991) estimates that HIV seroprevalence among sexually active adults in urban areas in some parts of Sub-Saharan Africa is about ten times that of rural areas. However, the Greater Accra Region, with 83% urban population and

Figure 4: Sex ratio of reported AIDS cases by region 1986-1995.

<!-- image -->

the national capital and primate city, Accra, had lower AIDS rates than the Eastern and Ashanti Regions. In 1995, the Eastern Region with only 28% urbanization had a cumulative incidence rate of 2.16 per 1,000 population while the Ashanti Region, with about 33% urbanization had 2.49 per 1,000 (T able 2). This is confirmed by data on seroprevalence of HIV among pregnant women in selected regions (T able 1).

## Islamic Cultural Practices and HIV/AIDS

Moreover, HIV/AIDS spread in Ghana does not appear to follow a hierarchical diffusion pattern. The Greater Accra Region did not have the highest rates initially as expected under a hierarchical diffusion pattern. Instead, the Eastern Region, with only 28% urbanization, had the highest rates initially (Fig. 5). The largest city in the Eastern Region had only 58,734 people during the 1984 census (Ghana Statistical Service 1992). If HIV/AIDS spread in Ghana followed a hierarchical diffusion pattern, Greater Accra Region would have the highest rate followed by the Ashanti, Western, and so on (T able 2). Instead, a simple contagious diffusion process may be at work beginning in the Eastern Region from where it spreads to the neighboring Ashanti and Greater Accra Regions (high urban populations with relatively high commercial sex activity), before expanding to the Brong Ahafo, the Western and the Central Regions (Fig.  5). The Northern, the Upper East and the Upper West Regions (T able 2) have lower infection rates due to much greater distance from the initial source region and perhaps, the restraining influence of certain practices in Islam.

Previous research suggests that Muslim Africa has generally lower HIV/AIDS rates than the rest of Africa although under reporting may be a problem (Gould 1993; Caldwell 1995). Studies in Senegal and Côte d'Ivoire show that even where Muslims and non-Muslims live side by side, Muslims usually have less than half the rate of non-Muslims. Islamic cultural practices may restrict HIV spread in two main ways-strict sanctions against promiscuity and promotion of circumcision (Caldwell 1995). Polygamy is the norm in Islam, but promiscuity is taboo and stringently punished to promote stable polypartner fidelity. Paradoxically, while polypartner sexual activity is the norm, participants may not be as vulnerable as those involved in commercial sex work or a long series of monogamous sexual liaisons.

Besides fidelity, another explanation for the low rates of HIV in Islamic areas may be the widespread practice  of male  circumcision, a practice that is almost completely absent among the ethnic groups of Africa's main AIDS belt (Caldwell and Caldwell 1993). Lack of circumcision either directly facilitates HIV transmission  or  facilitates  it  by rendering chancroid genital ulcerative diseases more likely. Caldwell (1995) attributes Southern Sudan's considerably higher seroprevalence rates to the absence of circumcision among the predominantly nonMuslim population. Thus, these practices of Islam, circumcision and  fidelity, can limit the spread of HIV/AIDS and probably explain the

Table 2 Urbanization, Islam, Polygamy and Reported AIDS Rate.

| Region        | %Urban Population (1)   | %Islamic Household heads(2)   | %Polygamous Females(3)   |   Cumulative Reported AIDS Rate per 1000(4) |
|---------------|-------------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Ashanti       | 32.5                    | 15.3                          | 23.0                     |                                        2.49 |
| Brong Ahafo   | 26.6                    | 12.3                          | 29.0                     |                                        1.11 |
| Central       | 28.8                    | 5.1                           | 26.9                     |                                        1.03 |
| Eastern       | 27 .7                   | 4.5                           | 17 .9                    |                                        2.16 |
| Greater Accra | 83.0                    | 12.5                          | 18.8                     |                                        1.52 |
| Northern      | 25.2                    | 32.7                          | 44.1                     |                                        0.05 |
| Upper East    | 12.9                    | 3.7                           | 32.2                     |                                        0.28 |
| Upper West    | 10.9                    | 4.8                           | 35.3                     |                                        0.34 |
| Volta         | 20.0                    | 1.7                           | 31.8                     |                                        0.48 |
| Western       | 22.6                    | 7 .6                          | 24.8                     |                                        1.1  |
| Ghana         | 32.0                    | 14.4                          | 27 .7                    |                                        1.29 |

Source: 1 . Ghana Statistical Service. Ghana in Figures - 1992.

2. Ghana Statistical Service, 1995. Ghana Living Standards Survey 1991-1992.

3. GDHS 1993.

4. Ghana AIDS Control Program, cumulative AIDS Cases 1986-1995, computations by author.

Figure 5: Cumulative incidence of reported AIDS cases 1986-1995.

<!-- image -->

low prevalence rate in the Northern Region where 33% of household heads profess Islam (T able 2).

In contrast, while formal polygamy is relatively low in the Eastern Region, serial polygamy, a series of marriages and divorces to get a new partner in a monogamous relationship, is widespread. When a spouse, due to economic reasons, migrates and is absent for a long time, the remaining spouse gets into a new monogamous, sometimes  temporary, sexual relationship. Thus, an infected individual, particularly a recent emigrant, may go from one partner to another spreading the disease. In other words, those involved in stable polygamous sexual relationships may not be as vulnerable as others involved in unstable monogamous sexual liaisons.

## Discussion:Vulnerability Theoryand HIV/AIDS in Ghana

Ghana's recent political and economic history and resulting vulnerability of different social groupsmayprovideexplanationsfortheunusual HIV/AIDS patterns. At independence in 1957, Ghana had a very promising future and a solid economy  based on  cocoa,  timber,  gold,  and other minerals. Before 1960, due to her economic strength, Ghana received more migrants from the West African subregion than any other West African country (Stock 1995). Most migrants came to work on cocoa farms. The steady decline of the economy after 1960, associated with multiple military coups and attendant political instability reduced the attractiveness of Ghanatomigrants. In the early 1970s, the deepening economic crisis led to increasing numbers of Ghanaians leaving for other countries, most notably Nigeria with its oil boom, and Côte d'Ivoire, which had a stable and steadily improving economy. Around 1983, when the economic crisis culminated in widespread food shortages and adoption of structural adjustment, many young Ghanaians left the country in search of better livelihoods in neighboring countries, Europe, and North America. Risky sexual behavior, including commercial sex work, became increasingly viable among these economic refugees, frequently for economic survival. Due to its proximity and historical migration ties, Côte d'Ivoire, which has the highest HIV/AIDS prevalence rate in West Africa, was a particularly attractive  destination  for migrants from  the Eastern and Ashanti Regions.

Ghana's recent economic crisis may be, thus, intricately linked to the current HIV/AIDS crisis. The Health Studies Branch (1996b) observes that unusually high HIV prevalence rates in Ghana's rural areas are explained by sex worker migrations. At the plenary session of the Vancouver AIDS Conference, Decosas (1996) discussed the HIV/AIDS statistics of Ghana and concluded that the high rural rates, particularly in the Eastern Region, were attributable to commercial sex workers forced by economic necessity to migrate to neighboring countries particularly, Côte d'Ivoire. A 1993 study conducted by the  Health  Research Unit of the Ghana Ministry of Health (Adjei et al. 1993), found that unemployment, poverty and idleness were high predisposing factors to HIV/AIDS infection. T o survive, the study concluded, un- employed female youth resorted to promiscuity in Ghana, and commercial sex work mostly in Côte d'Ivoire. Consequently, international prostitution, particularly in the Ivory Coast, was identified as a major causal factor of HIV/AIDS. Citing examples of former sex workers in Abidjan who were dying or had died of HIV/AIDS, most respondents concluded that migrant prostitutes and their sex partners are those who get HIV/AIDS (Adjei et al. 1993). In short, high rates in rural regions seem directly related to the activities of vulnerable social groups-female commercial sex workers.

The same phenomenon may explain the relatively low AIDS rate in the Greater Accra Region of Ghana. It should be emphasized that this low rate is not due to data inaccuracies or poor reporting. Unlike other regions, the Greater Accra Region has better access to modern health facilities including sexually transmitted disease clinics, and HIV/AIDS screening facilities are more readily accessible. Increased screening and greater access to testing facilities should produce increased detection of HIV/AIDS cases. Nevertheless, the number of cases reported in this region continues to be low compared with other regions. Moreover, the Greater Accra Region was not the initial core of HIV/AIDS prevalence in Ghana. How, then, is this difference interpreted?

Greater Accra Region has many more hospitals and medical personnel than any other region. Improved access to biomedical health care services provides early and effective treatment of sexually transmitted diseases,  particularly genital ulcerating diseases, which are known to facilitate the spread of HIV (Caldwell 1995). It also means relatively safe health care. Besides, better economic opportunities-government jobs, private industry  and  commerce-make fewer Greater Accra residents vulnerable enough to join the exodus to neighboring countries in search of economic survival. In effect, residents of Greater Accra are not as vulnerable as  residents  of less economically strong and medically underserved rural regions.

Endemicity of malaria makes lack of access to modern health care facilities a particularly worrisome problem. Monekosso, WHO Regional Director for Africa, estimates that each person less than 15 years of age experiences four to nine clinical attacks per year while older people experience about half that number (Monekosso

1993). In rural areas, many of these malaria victims usually patronize inexpensive itinerant drug vendors (IDVs) who bring their services right to their doorsteps, instead of traveling to more costly, urban-based facilities. Since many of these IDVs do not sterilize the injection needles they use between patients, the potential for HIV spread is high. Again, the risk of HIV infection reflects the differential vulnerability of social groups. Those who are unable to afford the urban-based, biomedical facilities, but are compelled to rely on IDVs, face a higher risk.

The high rate in Ashanti Region may be attributed to commercial sexual activity and greater mobility of the population, particularly in leading cities such as Kumasi and Obuasi. Agadzi (1989) identifies returning migrants to American and European cities or other African countries, many of who have multiple sexual partners, as a contributory factor. Besides, Ashanti Region has 23% polygamy among females (T able 2), and serial polygamy is common. Moreover, a large portion of the region is made up of rural farming villages. Due to the dearth of modern biomedical health facilities in rural villages, genital ulcerative diseases may not be treated quickly.  Many people  also  patronize IDVs.

In summary, Ghana's difficult economic crises created a substantial exodus of economic refugees who migrated temporarily into high HIV/AIDS prevalence regions and indulged in high risk activities. The high HIV/AIDS rates in rural, not urban, regions reflect dissemination through relocation diffusion-return migration of people who left Ghana in the late 1970s and early 1980s due to difficult economic circumstances, got infected, and subsequent contagious diffusion. The high rate among females is due to higher vulnerability among females, particularly those involved in commercial sex work. Heterosexual activity has spread the virus throughout the country primarily through polypartner sexual activity and possibly the activities of IDVs. Circumcision and fidelity limit vulnerability to HIV/AIDS and probably explain the low rates observed in the Northern region, an area  with a high  concentration  of Muslims (T astemain and Coles 1993). Poor rural access to biomedical health facilities makes rural residents vulnerable to HIV since it exposes them to risky health practices by unscrupulous health providers.

## Conclusion

The evidence presented here suggests that patterns of diffusion of HIV probably reflect the spatial distribution and social networks of vulnerable social groups. Understanding the subtle differences in HIV/AIDS patterns between regions, perhaps through identification of vulnerable social groups in spatial settings, is critical for the formulation and implementation of effective HIV/AIDS intervention  policies  and strategies. While information-based campaigns are still necessary in the fight against HIV/AIDS, it is time to supplement them with intervention programs aimed at enablement and empowerment of vulnerable people. For poor women forced by hardship into commercial sex work and rural residents forced to rely on dangerous health providers, behavior change does not come simply through education and dissemination of information. It comes through empowerment-providing opportunities to enable the poor secure respectable livelihoods, and safe health services for those beyond the reach of costly,  urban-based  health  care. Unfortunately, disseminating information about HIV/AIDS is much easier to accomplish than empowering those who are vulnerable to this disease. n

## Literature Cited

Adjei, Sam, Gertrude Owusu, and Mercy Ablordey. 1993. Qualitative Formative Study on AIDS in Ghana . Health Research Unit. Accra: Ghana Ministry of Health.

Agadzi, Victor K. 1989. AIDS: The African Perspective of a Killer Disease . Accra: Ghana Universities Press.

Aggleton, Peter. 1996. Global priorities for HIV/AIDS intervention research. International

- Journal of STD and AIDS

7 (2): 13-6.

Barnett, T ony, and Piers Blaikie. 1992. AIDS in Africa: Its Present and Future Impact. New York: Guilford Press.

Berkley, Seth. 1992. HIV in Africa: what is the future? Annals of Internal Medicine 16(4):339-41.

Bongaarts, John, and Peter O. Way. 1989. Geographic variation in the HIV epidemic and the mortality impact of HIV/AIDS in Africa. Research Division Working Papers , No. 1. New York: The Population Council.

Caldwell, John C. 1995. Understanding the AIDS epidemic and reacting sensibly to it. Social Science and Medicine 41(3):299-302.

- Caldwell, John C., and P. Caldwell. 1993. The nature and limits of the sub-Saharan African

AIDS epidemic: Evidence from geographic and other patterns. Population Development Review 19:817.

- Chin, James. 1990. Current and future dimensions of the HIV/AIDS pandemic in women and children. The Lancet 336:221-4.
- ---.1991.The epidemiology and projected mortality of AIDS. In Diseases and Mortality in SubSaharan  Africa, ed.  R. G.  Feachem  and D.  T. Jamison, Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press for the World Bank.
- deBlij, Harm J., and PeterO. Muller. 1997. Geography: Realms, Regions and Concepts . 8th ed. New York: Wiley.
- Decosas, Josef. 1995. Epidemic in Ghana: A very distinct profile. AIDS Analysis Africa . 5(3):12.
- ---. 1996. HIV and Development. AIDS 10(S3):69-74.
- Decosas, Josef, F . Kane, John K. Anarfi, K. D. R. Sodji, and H. U. Wagner. 1995. Migration and AIDS. The Lancet 346:826-28.
- Djomand, Gaston, Alan E. Greenberg, Madeleine Sassan-Morokro, Odette T ossou, Mamadou O. Diallo, Ehounou Ekpini, Peter Ghys, Benoit Soro, Kari Brattegaard, Achi Yapi et al. 1995. The epidemic of HIV/AIDS in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire: A review of data collected by Projet RETRO-CI from 1987 to 1993. Journal of Immune Deficiency Syndrome and Human Retrovirology 10:358-65.
- Epidemiology Division. 1992. Annual Report . Accra: Ghana Ministry of Health.
- Ghana Statistical Service. 1995. Ghana Living Standards  Survey -Report on the Third Round . Accra: Ghana Statistical Service.
- Ghana Statistical Service. 1992. Ghana in Figures, 1992. Accra: Ghana Statistical Service.
- Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) and Macro International Inc. (MI). 1994. GhanaDemographic and Health Survey 1993. Calverton, Maryland: GSS and MI.
- Gould, Peter. 1993. The Slow Plague: A Geography of the AIDS Pandemic. Boston: Blackwell Publishers.
- Health Studies Branch. 1993. Recent HIV seroprevalence levels by country: December 1993. Research Note No. 11. Washington DC: Bureau of the Census.
- Health Studies Branch. 1995. Recent HIV seroprevalence levels by country: July 1995. Research Note No. 17. Washington DC: Bureau of the Census.
- Health Studies Branch. 1996a. Recent HIV seroprevalence levels by country: June 1996. Research Note No. 21. Washington DC: Bureau of the Census.
- Health Studies Branch. 1996b. T rends and patterns of HIV/AIDS infection in selected developing countries: Country profiles June, 1996. Research Note No. 22. Washington DC: Bureau of the Census.
- Hotard, Rachel S., Donna M. Denno, Yaw AduSarkodie, Benjamin Baffoe-Bonnie, Russell W. Steele, and Irene D. Bordes. 1998. AIDS in a developing country: Education to prevent spread of disease. The AIDS Reader 8(1):12-6.
- Hunt, Charles W. 1996. Social vs biological: Theories on the transmission of AIDS in Africa. Social Science and Medicine 42(9):1283-96.
- Kalipeni, Ezekiel. 1997. The AIDS  pandemic  in Malawi: A somber reflection. In Cultural and Demographic Aspects of Health Care in Contemporary SubSaharan  Africa. ed.  Kalipeni E. and P. Thiuri. Langley Park, MD: IAAS Publishers.
- Mann, Jonathan  M., Daniel  J. M. Tarantola, and ThomasW.Netter.1992. AIDSintheWorld. Global AIDS Policy Coalition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Monekosso, Gottlieb L. 1993. Effects of Malaria and HIV Infections on Labor Productivity and Economic Growth in Africa in the 21st century. Unpublished paper presented  at the 2nd African Regional Conference of the Society for International Development, October 1-5, 1993.
- Parker, Richard G. 1996. Empowerment, community mobilization and social change in the  face of HIV/AIDS. AIDS 10(3):27-31.
- Perdigao, Joseph. A., Donna M. Denno, Charles N. Mock, Benjamin Baffoe-Bonnie, and Russell W. Steele. 1996. AIDS in a developing country. The AIDS Reader 6(5):40-6.
- Rushing, William A. 1995. The AIDS Epidemic: Social Dimensions of an Infectious Disease. Boulder: Westview Press.
- Stock, Robert 1995. Africa South of the Sahara . New York: Guilford.
- Tastemain, Catherine, and Peter Coles. 1993. Can a culture stop AIDS in its tracks? New Scientist 139: 13-14.
- UNAIDS and World  Health Organization.  1996. HIV/AIDS:TheGlobalEpidemic. Geneva: UNAIDS The Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS and World Health Organization .
- UNAIDS and World Health Organization. 1997. Report on the Global  HIV/AIDS Epidemic. Geneva: UNAIDS The Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS and World Health Organization .
- United Nations. 1994. HIV/AIDS and the Demography of Africa . New York: United Nations.
- Watts, Michael J., and Hans G. Bohle. 1993. The space of vulnerability: The causal structure of hunger and famine. Progress in Human Geography 17(1): 43-67.
- World Health Organization. 1995. AIDS Cases reported to WHO by Country/Area Based on Reports Received Through 15 December 1995: Regional Office for Africa. gopher://gpasv05.who. ch:70/00%5Caidscase%5CAFRO.TXT

JOSEPH OPPONG is an Associate Professor of Geography at the University of North T exas, Denton, TX 76203. Email: oppong@unt.edu. His research focuses on the geography of disease and health services in sub-Saharan Africa and T exas.