

the  geographical  review

## CREATIVE DESTRUCTION AND TRIAL BY SPACE IN A HISTORIC CANADIAN VILLAGE*

CLARE J. A. MITCHELL and JULIE VANDERWERF

abstract. Since the  s,  stakeholders have attempted to revitalize selected rural communities across the developed world. The resulting initiatives have contributed much to the growing multifunctionality of rural space. Geographers have conceptualized this transformation in at least two ways: as a process of creative destruction and as a process of trial by space. In this article we demonstrate the merit of uniting these concepts to enhance our understanding of the evolution of historic towns and villages. We illustrate this unification in  a  study  of  Creemore,  a  picturesque  village  in  the  province  of  Ontario, Canada.  Our analysis reveals that the transformation of this locale, from rural service center to heritagescape, has been fraught with controversy as various stakeholders have struggled to establish  a  dominant identity. We conclude that unification of these concepts does provide a useful framework for unraveling the evolution of historic communities within rural space. Keywords: Canada, creative destruction, heritage, historic villages, identity, postproductivism, trial by space.

T owns and villages in the developed world have experienced significant changes since  . Reduced primary-sector employment has led to the ongoing decline of many communities in rural regions (Clout  ;  Poudyala, Hodges, and Cordell  ; Conradson and Pawson  ). In some locales, stakeholders have taken advantage of local heritage to promote revitalization, thus stemming the tide of economic decline (Carter, Dyer, and Sharma  ; Coakley  ; Summerby-Murray  ; Knox  ; Panelli and others  ). These initiatives have contributed much to the growing multifunctionality of rural space.

Recent literature has drawn on the seminal works of Joseph Schumpeter and Henri Lefebvre to conceptualize the transformation under way in rural locales (Schumpeter  ; Lefebvre [  ]  ). Clare Mitchell and Sarah deWaal have used Schumpeter's concept of 'creative destruction' to describe the change taking place in historic towns and villages that seek to reposition themselves as centers for heritage  consumption (Mitchell and deWaal  ).  Keith  Halfacree  has  built  on Lefebvre's concept, 'trial by space,' to conceptualize rural stakeholders' struggle for identity (Halfacree  ). In this article we show that unifying these concepts enhances our understanding of the evolution of historic towns and villages. We examine the village of Creemore, Ontario, to illustrate this unification. To set the stage for this application, we begin with a discussion of the two key concepts that underlie this article: creative destruction and trial by space.

* The authors would like to thank two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments.

/ornament11 Dr. Mitchell is  an  associate  professor  of geography at the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario,   , Canada. Ms. Vanderwerf is an independent scholar in Adelaide, South Australia,  , Australia.

## Creative Destruction

In his  work Schumpeter introduced the phrase 'creative destruction' to the field of economics. He used the term to illustrate the transformative process that normally accompanies a radical innovation. According to Schumpeter, the creation of new innovations by profit-driven entrepreneurs results in the destruction of companies whose profits are based on older technologies. The process of creative destruction, he argued, initiates new cycles of economic growth in a regional economy.

Since this seminal work the concept has permeated many strands of academia (Huang, Wall, and Mitchell  ). Evolutionary economists, for example, owe much to Schumpeter's early ideas regarding the fundamental role of innovation (Andersen  ). Students of globalization have embraced the concept to describe the impact of Western creative activity on the destruction of national cultures (Jameson  ). Geographers and other scholars interested in the transformation of space have also benefited from Schumpeter's contribution (Barnes and Hayter  ; Page  ; T onts and Grieve  ;  Chang and Huang  ).  This is perhaps most apparent in the work of David Harvey (  ,  ,  ), who suggested that the creation of new innovation has spatial implications. For Harvey, the actions of entrepreneurs give rise not only to new cycles of capital accumulation but also to new landscapes that ultimately destroy those based on older innovations.

Several scholars have used this concept to describe the transformation of communities that commodify, or sell, local heritage (Mitchell  ; Mitchell and Coghill  ; Mitchell, Atkinson, and Clark  ; T onts and Grieve  ; Chang and Huang  ; Huang, Wall, and Mitchell  ; Fan, Wall, and Mitchell  ; Mitchell and deWaal  ). In our research we have suggested that various motivational drivers are responsible for the ongoing transformation of these locales (Mitchell and deWaal  ). Of greatest importance is the desire to accumulate surplus value, or profit, the wish to preserve  for example, historic buildings or preindustrial production techniques  and the need to promote growth or development, particularly in regions undergoing a decoupling from primary-sector activity. As Table I shows, these drivers give rise to new landscapes of accumulation that ultimately destroy landscapes associated with earlier regimes.

The productivist townscape, from which the transformation stems, traditionally appeared to provide basic goods and services to individuals employed in the primary sector (see Table I). The presence of motivational drivers, proximity to a large urban market, and the availability of historical amenities facilitates the evolution of this often-declining setting into a postproductivist heritagescape (Mitchell and deWaal  ). Once transformed, these locales typically offer a triad of unique products (for example, handmade crafts, antiques), dining venues (for example, those specializing in local cuisines), and experiences that satisfy consumers' thirst for heritage (for example, guided tours). This state may be maintained for a relatively long time, if the desire to preserve is the dominant driver (Mitchell and deWaal  ). A neoproductivist leisurescape may emerge, however, if the drive to profit, or

Table I  Creative Destruction in Historic Towns and Villages

| motivational drivers a   | motivational drivers a    | motivational drivers a   | landscape being created landscape being created   | landscape being destroyed landscape being destroyed   | dominant identity dominant identity               |
|--------------------------|---------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Profit                   | Preservation              | Promotion                | landscape being created landscape being created   | landscape being destroyed landscape being destroyed   | dominant identity dominant identity               |
|                          |                           |                          | Productivist townscape b                          | Preproductivist landscape                             | Place of service provision and social interaction |
|                          |                           |                          | Postproductivist heritagescape                    | Productivist townscape b                              | Place of commodified heritage                     |
| /triangledwn             | /triangledwn /triangledwn | /triangledwn             | Neoproductivist leisurescape                      | Postproductive heritagescape                          | Place of entertainment                            |

Source: Modified from Mitchell and deWaal ,  .

a The width of the lines indicates the degree of their dominance.

b In a recent article (Mitchell and deWaal  ), we used the term 'productivist rural landscape' to refer to landscapes dominated by commercial farms or other forms of primary-sector activity. Given our focus in this article on historic towns and villages, the term 'productivist townscape' seems more appropriate.

promote economic growth, takes precedence. Venues that appeal to a mass tourist market may appear and eventually displace those catering to serious heritage seekers (Mitchell and deWaal  ).

New place identities accompany these physical transformations. Building on an earlier article (Mitchell and deWaal  ), we suggest that three different identities emerge with each new landscape of accumulation (see Table I). For local residents living in a productivist townscape, place identity is a function of both their quotidian economic and social activities. For those who are attracted to a heritagescape, this space represents a place of commodified heritage, one that provides heritage seekers both tangible commodities and intangible experiences reflecting a bygone, preproductivist era. For individuals who are drawn to the leisurescape, this space is a place of entertainment where myriad venues meet the recreational and consumptive needs of the mass tourist market.

Each new place identity ultimately challenges existing identities associated with earlier landscapes of accumulation. At greatest risk is the identity held by some local residents who value the space for its social cohesion and small-town atmosphere. As stakeholders transform and reproduce or create the space, this place identity  may  be  compromised or destroyed. To understand more fully why this destruction occurs, we now turn to the concept of trial by space.

## Trial by Space

Lefebvre, the renowned social theorist whose work has contributed much to academics' understanding of space, coined the phrase 'trial by space' ([  ]  ). He suggested that the production of space involves confrontations among actors with

varying values and ideas who are vying to establish an identity as a means to achieve significance and power. This identity only emerges with physical presence. If values or ideas have no tangible expression, they will lose identity and evolve, as Lefebvre observes below, into mere abstract descriptions. Trial by space is the process by which this identity is established:

Nothing or no one can avoid trial by space. . . . It is in space on a worldwide scale, that each idea of 'value' acquires or loses its distinctiveness through confrontation with the other values and ideas that it encounters there. Moreover  and more importantly  groups, classes, or factions of classes cannot constitute themselves, or recognize one another, as 'subjects' unless they generate (or produce) a space. Ideas, representations or values which do not succeed in making their mark on space, and thus generating (or producing) an appropriate morphology, will lose all pith and become signs, resolve themselves into abstract descriptions, or mutate into fantasies. (Lefebvre [  ]  ,  - ; italics added)

Building on Lefebvre's work, Halfacree demonstrates that the search for identity affects the three facets that constitute rural space: rural localities, formal representations of the rural, and everyday lives of the rural (  ,  ,  and  ). Halfacree defines these as follows: Rural localities are 'inscribed through relatively distinctive spatial practices, linked to production and/or consumption activities.' Formal representations of the rural are those expressed by 'capitalist interests, cultural arbiters, planners and politicians.' Everyday lives refer to the daily behaviors of rural residents, which are 'inevitably subjective and diverse, and with varying levels of coherence/fracture' (  ,  ).

Table II  Trial by Space and the Production of Rural Space

<!-- image -->

Source: Halfacree . Source: Adapted from Halfacree .

Halfacree further suggests that space takes on various forms, according to the degree of consistency among these facets. This consistency is dependent on the nature of values and ideas within the space. Consistent values give rise to facets that will 'cohere in a relatively smooth . . . manner,' causing space to take on a 'congruent and unified' form. Inconsistency may result in a 'contradictory' and 'disjointed' space, although one that still reflects an overall coherence. In other cases, extreme inconsistency may cause a space to shift from a state of congruence to one of  'chaos and incoherence.' In this scenario the facets 'fail to internalize one another,' resulting in fundamentally conflicting ruralities (  ,  - ). A state of congruence will return only when the values, ideas, and facets of rural space are realigned.

Table II illustrates how the ideas and values that exist within groups, classes, or factions of classes are responsible for the production of space. When these ideas and values achieve spatial expression, they may influence the three facets of rural space. If this influence is consistent, then the resulting space will be congruent. In contrast, contradiction and chaos may ensue if ideas, values, and facets are in conflict.

## Creative Destruction and Trial by Space in Historic Towns and Villages

Integrating the concepts of creative destruction and trial by space provided us with a framework for understanding the transformation of historic communities located within rural space (Table III). For this conceptualization we tracked the potential transformation of a historic center through three congruent forms, each of which reflects the landscape and identity of the space at a particular point in time. Each of these spatial forms comprises the three facets of space  locality, representation, and everyday lives  which cohere with the dominant identity of the space. A period of contradiction or chaos may precede each state as stakeholder groups, driven by various motivations, attempt to find a physical expression of their values and ideas. In some cases this trial by space may be relatively smooth, if what is imposed on the space is relatively consistent with what is already in place. In contrast, chaos may erupt, if inconsistent values or ideas permeate the space.

## Introducing Creemore

To assess the merit of combining these two important concepts we conducted a detailed study of Creemore, a small village approximately  miles north-northeast of the Greater Toronto area (population  .  million [Statistics Canada  ]). The village contains an abundance of nineteenth-century buildings and is situated in the rolling hills of the Niagara Escarpment. Because of its pleasant streetscape and wide appeal it has been designated 'one of the prettiest town's in Canada' (Harrowsmith Country Life  )  (Figure  ).  T o  capture  the  essence  of  Creemore,  Julie Vanderwerf shares her impressions on  August  , her first visit:

Driving towards Creemore, I am pleased with the view. I approach the first bend on the road leading into the village and spot a group of horses taking shade beneath a tree. A few more bends and I am soon on George Street, a residential area on the east side of the village. Following this street until it ends, I arrive at Mill Street, the village's main shopping district. Attractive brick buildings and unique shops with witty names and inviting displays line the street. Following the 'P' signs, I find a parking spot off the main street, behind a building that resembles an historic train station.

As I stroll down Mill Street, something strikes me: Creemore is eerily quiet. Wondering what is missing, I realize that it is a lack of cars, and especially trucks. The silence requires an adjustment.

The aroma of freshly baked bread and the slightest smell of manure greet me as I make my way downtown. I sit on a bench and observe a young family carrying

a

Table III  Creative Destruction and Trial by Space in Historic Towns and Villages

c This progression assumes conflicting ideas and values.

| neoproductivist leisurescape   | The space is largely an entertainment place, with some limited offer- ings for locals and lim- ited unique products. The space is presented as an entertainment venue. Many locals are em- ployed in the tourist sector. Many basic necessities are pur- chased elsewhere. Mass tourists are present.                                                                                                                                                                | A coherent place of entertainment stages (precommodifica- stages (early destruction, ad- maybeforced to shop elsewhere for /g61                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|--------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| postproductivist heritagescape | The space provides unique products and experiences to heritage- seeking consumers, as well as some products for residents. The space is presented as a unique and 'authentic' setting. Some locals are em- ployed in the tourist sector. Some shop else- where for some necessi- ties. Heritage seekers are present. Trial by Space                                                                                                                                  | of Towns and Villages over Time c contradictory space A coherent place of commodified heritage A contradictory or chaotic transformation to a postproductivist heritagescape heritagescape to leisurescape through an additional In these cases, local residents                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| productivist townscape b       | Locality The space is a service center for local residents and those engaged in nearby primary-sector activity. Representation The space is presented as a local service center. Lived space Locals are employed in firms catering to resi- dents and producers. Most people shop locally for basic necessi- ties.A few heritage seek- /g61 Trial by Space /g61 PRODUCERS OF SPACE: The ideas and values of stake- holders, motivated by profit, preserva- tion, and | Spatial Evolution A coherent place of services and social interaction A or chaotic space a In a recent article (Mitchell and deWaal  ),we described the through three tion, early commodification, and advanced commodification) and from three vanceddestruction,andpostdestruction).Althoughthesestagescouldbeintegratedintothisconceptualframework,wehaveexcludedthemtoavoidunnecessary detail. b Someproductivist townscapes will be in a state of decline at the onset of commodification. |

F ig .  Mill Street is at the heart of the commercial district in the historic village of Creemore, in the province of Ontario, Canada. (Photograph by Julie Vanderwerf, June  )

<!-- image -->

groceries and singing. The number of children I see walking or biking downtown suggests to me that Creemore is probably a safe village. I am surprised by the number of cafés and restaurants. But what is most surprising is the lack of franchises, particularly restaurant chains. There are no McDonalds or Wendy's here.

I continue my walk north on Mill Street and encounter majestic trees gracing the lawns of stately, turn-of-the-century homes. I can see the appeal that Creemore would have to visitors. As I head back towards my car, I spot a young couple emerging from an suv with Toronto dealership license-plate brackets. As the woman photographs the historic train station, I hear her say to her companion, 'Oh look at it here, isn't it just perfect!' Smiling, I head home.

To determine how the seemingly congruent heritagescape of Creemore has evolved we drew on a variety of sources. Using a questionnaire distributed to  households during the autumn of  , 1 we elicited residents' opinions of Creemore's development. One hundred and twenty-six surveys were completed, representing  percent of Creemore's households. We also undertook a content analysis of all relevant print and online information on the village, including historical and contemporary planning documents provided by the municipality or the township, reports and brochures produced by the Creemore Business Improvement Association ( cbia ),  articles  found  in  Creemore's local weekly newspaper, the Creemore Star/ Echo (issues published since  ), and historical business data provided in the Dun and Bradstreet  Reference Book (  ). Together, these sources provided ample information with which to assess Creemore's current form and evolutionary path.

## Creemore as Locality

Creemore is home to  business establishments, most of which are in the downtown core. Of these, approaching two-thirds (  ) are service oriented and  percent (  venues) offer a variety of retail goods (  ), accommodation (  ), or dining venues (  ) ( ce  ). Some retailers likely cater to local residents, given the nature of their product mix (groceries, flowers, hardware, convenience items, and liquor). Others, however, provide commodities that may attract clientele from a wider area.

Sixteen of Creemore's retailers sell arts and crafts, antiques, home furnishings, or decorations. The presence of unique and locally crafted merchandise is apparent in many of these venues. For example, the Noisy Gallery  named after the Noisy River  offers 'exhibition space, art workshops, music nights and an ever changing display of talent from emerging and established artists' (Mad and Noisy Gallery  ). Similarly, the Curiosity House Books &amp; Gallery 'prides itself on introducing local artists and showcasing the work of old friends' ( ce  ).  Locally crafted merchandise can also be found in several other venues, including With our Hands, which specializes in handcrafted soaps, lotions, and other organic products ( ce  ).

A 'smorgasbord of gastronomical delights' awaits diners in Creemore's six restaurants ( csb  c). Four of these are located on Mill Street, in the town's main commercial area: the Bank Café, the Old Mill House, Sovereign Restaurant, and the Two Rivers Ceramics Café ( ce  ). The Bank Café bills itself as 'a favorite meeting spot for locals, visitors, artists &amp; authors [who] share their love for the Bank's warmth, friendliness and casual charm' ( ce  ). The Two Rivers Ceramics Café is  equally appealing, in that customers can not only purchase fresh baked goods, specialty coffee, herbal teas, and gifts but also create ceramic works of art ( cdic  ).  These dining establishments complement the shops that one finds in the business district. It is likely that both types of establishments benefit from the myriad special events that are held throughout the village.

Among the special events that attract both residents and tourists are a street festival, a harvest dinner, a duck race, and tours of homes, gardens, and studios ( ce  ). They take place year-round but are more frequent during the tourist season ( ce  ). The Copper Kettle Festival, initiated in  , perhaps the best known of all events, drew nearly  ,  attendees in  (White  ). Hosted by the Creemore Springs Brewery, the festival celebrates 'all things a hundred years behind the times' and is advertised as an 'old-time village fair' ( csb  b). Attendees can enjoy a beer garden, live music, tours of the brewery, a classic automobile show, children's events  pony rides, a petting zoo  wagon rides, and art displays.

Creemore's enterprises and experiences provide the foundation for the consumptive activities that one associates with a heritagescape locality. The village landscape is designed to encourage consumption both by those who seek to meet their daily or weekly needs and by those in search of amenities or items beyond life's necessities.

## Creemore as Formal Representation

If Creemore is a congruent space, then its spatial practices should be reflected in the way that it is formally represented. In other words, Creemore's provision of unique  and standard  products should be apparent in documentation provided by capitalists,  cultural  arbiters,  planners (Halfacree  ),  and  other officials. A content analysis of documents published by each stakeholder group reveals these representations.

The cbia , representing downtown retail merchants, publicizes Creemore at its Web site and in an annual brochure. 'Come Discover Creemore' is the title of the online description, which presents Creemore as an 'authentic village' and 'an alternative to the vast ye olde small towne tourist villages' that are appearing elsewhere within the township ( cbia  ). Six other phrases on the Web page accent Creemore's 'authenticity.' Among the most descriptive are: 'prim Victorian houses,' 'unassuming streetscape,' and 'genuine charm.' The cbia brochure Creemore: Follow Your Heart alludes  to  the  origins  of  this  authenticity: 'By  dint  of  nature, geography, architecture and popular consent, [Creemore] has become the icon for the early Ontario village' ( cbia  ,  ).

Authentic representation of the village is also apparent in the work of the Purple Hills Arts and Heritage Society, an organization composed of  volunteers who are committed to conserving the heritage of Creemore and supporting the local artistic community. The society published the Creemore Walking Tour, a guidebook that presents the village in all its architectural and historical glory. Readers are invited 'to follow this guide to view the beautiful homes built under lofty trees, stately churches and some of the town's oldest business establishments' ( phahs  ,  ). Such sentiments present Creemore as an authentic space and, as Robert Sack advised (  ,  ), one that provides visitors with the opportunity of 'seeing through to the real.'

Creemore's unique attributes are also acknowledged in promotional material supplied by the regional tourist organization. Although its ninety-nine-page publication highlights a variety of regional attractions, five paragraphs are devoted to Creemore (Georgian Triangle Tourist Association  ). In these the village is described as 'a lovely town worth investigating' (pp.  - ), one of several communities where 'artists and artisans can create and exhibit their works' (p.  ), a place of 'quaint ambiance and charming streetscape in a rural setting' (p.  ), 'a  secret hideaway, well off the beaten track' (p.  ), and a place where one finds a 'host of memorable shops and places to eat' (p.  ). Combined with the region's other attractions, Creemore contributes to 'the exceptional holiday experience you've been searching for' (p.  ).

Planners in the Township of Clearview, in which Creemore lies, have recognized the village's consumptive role as well. The township's  -page official plan contains an aptly titled section on 'Community Identity' (Township of Clearview  ). Here, ten development principles are presented, with one stressing Creemore's commercial role: 'Maintaining/establishing centralized downtown cores within the

Township's three primary settlement areas (Creemore / New Lowell / Stayner), oriented toward the needs of permanent residents and recreational residents and tourists in which strong retail, service, cultural and entertainment components are provided' (p.  ). Thus, to the planners, Creemore is a space of consumption that meets the needs of a variety of consumer groups. This recognition is clearly consistent with Creemore's spatial practices and, as shown below, with the everyday lives of those who occupy this space.

## Creemore as Lived Space

As Halfacree suggests, everyday lives are diverse and 'take in and, to a greater or lesser extent, subvert' the other facets of space (  ,  ). We anticipated that this facet would align with both its formal representation and spatial practices. More simply put, in this widely promoted consumptive space we expected to find local residents and visitors interacting in a relatively harmonious manner.

Three distinct groups occupy the lived space of Creemore:  ,  local residents who live in the village (  ,  people) and its catchment area (  ,  people), weekend residents, and tourists (Creemore Vision  /   ,  ). For the local residents, Creemore is an important source of employment and commerce. A survey conducted by the community in  found that thirty downtown businesses provided  permanent full-time jobs and  permanent part-time positions (p.  ). Creemore and district residents held more than three-quarters of these jobs, indicating a very high level of local employment.

These residents both work locally and do at least some of their shopping in the village. The  survey found that sales to local consumers accounted for  percent of revenue received at thirty businesses (Creemore Vision  /   ,  ). A more recent survey, conducted by the cbia , reveals that local clientele were responsible for more than  percent of the revenue earned by seven downtown businesses ( cbia  ,  ).  These surveys suggest, therefore, that local residents value Creemore both for the employment opportunities that it provides and for its provision of necessary goods and services.

Local residents are accompanied by others who live in the village on a part-time basis. The municipality identifies these residents as part-timers if their mailing address for tax files is different from their local address (Creemore Vision  /   ). The community first observed weekenders in the late  s ( cs  ). According to the Vision  /  Committee, approximately  ,  of  Creemore and district residents fall into this residential category, suggesting that the proportion of part-time residents in the market area is approximately  percent (  ,  ). The majority of these individuals come from Toronto, and their presence contributes much to the viability of the retailer sector.

Others, who travel to Creemore on a less frequent basis, accompany this weekend population. A  survey of eighty-nine shoppers found that  percent were permanent residents of Creemore and that  percent had a secondary residence in the region, with the remaining  percent classified as 'tourists,' or individuals who

neither owned or rented property in the area (Creemore Vision  /   ,  ). The survey also found that  percent of all tourists had traveled more than thirty minutes to the village, with nearly  percent traveling for one hour or more (p.  ). The cbia 's survey further demonstrates the village's continuing appeal. A questionnaire distributed to  visitors revealed that the community attracts residents from fiftyeight different places ( cbia  ,  ). Thus local residents, weekenders, and visitors clearly occupy the lived space of Creemore. As the following statement shows, their lives intertwine as they come into contact on the village's main street:

What emerges is an interesting mix of people using the community for all kinds of reasons. For those who live in the Village on a full-time or part-time basis, the Village serves as a place to shop or meet service needs, such as going to the bank or a restaurant. It is a place where one can both live, and make a living. Others are attracted to the Village as tourist visitors, attracted by a special event or who are just sightseeing. Finally, there are many who live in the Village who can be found there at any given time, not necessarily there to make a purchase, but who enjoy the ambience, the facilities and street for its own sake as part of their day to day lives. (Creemore Vision  /   ,  )

This quotation, much like our first impression, suggests that Creemore is a relatively congruent space. In an attempt to quantify this state, we conducted a survey with local residents in  .  Our primary goal was to assess the degree to which local residents are happy with their lived space and, more specifically, with the conversion of Creemore into a heritage landscape. One hundred and twenty-six residents completed the survey. The majority of the participants were female (  .  percent),  years old or older (  .  percent), and well educated (  percent with a postsecondary degree or diploma). More than two-thirds of the respondents indicated that they had lived in the community for less than ten years (  .  percent), with an almost equal percentage claiming local residence for between twenty and fifty  years  (  .  percent). About  percent indicated having moved to Creemore between ten and twenty years before the survey, and the remaining  percent stated that they had always lived in the village.

Residents' attitudes are extremely positive (Table IV). Nearly all (  percent) note the positive tangible economic benefits that have come about because of the presence of visitors. Most respondents (  percent) think that their presence does not negatively impact their sense of community, and the majority (  percent) enjoy seeing and interacting with visitors. In fact, almost two-thirds (  .  percent) believe that additional changes to the retail environment should be initiated to enhance the tourist experience.

Although the attitudes are overwhelmingly positive, nearly one-half of survey respondents acknowledge that parking problems and traffic congestion arise during the tourist season, particularly in the summer months when special events are held. Individuals who have always lived in the community most frequently voice these negative opinions. In fact, more than two-thirds of this cohort (eight of thirteen old-time residents) complain that parking is a problem during high-visitor

Table IV  Attitudes of 126 Creemore Residents Surveyed in 2007

| attitude                                                                                 |   agree (%) |   neutral (%) |   disagree (%) |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|---------------|----------------|
| Visitors are beneficial to local businesses                                              |        97.6 |           0.6 |            1.6 |
| Visitors contribute positively to the overall economy of the community                   |        96   |           2   |            2   |
| When visitors come and enjoy the community I am proud to live here                       |        84.8 |           9.4 |            5.8 |
| An increase in the numbers of visitors would not worry me                                |        81   |           3.1 |           15.9 |
| I enjoy seeing and interacting with visitors when they are in the community              |        78   |           9.4 |            3.3 |
| More effort should be made to attract tourists and market the community as a destination |        68   |          14.5 |           17.5 |
| More stores, services, restaurants, and accommodations are needed for visitors           |        66.6 |          14.8 |           18.9 |
| I am willing to put up with the negative impacts visitors may bring                      |        63.4 |          17.9 |           18.7 |
| In-town parking and traffic are problems during high-visitor periods                     |        47.2 |          16.8 |           36   |
| Visitors are destroying the sense of community in the village                            |         5.6 |           6.4 |           88   |
| Too many visitors come to the community                                                  |         5.5 |          13.5 |           81   |

periods. Despite these concerns the majority of residents surveyed are willing to put up with these negative externalities, and most respondents commented very positively on their experience with visitors. We concluded, therefore, that our first impression of Creemore was correct; that a state of congruence does appear to exist among the various facets that constitute this commodified heritage space.

## Creative Destruction in Creemore

In the early  s Creemore provided a venue for grinding locally produced grain into flour ( phahs  ).  The location of the village, close to two rivers, ensured sufficient power for the mill's operation. For much of its history, at least until the  s, Creemore was a vibrant commercial community. By  , it was home to at least three hotels, a pharmacy, a butcher shop, a grist mill, numerous retailers, the Creemore Star newspaper, and a jailhouse ( phahs  ).  By  ,  local  services met  percent of the community's needs (p.  ). Throughout the twentieth century, however, this importance diminished. Closure of the train station, as well as competition from larger centers (Simpson  ),  was largely responsible for its reduced commercial role. By  , 'one only [had] to walk down the main street with the many empty stores to see that the local business sector is in trouble' ( cs  ).

The cbia held meetings as early as  to reverse this situation. At one of these meetings a local proprietor suggested that the community should embark on a theme plan to revitalize the business area in 'keeping with its turn-of-the-century architecture' ( cs  ). This plan took effect in the late  s, when the cbia devised a strategy

F ig .  The Creemore Springs Brewery, in Creemore, Ontario, Canada, is known for its amber lager.  Established in  ,  it  was  one  of  the  village's  first  tourist  attractions.  (Photograph  by  Julie Vanderwerf, June  )

<!-- image -->

to revitalize the downtown area in order 'to draw more visitors to the village' and to 'capitalize on the vast potential of tourist traffic to the Creemore area' (MacMurchy  ). T o achieve this goal, the Creemore Council designated Mill Street a 'Business Improvement Area' in  ( cs  ). At the same time, downtown business owners were encouraged to improve their storefronts with historic facades and signage.

These initiatives continued in  , when the Creemore Council and the cbia jointly funded a study to be undertaken by a local college to assess Creemore's potential as a tourist destination (Yourkin  ).  The  five-year action plan that resulted  would  influence  the  course  of  development  over  the  next  decade.  As recommended in the plan, the cbia established a Beautification Committee in  to further improve the aesthetic appeal of the village to visitors ( cs  ). A year later the cbia asked the council to enforce the maintenance and remedial action bylaw, which required merchants to look after buildings that were 'run-down' ( cs  ). In  the council approved the placement of interlocking brick sidewalks in the downtown area at an estimated cost of the equivalent of .. ,  (Andrus  ). Six years later the council approved the construction of a replica of the original Creemore Railway Station. Architects designed this structure to be 'valuable not only during tourist times, when an information center and public washrooms are vitally needed, but also as a community meeting place' (Fletcher  ). Public-

ity accompanied these changes. In  the cbia produced a brochure that encouraged visitors to 'step back a century at this charming village nestled in the valley of the Mad &amp; Noisy Rivers' (p.  ).

Private-sector initiatives enhanced these public-sector actions. The Creemore Springs Brewery was the first major private-sector investment made during this period. In  the brewery opened in a historic  circa  stone structure on the village's main street (Figure  ). Since its opening it has produced a unique, amber lager that is brewed in small batches, using only four ingredients: malted barley, hops, yeast, and local spring water ( csb  a). Its opening appears to have been the turning point in Creemore's emergence as a commodified landscape. In the words of a local business owner, 'About  years ago the town started to really change. John Wiggins, who started the Brewery, organized people and saw the potential, he was the one who started the ball rolling, land was cheap back then and Creemore was a dead town with many stores boarded up, but after the Brewery started and word got out, people started buying cottages and seasonal homes. The Brewery really originally brought the tourism' (Durrant  ).

This opening was a catalyst for other business ventures. As the editor of the Creemore Echo observed, 'The brewery became a business success that created jobs for local residents, and then grew into an attraction for tourists and visitors. As the 'mom and pop' stores in the village lost out to shopping malls and box stores, many were replaced by shops appealing to those people who came to see the brewery. And so today's version of downtown Creemore was created and continues to evolve' (Simpson  ).

A content analysis of the  Dun and Bradstreet  Reference Book, and the  cbia brochure yielded insights into the evolving business composition of Creemore. In  ,  ten  years  before  the  brewery opened, Creemore had twentyseven businesses (Dun and Bradstreet  ).  Given their product mix  groceries, hardware, convenience items, funeral services, banking, and automotive service and supplies  most of them probably catered to local residents. The  Reference Book listed only one restaurant and one store providing gift, novelty, and souvenir items. In contrast, more than sixty-five businesses and services were listed in the  cbia brochure. Among them were twelve art and crafts/gift/specialty shops, ten restaurants, seven antiques/decor shops, four bed-and-breakfasts, and two clothing stores. This growth demonstrates that Creemore's declining commercial landscape had been replaced with a vibrant heritagescape. Creating this landscape has not been a particularly smooth process, however.

## Trial by Space in Creemore

In Creemore, two types of conflict have accompanied the creation of this heritagescape. The first is that which emerged between those who seek to promote economic development through commodification and those who hope to preserve the community's small-town, productivist landscape. The second is that which surfaced more recently between those who desire to preserve the heritagescape and those

who aspire to accumulate surplus value through the development of Creemore's residential sector. We consider each of these trials by space.

Local residents opposed the creation of this heritagespace throughout the  s. A local business owner revealed this resistance in  when he argued that two local  tourism-development promoters had no right 'to tell the businessmen of Creemore that they should make the façades of their buildings look like turn-ofthe-century buildings. Some of us don't want our buildings to look like they did  years ago' ( cs  ). Soon a battle between those in favor of restoring the village and those against the historic facade erupted. In a letter to the editor, one of the local promoters responded that 'the BIA Board has actively encouraged businesses to maintain, restore, or replicate the turn-of-the century architecture. . . . It is done because numerous studies have shown that people today have a strong appreciation for the heritage look as witnessed by the success of Niagara-on-the-Lake. . . . The projection of an image for the village to attract new customers only works if everyone cooperates' ( cs  ).

In  considerable opposition again emerged, this time against the sidewalk initiative. Many believed that the money could be better spent, as revealed in this resident's comment: 'I can't believe the village of Creemore is going to spend $  ,  on brick sidewalks when the water is in dire need of help' ( cs  ). A year later another resident voiced his comments on Creemore's new identity: 'What we now must do is play the role of entertainer for visitors. . . . Though we may not be collectively thrilled with the idea, we are aware that our area depends to a great extent on the infusion of dollars from tourists. . . . We are a small town caught in the economic no-man's-land between genuine small town life and the pre-packaged façade that we are being forced to sell' ( cs  ).

Opposition again surfaced in  over proposed plans to build a  -seat theater in the village. One resident observed that 'Creemore is a quaint little village and I think we should be careful not to build a white elephant we can ill afford' (Campbell  ).  He continued, 'It seems that the more thriving, lovely, and authentic a community is, the quicker are the minions of progress to try to destroy it and to bully its residents into believing that such destruction is in their best interests' (p.  ). Opposition to this initiative caused the promoters to back down, and the facility was never constructed.

These examples reveal that Creemore's emergence as a heritagescape came about after  a  period  of  conflict  that  pitted  promoters of tourism development against those who sought to preserve Creemore's existing place identity. Promoters believed that commodification would lead to downtown revitalization and generate revenue. The initiatives taken to re-create the 'preproductivist' setting were designed to take visitors back to a simpler time. For some local residents, however, these initiatives were not an accurate reflection of the 'real' Creemore. To these preservationists, the village was a place where residents converged for commerce  albeit somewhat limited commerce  and social interaction. The creation of this 'faux-authentic'

heritagescape conflicted greatly with their individual ideas, values, and, ultimately, place identity.

Over time, however, local residents appear to have accepted this new identity as real, or authentic. The relatively harmonious situation that appeared to exist in  , particularly between newcomers and visitors, suggests that the majority of local residents see this commodified landscape as the 'real' Creemore. This acceptance gave rise to a relatively congruent space. However, as we dug deeper we found that another trial by space is under way, one that may eventually compromise Creemore's identity as a commodified heritagescape.

The more recent conflict in Creemore is between a development company and local Creemore residents who are seeking to preserve the community as a heritagescape. Alliance Homes, a company based in the Greater Toronto Area, initiated this battle in  when it announced plans to construct a  -unit subdivision on a  -acre parcel on the outskirts of the village. At two public meetings more than  residents expressed opposition to this proposal, on the grounds that the dense development was 'not in character with the village' (Rusk  ). The development company decided to appeal to the Ontario Municipal Board when the township failed to come to a decision on this proposal. The board approved the proposal in  , with development expected to take several years to complete (Gennings  ). What impact this development will have on Creemore's current identity remains to be seen.

Creemore's future lies largely in the hands of local politicians. If they are driven by a desire to promote growth and/or enhance profit, future subdivision-development proposals  will  probably  be  approved.  These  initiatives  will  help  spur  this postproductivist heritagescape to a state of neoproductivism, one that will likely take on a residential identity that will appeal to former Toronto urbanites or retirees.  On the other hand, if those in power are motivated by a desire to preserve Creemore's small-town charm, future applications will be denied, thus halting the village's trek along the path of creative destruction. This outcome will not emerge quickly, however, for, as Lefebvre observed, 'nothing, or no one, can avoid trial by space' ([  ]  ,  ).

## Reflections

Geographers have used the concepts of creative destruction and trial by space to unravel the transformations under way in rural space (Halfacree  ; Mitchell and deWaal  ).  Each of these concepts has individual merit; however, as our case study of Creemore shows, their unification also has value. Trial by space reveals the process that occurs in the production of space; that is, contestation among stakeholders with varying ideas and values (Lefebvre [  ]  ). Creative destruction, in contrast, reveals the outcome of this process; that is, the creation of new landscapes of accumulation (Harvey  ). Thus their unification offers a more complete understanding of both how and why space is transformed.

This merger provides insight into the evolution of historic communities. The presence of stakeholders motivated by profit, preservation, and/or promotion may give  rise  to  three  landscapes  of  accumulation:  productivist  townscape,  postproductivist heritagescape, and neoproductivist leisurescape. New landscapes and identities emerge often after a period of conflict, as stakeholders' ideas and values vie for spatial expression (see Table III). Newer identities and landscapes replace older identities and landscapes as spatial expression is attained. Our research demonstrates that Creemore transformed from a productivist to a postproductivist landscape and that the actions of preservationists, profiteers, and promoters of growth facilitated the evolution. Contestations created a landscape of commodified heritage, where the three facets of space  locality,  representation, and everyday lives existed in a relatively congruent state at the time of our fieldwork. Recent development proposals, however, have initiated a new trial by space, the outcome of which cannot be foretold.

In this article we presented the progression of historic space as a three-stage process, one that sees specific communities move from a landscape of local service provision, to a heritagescape, and finally to a leisurescape of mass consumption. Our findings indicate that a leisurescape is only one of several possible landscapes that may emerge in communities that base their development on the commodification of heritage.

The impending construction of a large residential subdivision on the outskirts of Creemore suggests that outsiders are imposing a new identity on the village. If similar proposals are approved in the future, this identity may come to dominate. And if this scenario unfolds, the community may evolve into a state of neoproductivism, albeit one whose identity  as a place of exurban residence  may deviate from what was originally proposed  as a place of entertainment. In either case, the ongoing transformation will provide further evidence of the emerging multifunctionality of rural space. Additional investigation will likely reveal that creative destruction and trial by space extend well beyond this historic village in southern Ontario.

## Note

-  . Surveys were distributed to every second home in Creemore's residential neighborhoods.

## References

Andersen, E. S.  . Evolutionary Economics: Post Schumpeterian Contributions. London: Pinter Publishers.

Andrus, R.  . Interlocking Brick for Downtown Sidewalks. Creemore Star,  April,  .

Barnes, T. J., and R. Hayter.  . 'The Little Town That Did': Flexible Accumulation and Commu- nity Response in Chemainus, British Columbia. Regional Studies  (  ):  - .

Campbell, M.  . Comments and Opinions. Creemore Echo,  April,  .

- Carter J., P . Dyer, and B. Sharma.  . Dis-Placed Voices: Sense of Place and Place-Identity on the Sunshine Coast. Social and Cultural Geography  (  ):  - .
- CBIA [Creemore Business Improvement Association].  . Creemore. Creemore, Ont.: Creemore Business Improvement Association.
- ---.  . Creemore: Follow Your Heart. Creemore, Ont.: Creemore Business Improvement Association.

---.  . Creemore BIA Business Survey Responses. Unpublished document.

- ---.  . Welcome to Creemore, the Little Village with the Big Heart. Formerly at [www .creemoreontario.com].
- CDIC [Collingwood &amp; District Information Centre].  . Central East Ontario Community Information Database. [http://centraleastontario.cioc.ca/record/CWD  Two Rivers Ceramics Café] (access restricted).
- CE [Creemore Echo].  . Business Directory  Media &amp; Communications. Creemore.com. [www .creemore.com/business\_directory.asp?CatID=  ].

---.



.

Creemore Community Calendar. Creemore.com. [www.creemore.com/calendar.asp].

- Chang, T. C., and S. Huang.  . Recreating Place, Replacing Memory: Creative Destruction at the Singapore River . Asia Pacific Viewpoint  (  ):  - .
- Clout, H.  . Rural France in the New Millennium: Change and Challenge. Geography  (  ):  - .
- Coakley, L.  . 'Sea, Sail, Steam and Emigration': The Imagining of a Heritage Tourist Town in the Republic of Ireland. Geography  (  ):  - .
- Conradson, D., and E. Pawson.  . New Cultural Economies of Marginality: Revisiting the West Coast, South Island, New Zealand. Journal of Rural Studies  (  ):  - .
- Creemore Vision  /  .  . Background Report: Profile of Creemore and District. Creemore, Ont.: Creemore Vision  /  Committee.
- CS [Creemore Star].  . Creemore Needs Were Discussed. Creemore Star,  June,  .

---.  . Revitalized Business Association. Creemore Star,  June,  .

---.  . BIA Names Officers. Creemore Star,  February,  .

---.  . Weekenders: Invasion or Contribution. Creemore Star,  February,  .

---.  . Bring in the New? Creemore Star,  January,  .

- ---.  . Creemore's Downtown Core Revitalized. Creemore Star,  September,  .
- ---.  . Council Notes. Creemore Star,  July,  .

---.  . The Listening Machine. Creemore Star,  April,  .

---.  . Barrie Dumps on Creemore. Creemore Star,  June,  .

- CSB [Creemore Springs Brewery].  a. The Best Reason to Have a Beer. [www.creemoresprings .com/live/perfect.php].
- ---.  b. The Copper Kettle Festival. [www.creemoresprings.com/live/creemore\_copper.php]. ---.  c. Come to Creemore. [www.creemoresprings.com/creemore/hungryOrThirsty.php]. Dun and Bradstreet.  .  Reference Book. Toronto: Dun and Bradstreet, Inc.

Durrant, J.  . Interview with Julie Vanderwerf. Creemore, Ont.,  October.

- Fan, N., G. Wall, and C. J. A. Mitchell.  . Creative Destruction and the Water Town of Luzhi, China. Tourism Management  (  ):  - .
- Fletcher, J.  . Support of the Creemore Station  . Creemore Echo,  June,  .
- Gennings, M.  . OMB Approves Alliance Project. Stayner Sun,  April. [www.simcoe.com/news /article/  -omb-approves-alliance-project].
- Georgian Triangle Tourist Association.  . See and Do Visitor Guide  /  . Collingwood, Ont.: Georgian Triangle Tourist Association.
- Halfacree, K.  . Rethinking 'Rurality.' In New Forms of Urbanization: Beyond the Urban-Rural Dichotomy, edited by T. Champion and G. Hugo,  - . Aldershot, England: Ashgate.

---.  . Rural Space: Constructing a Three-Fold Architecture. In The Handbook of Rural Studies, edited by P. Cloke, T. Marsden, and P . Mooney,  - . London: Sage.

---.  . Trial by Space for a 'Radical Rural': Introducing Alternative Localities, Representations and Lives. Journal of Rural Studies  (  ):  - .

- Harrowsmith Country Life.  . Harrowsmith Country Life Back Issues Index: Ten Prettiest Towns in the Country. [www.harrowsmithcountrylife.ca/pdf/harrowsmith\_magazine\_index.pdf].
- Harvey, D.  . The Geographical and Geopolitical Consequences of the Transition from Fordist to Flexible Accumulation. In America's New Market Geography: Nation, Region, and Metropolis, edited by G. Sternlieb and J. W. Hughes,  - . New Brunswick: Rutgers  The State University of New Jersey, Center for Urban Policy Research.
- ---.  . From Managerialism to Entrepreneurialism: The Transformation in Urban Governance in Late Capitalism. Geografiska Annaler B, Human Geography  (  ):  - .
- ---.  . Between Space and Time: Reflections on the Geographical Imagination. Annals of the Association of American Geographers  (  ):  - .

- Huang, H. B., G. Wall, and C. J. A Mitchell.  . Creative Destruction: Zhu Jia Jiao, China. Annals of Tourism Research  (  ):  - .
- Jameson, F.  . Globalization and Political Strategy. New Left Review  , July/August,  - .
- Knox, D.  . Spectacular Tradition: Scottish Folksong and Authenticity. Annals of Tourism Research  (  ):  - .
- Lefebvre, H. [  ]  . The Production of Space. Translated by D. Nicholoson-Smith. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell Publishers.
- MacMurchy, N.  . Comprehensive Plan Hopes to Revitalize Commercial Area. Creemore Star,  March,  .
- Mad and Noisy Gallery.  . Mad and Noisy Gallery. [www.madandnoisy.com/madandnoisy.htm].
- Mitchell, C. J. A.  . Entrepreneurialism, Commodification and Creative Destruction: A Model of Post-Modern Community Development. Journal of Rural Studies  (  ):  - .
- Mitchell, C. J. A., and C. Coghill.  . The Creation of a Cultural Heritage Landscape: Elora, Ontario, Canada. Great Lakes Geographer  (  ):  - .
- Mitchell, C. J. A., and S. B. deWaal.  . Revisiting the Model of Creative Destruction: St. Jacobs, Ontario a Decade Later. Journal of Rural Studies  (  ):  - .
- Mitchell, C. J. A., R. G. Atkinson, and A. Clark.  . The Creative Destruction of Niagara-on-theLake. Canadian Geographer  (  ):  - .
- Page, M.  . The Creative Destruction of Manhattan,  - . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Panelli, R., D. Allen, B. Ellison, A. Kelly, A. John, and G. Tipa.  . Beyond Bluff Oysters? Place Identity and Ethnicity in a Peripheral Coastal Setting. Journal of Rural Studies  (  ):  - .
- PHAHS [Purple Hills Arts and Heritage Society].  . A Green and Pleasant Place: A Glimpse of Creemore and Area. Creemore, Ont.: Purple Hills Arts and Heritage Society.
- ---.  . Creemore Walking Guide. Creemore, Ont.: Purple Hills Arts and Heritage Society.
- Poudyala, N. C., D. G. Hodges, and H. K. Cordell.  . The Role of Natural Resource Amenities in Attracting Retirees: Implications for Economic Growth Policy. Ecological Economics  (  - ):  - .
- Rusk, J.  . Development Battle Brewing in Idyllic Creemore. Urbantoronto.ca. [http://urbantoronto .ca/showthread.php?  -Development-battle-brewing-in-idyllic-Creemore].
- Sack, R. D.  . A Sketch of a Geographic Theory of Morality. Annals of the Association of American Geographers  (  ):  - .
- Schumpeter, J. A.  . Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York: Harper and Row.
- Simpson, C.  . Happy  th Creemore Springs. Creemore Echo,  January,  .
- Statistics  Canada.  . Community Profiles. [www  .statcan.ca/census-recensement/  /dp-pd /prof/  - /index.cfm?Lang=E].
- Summerby-Murray, R.  . Interpreting Personalized Industrial Heritage in the Mining Towns of Cumberland County, Nova Scotia: Landscape Examples from Springhill and River Hebert . Urban History Review  (  ):  - .
- Tonts, M., and S. Grieve.  . Commodification and Creative Destruction in the Australian Rural Landscape: The Case of Bridgetown, Western Australia. Australian Geographical Studies  (  ):  - .
- Township of Clearview.  . Official Plan of the Township of Clearview. Stayner, Ont.: Township of Clearview.
- White, L.  . Interview with Julie Vanderwerf. Creemore, Ont.,  February.
- Yourkin, P.  . Village Gets Action Plan for Economic Development. Creemore Star,  September,  .