<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Beyond the Edge and in Between: (Re)conceptualizing the Rural-Urban Interface as Meaning-Model-Metaphor

## Colleen C. Hiner

To cite this article: Colleen C. Hiner (2016) Beyond the Edge and in Between: (Re)conceptualizing the Rural-Urban Interface as Meaning-Model-Metaphor, The Professional Geographer, 68:4, 520-532, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2016.1198264

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2016.1198264

<!-- image -->

曲

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 26 Aug 2016.

[Submit your article to this journal](http://www.tandfonline.com/action/authorSubmission?journalCode=rtpg20&show=instructions)

[View related articles](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/mlt/10.1080/00330124.2016.1198264)

[View Crossmark data](http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1080/00330124.2016.1198264&domain=pdf&date_stamp=2016-08-26)

<!-- image -->

## Beyond the Edge and in Between: (Re)conceptualizing the Rural-Urban Interface as Meaning-Model-Metaphor

## Colleen C. Hiner

Texas State University

As examinations of the rural -urban interface move beyond a focus on the rural or urban fringe as a location and move toward examining the patterns and processes that both divide and link rural and urban places, a broader (re)conceptualization of the rural -urban interface becomes increasingly important. Thus far the question of boundaries and interfaces between so-called urban and rural locales has mostly revolved around where and when such boundaries occur (including signi fi cant coverage of the differences and con fl icts between urban vs. rural people), rather than asking what physical or social functions are being served by the rural -urban interface itself. In response, I (re)frame the rural -urban interface not only as a boundary between two distinct spaces but also as a conduit, a place of exchange, and a fl ux point between them. Using a particular case of contested ecologies in the exurban Sierra Nevada foothills of California, I (re)conceptualize the rural -urban interface as meaning, model , and metaphor (MMM), situating contrasting people and places in an ongoing negotiation of place and environmental meaning along the (ex) urbanizing edge. Although the differences between rural and urban are increasingly unclear, the division continues to be compelling from environmental and sociopolitical standpoints. I argue that (perceived) boundaries are instrumental in understanding physical -material change and for mitigating social con fl icts occurring across them. As such, attention to the patterns, processes, and fl ows that connect or separate rural and urban areas is critical to forging effective and long-lasting solutions to contemporary social, economic, and environmental problems. Key Words: borders and boundaries, California, contested ecologies, exurbia, rural -urban interface, Sierra Nevada foothills.

当 城 乡 界 面 的 研 究 超越 了 聚 焦 作 为 区 位 的 城 乡 边 缘 , 并 迈 向 检 视 同 时 分 隔 和 连 结 城 市 与乡 村 地 方 的 模 式 及 过 程 时 , 对 于 城 乡 界 面 进 行 更 广 泛 的 ( 再 ) 概 念 化 , 便 越 来 越 重 要 。 截 至 目 前 为 止 , 所 谓 的 城 市 和 乡 村 场 所 之 间 的 边 界 和 界 面 之 问 题 , 主 要 围 绕 着 这 些 边 界 在 何 处 与 何 时 发 生 ( 包 括 对 于 城 市 和 乡 村 人 群 之 间 的 差 异 和 冲 突 的 显 着 涵 盖 ), 而 非 质 问 什 麽 样 的 物 理 或 社 会 功 能 由 城 乡 界 面 本 身 获 得 满 足 。 为了 回 应 上 述 问 题 , 我 不仅 将 城 乡 界 面 ( 再 ) 架构 为两个不 同 空 间 之 间 的 界 限 , 同 时 也 是 两 地 之 间 的 导 管 、 交 换 之 地 与 变 迁 点 。 我 运 用 加 州 内 华 达 山 脉 山 麓 丘 陵 的 城 市 远 郊 中 的 争 夺 生 态 之 特 定 案 例 , ( 再 ) 概 念 化 城 乡 界 面 作 为 意 义 、 典 范 和 象 徵 (MMM), 将 ( 过 往 ) 城 市 化 边 缘 中 截 然 不 同 的 人们 和 地 方 置 放 在地 方 和 环 境 意 义 的 持 续 协 商 之中 。 尽 管 乡 村 和 城 市 的 差 异 逐 渐 模 煳 不 清 , 但 从 环 境 和 社 会 政 治 的 角 度 而 言 , 该 界 分 仍 持 续 存 在 。 我 主 张 , ( 感 知 的 ) 界 限 有 助 于 理 解 物 理 -物 质 变 迁 和 减 缓 其 中 所 发 生 的 社 会 冲 突 。 于 此 , 关 注 连 结 或 区 分 城 市 和 乡 村 地 区 的 模 式 、 过 程 和 流 动 , 对 于 打 造 对 当 代 社 会 、 经 济 与 环 境 问 题 而 言 有 效 且 持 久 的 解 决 方 案 是 非 常 关 键 的 。 关 键 词 : 国 界 与 边 界 , 加 州 , 争 夺 生 态 , 城 市 远 郊 , 城 乡 界 面 , 内 华 达 山 脉 山 麓 丘 陵 。

A medida que los ex  amenes de la interfaz rural -urbana se desplazan m  as all  a de puntos de atenci  on colocados sobre el borde rural o el urbano, como una localizaci  on, y se extienden al examen de los patrones y procesos que bien dividen o conectan los lugares rurales y urbanos, se hace cada vez m  as imperiosa una m  as amplia (re)conceptualizaci  on de esa interfaz rural-urbana. Hasta este momento la cuesti  on de límites e interfaces entre las llamadas zonas urbanas y rurales ha girado principalmente alrededor de d  onde y cu  ando ocurren esos límites (incluyendo una cobertura signi fi cativa de las diferencias y con fl ictos que se presentan entre la gente urbana contra la rural), en vez de preguntarse qu  e funciones físicas o sociales est  an siendo servidas por la propia interfaz rural -urbana. Como respuesta a este interrogante, yo (re)formulo la interfaz rural -urbana no solamente como un límite entre dos espacios distintos, sino tambi  en como un conducto, un lugar de intercambio y un punto de fl ujo entre aquellos. Tomando como ejemplo un caso particular de ecologías disputadas en las colinas piedemontanas de la extraurbana Sierra Nevada de California, (re)conceptualizo la interfaz rural -urbana como mensaje de signi fi cado, modelo y met  afora (MMM) situando la gente y los lugares dentro de una negociaci  on en desarrollo sobre el signi fi cado de lugar y entorno a lo largo del lindero (ex) urbanizante. Aunque cada vez son menos claras las diferencias entre lo rural y lo urbano, la divisi  on sigue siendo convincente desde los puntos de vista ambientales y sociopolíticos. Yo sostengo que los límites (percibidos) son instrumentales para entender el cambio físico -material y para aminorar los con fl ictos sociales que ocurren a trav  es de aquellos. Entonces, la atenci  on a estos patrones, procesos y fl ujos que conectan o separan las  areas rurales es crítica para forjar soluciones efectivas y duraderas a los problemas sociales, econ  omicos y ambientales contempor  aneos. Palabras clave: límites y fronteras, California, ecologías disputadas, exurbio, interfaz rural -urbana, piedemonte de la Sierra Nevada.

Things are not given, they are products of processes in particular times and places.

-Massey, Allen, and Sarre (1999, 18)

R ural places have been framed in a number of ways: as functional (i.e., identi fi able by distinctive functional characteristics); as (an ongoing) political -economic process; as socially constructed -in other words de fi ned by the ' social, cultural, and moral values ' associated with rural people and people; and as hybrid or networked space, whereby ' imaginative, material and practised ruralities '-ruralities that might or might not occupy the same physical space -' are intrinsically and dynamically entwined ' (Woods 2009, 850 -52). This fi nal framing, which Woods (2009, 852) called an ' innovation ' of thinking of rural space as hybrid or networked, has renewed interest in those areas ' in which rural and urban identities are most entangled and rural -urban distinctions most elusive '-small rural towns, exurbia, periurban areas within urban commuter sheds, and the rural -urban fringe (Taylor and Hurley 2016a).

Areas where rural and urban are intertwined ' present challenges for land-use planning, ' are ' the sites of con fl ict between rural and urban interests, ' and are the ' arenas in which rural and urban identities are negotiated and contested ' (Woods 2009, 852). Land use decisions are ultimately made by various actors (e.g., public of fi cials or bodies or private land owners, depending on the situation) within a given regulatory context, but the cultural norms and standards that direct what is acceptable are constructed from cumulative social judgments made by local residents and stakeholders (Robbins 2007) as well as wider social understandings of the rural (Woods 2011). In communities along the rural -urban interface, stakeholders and decision makers are struggling to devise strategies for making rural spaces the kinds of places residents and stakeholders want them to be, especially in the context of environmental degradation, declining economic viability in some sectors, and shifting demographics and lifestyle preferences, a process collectively known as rural restructuring (P. B. Nelson 2001; Woods 2005; Gosnell and Abrams 2011).

To better appreciate the unique challenges that members of these dynamic (and sometimes contested) ' in-between ' spaces face, I propose (re)conceptualizing the rural -urban interface as both a physical place and a social construction. This revised conceptualization is suggested by both my own empirical data as well as conclusions drawn from other published scholarship. The rural -urban interface as a physical place provides inspiration and motivation for public decisions and policies based on a variety of factors, including preferred land uses and housing styles, economic and political ideologies, and the perceived vulnerability or resilience of the environment. The interface as a social construct affects personal and community identity, including perceived roles and expectations for and within those physical spaces. This amounts to a multilayered construction of space, where different, although related, perceptions of place overlap.

From this basis, I (re)frame the rural -urban interface as a multidimensional concept, conceptualizing the interface as meaning, model, metaphor . Re fi ning and deepening our understanding and application of the concept of the rural -urban interface in this way is valuable to scholars, practitioners, and communities as they struggle to parse apart the ways in which placebased change affects both the physical landscape as well as the social and cultural one. There is a long history of scholars grappling with socionatures and how humans interact with their environments, including now well-known treatments of the production of space and nature  a la Lefebvre ' s (1991) own triad, Smith ' s (2008) Uneven Development , and various interpretations of the socially constructed nature of nature itself (Castree 2005), in addition to the development of particularly political ecological approaches (Peet and Watts 2004; Neumann 2005; Robbins 2011). This (revised) view of the role and function of the rural -urban interface -that place where politics and environment are negotiated between physically or culturally different contexts -builds on the foundation of previous work on this topic, providing a practical and elegant formulation that is hopefully useful for scholars and policymakers trying to understand and manage rural landscapes, especially those on the urbanizing fringe.

## Methods, Site, and Situation

I develop and deepen the concept of the rural -urban interface through a mixed-method, comparative case study conducted in Calaveras County, California. Calaveras County is situated in the middle northern part of California and stretches from the fl oor of the Central Valley of California into the alpine reaches of the Sierra Nevada Mountains (Figure 1). As such, the landscape is both heterogeneous and dynamic. The county is rural by conventional descriptions (Ilbery 1998; Woods 2005; Cromartie and Bucholtz 2008), with a total population of around 46,000 people (U.S. Census 2009). Much of the county is within commutable proximity to two large metropolitan centers, the capital of California, Sacramento, and Stockton. With a high-amenity values and low land prices in comparison to other local markets, Calaveras County has been a receiving community for rural and other amenity migrants (Gosnell and Abrams 2011) for some time.

Calaveras County is situated at the fringe of the urbanizing Central Valley of California and is part of the wider Sierra Nevada foothill region. The Sierra Nevada foothills have a long history of ' boom and bust ' economies (Filan and Hiner forthcoming) and Calaveras County is subject to the most recent boom,

GCSWGS1984.DatafromtheUnitedStatesCensusBureau.MapcreatedbyDavidGimnich,MAGeo.

<!-- image -->

Figure 1 Map of Calaveras County, as situated in the Sierra Nevada foothills and California generally. Source: Dr. Trina Filan. (Color figure available online.)

an economic and social trajectory based around exurban residential development, amenity migration, and second-home investors. This kind of rural change is occurring across the U.S. West (Travis 2007; Gosnell and Abrams 2011) and in the Sierra Nevada in particular (Duane 1999; Walker and Fortmann 2003; Beebe and Wheeler 2012). Indeed, I have expounded on the processes of rural restructuring and associated social and environmental change occurring in Calaveras County in detail elsewhere (Hiner 2014, 2015, 2016a, 2016b).

This analysis is one part of a larger study wherein I examined several divergent instances of land management. For the larger study, three cases were selected

that represented very different land use outcomes despite being situated in similar geographical, ecological, and sociopolitical contexts. Fieldwork took place from January through June 2010. Methods included participant observation; semistructured, indepth interviews with key stakeholders and informants; and a short political -ideological survey. Study respondents ( fi fty-one in total) represented a range of perspectives and backgrounds present in the region in question, such as ranchers, farmers, business owners, community activists, public servants, planners, and residents. Using these cases, each of which represented a different outcome, a different way of dealing with changing landscapes and lifestyles along the rural -urban interface, I investigated the values various rural residents embrace and how they mobilize those values and ideologies to in fl uence and enact land use change.

In this article, drawing on one case speci fi cally, as well as extant scholarship on the rural -urban interface and exurbia, I describe how our understanding and governing of places along the urbanizing fringe of rural space can be improved by conceptualizing the rural -urban interface as meaning, model , and metaphor . This conceptual trio provides a fresh perspective on an old idea that rural spaces and places are changing due to the pressures of urbanization. In fact, the belief that there even is a separation between rural and urban is increasingly questioned (Scott, Gilbert, and Gelan 2007). In these pages, however, I endeavor to demonstrate that the rural -urban interface is still a relevant site of inquiry and, indeed, that by engaging with the rural -urban interface as a multidimensional concept, our understanding of, and problem solving for, rural places in fl ux is improved.

## The Rural-Urban Interface as Multidimensional Concept

I argue that the rural -urban interface encompasses both the physical -material and the sociopolitical and situates contrasting people and places in an ongoing negotiation of place and environmental meaning. At present, although there is some attention to the literal interface between different land use types (Ewert, Chavez, and Magill 1993; Furuseth and Lapping 1999; Theobald 2001; Gallent, Andersson, and Bianconi 2006; Cadieux 2008; Lichter and Brown 2011; Serra et al. 2014), rural -urban linkages and processes (Tacoli 2006), and signi fi cant coverage of the differences and con fl icts between urban versus rural people (see, e.g., P. B. Nelson 2001; Gallent, Andersson, and Bianconi 2006; Scott, Gilbert, and Gelan 2007; Sheridan 2007; Winkler et al. 2007; Robbins et al. 2009; Gosnell and Abrams 2011; Larsen and Hutton 2011; Lichter and Brown 2011; Taylor 2011; Walker and Hurley 2011; Woods 2011), there is less in the literature regarding the actual physical or social functions of the rural -urban interface (but see Laband, Lockaby, and Zipperer [2012] for an excellent example).

Literature on boundaries, borders, and interfaces informs my understanding of the form and function of the rural -urban interface. In ecology, for example, borders and boundaries are recognized as important elements of ecosystem composition and function (Cadenasso, Pickett, Weathers, Bell, et al. 2003; Cadenasso, Pickett, Weathers, and Jones 2003; Strayer et al. 2003; Post et al. 2007). In the social science literature, the question of boundaries and interfaces between urban and rural has mostly revolved around where and when boundaries occur (e.g., Riebsame, Gosnell, and Theobald 1996; Knickel and Renting 2000; Croissant 2004; Masuda and Garvin 2008; Ban and Ahlqvist 2009; Lichter and Brown 2011; Taylor 2011; Soini, Vaarala, and Pouta 2012), rather than what the interface means for various actors. In other words, scholars have not asked what physical or social functions are being served by the rural -urban interface or investigated the signi fi cance of boundary type, placement, and form.

To bridge this gap, Taylor (2011) suggested that studies of these kinds of places require an examination of not just the spatial elements, not just ecological impacts, and not just the motivations of exurbanites but the intersection of each of these factors (see also Taylor and Hurley 2016a). As such, here I (re)conceptualize the rural -urban interface in recognition that (perceived) boundaries are instrumental in understanding both the physical changes occurring and for mitigating any social con fl ict(s) taking place. Although the material differences between rural and urban areas are seemingly diminishing, the social signi fi cance of the divide is not. In other words, even as the physical distinction might be decreasing, especially in an era of global urbanization, sociocultural and political differences between that which we call ' rural ' and ' urban ' persist (Scott, Gilbert, and Gelan 2007; Lichter and Brown 2011; Taylor 2011; Walker and Hurley 2011; Woods 2011).

To do this, I apply Pickett and Cadenasso ' s (2002) framing of multidimensional concepts (e.g., ecosystem) as meaning, model , and metaphor . They described how the term ecosystem and the concept it represents has a technical de fi nition, which they called its meaning . This abstract de fi nition is broad and neutral in scale and constraint, such that to apply the de fi nition to any given situation, a model must be devised that speci fi es the ' parts, interactions, and scope of the system of interest ' (Pickett and Cadenasso 2002, 2). In other words, the model translates the de fi nition into a usable tool. The model operationalizes the meaning. Moreover, models facilitate communication and understanding for both the public and scientists and scholars.

Additionally, Pickett and Cadenasso (2002) noted that the concept or term itself is a metaphor employed by scientists, decision makers, the media, and the general public. Each party or actor invoking the term might have a different understanding of the concept.

In other words, the term itself is symbolic; it is valueladen and carries signi fi cance that is not reducible to its technical de fi nition by experts. When a term is widely adopted as a metaphor, its ' precision and narrow focus . . . is eschewed in favor of richness of connotation and in support of socially important, if sometimes controversial, values ' (Pickett and Cadenasso 2002, 6). In sum, according to Pickett and Cadenasso ' s (2002) conceptualization, a concept ' s meaning represents its general features or de fi ning characteristics; a model of that meaning speci fi es the components, interactions, and relevant constraints for a particular application of the meaning (a.k.a. technical de fi nition) of the concept or term; the metaphor for a concept includes its symbolic value and socially mediated connotations.

I build on Pickett and Cadenasso ' s (2002) framing of a multidimensional concept to examine the context of change and richness of meaning attributed to the rural -urban interface. In the following pages I outline how the rural -urban interface simultaneously serves as meaning, model, and metaphor (MMM; Pickett and Cadenasso 2002). The following paragraphs introduce each conceptual element in the MMM triad and how each of the elements relates to the rural -urban interface.

The rural -urban interface has a literal meaning, a technical de fi nition that is broad and can be applied across a range of geographic areas. Although having particular fundamental characteristics (described later), the rural -urban interface is unspeci fi ed without being applied to a particular setting or circumstance.

The rural -urban interface offers a model of interactions between urban and rural, whether those relations are patchy or more gradient. The model applies speci fi c parts, interactions, and scope to the system of interest. A range of interactions can occur across the rural -urban interface and can take different forms. For example, interactions across the rural -urban interface can be sociocultural (e.g., transfers of meaning and values or the movement of people), ecological ( fl uxes of organisms, plants, bacteria, air, water), fi nancial ( fl ows of capital in terms of urban investment in rural development or speculation, or payment of rural-based monies to urban service providers, or in fl uxes of retirement and other unearned income as rural inputs), and material (as in goods, bodies, and resources are moved between the two sites).

The interface serves as a metaphor between imagined differences between two places, that which is rural and that which is urban, representing the ongoing negotiation of difference between plural perspectives. In other words, the interface holds social signi fi cance and means different things to a variety of actors. Rural and urban places are imbued with meaning and value partially in relation to each other (Williams 1973; Allen, Massey, and Cochrane 1998; Walker and Hurley 2011), and the rural -urban interface is the locus of that cultural and philosophical exchange.

From the MMM conceptualization we fi nd that there is a de fi nable space called the rural -urban interface, which is recognizable in a general sense. Yet, greater understanding of the system can be gained by mobilizing a particular model of the rural -urban interface, which is applied in a particular context with speci fi c constraints and circumstances identi fi ed. The relevant parts, interactions, and scope of the interface will vary from place to place. Terms and concepts with metaphorical dimensions often contain ' contradictory assumptions and values that are a necessary part of social and political discourse ' (Pickett and Cadenasso 2002, 8). For this reason, Pickett and Cadenasso encouraged researchers to make better use of concepts such as these once they become aware of their multidimensional character. In the following pages, I describe in greater depth how the multidimensional concept of the rural -urban interface is deepened analytically by applying the MMM framework.

## The Meaning of the Rural-Urban Interface

For contemporary geographers and sociologists, de fi ning urban and rural has been ' the subject of much academic hand-wringing as the two [concepts] overlap in space and experience ' (Taylor 2011, 334). The ideas and ideals of urban places -either the policies or the people who produce them -in fl uence the policies, people, and outcomes in rural areas, and the opposite is also true (Cadieux and Hurley 2011). It can be broadly argued that rural and urban areas are interlinked politically and economically, both globally and locally, as rural goods and materials (e.g., food, fi ber, and other products) are indispensable building blocks for urban areas and rural areas depend on urban ones for visitors and inmigrants, patronage and fi nancial supports, and, indeed, governance (Woods 2005, 2011; McCarthy 2008; Cadieux and Hurley 2011; Walker and Hurley 2011). In other words, there is a discursive and material link between urban and rural; neither is completely autonomous from the other.

Moreover, the form and function of the rural landscape is transforming as land is rapidly converted to urban (and exurban) uses and undeveloped, agriculturally productive land is becoming more fragmented, reducing the economic return or ef fi ciency of that land (Kuminoff, Sokolow, and Sumner 2001; Libby and Dicks 2002; Sokolow 2004). Reliance on off-farm occupations and continued farmland conversion and fragmentation will undoubtedly change farm operations, productivity, and meaning (Knickel and Renting 2000; Wilson 2001; Huylenbroeck and Durand 2003; Jackson-Smith and Sharp 2008). In addition, the ecosystem functions and environmental services of other types of open space(s) are degraded or eliminated completely through residential or commercial land development and fragmentation (Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project 1996; Huylenbroeck and Durand 2003; Travis 2007; Wilson 2010; Haaland, Fry, and Peterson 2011).

Therefore, the functional arrangement of rural and urban areas -in both physical form and symbolic reproduction -has important social, cultural, economic, and environmental implications. To date there has not been a comprehensive review of the physical typologies of the rural -urban interface in particular; although such a study would be an exciting and relevant contribution, it is outside the scope of this article. Either way, the abstract form and context of the interface (its meaning) is important, as are its models and metaphors.

## Exurbia as a Model of the Rural-Urban Interface

Accepting that rural places are in fl ux and that these changes hold signi fi cance for stakeholders along the urbanizing edge, we can apply the MMM conceptualization to the rural -urban interface to identify models of that change. To test the ef fi cacy of the MMM framework as related to the (multidimensional) rural -urban interface, I apply the framework to one model of rural change, exurbia. Although exurbia or exurbanization is just one form of (rural) development found along the rural -urban interface, it is a prominent one and one that has been of signi fi cant interest to scholars in the fi eld (Taylor 2011; Taylor and Hurley 2016a).

In brief, exurbanization can be de fi ned as the permanent settlement of urban or suburban people in large-lot, low-density residential settlements beyond typical commuting distances (Walker 2003; Travis 2007; Gosnell and Abrams 2011; Taylor 2011; Taylor and Hurley 2016b). The term exurbia describes places that were once rural and are being transformed by new residents -and their expectations -into new landscapes, which, presumably, will one day become urban as the forces of urbanization continue their outward march (A. C. Nelson 1992; Theobald 2001, 2005; Irwin, Cho, and Bockstael 2007). Although exurban land change is not exclusive to the U.S. West, it has occurred most signi fi cantly in that region (Walker 2003; Travis 2007; Gosnell and Abrams 2011; Taylor 2011), including places in the Sierra Nevada like Calaveras County, California (Walker and Fortmann 2003; Beebe and Wheeler 2012; Hiner 2016b).

Exurban landscapes are particular to the rural -urban interface and are characterized by an in fl ux of residents seeking speci fi c idealized notions of rural life while maintaining connections to urban places (A. C. Nelson 1992; Crump 2003; Travis 2007; Gosnell and Abrams 2011; Taylor 2011). These landscapes are unique in that how exurbanites living in the countryside fi t their urban ideas into rural space confuses the de fi nitions of each. Exurbia is visibly rural in its geography and is residential in its use just like its long established rural neighbors. . . . The differences for the most part are activities within residences: exurban households are urban in their employment, social milieu, consumer behavior, natural landscape ideals, and property

maintenance. These activities can impact upon the community in ways different than traditional rural behaviors. (Taylor 2011, 334)

Although de fi ning traditional rural behaviors can be problematic, notable shifts have taken place in rural areas, altering their social, political, economic, and environmental composition (Ilbery 1998; P. B. Nelson 2001; Woods 2005, 2011; Gosnell and Abrams 2011; Lichter and Brown 2011; Hiner 2014).

In short, exurban residences are visibly rural but urban in practice, which makes categorizing exurbia diffi cult and managing exurban landscapes even more so. In this way, the exurban condition can be seen as one form -or model -of the rural -urban interface, one that blurs the distinction between that which we call urban and that which we call rural. In short, the signi fi cant and persistent linkages between the rural and the urban complicate their practical intersections. These linkages, and how people respond to them, reveal how the rural -urban interface is mobilized as metaphor.

## Rural-Urban Linkages and the Rural-Urban Interface as Metaphor

Drawing on Williams ' s (1973) The Country and the City , Walker and Hurley (2011) argued that ' the country ' and ' the city ' are not just geographical designations -or, as I argue, models of interaction -but are also ' powerful cultural visions or ideals ' (15). The two are also deeply intertwined: The concept of the country does not hold as much meaning unless contrasted with the concept of the the city. As Allen, Massey, and Cochrane (1998) argued, the identities of places and regions are constructed relationally; space and place are ' constituted out of spatialized social relations -and narratives about them ' (1).

For example, the desire to protect and preserve rural landscapes has very much emerged from the imaginations of urban people. Rurality has been constructed as a place of beautiful open spaces, led by moral values, with a strong sense of community by urbanites, whereas urbanity has often been constructed by rural people as a place of overdevelopment, overcrowding, crime, pollution, and a lack of community and moral values (Bunce 1994; Ilbery 1998; Woods 2005). 1 Due to unequal power relations, it is urban people ' s ideas that are shaping rural people ' s lives through the process of governing (i.e., population counts, boundary drawing, regulation, land and environmental management, etc.; Walker and Hurley 2011; Woods 2011).

These actions, which emerge from particular rural imaginaries (Nesbitt and Weiner 2001; Peet and Watts 2004), can have signi fi cant impacts on rural form, function, and meaning. As we live in a world with very few empty places, the ideas of open space, gentri fi ed recreational spaces, and often particular forms of housing development inform the actions that

people and groups take in real places alongside or with existing infrastructure and populations. Such changes occur in particular places and are necessarily imposed on existing landscapes, economies, and cultures. In short, urban-based ideals shape policy, which can have profound implications for form and function of rural space (Woods 2011).

Even though the dichotomy of urban versus rural is increasingly dif fi cult to empirically justify in terms of physical structures and processes (Scott, Gilbert, and Gelan 2007; Lichter and Brown 2011), the residents and stakeholders in the places in question still fi nd signi fi cance in the differentiation. As a result, the rural -urban interface is imbued with social values at multiple levels, physically in terms of landscapes and behaviors, as well as socioculturally as economic and political processes play out. In other words, the rural -urban interface serves as a metaphor, a vehicle carrying political and environmental ideologies and imaginaries (Hiner 2015), which can signi fi cantly affect the policies and management strategies adopted in rural areas along the urbanizing edge.

In sum, the rural -urban interface serves as MMM because, based on our conceptions of different places -including whether and how they interact across the interface -we expect certain kinds of activities, certain kinds of people, and certain kinds of processes to occur (P. B. Nelson 2001; Tacoli 2006; Lichter and Brown 2011; Woods 2011; Laband, Lockaby, and Zipperer 2012).

## Trinitas and (Re)Conceptualizing the Rural-Urban Interface

The story of Trinitas, one of the three cases utilized in a grander analysis of land management as related to values, ideologies, lifestyles, and livelihoods in Calaveras County (Hiner 2014, 2015, 2016a, 2016b), is one of dreams and deceit, of trust and mistrust, of dashed hopes and disappointment. The Trinitas case encompasses multiple narratives and multiple meanings, each occupying the same space (Allen, Massey, and Cochrane 1998). At its simplest, Trinitas is a former sheep ranch turned golf course. The course was developed by a man who cashed in fi ve acres of property in the nearby, urbanizing Central Valley of California for 450 acres of idle land in rural Calaveras County. The landowner built the golf course without following the established guidelines for such a land use change, however. As such, he garnered signi fi cant public attention, both support and disapproval, as his appeals for exemption and post hoc approvals moved forward through the county government.

Although space does not permit a detailed discussion of the speci fi cs of the Trinitas case, a brief recounting would go like this: An (ex)urban property owner trades a fi ve-acre ranchette in Stockton, California, for nearly 500 acres of land farther a fi eld, in the Sierra Nevada foothills. Seeing potential in his property for a golf course, the owner begins to build a personal, (ostensibly) private-use golf course but ultimately decides to make it publicly accessible. As a property zoned for agricultural use (as a former sheep ranch), it is permissible to develop private gol fi ng infrastructure; however, commercial uses are prohibited. After much of the construction had been completed (and several neighbors had complained), the owner began the process of bringing his now de facto land use change into regulatory conformance. This was met with consternation from public of fi cials and dismay from many community members because the owner ' s ' act now, ask for forgiveness later ' approach -whether intended or not -meant that he had skirted several important environmental and political processes, namely, seeking a legitimate rezone of his property and conducting mandated environmental reviews and mitigation. The resulting legal and cultural battle left the community torn (Hiner 2016a, 2016b). Furthermore, the case serves as a telling example of how the rural -urban interface, as a heuristic or framework for understanding, especially as conceptualized as MMM, lends insight into the material and symbolic shifts occurring in places on the edge. The following section applies the rural -urban interface as MMM speci fi cally to the Trinitas case.

## Rural-Urban (Re)Conceptualization, Applied

The neutral ' facts ' about the Trinitas case (its meaning, as presented earlier) indicate the Trinitas golf course is physically situated right in the middle of two distinct realities: the open spaces, low-population-density, rural Sierra Nevada foothills and paved, high-density, urban Central Valley cities. Socioculturally, Trinitas sits along the edge as well. The property owners, following the growing local trend toward agritourism, attempted to straddle agricultural values and uses and postproductive, consumptive land uses (Walker and Fortmann 2003), inciting a con fl ict over values in the county and setting in motion a string of events that would ultimately cost them their land.

Trinitas represents one form (or model) of the rural -urban interface. The site is located in an exurban location and demonstrates exurban con fl ict. Building a golf course in the middle of dry grazing land would not have seemed feasible or desirable if it were not for the exurban context within which the Trinitas property existed. Indeed, the exurban nature of this particular rural -urban interface in fl uenced how the Trinitas issue came about, as well as played out, physically, economically, and environmentally.

The debate over the legality and, more signi fi cantly, the acceptability of the (or a) golf course was driven by contrasting and idealized conceptions of rural place in this context of an exurban rural -urban interface.

There are several other golf courses in Calaveras County, so the activity or presence of golf is not so much the problem but where and how it came to be there. The Trinitas issues set in motion a chain reaction in the community, one characterized by stances of support, opposition, and uncertainty. In short, the values and imaginaries actors applied to the site (its metaphor) in fl uenced how it was perceived and thus how stakeholders reacted in situ.

Trinitas began as one man ' s vision for functional beauty and became the focus of clashing ideals and perspectives, one that ultimately drove a wedge between neighbors, stimulated divisive and destructive political power plays, and, in the end, led to a lose -lose outcome (Hiner 2016b). Even opponents to the course, although they won in the sense that the golf course has been shuttered, were left with the vestiges of an altered landscape and a sense of bitterness toward the site and its former owners. Moreover, at the close of the con fl ict, there was no telling what might be done with the property next. Perhaps, as some respondents suggested, the course could have been folded into the community in some valuable way, if the relations between the different parties had been more cooperative and less confrontational. That opportunity, however, was lost in a fi restorm of controversy over the purported bene fi ts and potential detriments of the course.

Interestingly, after hearing this saga, people immediately know on which side they stand. The challenge, though, is that given a diversity of interests and preferences in society, not everyone can get what they want (Flyvbjerg 1998). That is the political part of this political ecology -some perspectives will prevail as others wither (Swyngedouw and Heynen 2003; Robbins 2004). Even though, when it comes to land use disputes, we might discern almost immediately what we think the preferred outcome is based on our own value systems, ideals, and imaginaries, these situations do not always play out as desired. Moreover, it is not possible for everyone ' s ideals to play out in reality, as we live in a plural society, especially when it comes to nature and the environment (Forester 1999; Castree 2001; Rosenbaum 2011).

Robbins (2007) reminded us that, as originally stated by Blaikie and Brook fi eld (1987), any explanation of local phenomenon is ' nested within a wider context of pressures and coercions ' (6). There are different actors present, different motives, and different levels of success at making one ' s own designs come to fruition. Power is thus created and manifested in terms of relationships and ongoing social negotiations (Massey 1993, 1994). In other words, ' People may make their own landscapes, but not always the landscapes of their own choosing ' (Robbins 2007, 6). This concept is made plain through an interaction I had with one respondent, one of fi ve county supervisors, and someone with palpable political capital as well as functional, jurisdictional control over much of the county:

Author: Clearly you make land use decisions . . .

Calaveras County Supervisor: Occasionally. Author (perplexed): But you ' re one of the actual decision makers.

Calaveras County Supervisor: I guess so. It doesn ' t always feel like that. There ' s a certain fate, you know. It ' s kind of like a Greek tragedy. You know where you ' re gonna wind up, but you still gotta go through it. (Interview April 2010)

The Trinitas case offers a fascinating glimpse of the rural -urban interface, demonstrating both the qualitative and physical characteristics of the boundary. Qualitatively, the rural -urban interface is the intersection between contrasting mindsets, one that is urban and one that is rural. The interaction and con fl ict present in the Trinitas case demonstrate that there are divisions between stakeholders along the rural -urban interface, divisions that are represented by contrasting views of the economy, the environment, and the role of government in land management (Hiner 2014).

Physically, the battle was waged over resources and allowable land uses. In other words, depending on how different stakeholders viewed the land, they had differing preferences and ideas of what form and function it should have. In terms of the resources themselves (e.g., water, trees, sheep), those on one side saw their meaning and signi fi cance differently, preferring to put economics fi rst, whereas others preferred to preference the environment (Hiner 2015). The environment took on symbolic signi fi cance above and beyond its ' simple ' material form; the debate deepened and became one between not only the role and value of regulation but also what constitutes an acceptable rural use (Hiner 2016a). The Trinitas case became a de fi ning moment in the county, one that affected personal and public views of landscape and society. Ideologies or imaginaries, whether shaken or reinforced, were mobilized as personal, community, and place identities were formulated.

## The Rural-Urban Interface and Defining Moments

The outcome of this analysis is that the rural -urban interface cannot be simply described in terms of physical or social characteristics. It must be understood as a complex geography of functions and processes across time and space. How people view the landscape and how that landscape in turn alters them create mutually reinforcing social categories with which people identify. Social difference is constructed through the process of identity formation through counterposition (Allen, Massey, and Cochrane 1998). In other words, it is through the process of de fi ning oneself (individually and socially) in contrast to others that difference is created. As such, political ideologies paired with environmental imaginaries, as enacted in

land use planning and management, create de fi ning moments, moments that not only physically shape the landscape but also shape identities and, iteratively, imaginaries and ideologies. An aerial view of the Trinitas golf course (Figure 2) shows how the presence of a golf course, in a landscape otherwise dominated by dryland ranching, shifts the physical characteristics of the land. This view of the course highlights the physical transformation of the site, including landscape contouring, the creation of waterways, and a distinct shift in vegetation.

De fi ning moments are characterized by the decision-making processes occurring and the experiences stakeholders have, experiences that ultimately shape the physical form of the land; its ecological functions; the values of those involved; and the symbolic place, in fl uencing what a locale means locally, regionally, and beyond. It is appropriate here to invoke Hester ' s

(1985, 78) conception of ' landstyles ' and ' lifescapes, ' whereby we recognize that ' life pattern is inseparable from the land. ' In short, the rural -urban interface represents, as an abstract conception, the division between rural and urban (meaning) and, based on these conceptions of certain places (urban, rural, exurban, etc.), we expect certain outcomes as well as certain types of people, places, and landscapes (model). Furthermore, the rural -urban interface serves as a metaphor that represents these ideas in shortened, value-laden, and often politically or culturally imbued forms, creating the imaginaries -and ideologies -that drive the process (Hiner 2014, 2015).

As demonstrated by the cases of this study -namely, a ranch that has largely remained a ranch over time, a ranch that has shifted to wine and wine grape production and entertainment, and a ranch recon fi gured into a destination golf course -it is not only the physical

Figure 2 Aerial view of the Trinitas golf course. Source: Google Maps, accessed 21 April 2010. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 3 Diagram of iterative landscape and identify formation process along the rural-urban interface.

<!-- image -->

landscape that is changed in such environmental shifts but also the cultural landscape (Hiner 2016b). In this way environmental transitions are both indicators and drivers of attendant sociocultural transitions, such that there is an iterative interaction between space and place, between landscape and lifestyle.

In sum, the rural -urban interface is an iterative, mutually constitutive, and ongoing process of place and identity formation. Figure 3 visually diagrams the iterative and ongoing process of landscape and identity formation occurring along the rural -urban interface. The diagram outlines how the sociocultural, political, and economic context in fl uences community advocacy and activism as well as governmental action, which leads to land use or environmental decision making. These decisions affect the physical environment in addition to the meanings and values derived from them. In turn, the physical landscape and the sociocultural meanings attached to those landscapes in fl uence social, political, and economic context and functioning.

## Conclusion

In the preceding pages, I have (re)conceptualized the rural -urban interface to encompass both the physical -material and the sociopolitical. This work is important and necessary because recognizing the complexities of the interactions and intersections between rural and urban can be instrumental in understanding the physical changes taking place and for mitigating con fl ict between different stakeholders. As rural places have been, and continue to be, in fl ux as lifestyles change and landscapes shift, attention to the interface, to the edge, can be highly informative about rurality as a whole.

As the preceding analysis presented, there are a number of perspectives present in Calaveras County and, by implication, along the rural -urban interface. These varying perceptions are not just of interest intellectually; they make a real, material difference in terms of how resources are used and how stakeholders do or do not interact with planning and decision-making processes. The overarching goal of this research has been to gain insight into the interests and motivations of rural land users and stakeholders and the rationales used in land use decision making as landscapes are transformed by social, political, and economic transition.

As rural planning and governance moves forward, attention to the linkages between rural and urban locales and contested viewpoints along the edge will be critical to forging effective and long-lasting solutions to contemporary social, economic, and environmental problems. Rural policy and decision makers will need to apply knowledge gained about rural places along the urban fringe and explore approaches for

sustainable rural development -that is, rural development that honors the ecological and sociocultural integrity of rural places under pressure.

As suggested by Masuda and Garvin (2008, 120), policy can become more than policy; the introduction of policy initiatives can be a ' volatile catalyst ' that reveals ' a complex series of latent incompatibilities. ' Understanding the context of land and environmental management along the rural -urban interface is crucial for problem solving. It is in the interest of decision makers, planners, and community or environmental advocates to be aware of the differences between rural stakeholders and to act on that knowledge to foster mutually agreeable, sustainable solutions to the diverse and pressing problems facing society in both rural and urban areas. &amp;

## Acknowledgments

I would like to extend my deepest and heartfelt gratitude to Dr. Ryan Galt, who not only shepherded me through the research process that produced this article but who also guided me through the equally long process of publication of this article (and others). The value of such a true mentor is hard to describe, so I will put it very simply: Thank you for your trusted guidance and support, Ryan. I would also like to acknowledge and appreciate the feedback and assistance provided by Deborah Elliott-Fisk, Mary Cadenasso, Bettina Ng ' weno, Jonathon London, Trina Filan, Laura Taylor, Garrett Wolf, and David Gimnich through the various stages of completing this work. In addition, I received helpful reviews and suggestions from several anonymous reviewers. With all of this input, this work has been much improved from its original state; any remaining errors are my own.

## Note

- 1 It must also be noted, though, that urban places are also seen as repositories of culture and sophistication; hence the other dictionary de fi nition of urbanity, that which is re fi ned, elegant, and civilized.

## Literature Cited

- Allen, J. D., D. Massey, and A. Cochrane. 1998. Rethinking region . London and New York: Routledge.
- Ban, H. W., and O. Ahlqvist. 2009. Representing and negotiating uncertain geospatial concepts -Where are the exurban areas? Computers Environment and Urban Systems 33:233 -46.
- Beebe, C., and S. M. Wheeler. 2012. Gold Country: The politics of landscape in exurban El Dorado County, California. Journal of Political Ecology 19:1 -16.
- Blaikie, P. M., and H. C. Brook fi eld. 1987. Land degradation and society . London: Methuen.
- Bunce, M. 1994. The countryside ideal: Anglo-American images of landscape . London and New York: Routledge.
- Cadenasso, M. L., S. T. A. Pickett, K. C. Weathers, S. S. Bell, T. L. Benning, M. M. Carreiro, and T. E. Dawson. 2003. An interdisciplinary and synthetic approach to ecological boundaries. BioScience 53:717 -22.
- Cadenasso, M. L., S. T. A. Pickett, K. C. Weathers, and C. G. Jones. 2003. A framework for a theory of ecological boundaries. BioScience 53:750 -58.
- Cadieux, K. V. 2008. Political ecology of exurban ' lifestyle ' landscapes at Christchurch ' s contested urban fence. Urban Forestry &amp; Urban Greening 7:183 -94.
- Cadieux, K., and P. Hurley. 2011. Amenity migration, exurbia, and emerging rural landscapes: Global natural amenity as place and as process. GeoJournal 76:297 -302.
- Castree, N. 2001. Socializing nature: Theory, practice, and politics. In Social nature: Theory, practice, and politics , ed. N. Castree and B. Braun, 1 -21. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

---

- . 2005. Nature . London and New York: Routledge.
- Croissant, C. 2004. Landscape patterns and parcel boundaries: An analysis of composition and con fi guration of land use and land cover in south-central Indiana. Agriculture, Ecosystems &amp; Environment 101:219 -32.
- Cromartie, J., and S. Bucholtz. 2008. De fi ning the ' rural ' in rural America. Amber Waves , 6. http://www.ers.usda.gov/ amber-waves/2008-june/de fi ning-the-%E2%80%9Crural %E2%80%9D-in-rural-america.aspx#.V3PQ8k32aM8 (last accessed 29 June 2016).
- Crump, J. R. 2003. Finding a place in the country -Exurban and suburban development in Sonoma County, California. Environment and Behavior 35:187 -202.
- Duane, T. P. 1999. Shaping the Sierra: Nature, culture, and conflict in the changing West . Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Ewert, A. W., D. J. Chavez, and A. W. Magill. 1993. Culture, conflict, and communication in the wildland -urban interface . Boulder, CO: Westview.
- Filan, T., and C. Hiner. Forthcoming. ' Boom and bust ' : (Hi) stories of landscape production and consumption in the Sierra Nevada foothills of California. Regional Studies, Regional Science .
- Flyvbjerg, B. 1998. Rationality and power: Democracy in practice . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Forester, J. 1999. The deliberative practitioner: Encouraging participatory planning processes . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Furuseth, O. J., and M. B. Lapping. 1999. Contested countryside: The rural urban fringe in North America . Brook fi eld, VT: Ashgate.
- Gallent, N., J. Andersson, and M. Bianconi. 2006. Planning on the edge: The context for planning at the rural-urban fringe . London and New York: Routledge.
- Gosnell, H., and J. Abrams. 2011. Amenity migration: Diverse conceptualizations of drivers, socioeconomic dimensions, and emerging challenges. GeoJournal 76:303 -22.
- Haaland, C., G. Fry, and A. Peterson. 2011. Designing farmland for multifunctionality. Landscape Research 36:41 -62.
- Hester, R. T. 1985. Landstyles and lifescapes C 12 steps to community development. Landscape Architecture 75:78 -85.
- Hiner, C. C. 2014. ' Been-heres vs. come-heres ' and other identities and ideologies along the rural -urban interface: A comparative case study in Calaveras County, California. Land Use Policy 41:70 -83.
- ---. 2015. (False) dichotomies, political ideologies, and preferences for environmental management along the rural -urban interface in Calaveras County, California. Journal of Applied Geography 65:13 -27.

- ---. 2016a. ' Chicken wars, ' water fi ghts, and other contested ecologies along the rural -urban interface in California ' s Sierra Nevada foothills. Journal of Political Ecology 23:167 -81.
- ---. 2016b. Divergent perspectives and contested ecologies: Challenges in environmental management along the rural -urban interface. In A comparative political ecology of exurbia: Planning, environmental management, and landscape change , ed. L. Taylor and P. T. Hurley, 51 -82. Springer Verlag.
- Huylenbroeck, G. v., and G. Durand. 2003. Multifunctional agriculture: A new paradigm for European agriculture and rural development . London: Ashgate.
- Ilbery, B. W. 1998. The geography of rural change . London: Longman.
- Irwin, E. G., H. J. Cho, and N. E. Bockstael. 2007. Exurban settlement pattern and the exurban condition: A typology of US metropolitan areas. Review of Agricultural Economics 29:494 -501.
- Jackson-Smith, D., and J. Sharp. 2008. Farming in the urban shadow: Supporting agriculture at the rural -urban interface. Rural Realities 2 (4): 1 -12.
- Knickel, K., and H. Renting. 2000. Methodological and conceptual issues in the study of multifunctionality and rural development. Sociologia Ruralis 40:512 -28.
- Kuminoff, N., A. Sokolow, and D. Sumner. 2001. Farmland conversion: Perceptions and realities. Davis, CA: AIC Issues Brief No. 16, Agricultural Issues Center, University of California.
- Laband, D. N., B. G. Lockaby, and W. C. Zipperer. 2012. Urban -rural interfaces: Linking people and nature . Madison, WI: American Society of Agronomy.
- Larsen, S., and C. Hutton. 2011. Community discourse and the emerging amenity landscapes of the rural American West. GeoJournal 77:651 -65.
- Lefebvre, H. 1991. The production of space . Malden, MA: Blackwell.
- Libby, L. W., and M. Dicks. 2002. Rural -urban interface issues . Oak Brook, IL: The Farm Foundation.
- Lichter, D. T., and D. L. Brown. 2011. Rural America in an urban society: Changing spatial and social boundaries. Annual Review of Sociology 37:565 -92.
- Massey, D. 1993. A place called home? New Formations 17:3 -15. ---. 1994. Space, place, and gender . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Massey, D. B., J. Allen, and P. Sarre. 1999. Human geography today . Cambridge, UK: Polity.
- Masuda, J. R., and T. Garvin. 2008. Whose heartland?: The politics of place in a rural -urban interface. Journal of Rural Studies 24:112 -23.
- McCarthy, J. 2008. Rural geography: Globalizing the countryside. Progress in Human Geography 32:129 -37.
- Nelson, A. C. 1992. Characterizing exurbia. Journal of Planning Literature 6:350 -68.
- Nelson, P. B. 2001. Rural restructuring in the American West: Land use, family and class discourses. Journal of Rural Studies 17:395 -407.
- Nesbitt, J. T., and D. Weiner. 2001. Con fl icting environmental imaginaries and the politics of nature in Central Appalachia. Geoforum 32:333 -49.
- Neumann, R. P. 2005. Making political ecology . London: Hodder Arnold.
- Peet, R., and M. Watts. 2004. Liberation ecologies: Environment, development, social movements . London and New York: Routledge.
- Pickett, S. T. A., and M. L. Cadenasso. 2002. The ecosystem as a multidimensional concept: Meaning, model, and metaphor. Ecosystems 5:1 -10.
- Post, D. M., M. W. Doyle, J. L. Sabo, and J. C. Finlay. 2007. The problem of boundaries in de fi ning ecosystems: A potential landmine for uniting geomorphology and ecology. Geomorphology 89:111 -26.
- Riebsame, W. E., H. Gosnell, and D. M. Theobald. 1996. Land use and landscape change in the Colorado mountains I: Theory, scale, and pattern. Mountain Research and Development 16:395 -405.
- Robbins, P. 2004. Political ecology: A critical introduction . Malden, MA: Blackwell.
- ---. 2007. Lawn people: How grasses, weeds, and chemicals make us who we are . Philadelphia: Temple University Press. ---. 2011. Political ecology: A critical introduction . Malden,
- MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
- Robbins, P., K. Meehan, H. Gosnell, and S. J. Gilbertz. 2009. Writing the new West: A critical review. Rural Sociology 74:356 -82.
- Rosenbaum, W. A. 2011. Environmental politics and policy . Washington, DC: CQ Press.
- Scott, A., A. Gilbert, and A. Gelan. 2007. The urban -rural divide: Myth or reality? SERG Policy Brief No. 2. Aberdeen, UK: The Macaulay Institute.
- Serra, P., A. Vera, A. F. Tulla, and L. Salvati. 2014. Beyond urban -rural dichotomy: Exploring socioeconomic and land-use processes of change in Spain (1991 -2011). Applied Geography 55:71 -81.
- Sheridan, T. E. 2007. Embattled ranchers, endangered species, and urban sprawl: The political ecology of the new American West. Annual Review of Anthropology 36:121 -38.
- Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project. 1996. Status of the Sierra Nevada: Summary of the Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project report . Berkeley: Centers for Water and Wildland Resources, University of California.
- Smith, N. 2008. Uneven development: Nature, capital, and the production of space . Athens: University of Georgia Press.
- Soini, K., H. Vaarala, and E. Pouta. 2012. Residents ' sense of place and landscape perceptions at the rural -urban interface. Landscape and Urban Planning 104:124 -34.
- Sokolow, A. 2004. California ' s edge problem: Urban impacts on agriculture. In California agriculture: Dimensions and issues , ed. J. Siebert, 289 -304. Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
- Strayer, D. L., M. E. Power, W. F. Fagan, S. T. A. Pickett, and J. Belnap. 2003. A classi fi cation of ecological boundaries. BioScience 53:723 -29.
- Swyngedouw, E., and N. C. Heynen. 2003. Urban political ecology, justice and the politics of scale. Antipode 35:898 -918.
- Tacoli, C. 2006. The Earthscan reader in rural -urban linkages . London: Earthscan.
- Taylor, L. 2011. No boundaries: Exurbia and the study of contemporary urban dispersion. GeoJournal 76:323 -39.
- Taylor, L., and P. T. Hurley, eds. 2016a. A comparative political ecology of exurbia: Planning, environmental management, and landscape change . Berlin: Springer Verlag.
- ---. 2016b. Introduction: The broad contours on exurban landscape change. In A comparative political ecology of exurbia: Planning, environmental management, and landscape change , ed. L. Taylor and P. T. Hurley, 1 -29. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
- Theobald, D. M. 2001. Land-use dynamics beyond the American urban fringe. Geographical Review 91:544 -64.

- ---. 2005. Landscape patterns of exurban growth in the USA from 1980 to 2020. Ecology and Society 10 (1): 32.
- Travis, W. R. 2007. New geographies of the American West: Land use and the changing patterns of place . Washington, DC: Island.
- U.S. Census. 2009. State and county quick facts: Calaveras County . California. http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/ 06/06009.html (last accessed 2 June 2010).
- Walker, P. A. 2003. Reconsidering ' regional ' political ecologies: Toward a political ecology of the rural American West. Progress in Human Geography 27:7 -24.
- Walker, P., and L. Fortmann. 2003. Whose landscape? A political ecology of the ' exurban ' Sierra. Cultural Geographies 10:469 -91.
- Walker, P. A., and P. T. Hurley. 2011. Planning paradise: Politics and visioning of land use in Oregon . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- Williams, R. 1973. The country and the city . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Wilson, G. A. 2001. From productivism to post-productivism . . . and back again? Exploring the (un)changed natural and mental landscapes of European agriculture. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 26:77 -102.
- ---. 2010. Multifunctional ' quality ' and rural community resilience. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 35:364 -81.
- Winkler, R., D. R. Field, A. E. Luloff, R. S. Arannich, and T. Williams. 2007. Social landscapes of the inter-mountain west: A comparison of ' old west ' and ' new west ' communities. Rural Sociology 72:478 -501.
- Woods, M. 2005. Rural geography: Processes, responses and experiences in rural restructuring . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
- ---. 2009. Rural geography: Blurring boundaries and making connections. Progress in Human Geography 33:849 -58.
- ---. 2011. Rural . London and New York: Routledge.

COLLEEN C. HINER is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography at Texas State University, San Marcos, TX 78666. E-mail: cchiner@txstate.edu. She is a rural geographer and political ecologist with specialties in land and environmental management; (ex)urbanization; (rural) sustainability and tourism; wine, beer, and cider geographies ( ' fermented landscapes ' ); and agriculture (urban, periurban, and sustainable).