## This Land Is Ours Now: Spatial Imaginaries and the Struggle for Land in Brazil

Wendy Wolford

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

In recent years, scholars of ''contentious politics'' have paid increasing attention to the dynamics of space and place in the construction of organized resistance. T o date, however, the literature has tended to focus on the social construction of space rather than the equally important spatial constitution of the social. In this paper, I analyze how particular understandings of space, or what I call ''spatial imaginaries''-cognitive frameworks, both collective and individual, constituted through the lived experiences, perceptions, and conceptions of space itself-influenced the formation of the largest grassroots social movement in Brazilian history, the Movement of Rural Landless Workers (the MST). I analyze the decision to join the MST among small family farmers in southern Brazil and rural plantation workers in northeastern Brazil. People from both groups decided to join the movement, but the farmers from southern Brazil used their spatial imaginaries to embrace the act of occupying land and to create new frontiers for colonization while the rural workers from northeastern Brazil overcame the spatial imaginaries produced through the plantation labor system and joined the movement because they had few other options available to them. Because such imaginaries stay with people long after they engage in the initial acts of mobilization, incorporating this sort of analysis introduces an important dynamic component into the analysis of movement formation. Key Words: social movements, agrarian political economy, Brazil.

O nApril 17, 1997, more than 50,000 people marched through the streets of Brası ´ lia in a historic demonstration of support for what had become the largest grassroots social movement in Brazilian historyO Movimento Dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem T erra (the Movement of Rural Landless Workers, or the MST). Created officially in 1984, in the wake of a repressive military dictatorship, MST members aggressively occupied ''unproductive'' land as a way of pressuring the newly elected government for rights to the property. Over the next 19 years, the Brazilian government responded to the MST's actions with an erratic combination of violence and diplomacy that generated a frightening list of rural victims (CPT 2000), but also led to the redistribution of over 1,000 rural properties. T oday, the MST represents approximately 1 million people on land reform settlements and in temporary squatter camps throughout Brazil.

As one of the most visible examples of the ''New Left'' in Latin America (Petras 1997), the movement's rise has inspired an extensive literature. 1 In their discussion of the movement's origins, academics and movement leaders have consistently stressed the importance of agricultural restructuring, political opportunity, and religious mobilization. The MST's formation is so uniformly attributed to these three factors that they now constitute what I call the Official Genesis Story: the MST was formed because agricultural restructuring in the coun- tryside created a ''landless class'' at the same time as the return to democracy provided the opportunity for largescale mobilization, and progressive religious activists served as natural incubators, or ''institutional hosts'' (cf. Houtzager 1997) for the fledgling movement. This ''story'' roughly parallels three important schools of work on social movements: grievance theories, political opportunity theories, and resource mobilization theories.

The official story was compelling enough on paper that when I began field research in 1998, I did not intend to study the formation of the movement. I did not want to revisit processes and events that had already been well documented in the literature. As I talked with MST members over the course of the year, however, I realized that while the story explained what factors facilitated the formation of the movement, it did not actually do a good job of predicting who would join the MSTor why. There were many poor people in rural Brazil who were affected by agricultural modernization, political opening, and religious organization, and most of them did not join the movement. So what distinguished those who did join from those who did not? Were the former simply more affected by the contextual factors, or did they perceive the contextual factors in a different way?

In this paper, I suggest that we will only have a complete picture of movement formation if we go beyond the sort of structural factors outlined in the Official Genesis Story to show how mobilization is shaped by-

and shapes-the way people internalize and engage with their specific material and symbolic spatial environments (Escobar 2001; Massey 1994; Miller 2000; Pile and Keith 1997; Sewell 2001). In recent years, scholars of ''contentious politics'' (McAdam, Tarrow, and Tilly 2001) have paid increasing attention to the dynamics of space and place in the construction of resistance. Using the Oxford English Dictionary's definition of space as abstract and concrete, historian William Sewell Jr. (2001, 56) argues that scholars of resistance should take space seriously because, ultimately, ''all social life is located.'' People, or ''spatial agents,'' manipulate the material and symbolic character of location in expressing discontent, and at the same time, their actions ''can restructure the meanings, uses, and strategic valence of space'' (Sewell 2001, 55).

This conceptualization of space as the physical environment that structures (facilitates and constrains), and is restructured by, resistance dominates the academic studies of mobilization. Influenced by the spatial turn in critical social theory, excellent work has been done both within geography and without on safe spaces (Gamson 1989; Whittier 1995), segregated spaces such as urban ghettos (Feagin and Hahn 1973), tactical manipulations of space (Auyero 2003; Marston 2002; Routledge 1997), symbolic reappropriations of place (Escobar 2001; Moore 1997), spatial patterns of state control (Routledge 1997; Sewell 2001; Tilly 2000), the ''power of distance'' (Davis 1999), and ''jumping'' (or manipulating) scales (Adams 1996; Herod 1997; Miller 2000; Smith 1993). Clearly, these are all important aspects of the geography of resistance. Claims to, and control over, the physical environment are reactions to the apparently footloose nature of contemporary capitalist development. But place and space constitute more than the physical world in which we live, and, as Doreen Massey (1994) has argued more generally, we need to go beyond the ''social construction of space'' to better incorporate the spatial construction of the social. A geography of resistance needs to examine the ways in which the physical environment is internalized, embodied, imagined, and remembered. In Foucault's (1979) conceptualization of modern society, the importance of Bentham's panopticon was not simply that physical space was reordered in ways that allowed for isolation and effective supervision; rather, the panopticon was powerful because the threat of supervision was internalized by those within. The spaces of incarceration shaped the prisoners' consciousness and, in so doing, shaped their perception of, and relationship to, the outside world.

In relation to the struggle for land in Brazil, the spatial construction of social relations shaped people's decision to join the MST. The formation of resistance was embedded in particular understandings of space, or what I call ''spatial imaginaries''-cognitive frameworks, both collective and individual, constituted through the lived experiences, perceptions, and conceptions of space itself (Lefebvre 1991). Analyzing these spatial imaginaries will help to explain more precisely how people in rural Brazil experienced agricultural modernization, political opening, and religious mobilization in ways that made them choose to leave everything behind and join a radical landless movement.

In order to illustrate the importance of spatial imaginaries, I compare settlers who were originally small family farmers in the southern state of Santa Catarina to settlers who were originally rural plantation workers in the northeastern state of Pernambuco. These two groups possessed very different spatial imaginaries that shaped their perception of the MST and their decision to join the movement. Ultimately, people from both groups joined the movement even though the small farmers' spatial imaginaries were much more compatible with the movement's methods and ideology than the rural workers'. In the southern case study, small farmers, whom Eric Wolf (1969) would have called ''middle farmers,'' used their experiences of production and reproduction on the land to question the large landholders' claim to property. They joined the movement because they had the social, cultural, and material resources to fund their struggle, and they believed that doing so was worthwhile. In the northeastern case study, the poorest and most mobile rural workers, whom Jeffery Paige (1975) might have called ''migrant workers,'' were the first to join the MST-not because they had the resources or because they necessarily believed in the movement's methods or ideology, but because the local sugarcane economy had collapsed, and they felt the movement was their best alternative.

Going beyond the Official Genesis Story to explain how different spatial imaginaries played out in unique ways to shape an individual's decision to join the MST builds on work that analyzes the importance of dynamic mechanisms of contention. Recent work by three veteran scholars of social movements, Douglas McAdam, Sydney Tarrow, and Charles Tilly (2001, 24-32), emphasizes the need to push new studies away from general models that prioritize structure towards case studies that prioritize ''causal mechanisms, causal processes and contentious episodes.'' Mechanisms are the smallest unit of the three and can be broken down into environmental mechanisms (context), cognitive mechanisms (perception), and relational mechanisms (interaction among actors and actors and context). Analyzing the different

reasons for joining the MST makes it clear that spatial imaginaries are important cognitive mechanisms of contention.

Because such imaginaries stay with people long after they engage in initial acts of mobilization, incorporating this sort of analysis introduces an important dynamic component into the analysis of movement mobilization. The character of a movement as it grows through time and space will be shaped by the ideas that individuals bring with them when they join the movement (cf. Zamosc 1986). Analyzing the spatial imaginaries in the MST helps to explain postmobilization experiences that might not otherwise make sense.

In what follows, I outline the context of the MST's formation and describe the methods and ideologies employed by the movement. Then I analyze the official story-in theory and in history-and elaborate on a perspective of the MST's formation that takes into account the importance of diverse spatial imaginaries. 2

## Historical Background: A Movement in the Making

Brazil is one of the most developed, industrialized, and urban economies in Latin America. And yet it is in Brazil that rural unrest is making headlines. The reasons for this seeming contradiction have everything to do with the legacies of inequitable land tenure. From the year 1500 (when Brazil was ''discovered'' by the Portuguese) until the present, power and prestige in Brazil have derived in large part from access to land. 3 The agrarian elite controlled national politics to such an extent that the presidents between 1898 and 1930 were referred to as '' cafe ´ com leite ,'' or ''coffee with milk,'' because most of them came from either the coffee plantations in Sa ˜o Paulo or the dairy ranches in Minas Gerais (see Fausto 1999, 148-60; also Bethell 1987).

Because of the enormous inequalities in access to land, the agrarian elite was able to manipulate the allocation of labor in such a way as to maintain both status and production. The various labor allocation strategies employed by the elite-slavery, subsidized immigration, and family labor-created high levels of poverty and uneven access to social infrastructure (schools, health services, etc.) throughout the countryside (cf. Martins 1981; Sigaud 1979; Stolcke 1988). Poverty and ongoing social inequality generated frequent resistance, which coalesced in the mid-1900s as the Communist Party, the Catholic Church, and trade unions all expanded their mobilization efforts into the countryside (Forman 1975).

As membership in the Communist Party began to grow and progressive Catholic priests urged their constituents actively to pursue a better life, Brazil seemed to be poised at the edge of radical changes (Stepan 1973). But these changes did not sit well with certain sectors of the Brazilian elite, and in 1964 the armed forces stepped in to establish authoritarian law and order (Skidmore 1988). Democratic, civilian elections would not be held again until 1985.

The 21 years of military rule were turbulent ones. Between 1967 and 1973, Brazil experienced such rapid economic growth that the period was dubbed the ''economic miracle'' (Burns 1993). GDP increased at an astonishing annual rate of 11.2 percent during this period (Fausto 1999, 291) and inflation fell from 58.2 percent per annum in 1965 to a low of 16.4 percent per annum in 1970 (Skidmore 1999, 178). The government focused on domestic manufacture in an attempt to make the transition from an underdeveloped agricultural economy to a developed industrial one. The largest landowners were provided with generous incentives and resources for modernization in the hopes that production increases in agriculture would generate foreign currency and lower the cost of living for urban workers (Delgado 1985; Mu ¨ller 1985).

Despite the initial advances in production, this rapid period of what came to be called ''conservative modernization''-or, alternatively, ''painful modernization'' (Graziano da Silva 1982)-had devastating social effects. Changing labor requirements due to mechanization spawned a massive exodus from the rural areas into the cities. Between 1960 and 1980, the population of Brazil's largest city, Sa ˜o Paulo, rose from 4.7 million to 12.6 million. 4 With such an influx of labor, real urban wages fell by two-thirds from 1960 to 1976 (IBGE 1990). The concentration of land ownership grew, and in 1985, just over 10 percent of the landowners in the country controlled almost 80 percent of the land. Growing levels of inequality meant that a large part of the country's population was left out of the economic miracle altogether. 5 Religious mobilization increased in the countryside as the Catholic Church worked to convince the rural poor that access to land was a ''gift of God'' rather than a right of birth.

By the late 1970s, the military's ambitious industrial development plan had run its course and the economic miracle was over. When international interest rates doubled overnight in 1979, Brazil's massive public debt became a crippling burden on an already unstable economy (Burns 1993). 6 Beginning in 1978-1979, the military slowly withdrew from government, and in 1985, the first civilian president in 21 years was elected. 7 This

was the year that the Movement of Rural Landless Workers (MST) held its first National Congress.

As early as 1978, several hundred families in the southernmost states of Rio Grande do Sul and Santa Catarina had organized land occupations (see Fernandes 1999). These occupations met with immediate state censure, but they were ultimately successful and provided the impetus for the formation of an official movement. In 1985, MST members established a short-term goal of securing ''land for those who work it'' and a long-term goal of creating a just, socialist society. Many of the first MST leaders came directly out of the church as the local Ecclesiastical Base Communities (CEBs) provided important resources for the spread-and legitimation-of militant ideology (Stedile 1997; Schwade 1992).

The movement's aggressive tactics of occupying land exploited contradictions at the heart of the Brazilian state. On paper, the Brazilian Constitution was extremely progressive. Article 186 of the most recent (1988) constitution states that if land is not fulfilling its ''social responsibility to be productive'' then the federal government is empowered to expropriate the area from the owner. But in practice, the law is rarely upheld without aggressive actions undertaken by groups of squatters. The Brazilian state acknowledges and reinforces the contradictions between formal law and practice by sometimes legalizing the occupations and sometimes criminalizing them and depicting the squatters as illegal invaders.

MST activists worked in poor rural and urban communities, spreading news of the movement and informing people of their right to land (Petras 1997). Church leaders and union workers often helped the activists by using their connections within local communities to spread word of the movement. When a group of interested people were organized, the immediate goal was to occupy land, setting up temporary barracos (barracks) made out of heavy black plastic and wood. The squatters often had to reoccupy a given area several times as the government and/or private landlord usually responded with violence before negotiations (Fernandes 1999).

These methods have been extremely effective. In the past nineteen years, the MST has carried out approximately 230,000 occupations, secured over 1,000 settlements and expanded its base from 3 states to 22 (of 26). For the first time in Brazilian history, a social movement has organized a coherent membership base in each of the country's highly differentiated geographic regions.

## The Official Genesis Story

As the MST has grown and taken its struggle past the farm gate into the cities, the question of the movement's formation has generated a considerable literature. Most answers to the question ''Why did the movement form when and where it did?'' have identified three major factors-agricultural modernization, democratic transition, and religious mobilization. As Zander Navarro, one of the most influential and widely read scholars of the agrarian question in Brazil, has written:

The social struggles of Brazil's landless agricultural workers and small producers over the past two decades . . . [were] stimulated by a number of factors, three of which stand out. First, the political liberalization that characterized the final years of the dictatorship and the gradual development of the conditions leading to the Brazilian political transition opened space for active social protest. Second, progressive sectors of the Catholic Church not only lent an ethicalreligious endorsement to the mobilization of rural workers under the canons of Liberation Theology, but also offered broad operational and logistical support to the incipient social movements. And third, the intense capitalist modernization of the rural areas of central and southern Brazil wrought profound social and economic changes that fueled rising social protest.

-(Navarro 2000, 36-37)

Joa ˜o Pedro Stedile, one of the MST's founding members and arguably the movement's intellectual spokesperson, and Bernardo Manc ¸ano Fernandes, a Brazilian geographer who has done some of the most thorough and intensive work on the MST to date, also write about the modernization of agriculture and the progressive actions of the church. They argue that these two factors came together to generate high levels of participation in the movement (cf. Fernandes 1999; Stedile 1997; Stedile and Fernandes 1999). These contextual factors are so regularly emphasized in discussions of the MST's formation that they have created what I refer to as an official genesis story. The theoretical basis of this official story parallels three influential schools of thought on social movements: grievance theories, political opportunity theories, and resource mobilization theories.

Grievance theories generally argue that resistance arises in response to economic conditions perceived as exploitative or oppressive. Although grievance theories have largely been rejected in analyses of ''new social movements'' for whom the ''freedom to have'' is replaced by the ''freedom to be'' (Melucci 1989, 177-78), they continue to be prominent in studies of Third World social movements (Edelman 1996; Eckstein 1989; Veltmeyer 1997). Scholars working on the MST have argued that the expansion of agroindustrial capitals into the countryside forced subsistence producers off of their land and into the movement (Oliveira 1994). Political

opportunity theories argue that movements are very sensitive to the balance between repression and inclusion because they are, by definition, both marginal to the institutional political process and engaged in a struggle over the nature of political expression and control (Jenkins and Perrow 1977; McAdam 1982; Skocpol 1979; Tarrow 1998). Analyses of the MST's formation have argued that the transition to democracy in Brazil provided a crucial opportunity for the movement's development. Resource mobilization theorists argue that the formation of social movements is facilitated and constrained by the institutional, financial, and cultural resources of their members (McCarthy and Zald 1973). In Brazil, the institutional strength of established Catholic and Lutheran churches has been considered a crucial resource for mobilization among the rural poor throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Peter Houtzager (1997) argues that the Catholic Church operated as an ''institutional host'' for incipient rural mobilization efforts during the 1970s and 1980s (see also Mainwaring 1986; Houtzager and Kurtz 2000).

The official genesis story as stated by Zander Navarro in the beginning of this section, with its emphasis on grievances, politics, and resources, highlights important aspects of the context in which the MST was first formed, but it does not fully explain who would actually join the movement. 8 As McAdam, Tarrow and Tilly (2001, 43) say, ''No opportunity [or threat], however objectively open, will invite mobilization unless it is a) visible to potential challengers and b) perceived as an opportunity'' (see also Kurzman 1996). Many different groups of people joined the movement, and the best way to explain why is not simply to research the development of capitalism, or the rise in political opportunity, or the actions of radical priests. The best way to explain who joined the MST is to investigate the relationship between members and the movement's methods and ideology-a relationship shaped by spatial imaginaries. I have chosen two groups for this paper, a group of small family farmers in southern Brazil and a group of rural workers in northeastern Brazil. People from both groups joined the movement, and their unofficial genesis stories point to the importance of imagination as a lens for turning context into action. In each case, the decision to join the MST was shaped by culturally specific relationships formed between individuals and their spatial environments.

## The Geographic Analysis of Resistance

The settlers being compared in this paper live on MST settlements-one in the southern state of Santa

Figure 1. Map of field research sites.

<!-- image -->

Catarina and one in the northeastern state of Pernambuco (see Figure 1). This comparison rests on the different spatial imaginaries formed by small farmers and rural workers in two particular places. I do not claim to be representing ''the South'' or ''the Northeast'' in this paper, but a group of family farmers from the South, and a group of rural workers from the Northeast.

## Who Joined the MST and Why?

The MST community in Santa Catarina being presented as a case study for the purposes of this paper will be referred to as Vento. 9 A land reform settlement with 97 families, Vento is located in the center of the state. Most of the 97 families were previously small farmers who owned or rented land in western Santa Catarina. They came to the settlement in 1989 after living in MST squatter camps for several years. On the settlement, the families were given 18 hectares of land and funds to build a simple house. By 1998, most of the settlers were planting corn and beans, along with a few vegetables, and raising chickens, pigs, and the occasional cow.

These families came from a tradition of farming that was inherently expansive, and migrating along the edge of the spatial frontier was a traditional survival strategy in the face of that expansion. Roberto's story is a typical one. 10 Roberto was the son of Italian immigrants. His parents came from Italy in the early 1900s and settled in a small town in the southernmost state of Rio Grande do Sul. Roberto grew up in an Italian community of small farmers, and he remembered speaking his parent's language as a child. Roberto had 11 brothers and sisters, and his parents did not have enough land to support all

of them. When Roberto married Isa, the daughter of neighboring small holders, the two moved northward to find land of their own. They moved to a small community in western Santa Catarina where the land was still covered in forest and belonged to a ''colonizing company'' called Bertasco. Colonizing companies were common in Santa Catarina during the early 1900s when the state government made territorial colonization a priority. The state put private companies in charge of selling land to the immigrants who arrived regularly from Europe looking for land along the spatial frontiers of southern Brazil (Seyferth 1990). 11

Roberto and Isa bought four urban blocks and five rural hectares from Bertasco. Soon after, they sold their urban property and moved into the countryside to build a small wooden house on their five hectares. This was a good time, according to Roberto, a time when the couple had no children and ''didn't have to worry about anything.'' 12 Five hectares of land was enough to provide a good living because the soil was better than it had been in Rio Grande do Sul. Roberto was soon able to buy a used car, which he proudly parked beside the house.

But gradually, the couple ran out of land. They took some land out of production to build the house. Then they gave some land to their children and ''it all started to go.'' The couple did not have enough land for themselves and all of their children '' . . . and we had such a dream of having land for the kids.'' Roberto and Isa lived with their two sons and three daughters until 1987 when an MST militant approached them and began talking about agrarian reform. One son was married and the other engaged, and Roberto and Isa saw the MSTas a way to solve their problem of finding land for the children. They encouraged their sons to join in an occupation: ''We can't give you land, but we will help you until you do manage to get land of your own. When you have land, then you are on your own.'' Their daughters moved into a nearby town and found work in a factory.

As Roberto and Isa's story suggests, family farming was expansive because of the so-called demographic lifecycle of the farming household (cf. Chayanov 1966). Due to both necessity and tradition, the sons of small family farmers in the region sought land of their own in order to begin a new household (see also Cazella 1992; Metcalf 1992; Paulilo 1996). One tall, thin man with light brown hair and nervous eyes traced his story back over two states and three farms. When he was seven years old, Vilmar and his family packed up all their belongings, threw them on top of a big truck, and left their small town in Rio Grande do Sul. They moved further north in search of good hunting and fishing. The land they found belonged to the state of Santa Catarina, and they were able to pay a cheap price for two colonias (48.4 hectares). His parents brought up their two children on that land, but when Vilmar was old enough, he rented his own farm on the outskirts of town, even though he said his parents had sufficient land for him to work. Vilmar wanted his own land to start a new family, but he could only afford to rent a small amount of land. So when he found out about the MST in 1988, he decided to join.

It was common for younger generations to travel far from their parents in search of new land. The families on Vento had migrated an average of two times each before joining the MST . 13 They decided to join the movement because the spatial frontier in Santa Catarina (and in southern Brazil more generally) had come to an end and they were at the point in their demographic cycle where some members of the family needed new land. 14 Between 1980 and 1991, 70,000 people left rural western Santa Catarina because of the end of the spatial frontier and the decreasing size of small-holdings that were inevitably situated on the worst land in the region. As one woman said, ''I always say that [joining the MST] was a decision made out of necessity. We had 13 brothers and sisters and so where were you going to put all these kids? For this, we joined the movement.''

Farmers who had sufficient land to farm often joined the movement as a way to escape the position of sharecropping. Settlers who had rented land said they saw tenancy as a stepping-stone to owning their own land, but as the territorial frontier in Santa Catarina closed, sharecropping became increasingly common (Cazella 1992, 19). In 1995, 28 percent of small farmers (those with fewer than 10 hectares) were renting the land they worked (IBGE 1996b 21). 15 Many of the settlers described paying their landlord as an unfair imposition and said that they joined the MST in search of land of their own. One older man who had three children said that he and his family did very well before they joined the movement. They rented land and got along well with the landowner until they started to do ''too well.'' The family managed to buy 12 head of cattle and 28 pigs, and the landlord worried that their success would give them legal rights to the land in his absence. So he threw the entire family off of the farm. The family left because they were unsure of their rights and did not want to ''make a stink.''

The demographic nature of the way these families farmed in western Santa Catarina not only pushed them into the MST, it also pulled them in. Parents often helped their children through occupation periods because they felt it was their responsibility to see them

successfully set up a new household. Roberto and Isa brought their sons food regularly and even stayed with them in the occupation camp for 40 days. The two sons received land on Vento in 1989. Families were pulled into the movement by the encouragement of sons, daughters, fathers, mothers, uncles, and others who left for the movement and called their relatives to join them. Often, one person winning land through the movement was enough to encourage the entire extended family to join as well. Many settlers on Vento argued that they had joined the MST at the urging of other family members. Some saw their brothers and sisters win land and joined an occupation to ''stick with'' the family and ''see what would happen.'' One woman on the settlement, to whom everyone referred affectionately as ''the little old one,'' had joined the MSTwith her husband in 1984 and by 1998 seven of her nine children had also joined the movement. Each household on the settlement had an average of four adult relatives living on MSTsettlements somewhere in the state (as compared to fewer than one for settlers on Flora).

The search for new land was also a legacy of the environmental degradation experienced by small family farmers in western Santa Catarina. When the region had originally been colonized in the 1920s, it had boasted excellent natural soil fertility and ample trees for both construction and sale. By 1990, a government-sponsored report ''Sustainable Development in Western Santa Catarina'' (T esta et al. 1996) judged that 41.5 percent of the former agricultural land was totally inappropriate for cultivation due to soil loss, hillside slope, and prevalence of rocks. Over the years, the land that Roberto and Isa farmed grew worse: ''There were so many rocks, and it seemed like there were more every year.'' The land the settlers had worked in western Santa Catarina was no longer able to support the extensive method of cultivation practiced by many of the small farmers. Years of planting corn and beans on hillside slopes led to deteriorating soil conditions and lower yields. When the land in one area became exhausted, families were forced to move on and look for new land (see also Paulilo 1996).

Because of this historical experience with mobility as a productive and reproductive survival strategy, the settlers understood and accepted the MST's seemingly radical methods. The MST's slogan of ''land for those who work it'' fit with the small farmer's spatial imaginaries where migration had created the perception of an endless frontier. ''Squatting''-or occupying land-was considered a legitimate solution to limited land, degraded soil, and usufruct impositions conceived of as unfair. The settlers took this experience with the spatial frontier and used it to create a political frontier. They reframed space that was physically occupied by powerful actors and presented it as morally empty in a conscious political effort to alter the material shape of that space. Symbolically revising the nature of spaces constitutes an important resource for actors who are otherwise marginalized or economically weak (Sewell 2001). This new political frontier generated an intense struggle as exclusive and opposing sets of rights were imposed upon the natural landscape.

The settlers were supported in their decision to join the MST by strong rural communities who presented a familiar public forum for discussing ideas that were often considered dangerous. Members within the community were important sources of information as families often met on Sundays in church or for a game of soccer and exchanged news. These social ties helped to spread word of the MST's mission and encouraged people to join the movement. As one young settler whose entire family had joined the movement said, ''We were organized by the community. The MST activists came to the meetings in the church. There were 18 families in the community, and all of them came to the meeting in the church.'' One older settler on Vento named Paolo was born the son of small farmers who rented 12 hectares of land in a small farming community in Rio Grande do Sul. Paolo always participated in meetings because he was considered one of the community's leaders. When MSTactivists came to his town and talked about their new movement, he was selected by the community to lead the local struggle for land. It was common for communities to respond to the MST's message cautiously, by sending one or two people to find out more about the movement. These ''delegates'' were expected to report back to the community and were often pivotal mediators in the formation of MST networks. Paolo decided that he agreed with the movement's message, and an occupation was scheduled in the state of Santa Catarina. Paolo convinced a few other families to leave with him, and they all joined the occupation.

While the historical search for new land was motivated, in large part, by productive and reproductive concerns, the settlers shared a desire to continue farming that was embedded in culturally informed notions of an honest life. The settlers expressed a real love for the land; land was a tradition in and of itself and a means for continuation of a life many found extremely valuable. As one young MST settler who was preparing to become an activist ''on the front lines'' ( frente da massa ) of the movement said, having land meant having ''citizenship, and the dignity of being able to produce. Land is life.'' For many of the settlers, the city meant chaos, insecurity, and violence as opposed to the stability, security, and

peace of the countryside. An older woman on Vento said,

Living on the land means not having to live in the city, which is full of commotion, and it is difficult to bring up a family. In the country you work the whole day, rest at night, and it's calm. The country is free of a lot of bad things. It's easier to survive because you plant everything you need and don't buy very much on the market.

The settlers on Vento had formed their spatial imaginaries on the moving frontier, and they used these imaginaries to justify participation in the MST. Their lived spaces were altered by the increasing penetration of agro-industrial capitals into the countryside, but the way they experienced that change was shaped by their historical understanding of the land, family, and community. In the face of the decreasing availability of land, the small farmers who ended up on Vento created a political frontier, using the moral and material support of family and friends to help them colonize new land.

The situation on the settlement in the sugarcane region of northeast Brazil was in many ways the opposite of the South. The MSTcommunity in Pernambuco being presented as a case study for the purposes of this paper will be referred to as Flora. 16 Forty-seven families lived on Flora, 13 of whom received land because they occupied the area with the MST . The other 33 families had been given land because of their previous association with the property, which had been a large-scale sugarcane plantation before its expropriation in 1997. Federal law mandated that all of the families living or working on the plantation be given the chance to receive land, even though this included a wide range of social classes (e.g., the boss, administrative heads, team leaders, and workers). Most of the people living on the plantation that became Flora accepted the offer of land because few alternatives existed in the region. Each family received approximately nine hectares and funds to build a simple house. Production on the land varied greatly, but by 1999, most of the settlers were planting manioc and corn.

In this region, it was difficult for people to imagine joining the MST because the spatial imaginaries produced through plantation labor clashed with the MST's methods and ideology. Local traditions of work, family, and community in the sugarcane region of Pernambuco created a perception of the plantation as ''not-frontier,'' and this perception was not compatible with the idea of occupying ''someone else's land'' for distribution. A notfrontier is the opposite of the spatial frontier; it is a space that may be technically or legally ''empty,'' but is represented, perceived, and experienced as not available for occupation or exchange. It is not always clear who ''owns'' not-frontiers, but possession is usually backed up by significant political and economic strength.

In the context of limited land availability, the majority of the plantation workers in Pernambuco had little experience with family farming, and there was no widespread belief that having land was necessary for beginning a new family. The workers had occasionally been allowed to plant subsistence crops by their houses inside the plantation, but they were always at the whim of the plantation owner. Landlords who did provide their workers with land for planting did so as a dom (gift), and many plantation owners simply refused ever to allow their workers access to land. According to an older man who had worked on several different plantations, the workers were only given land to plant crops if something happened to the sugarcane: ''When there was that drought, all of the sugarcane died, and then there were people planting [food crops] everywhere . . . . If the cane doesn't die, there isn't land for people to work on.'' Another worker said that the mill where he worked ''didn't want to give anything to the worker because they thought that the worker would take over their lands.''

Without access to land, the workers were dependent on employment in the plantations. The work was not easy, nor was the pay very good. One settler who had begun cutting cane when he was eight years old said, ''I didn't like it. The cane cut us a lot, and there were always ants and snakes. And it is very heavy workweeding cane is work for animals. And you earn very little!'' Although life in the sugarcane was difficult, the workers learned to prefer receiving a salary to working on their own land. As a local leader in the region said,

When you go to them with an idea about going after land . . . they measure the time [that they would spend in an occupation] against the time that they would spend employed. If they started a job today, in five days they would already have money in his pocket. And so if you go to them and ask if they want land or a job, they are going to say a job.

The rural sugarcane workers on Flora also had very different notions of family and community than their counterparts in the South. The monopolistic production of sugarcane had created a tradition of mobility in search of work that actually weakened family ties across generations. Young men often began work with their fathers at the age of eight or nine. A few years later, one male settler on Flora said, they left in search of their own fortune: ''When we were grown up and came into our own and were going to bring up our own families, we left to go out into the world, and my father stayed there with

his family.'' Family labor on the plantations was segmented, and men often worked in the fields by themselves while the women took care of the home. Because of this segmentation, mobility in search of work often meant that the men left their families on one plantation, or in town, while they found work elsewhere. And because plantation owners accepted laborers as they chose, larger extended families rarely moved around together. As a result, families on the settlement tended to be small, and there were very few extended families on the settlements. There was no strong tradition of investment in either land or jobs for the future generations.

Mobility was also the most effective means of expressing discontent with a plantation. 17 Working contracts were usually informal and open to interpretation, so exit was often the only effective resistance to difficult working conditions perceived as unfair. The option to move to another plantation was important for the workers' sense of autonomy and freedom. As one man who had worked as a team leader on the plantation before winning land said, '' At that time, there wasn't anything holding you in one place . . . . I would spend two or three years in one place, and when that started to get bad, I was already leaving for somewhere else.''

Community ties on the plantation were extremely tenuous because of the workers' mobility and individual production practices. Each person's wages were assessed according to the amount of land they cleared or cane they loaded into the trucks, and there were few incentives to cooperating or working together during the harvest. The communities that did develop within the plantations were relatively hierarchical because social networks reflected the labor process. The way that sugarcane was produced on the plantation required a few skilled '' empregados '' (employees) and many unskilled '' trabalhadores '' (workers). The employees managed the estate and oversaw the work crews. The workers cut the cane, weeded the fields, and loaded the trucks. Labor segmentation was enforced formally, in the sense of occupational difference, and informally through traditional norms attached to rights and privileges. But rights and privileges were negotiated constantly as the informal nature of labor contracts left the details open to constant reinterpretation. The balance of the negotiations was indicated in the size and kind of residence a worker had on the plantation. Workers who were contracted seasonally, or without their working papers (called clandestinos or illegals), occupied the most insecure, unstable positions within the plantation.

In spite of the many factors discouraging rural workers from joining the MST , the movement began to build its membership in the region when agricultural restructur- ing in the 1980s generated a massive crisis in the sugarcane industry. 18 State subsidies that had propped up the industry for years were withdrawn, and many plantations and mills found themselves saddled with huge debts and unable to continue production (Lima and Silva 1995; Buarque 1997). In 1995, 44 percent of the sugarcane refining distilleries in Pernambuco were classified as ''paralyzed or functioning with difficulty'' (Lins 1996, 2). One settler summed up the situation, saying, ''[Before], we would go out and get a job, but now we can't. Now, if a guy has a job, he should stay put, because if he leaves it, he is going to starve. We can't find work. The mill owners don't even want us to work for them, not even for an hour, or for free.''

The people most affected by the crisis were those who had not been given housing in the interior of the plantations and were living in the cities. Many of these workers were seasonally employed. 19 Being forced to live in the town made their position within the plantation more unstable, and they often had to do the most menial tasks of the harvest for a fraction of the pay they were promised. They had little recourse, however, if they wished to be contracted again the following year. 20 These workers were the ones who occupied the plantation with the MST. Even though many of them were uncomfortable with the act of occupying land and attending public demonstrations against the state, they felt that the movement offered a better alternative than they would see on the plantations. One former uncertified worker described a meeting an MST activist held by the side of the road where a number of workers were resting: ''He talked to us to find out if we were wanting to involve ourselves with the movement-if we wanted to get a plot [of land], and if we wanted to be part of the movement. I said to him, 'Buddy, I am for whatever works and for what comes my way.' At that time I was unemployed-not just me, a lot of people.'' Another settler who participated in the original occupation said the miserable conditions of working on the plantation pushed him into the MST . When Fernando was eight years old, he began working in the plantations. His father had land, but the family still worked for a mill during the mornings. In the afternoons, they worked in their own garden, growing foodstuffs to take to the market on the weekend. Eventually, Fernando's father sold his land, and the children were forced to find work where they could: ''I was working for some of the large [mills] around here . . . . One day I went to a mill near Xexeu, and I beat myself up . . . cutting myself everywhere. I broke the hoe, threw it away, and came here on foot. I said that while I had faith in God, I would not work for anyone anymore.''

The traditional construction of community shaped the way that people thought about their options in general and the MST in particular. None of the people on Flora had joined an occupation with members of the same original community. Even when two people from the same community joined the MST , they made their decisions independently and did not consciously maintain social ties after receiving land. The people most likely to join the MST were also those who did not have the option of attaching themselves to communities already established in the city or another rural area.

At the same time, another group of people in Pernambuco who were not as badly affected by the sugarcane crisis joined the MST. These were the people who had been offered land as a right of association rather than as a result of having joined an MST occupation. These settlers were often doing a little bit better than the uncertified workers, but not well enough (in most cases) to leave the plantation. They joined the MST because the movement came to their new settlement and aggressively began to organize. The movement's organizing efforts, together with the promise of money and the desire for a political voice, provided powerful incentives for joining. These people did not have to join the MST after receiving land, but many decided to do so because membership provided them with political leverage that they would not otherwise have.

The settlers who had been living and working on the plantation at the time of the occupation were drawn into the movement almost against their will. When the MST members were settled on a plantation, there were brief conflicts between the two groups of people (the MST members and the original occupants of the plantation). One of the men who originally occupied the plantation said, ''In the beginning, [the residents] didn't support the movement because they think that we messed up their lives, because when they worked for the boss, they had work, every week they had a little income, and after we got there, they didn't have this any more.'' But the residents were drawn into the MST because the movement became the most obvious vehicle for organizing the settlement.

The crisis in the sugarcane industry brought with it a reorganization of local power structures. As sugarcane industries went bankrupt and many of the old sugar elites pulled out of the region altogether, the local elites were no longer able to protect or control their workers politically. Once the plantation had been expropriated, the settlers could not approach their former patra ˜o for assistance. The unions, which had been an important organization for workers in the region during the 1950s and 1960s, were encountering membership diffi- culties as a result of widespread unemployment on the plantations.

In this new political environment, the MST offered the best representation vis-a `-vis both the local mayor and the state government. According to a settler, ''The movement helps us. They put pressure on the government to make the projects happen for us; it's always the strength of the movement.'' Because of the elitist character of politics in the Northeast, a political voice is synonymous with an economic voice. For a community that often feels as powerless as the plantation workers do, the political visibility that the movement provides is extremely significant. Not everybody is happy about the change, however. Some settlers argued that they joined the movement unwillingly, but felt they had to. One older man who had been a team leader before receiving land on Flora said, ''Whether I want to or not I have to be part [of the movement] because we arrange things within the movement.''

In spite of the clear clashes between the MST's peasant-based ideology and the rural workers' spatial imaginaries, so many people have joined the movement in this area that the MST considers it a focal point of their organization in the Northeast.

## What Difference Does It Make? Ongoing Participation in the MST

Analyzing the spatial imaginaries that influenced individuals' decision to join the MST is useful because it helps to explain very different styles of postmobilization participation. In spite of the MST's rhetorical coherence at the national level, the regional constitution of people and place has created very different movement actors throughout the country. Focusing on the structural factors that facilitated the movement's formation hides the fact that some of the movement's members desperately tried to avoid joining and had very different ideas about participation than people who joined because they agreed with the MST's basic argument that land was a necessary component of both production and reproduction.

In the southern settlement of Vento, the small farmers who joined the movement did so because they wanted land. This land was central to their plans for the future, and most of them worked it with the idea that it would eventually be passed on to their children. One settler, an energetic man with three children, was constantly engaged in agricultural experiments (he planted small patches with watermelon and strawberries one season to see how they would do on his land) that he hoped

would pay off so that he could leave an inheritance for his children.

As small farmers who had had difficulty making a living on their land before joining the movement, the settlers on Vento were acutely aware of how hard life could be on the settlement. Most thought that if they worked hard enough, they would have enough to eat, but to prosper on the land, they needed the MST's help. As one settler said, ''Even though we have a lot of things now, we cannot stop yet because the situation is not easy.'' The movement was seen as an extremely effective vehicle for pressuring the state to distribute the resources it had promised the settlers. These resources included investment credit as well as basic infrastructure on the settlement, including good roads and potable water. As one settler said, ''T oday the movement is respected because we have won some of the things that we wanted. Our credit is subsidized, for example, and not even the union got that!'' Access to credit provides a fundamental justification for participation in the movement because working the land requires investment capital. As one settler said, ''Without the movement, there would be no money to work on the land and without that, we wouldn't be able to stay.''

MST settlers living in Vento participated regularly in movement activities. They were involved in local activities such as regular meetings organized by the movement and even the occasional land occupation. The MST's experience suggested that strength during occupations lay in numbers, and sometimes people were brought in from established settlements to participate in new occupations. The settlers on Vento also participated in movement activities that took place further away, including demonstrations anywhere from 200 miles to 2,000 miles away. People who did not actively participate often said they had an obligation to be supporting the activities in other ways. An older woman who had been living on Vento since 1993 said, ''I am settled, but they are fighting for us. So today, we put together food for people [mobilizing] in [a nearby town].''

Regular participation in movement activities generated a self-sustaining ''virtuous circle'' of participation. The longer the settlers stayed in the movement and the more they participated in organized activities, the more they were exposed to the movement's political, social, and cultural opinions. As one settler in Vento said, ''The movement educates you much better than the farm. Now we know that our government is against us . . . and we are the ones who are going to lose.'' An older man on the settlement said, ''Other people my age don't know so many things about the government, politics.'' In addition to information about politics, movement activists con- tinually reminded the settlers of the debt they owed the organization. And most people agreed; one woman put it simply: ''The people who get land through agrarian reform will be guaranteed a better life.''

In the northeastern settlement of Flora, things were very different because most of the MST settlers in the sugarcane region had joined the movement out of desperation, rather than out of a deep desire for land, and so they tended to participate much less in movement activities than their counterparts on Vento. Many did not even think of themselves as being integral to the movement; rather, they saw the movement as an assistance organization they signed up for much like a trade union or a political party. One man said, ''I think it's good. They are always doing marches and things, and it's to help us, isn't it? They confront INCRA, they pressure the government, they even make the projects happen for us.'' As members of an association, the settlers expected the MST to provide certain services and were sometimes reluctant to pay their dues if they did not see the material manifestation of those services.

The settlers' attitudes toward the MST became clear in 2001 when the local sugarcane economy roared back into life (Wolford 2004). In the early and mid-1990s when the settlers joined the movement, the price of sugarcane was low and many distilleries had stopped harvesting or accepting cane altogether. In 1999, when I first visited Flora, the settlers were experimenting with alternative crops such as vegetables and fruits that might earn a higher price in the market. The MST promoted and supported these experiments as much as possible. The local agricultural extension agent, who was contracted by the MST , ran the settlement meetings, and he always spent some part of the meeting discussing the reasons why the settlers should move away from the exploitative sugarcane crop and into niche markets that were healthier for the body and for society.

In 1999, the settlers were making an effort to move toward fruits such as bananas, coconuts, and pineapple. But a drought in southern Brazil weakened sugarcane production there, pushing up the price in the Northeast, and by 2001, most of the settlers were planting sugarcane again. Many had dropped their alternative projects either because the alternative crops were not doing well or because they thought that sugar would do better. In the case of banana trees, many settlers happily abandoned their plantings because they had never believed bananas would grow well on their land and had only agreed to try because, at the time, the government provided R$2,000 (about $1,000 in U.S. dollars in 1999) for projects built around either bananas or coconut trees. The government's offer of credit was particularly

attractive because only half of the money had to be repaid; the other half was a ''rebate,'' which the MST prided itself on having won for settlers throughout the country.

In 2001 the settlers moved back to sugarcane because they knew the crop well and knew that there were wellestablished marketing lines so that if the price were good and the harvest decent, they would have money in their pockets again. And in spite of the rhetoric of government agrarian reform officials, it would have been difficult to completely dismantle the sugarcane industry since the entire economic and social structure of the Pernambuco sugarcane region was built around the rhythm of cane production. Even amid generalized crisis, few people suggested that sugarcane production be abandoned entirely. Instead, state plans for diversification included agrarian reform as a means to occupy land that was not considered appropriate for sugar production. The state hoped that agrarian reform settlements would employ excess labor on a seasonal basis and, at the same time, foster smallholder suppliers of cane for the large distilleries (MEPF 1998, 2). By 2001, this was what was happening on the settlements.

When I returned to Flora in 2001, the settlers were busily preparing for the sugarcane harvest. Indications of the MST had all but disappeared from the settlement. Two of the men who had originally occupied the plantation with the MST had left the settlement and were reportedly no longer involved with the movement. Perhaps most importantly, however, the young agronomist employed by the MST , who had been such an active spokesperson for the movement, had also left. The agronomist, Antonio, had been nominated for his position by the town's mayor, although the MST paid his salary and set his monthly agenda. When I first arrived in A ´ gua Preta, Antonio appeared to be passionately committed to the movement. He had only been with the movement for a year, having returned from a brief stint working for a large cattle rancher in Bahia, but he worked tirelessly. He was always up early and in meetings until very late. Antonio was considered a key MST activist in the region because his close ties to the mayor resulted in what were considered to be generous concessions.

Antonio talked seriously in meetings about the need for a new way of doing politics, but his own influence depended on the traditional way-personal connections. People on the settlement were thankful that Antonio had the kind of connections that experience had taught them were necessary in order to access resources. And if Antonio said that the movement was responsible, they were glad to be part of it, although they expressed their gratefulness to Antonio himself, rather than to the movement. Settlers would often bring Antonio and his family a treat from their farm-an especially sweet piece of fruit or a handful of manioc, a starchy tuber all of the settlers relied on for nourishment. The wife of the former patra ˜o would occasionally visit Antonio's small house, bringing little gifts for the children and for his wife.

In 2001 Antonio left the movement. He had worked faithfully to secure the settlers' vote for the mayor's reelection campaign, and when the mayor was reelected, Antonio was asked to begin working with him full time. Antonio left the movement, and it would hardly be an exaggeration to say that the movement left the settlement at the same time. The settlers had never fully embraced the MST's ideals, and without a constant spokesperson for the movement, they had little reason to remain involved. Antonio still worked to provide services and goods for the settlers, but instead of encouraging them to thank the movement, he now encouraged them to thank the mayor. The settlers, who were used to seeing state investments as gifts or favors, had little difficulty shifting their allegiance back to the mayor and thanking him for things that only months before the movement had tried to teach them were their rights as citizens of Brazil. Settlement meetings were still held regularly, but without the extension agent's presence, they seemed less organized and had little to do with the MST . This situation had everything to do with the different spatial imaginaries the settlers brought to the movement.

## Conclusion

After examining the stories of people who joined the MST, I would restate the movement's genesis stories in these terms: in the context of agricultural restructuring, political opening, and religious mobilization, a small group of landless farmers in southern Brazil used-and reformulated-their spatial imaginaries to embrace the act of occupying land and to create new frontiers for colonization, while a small group of unemployed rural workers in northeastern Brazil overcame the spatial imaginaries put in place by the local sugarcane economy and joined the movement because they had few other options available to them.

These different genesis stories are the product of very different representations and perceptions of space. Whether people saw space as open or closed was shaped by their historical experiences on the land and in various labor arrangements. The way social life was embedded in particular spaces-or the way those spaces were

''lived''-informed both the decision to join or not to join the MST . As participation in the movement moved past the initial act of gaining land, those same spatial experiences engaged with new spatial arrangements to produce very different political actors within the movement.

It is not that the official genesis story is wrong, of course; many of the settlers emphasized their frustration at not having land and spoke emotionally about the assistance provided by members of the Catholic and Lutheran Churches. And the MST activists themselves stress their own involvement in the Church and how discussions with local priests and study groups helped them understand the injustices of capitalism in the countryside. They argue convincingly that the Brazilian state is complicit with business interests to a degree that compromises the quality of citizenship for millions of marginalizados (marginalized people). It is not the intention of this paper to defend capitalism or the state in Brazil. Instead, it is to give the members of the movement back their voices, with all of the diversity, complexity, and contradiction that doing so implies. This is a particularly important project for the study of social movements because movements often strive to create strong ''master frames'' as a way of legitimating unorthodox strategies or goals.

Bringing geography into the study of social movements through the careful study of how political actors are constituted in meaning and in practice can shed light on the critically important relationships between context and imagination, or perception. It is never enough to know what factors might facilitate the formation of a movement; the critical study of resistance requires an analysis of the ways different historical-cultural frameworks shape the decision to mobilize in particular people and places.

## Acknowledgments

This research was generously supported by grants from the Social Science Research Council, the National Science Foundation, the Institute of International Studies at the University of California, Berkeley, and the Institute for the Study of World Peace. This paper was submitted to the AAG Nystrom Competition for Best Dissertation in 2002 and selected as a co-winner. The author would like to thank the Nystrom selection committee as well as Julie Guthman, Felicia Mebane, Andrew Perrin, Charles Postel, Jessica T eisch, Michael Watts, and Angus Wright for their help with previous drafts of this paper.

## Notes

1. Some of the most comprehensive and informative pieces on the movement include: Fernandes 1999, Rocha and Branford 2002, and Wright and Wolford 2003.
2. This research was generously supported by grants from the Social Science Research Council, the National Science Foundation, the Institute of International Studies at the University of California, Berkeley, and the Institute for the Study of World Peace. I spent one year (1996-1997) in Brazil conducting preliminary research and returned in 1998 and 1999 to carry out the field research. I spent seven months in Santa Catarina and seven months in Pernambuco, interviewing approximately 200 MST settlers, as well as many MST leaders, local politicians, small farmers in the regions surrounding the settlements, agrarian reform agents, and agricultural day-laborers living in urban peripheries. A return trip to Brazil in the summer of 2001 helped me to solidify my arguments.
3. In the 1930s, the political-economic basis of development shifted from a fairly exclusive focus on agricultural commodities to include industrial manufacturing. See Warren Dean's (1985) work on the transition from coffee to industry in Sa ˜o Paulo in the early 20th century. Despite this shift, rural elites continued to be a strong political voice. Inequalities in the rural areas have arguably generated the most consistent political tension in the country.
4. In 2000, the population of Sa ˜o Paulo was estimated at 17.8 million. These figures almost certainly underestimate the actual population given the difficulty of counting heads in rapidly changing urban squatter settlements.
5. In 1960, the wealthiest 5 percent of Brazil's economically active population earned 27.7 percent of the country's total income. In 1990, the top 5 percent earned 35.8 percent of total income (see Skidmore 1999, 198).
6. Brazil's foreign debt increased from US$49.9 billion in 1979 to US$91.0 billion in 1984 (see Hirst at http://www.mre. gov.br/acs/diplomacia/ingles/h\_diplom/gm017i.htm).
7. During the years that the military held power in Brazil (1964-1985), the fiction of civilian elections was maintained. Upon being nominated for president, the indicated military leader revoked his military status and technically became a civilian leader. Nineteen eighty five was the first year since 1964, however, that the president of Brazil did not come out of the military's ranks.
8. The Official Genesis Story may be as effective as it is because it fits into the movement's ''master frame'' (Benford and Snow 2000), actively constructed (although not necessarily intentionally) to legitimate the movement's actions both internally and externally. The movement's master frame focuses on capitalism and the state as key figures in the exploitation of rural landless workers and calls on the power of the Catholic Church to justify mobilization. The state is portrayed as a class enemy that will only accede to demands for land under great pressure and if people mobilize within the movement. MST documents stress the need to experiment with economic and political alternatives in the settlements, working toward the creation of a ''new society.'' In this context, the Official Genesis Story appears self-evident and serves to bolster the movement's master frame.
9. Not the community's real name.
10. All names have been changed.

11. The state of Santa Catarina made colonization a priority because of territorial disputes with the neighboring state of Parana. These disputes culminated in the Contestado War (1912-1916) (see Diacon 1991).
12. All direct quotes in this paper are taken from interviews conducted by the author between October 1998 and November 1999. Interviews were either taped or written down, depending on the circumstances. The author received approval from the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at the University of California at Berkeley (approval #99-4-76).
13. Maria Paulilo (1996) found that the settlers she interviewed in Santa Catarina had moved an average of three times before joining an MST occupation (124).
14. Western Santa Catarina was an area of relatively recent colonization in Brazil. The region offered a seemingly generous spatial frontier that began to attract people-primarily small farmers-in the 1920s and did not fill up until the 1970s.
15. The contracts mediating rental varied considerably, although they generally exchanged usufruct rights to land for anywhere from one-quarter to one-half of production income.
16. Not the community's real name.
17. Another strategy used by the mill owners was to order workers to do jobs for which they were either not qualified or which were below their previous position (cf. Siguad 1977). As one former cane worker said, ''I stayed there for four years all at once, I worked with the tractor there. And . . . something happened there-the tractor broke downand the man said, 'If you want, you can go cut cane' and so I said, 'If it's to cut cane, I will do it somewhere else, but not here in your mill.'''
18. After the First National Congress in 1985, MST activists attempted to establish a branch of the movement in Pernambuco. The movement saw the sugarcane region of Pernambuco as important because of the region's history of rural organization and because of the return of Miguel Arraes (in 1986 and 1994) as governor of the state. Arraes, who had been governor of Pernambuco at the time of the military coup, became known as a friend of the rural poor because of his support for rural workers' rights. MST's efforts to organize in Pernambuco during the 1980s were unsuccessful however. The leaders attributed their difficulties to a surprising lack of support from Arraes and to an unwillingness to organize among the local population.
19. According to federal law, the mill owners are expected to sign working papers for every person employed on the plantation. The papers are intended to ensure that the workers receive their rights, that they are eligible for union membership, and that they have their years of service counted in the interests of receiving their benefits. Uncertified workers, on the other hand, did not receive any of the public or private benefits of being registered as a legal worker.
20. The uncertified workers were also kept from joining the rural unions, a traditional source of protection for the plantation workers. The unions were hurt badly by the region's sugar crisis because when there aren't any jobs, nobody pays the union fees. The unions were also deeply implicated in the sugar industry and highly ambivalent about supporting MST: ''In seven or eight cities around here, it's the mill owner who controls the unions, so the president of the union does whatever the boss says.''

## References

- Adams, P . 1996. Protest and the scale politics of telecommunications. Political Geography 15 (5): 419-41.
- Auyero, J. 2003. The geography of popular contention: An urban protest in Argentina. Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies 28:37-70.
- Benford, R. D., and D. A. Snow. 2000. Framing processes and social movements: An overview and assessment. Annual Review of Sociology 26:611-39.
- Bethell, L. ed. 1987. The independence of Latin America . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Buarque, S. C. 1997. Proposta de re-estruturac ¸a ˜o do setor sucroalcooleiro e negociac ¸a ˜o da dı ´ vida por terra para assentamento de reforma agra ´ria . Recife, PE: National Institute for Colonization and Agrarian Reform.
- Burns, E. B. 1993. A history of Brazil . New York: Columbia University Press.
- Cazella, A. A. 1992. Assentamentos rurais e cooperac ¸a ˜o agrı ´ cola: Polı ´ticas conflitantes . Master's thesis, Center for Research in Agriculture and Development with the Federal Rural University of Rio de Janeiro.
- Chayanov, A. V . 1966. The theory of peasant economy , ed. D. Thorner, B. Kerblay, and R. E. F . Smith. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
- Comissa ˜o Pastoral da T erra (CPT) 2000. Assassinatos no campo Brasil 1985-2000: Viole ˆncia e impunidade . Goia ˆnia, MT: CPT Press.
- Davis, D. 1999. The power of distance: Re-theorizing social movements in Latin America. Theory and Society 28: 585-638.
- Delgado, G. C. 1985. Capital financeiro e agricultura no Brasil: 1965-1985 . Campinas, SP: Editora UNICAMP .
- Diacon, T. 1991. Millenarian vision, capitalist reality: Brazil's contestado rebellion, 1912-1916 . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Eckstein, S. 1989. Power and popular protest: Latin American social movements . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Edelman, M. 1996. Reconceptualizing and reconstituting peasant struggles: A new social movement in Central America. Radical History Review 65:26-47.
- Escobar, A. 2001. Culture sits in places: reflections on globalism and subaltern strategies of localization. Political Geography 2 (2): 139-74.
- Fausto, B. 1999. A concise history of Brazil . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Feagin, J., and H. Hahn. 1973. Ghetto revolts: The politics of violence in American cities . New York: Macmillian.
- Fernandes, B. M. 1999. MST, Movimento dos trabalhadores rurais sem-terra: Formac ¸a ˜o e territorializac ¸a ˜o . Sa ˜o Paulo: Editora Hucitec.
- Forman, S. 1975. The Brazilian peasantry . New York: Columbia University Press.
- Foucault, M. 1979. Discipline and punish . New York: Random House.
- Freyre, G. 1967. The masters and the slaves: A study in the development of Brazilian civilization . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
- Gamson, W. A. 1989. Safe spaces and social movements. In Perspectives on social problems , ed. G. Miller and J. A. Holstein, 27-39. Greenwich, CT : JAI Press.

- Graziano Da Silva, J. F . 1982. A modernizac ¸a ˜o dolorosa: Estrutura agra ´ria, fronteira agrı ´cola e trabalhadores rurais No Brasil . Rio de Janeiro, RS: Zahar Editores.
- Herod, A. 1997. Labor's spatial praxis and the geography of contract bargaining in the US East Coast longshore industry, 1953-89. Political Geography 16 (2): 145-69.
- Houtzager, P . P . 1997. Caught Between state and church: Popular movements in the Brazilian ountryside, 19641989. Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
- Houtzager, P . P ., and M. J. Kurtz. 2000. The institutional roots of popular mobilization: State transformation and rural politics in Brazil and Chile, 1960-1995. Comparative Studies in Society and History 422:394-424.
- Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatı ´sticas (IBGE). 1990. Censos econo ˆmicos-1985 . 2 vol. Rio de Janeiro: Brazilian Institute for Geography and Statistics.
- FFF . 1996a. Censo agropecua ´rio, 1995-1996 . Rio De Janeiro: IBGE.
- FFF . 1996b. Censo agropecua ´rio, Santa Catarina, No. 21, 1995-1996 . Rio De Janeiro: IBGE.
- Jenkins, C. J., and C. Perrow. 1977. Insurgency of the powerless: Farm worker movements (1946-1972). American Sociological Review 24:249-68.
- Kurzman, C. 1996. Structural opportunity and perceived opportunity in social movement theory: The Iranian revolution of 1979. American Sociological Review 61:153-70.
- Lefebvre, H. 1991. The production of space . Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
- Lima, J., and G. V. Silva. 1995. A economia canaviera de pernambuco e a reestruturac ¸a ˜o necessaria. Revista de Economia Nordeste de Fortaleza 262:181-203.
- Lins, C. 1996. Programa de ac ¸a ˜o para o desenvolvimento da zona da mata do Nordeste . Recife, PE: Superintendent for the Development of the Northeast.
- Mainwaring, S. 1986. The Catholic church and politics in Brazil, 1916-1985 . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Marston, S. A. 2002. Making difference: Conflict over Irish identity in the New York City St. Patrick's Day Parade. Political Geography 21 (3): 373-92.
- Martins, J. D. S. 1981. Os camponeses e a polı ´ tica No Brasil: As lutas sociais no campo e seu lugar no processo polı ´ tico . Petro ´-polis, RJ: Vozes.
- Massey, D. B. 1994. Double articulation: A place in the world. In Displacements: Cultural identities in question , ed. A. Bammer. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- McAdam, D. 1982. Political process and the development of black insurgency . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- McAdam, D., J. D. McCarthy, and M. N. Zald, eds. 1996. Comparative perspectives on social movements: Political opportunities, mobilizing structures and cultural framings . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- McAdam, D., S. Tarrow, and C. Tilly. 2001. Dynamics of contention . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- McCarthy, J. D., and M. N. Zald. 1973. The trend of social movements in America: Professionalization and resource mobilization . Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press.
- Melucci, A. 1989. Nomads of the present: Social movements and individual needs in contemporary society . Philadelphia: T emple University Press.
- Metcalf, A. C. 1992. Family and frontier in colonial Brazil: Santana de Parnaı ´ ba, 1580-1822 . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Miller, B. A. 2000. Geography and social movements: Comparing antinuclear activism in the Boston area . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Ministerio Extraordina ´rio da Polı ´ tica Fundia ´ria (MEPF). 1998. Programa integrado de reforma na zona da mata nordestina . Recife, PE: MEPF .
- Moore, D. 1997. Remapping resistance: ''Ground for struggle'' and the politics of place. In Geographies of resistance , ed. S. Pile and M. Keith. London: Routledge.
- Mu ¨ller, G. 1985. A dina ˆmica da agricultura Paulista . Sa ˜o Paulo: Foundation for the State System of Data Analysis.
- Navarro, Z. 2000. Breaking new ground: Brazil's MST . NACLA Report on the Americas 33 (5): 36-39.
- Oliviera, A. 1994. O campo Brasileiro no final dos anos 80. In A questa ˜o agra ´ria hoje , ed. J. P . Stedile. Porto Alegre, RS: Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul.
- Paige, J. M. 1975. Agrarian revolution: Social movements and export agriculture in the underdeveloped world . New York: Free Press.
- Paulilo, M. 1996. Terra a vista . . . . e a ˜o longe . Florianopolis, SC: Federal University of Santa Catarina.
- Petras, J. 1997. Latin America: The resurgence of the Left. New Left Review 223:17-47.
- Pile, S., and M. Keith, eds. 1997. Geographies of resistance . New York: Routledge.
- Rocha, J., and S. Branford. 2002. Cutting the wire: The story of the landless movement in Brazil . London: Latin American Bureau.
- Routledge, P . 1997. A spatiality of resistances: Theory and practice in Nepal's revolution of 1990. In Geographies of resistance , ed. S. Pile and M. Keith. New York: Routledge.
- Scheper-Hughes, N. 1992. Death without weeping: The violence of everyday life in Brazil . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Schwade, E. 1992. A luta na ˜o faz parte da Vida . . . e ´ a vida: O projeto polı ´tico-religioso de um assentamento No Oeste Catarinense . Florianopolis, SC: Universidade Federal de SC.
- Sewell, W . H. Jr. 2001. Space in contentious politics. In Silence and voice in the study of contentious politics , ed. D. McAdam, S. T arrow, and C. Tilly. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Seyferth, G. 1990. Imigrac ¸a ˜o e cultura No Brasil . Brası ´ lia: Editora Universidade Federal de Brasilia.
- Sigaud, L. 1979. Os clandestinos e os Direitos: Estudo sobre trabalhadores da cana-de-ac ¸u ´car de pernambuco . Sa ˜o Paulo: Livraria Duas Cidades.
- Skidmore, T. E. 1988. The politics of military rule in Brazil, 1964-85 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- FFF . 1999. Brazil: Five centuries of change . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Skocpol, T. 1979. States and social revolutions: A comparative analysis of France, Russia, and China . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Smith, N. 1993. Homeless/global: Scaling places. In Mapping the futures: Local cultures, global change , ed. J. Bird, B. Curtis, T . Putnam, G. Robertson, and L. Tickner, 87-119. London: Routledge.
- Stedile, J. P . 1997. O MST e a questa ˜o agra ´ria: Entrevista com Joa ˜o Pedro Ste ´dile. Estudos Avanc ¸ados 11 (31): 69-98.
- Stedile, J. P ., and B. M. Fernandes. 1999. Brava gente: A trajeto ´ria do MST e a luta pela terra No Brasil . Sa ˜o Paulo: Editora Fundac ¸a ˜o Perseu Abramo.

- Stepan, A. C. 1973. Authoritarian Brazil: Origins, Policies, and future . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Stolcke, V . 1988. Coffee planters, workers and wives: Class conflict and gender relations on Sa ˜o Paulo plantations, 1850-1980 . Houndmills, U.K.: Macmillan.
- Tarrow, S. G. 1998. Power in movement: Social movements and contentious politics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Testa, V . M., R. D. Nadal, L. C. Mior, I. T . Baldiserra, and N. Cortina, with J. Wilkinson. 1996. O Desenvolvimento sustentavel do Oeste Catarinense . Floriano ´polis, SC: EPAGRI.
- Tilly, C. 2000. Spaces of contention. Mobilization: An International Journal 5 (2):135-59.
- Veltmeyer, H. 1997. New social movements in Latin America: The dynamics of class and identity. Journal of Peasant Studies 25 (1): 139-69.
- Whittier, N. 1995. Feminist generations: The persistence of the radical women's movement . Philadelphia: T emple University Press.
- Wolf, E. 1969. Peasant wars of the twentieth century . New York: Harper and Row.
- Wolford, W . 2004. Of land and labor: Agrarian reform on the sugarcane plantations of Northeast Brazil. Latin American Perspectives 31 (2): 147-70.
- Wright, A., and W. Wolford. 2003. To inherit the Earth: The landless movement and the struggle for a new Brazil . Oakland, CA: Food First Books.
- Zamosc, L. 1986. The agrarian question and the peasant movement in Colombia: Struggles of the National Peasant Association, 1967-1981 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Correspondence : Department of Geography, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Campus Box 3220, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, e-mail: wwolford@email.unc.edu.