<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Oil and Gas Production in the Russian Sector of the Caspian Sea: Public Opinion on Development Paths and Consequences

Eldar M. Eldarov, Edward C. Holland &amp; Magomed-Kamil B. Kamilov

To cite this article: Eldar M. Eldarov, Edward C. Holland &amp; Magomed-Kamil B. Kamilov (2015) Oil and Gas Production in the Russian Sector of the Caspian Sea: Public Opinion on Development Paths and Consequences, The Professional Geographer, 67:3, 342-350, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2014.968835

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2014.968835

<!-- image -->

曲

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 14 Nov 2014.

[Submit your article to this journal](http://www.tandfonline.com/action/authorSubmission?journalCode=rtpg20&page=instructions)

Article views: 65

[View related articles](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/mlt/10.1080/00330124.2014.968835)

[View Crossmark data](http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1080/00330124.2014.968835&domain=pdf&date_stamp=2014-11-14)

Full Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rtpg20

<!-- image -->

## Oil and Gas Production in the Russian Sector of the Caspian Sea: Public Opinion on Development Paths and Consequences

Eldar M. Eldarov

Dagestan State University

Edward C. Holland

Miami University of Ohio

## Magomed-Kamil B. Kamilov

Dagestan State University

This article considers public opinion in the republic of Dagestan on the expansion of hydrocarbon production in the Russian sector of the Caspian Sea. The article reports the findings of a survey ( N = 956) conducted in 2010 in fourteen rural locations in the republic. Overall, respondents uniformly oppose the proposed expansion of offshore oil and gas production in the Russian sector of the Caspian Sea, seeing little economic benefit from this development and expressing concern about the environmental consequences. These findings resonate with work in geography on resource peripheries and development alternatives available in these locations. Key Words: Caspian Sea, environment, oil and gas production, public opinion survey, Russia.

/ZdZ7256 /ZdZ6835 /ZdZ13615 /ZdZ18171 /ZdZ17642 /ZdZ2357 /ZdZ6875 /ZdZ3218 /ZdZ1693 /ZdZ2488 /ZdZ3113 /ZdZ857 , /ZdZ1688 /ZdZ1091 /ZdZ4389 /ZdZ954 /ZdZ3156 /ZdZ15867 /ZdZ8867 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1264 /ZdZ13443 /ZdZ6875 /ZdZ2150 /ZdZ8417 /ZdZ17671 /ZdZ15736 /ZdZ11743 /ZdZ8526 /ZdZ2114 /ZdZ2356 /ZdZ10133 /ZdZ10827 /ZdZ979 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ5691 /ZdZ16109 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ7256 /ZdZ6835 /ZdZ6097 /ZdZ4392 /ZdZ812/ZdZ854 /ZdZ3156 2010 /ZdZ5024 /ZdZ954 /ZdZ1693 /ZdZ2488 /ZdZ3113 /ZdZ1713 /ZdZ2157 /ZdZ3079 /ZdZ5075 /ZdZ17910 /ZdZ2150 /ZdZ3164 /ZdZ9701 /ZdZ17671 /ZdZ15736 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ16687 /ZdZ7441 ( /ZdZ7523 /ZdZ7256 /ZdZ6812 /ZdZ870/ZdZ905 /ZdZ11178 /ZdZ960 /ZdZ2157 /ZdZ1689 ) /ZdZ887 /ZdZ2301 /ZdZ10460 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ5479 /ZdZ1151 /ZdZ13624 /ZdZ16172 , /ZdZ2307 /ZdZ16687 /ZdZ13617 /ZdZ812 /ZdZ14112 /ZdZ2297 /ZdZ4389 /ZdZ3156 /ZdZ15867 /ZdZ8867 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1264 /ZdZ13443 /ZdZ6875 /ZdZ2150 /ZdZ8417 /ZdZ6037 /ZdZ5196 /ZdZ12007 /ZdZ4580 /ZdZ11551 /ZdZ8677 /ZdZ826 /ZdZ3669 /ZdZ9826 /ZdZ8512 /ZdZ10827 /ZdZ979 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ6396 /ZdZ7540 , /ZdZ16592 /ZdZ870 /ZdZ13865 /ZdZ1018 /ZdZ8336 /ZdZ5164 /ZdZ2301 /ZdZ857 /ZdZ14563 /ZdZ5315 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ13307 /ZdZ8826 /ZdZ1877 /ZdZ11254 /ZdZ7341 /ZdZ4413 , /ZdZ5026 /ZdZ15764 /ZdZ17642 /ZdZ1830 /ZdZ4389 /ZdZ10459 /ZdZ3503 /ZdZ2362 /ZdZ7368 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ6129 /ZdZ5395 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ17669 /ZdZ967 /ZdZ2301 /ZdZ10460 , /ZdZ826 /ZdZ3164 /ZdZ10546 /ZdZ4242/ZdZ4389 /ZdZ17008 /ZdZ9148 /ZdZ17637 /ZdZ19358 /ZdZ3164 /ZdZ2294 /ZdZ17669 /ZdZ967 /ZdZ3164 /ZdZ9701 /ZdZ2331 /ZdZ17671 /ZdZ15736 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ2322 /ZdZ12711 /ZdZ2301 /ZdZ4481 /ZdZ887 /ZdZ11584 /ZdZ12194 /ZdZ11300 /ZdZ958 /ZdZ2472 /ZdZ5056 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ1262 /ZdZ9229 /ZdZ7975 : /ZdZ7640 /ZdZ4545 , /ZdZ5194 /ZdZ2180 , /ZdZ5678 /ZdZ4441 /ZdZ822 /ZdZ2244 /ZdZ4942 /ZdZ4344 /ZdZ5326 /ZdZ914 , /ZdZ1257 /ZdZ980 /ZdZ3135 /ZdZ7724 /ZdZ8028 /ZdZ3940 , /ZdZ1073 /ZdZ6547 /ZdZ3691 /ZdZ544

Este art´ ıculo examina la opini´ on p´ ublica de la rep´ ublica del Daguest´ an en relaci´ on con el incremento de la producci´ on de hidrocarburos en el sector ruso del Mar Caspio. El art´ ıculo informa sobre los hallazgos de un estudio de campo ( N = 956 ) llevado a cabo en 2010 en catorce localidades rurales de esa rep´ ublica. En general, los entrevistados uniformemente se oponen a la expansi´ on propuesta de producci´ on de petr´ oleo y gas dentro del mar en el sector ruso del Caspio, viendo poco beneficio econ´ omico derivado de este desarrollo y manifestando preocupaci´ on por las consecuencias ambientales. Estos hallazgos resuenan en el trabajo geogr´ afico sobre recursos de la periferia y alternativas de desarrollo disponibles en esta regi´ on. Palabras clave: Mar Caspio, medio ambiente, producci´ on de petr´ oleo y gas, estudio sobre la opini´ on p ´ ublica, Rusia.

R ussia has only recently opened up its sector of the Caspian Sea to offshore production of oil and natural gas. LUKoil, Russia's second largest oil company, began exploring the northern portion of the Russian sector in 1995; by 2004, the company had identified six viable fields for production. The first offshore platform, over the Yuri Korchagin field, started producing oil for the commercial market in 2010; the sector's largest field is anticipated to begin producing oil for market in 2015. Although Russia's total reserves are small in comparison to three other Caspian Sea states (Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan), these recent events signal the further diversification in sites of extraction for the Russian oil and gas industry (Joyner and Walters 2006). 1 The Russian state is increasingly engaging in oil and gas production in resource peripheries (Bradshaw 2003; Hayter, Barnes, and Bradshaw 2003).

Further to the south along Russia's Caspian Sea littoral, in Dagestan, increased offshore oil and gas production has previously been proposed and was recently reiterated by the republic's president (Ekho 2014). Preemptive to any such development, two of this article's coauthors conducted a survey ( N = 956) in sixteen settlements proximate to Dagestan's coast in the summer of 2010. The survey queried respondents on a variety of questions related to this planned expansion. In this article, we draw on the results of the survey to evaluate public opinion on support for offshore oil and gas production among Dagestan's residents, its environmental consequences, and potential alternative development strategies as evaluated by those queried.

First, the article reviews the role of oil and gas production in Russia's sector of the Caspian Sea. The expansion of this production reflects the further consolidation of hydrocarbons as the basis for Russia's economy. We then detail the process of expanding capacity as spearheaded by LUKoil; although the future of oil and gas production in the region is linked to offshore fields, the three regions (the republics of Dagestan and Kalmykia and Astrakhan oblast') that make up Russia's Caspian Sea littoral have previously

established oil and gas infrastructure. The article then presents the survey results, reporting public opinion on the economic and environmental consequences of expanding offshore capacity in Russia's Caspian. We conclude by situating the case of Dagestan within the wider literature on economic geography, the environment, and resource peripheries and subsequently offer a recommendation about how the Russian state and oil companies should move forward in consonance with the local population in the republic.

## Oil and Gas Production in the Russian Sector of the Caspian Sea

The transition away from communism-an economic system associated with top-down planning, an overweighting toward the military and armaments in industrial production, and single-industry settlements-consolidated Russia's dependency on oil and natural gas exports (Kotkin 2001). The decline in world oil prices from their peaks during the 1970s weakened the USSR's economic position during the mid- and late 1980s and is commonly viewed as one of the contributing factors to the country's breakup. In post-Soviet Russia, the devaluation of the ruble in 1998spurred domestic production and consumption in the broader economy, although much of this growth was subsidized through rents from natural resource extraction. Gustafson (2012) argues that the state is now even more dependent on rents to fund its budget; Russia's current situation can be characterized as a dual economy, with its reliance on natural resources, while failing to diversify into other growth sectors (Bradshaw 2008). Some parts of the Russian Federation, including resource-rich areas in the country's north and east, have benefited disproportionately from the extraction and export of resources such as oil, gas, and timber.

At the national scale, Russia's long-term prospects for an economy based on hydrocarbons are tenuous; Gustafson (2012) cautions that the future of world oil prices is uncertain in terms of both supply and demand. Other concerns revolve around the failure of the oil industry to diversify its technology platform, the approach of peak oil, and the lack of an effective working relationship with Western partners (Hill and Fee 2002; Gustafson 2012).

In Russia, there is little concern for the consequences of continued oil and gas production that have been articulated in the conceptual literature on resource extraction: anthropogenic climate change, economic overdependence on resource production, and the finite nature of such resources, among other topics. A report from the Pew Research Center's (2009) Global Attitudes Project found that 44 percent of respondents in Russia-an equal percentage to the United States-consider global warming to be a very serious problem. For now, resources remain useful and valuable to the Russian economy; the country is pursuing opportunities to extend hydrocarbon production capacities into areas, such as the Caspian Sea, that have previously received little attention as sites of production.

As illustrated in Figure 1, the Caspian Sea can be divided into four main areas of oil and gas production: (1) the Northwest, in Russia and centered offshore proximate to the cities of Astrakhan and Makhachkala; (2) the Apsheron peninsula in Azerbaijan, near the country's capital of Baku; (3) the Atyrau-Mangistau complex in Kazakhstan; and (4) the West Balkan province of Turkmenistan. The region's potential oil and gas reserves play an important role in prospective development plans for the five states-Russia, Azerbaijan, Iran, Turkmenistan, and Kazakhstan-that border the Caspian Sea; the various states have offered contrasting proposals on the division of the seabed to maximize their access to offshore oil and gas (O'Lear 2004).

Someoftheseareashaveonlyrecentlybeenexplored for oil reserves; for example, Kazakhstan's Tengiz field was discovered in 1974, with production ramping up in 1993 only after Kazakhstan became independent (Kaiser and Pulsipher 2007). Other areas have long been centers of oil production; Baku's first oil boom, in the late nineteenth century, made the fortune of the Nobel Brothers (LeVine 2007). Today, nearly 70 percent of the region's oil comes from Kazakhstan. The Kashagan field, located in the northern Caspian Sea near Atyrau, has estimated recoverable reserves of 7 to 9 billion barrels. It is the largest find since the discovery of oil in the North Sea during the 1960s (Rutland 2008). In 2009, total oil production from existing fields in the region amounted to approximately 130 million tons. Estimates of potential reserves vary quite widely, from 7 to 20 billion tons; in the Russian sector, the estimates of unproven reserves are 2 billion tons (Eldarov and Ismailov 2009).

The Russian sector of the Caspian Sea has received less attention from scholars and policymakers due to the zone's small proven reserves. Other considerations-including U.S. policy toward the greater Caspian region and the discourse of the 'new great game,' the search for alternative energy corridors for exporting oil and gas by Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan, and Russia's relative economic weakness in the first decade after the breakup of the Soviet Union-all served to shift focus away from Russian production in the region (Shaffer 2010). Moreover, although Russia is one of the world's leading oil producers, ranking second to Saudi Arabia in total production in 2012 (BP 2013), little of the country's production comes from the Caspian. In part, this is because the Russian sector remains underdeveloped relative to other parts of the country.

There are approximately twenty commercial fields currently operational in Dagestan, the southernmost of the three regions that make up Russia's Caspian Sea littoral. There is a small refinery, operated by Dagestan Oil, located in Makhachkala (U.S. Energy Information Administration 2013). The city is also a transit point for offshore production, with oil delivered there before entering the pipeline to Novorossiysk for export.

Figure 1 Caspian Sea hydrocarbon complex. Source: Eldarov and Ismailov (2009).

<!-- image -->

In the republic of Kalmykia, to Dagestan's north, the deposits are generally smaller, with probable oil reserves estimated at 65 million tons; there are two main fields, the Caspian and the Promyslovie, in the republic's coastal sector. There is a large gas condensate field in Astrakhan oblast', the third region of Russia's Caspian Sea littoral; the field is located approximately 30 km to the north of the region's main city of Astrakhan (Eldarov and Ismailov 2009). Overall, Dagestan and Kalmykia experienced declines in oil production between 1991 and 2006, although this was offset by substantial growth in the third region, Astrakhan oblast' (Sagers 2006).

As such, the expansion of oil and gas production in the Russian sector of the Caspian Sea is a longer term project; Sagers (2006, 517) wrote, 'The area is likely to provide a sizable contribution to national output in the future, but not in the near term.' LUKoil has spearheaded exploration efforts of offshore reserves in the Caspian Sea. Between 1995 and 2004 the company identified six fields for development, the largest being the Vladimir Filanovskiy field. 2 Of these six fields,

only one, the Yuri Korchagin field, is currently producing oil. The Korchagin field has been profitable thanks to a reduction in export duties collected on oil produced from the field (U.S. Energy Information Administration 2013). The Filanovskiy field is much larger in terms of probable reserves, and LUKoil estimates that this field will produce 120,000 barrels per day at its maximum output (U.S. Energy Information Administration 2013). The company reported completing the first stage of site development in December 2013; drilling is slated to begin during 2014, with production for market starting by the end of 2015 ( Oil &amp;Gas Journal 2013).

The Korchagin and Filanovskiy fields are located in the north central portion of Russia's Caspian Sea sector, close to the agreed-on maritime boundary between Russia and Kazakhstan. A second, and smaller, grouping of oil and gas fields is located in Dagestan, to the southeast of the republic's capital, Makhachkala. These fields range along Dagestan's Caspian Sea coast between Makhachkala and the southern Dagestani city of Izberbash (where oil was first produced in the republic in 1936). This area contains estimated oil reserves of 340 million tons and 540 billion cubic meters of natural gas. The development of these reserves is still in the proposal stages; in January 2014, Dagestan's acting president, Ramazan Abdulatipov, expressed a desire to increase exploration work along the republic's coast in collaboration with leading Russian oil companies, including Rosneft and LUKoil (Ekho 2014). Any such development will have a direct impact on rural residents of Dagestan's southern coast, and those living to the north of the capital would be affected by any oil spills resulting from offshore production and the transit of oil in the northern part of Russia's Caspian Sea sector.

## Opinions on Resource Development in Dagestan

To evaluate the potential impact of hydrocarbon development on the rural residents of Dagestan, in the summer of 2010 two of the article's coauthors conducted a survey ( N = 956) among residents living near Dagestan's Caspian Sea coast. The survey consisted of a structured questionnaire with twenty-three questions that queried respondents on the following subjects: demographic information such as age, gender, and educational level; baseline economic statistics such as employment status, socioeconomic condition, and migration preferences; opinions on the economic situation in Dagestan; and prospects for expanded oil and gas production (Eldarov et al. 2011). Broadly stated, the survey had two aims to (1) evaluate economic and environmental conditions in rural Dagestan; and (2) gauge residents' positions on nascent oil and gas development in Dagestan's coastal region.

The survey used convenience sampling at fourteen rural locations. Local contacts at each site distributed the survey among their social and employment networks. 3 Acknowledging the nonrepresentative nature of the sample, we do not perform more advanced statistical analysis on the data. Given the large sample size and the targeted nature of the survey, however, and its questions at locations that will be affected by increased oil and gas production (both offshore in the north Caspian and near Dagestan's southern coast), these data provide valuable insight into receptiveness to the proposed longer term expansion of such production.

The fourteen villages and urban-type settlements ( poselki gorodskogo tipa ) that were surveyed are sited either near or along the republic's coast (see Figure 2). 4 In the south, this included the villages of Kayakent, Novokayakent, Berikey, Mamedkala, Belidzhi, and Samur; in the republic's central region, it included Dakhadaevka, Zelenomorsk, Manaskent, and the urban-type settlement of Glavniy Sulak. The southern section of the republic's coastline is a site for industrial facilities but also an area for recreation, with large urban settlements. Roughly one third of the sample was drawn from the north of the republic, an area of comparatively less economic development. The primary economic activities in this section are tied to the fisheries sector and include fishing and the processing of the catch. The hydrocarbon potential of much of this northern section has yet to be evaluated for recoverable reserves, although these villages would be impacted by any spills occurring further out in the Caspian Sea. The sample points in this area were the villages of Kochubey, Bryansk, and Kraynovka, as well as the settlement of Staroterechnoe.

A majority of respondents to the survey were men (64 percent). With respect to age, roughly three fifths of those surveyed reported that they are older than thirty years of age. Similarly, approximately 60 percent of the sample reported that they were born in Dagestan's lowlands; the remainder have resettled there from other parts of the republic, specifically the mountainous regions of the republic's south and west (on this process of resettlement, see Eldarov et al. 2007). The overall educational level was lower than expected given the convenient nature of the sampling and its reliance on employment and social networks, with only a quarter of respondents reporting some university-level work.

## The Economy in Rural Dagestan

The subset of questions on the economy of rural Dagestan underscores the region's poverty relative to muchof the Russian Federation. Of particular note are the data on income for the sampled population. The overwhelming majority of respondents (73 percent) manage to carve out a living on a monthly income less than 20,000 RR (US $ 660) for their family as a whole. Given that the average family in Dagestan is composed of four to five persons, this amount corresponds to a subsistence-level existence for many of those surveyed. Only 105 respondents, or 11 percent of the total, reported family incomes above 40,000 RR per month per family, which is close to the average for Russia as

Figure 2 2010 survey sample points, Dagestan. Key: (1) Interregional boundaries; (2) international boundaries; (3) major cities; (4) survey sample points.

<!-- image -->

a whole when assuming two wage earners (just below 38,000 RR).

The proportion of those employed in industry (approximately 29 percent) in comparison to those en- gaged in service work (approximately 71 percent) is in line with global trends; in developed countries the number of individuals engaged in service work generally ranges from 50 to 70 percent. In Dagestan's coastal areas, however, such a ratio is somewhat anachronistic and is linked to two negative socioeconomic trends. The first is the dominant role that is played in real economic production by subsistence farming, as well as illicit fishing in the nearby Caspian. Building on the latter point, despite the proximity of the villages and settlements sampled to the Caspian Sea, only 7 percent of respondents reported that they are employed in the fisheries sector. It could well be that survey participants did not want to respond positively to this question, given the prevalence of poaching and the processing and selling of fish that frequently occurs in the region, and report employment in the service sector to mask this activity. Second, high levels of employment in nonindustrial sectors reflect the primary, and frequently only, type of governmental investment in the rural areas of the republic: in infrastructure and increased employment in the state bureaucracy (including local and regional administration, law enforcement, health services, education, and information services). In sum, there is little industry in rural Dagestan in which employment can be secured. Given the employment and economic situation in the republic, and perhaps somewhat surprisingly, most of those surveyed indicated that they were uninterested in moving away from their place of residence; nearly two thirds of the sample (568 respondents, or 59 percent) responded in the negative to the question about resettlement: 'If you had the opportunity to move somewhere in the next two years, would you take advantage of this opportunity?'

When asked which type of economic activity is most promising for the region, a majority of respondents indicated support for the idea of developing large-scale tourist facilities, specifically beach resorts along the Caspian coast. The responses to this question are reproduced in Table 1. Without question, the geographic location and unique natural amenities that exist along Dagestan's littoral make the republic's Caspian Sea coast a possible tourist destination. Radvanyi and Thorez (1976) discussed the attraction of the Caucasus mountains, specifically ski resorts and hot springs, for Soviet tourists; tourism, in the form of ski and beach resorts, plays a large role in Moscow's plan

Table 1 In your opinion, which type of economic activity along the Caspian coast is most promising?

| Economic activity                         |   Respondents | Percentage   |
|-------------------------------------------|---------------|--------------|
| Agriculture and subsidiary personal plots |            38 | 4 . 0        |
| Legal types of fishing                    |           201 | 21 . 0       |
| Tourism                                   |           497 | 52 . 0       |
| Oil and gas production                    |           115 | 12 . 0       |
| Other                                     |           105 | 11 . 0       |

N = 956.

for achieving economic growth in the North Caucasus region. 5 The unsettled political situation in Dagestan, however, with the republic appearing on the news only when the latest bombing or terrorist act occurs, creates a negative image of the republic as potential destination. 6 A second finding of note is the low level of support among the sample for oil and gas production, with this option ranked behind fishing as a path to improving the economic situation in the localities sampled. Also of note is the fact that only 4 percent of respondents consider agriculture and subsidiary agricultural production as a potential path forward, despite living in a republic where a majority of the population lives in rural areas and has traditionally relied on agriculture as their means of livelihood.

## The State of the Environment

As a baseline measure of public opinion on the environment, a majority of respondents view the current situation in their locality as unsatisfactory (11 percent of respondents characterized the situation as 'poor,' and a further 45 percent viewed the situation as 'more poor than good'); only 1 percent of those surveyed responded that they consider the ecological situation in the region to be 'excellent.' These responses reflect the dire state of the Caspian Sea's environment. As with other regions of the former Soviet Union, the Caspian Sea's environment has been significantly altered through human action (Dumont 1995; Barannik, Borysova, and Stolberg 2004). The health of the Caspian Sea is further compromised by pollution, the continued extraction of nonrenewable resources including sturgeon, and a loss in biodiversity also linked to the incursion of invasive species (Henry and Douhovnikoff 2008). Two thirds of respondents identified the Caspian Sea and sandy beaches as most susceptible to the continued deterioration of the environmental situation along Dagestan's coast. For example, raw sewage from the republic's settlements is commonly discharged, untreated, into the Sea.

A set of questions in the survey dealt with the opinion of rural residents on the development of offshore oil and gas fields. A clear majority of respondents-79 percent-learned about the existing plans for offshore oil and gas development in the Caspian Sea through the questionnaire process; they had no prior knowledge that the proposed expansion of hydrocarbon extraction would take place offshore in the Caspian (this percentage is notably lower than the measure of environmental awareness reported for Azerbaijan, located just to Dagestan's south, by O'Lear and Gray 2006). Wereturn to the implications of this result in the article's concluding section. Processing this information, and in turn responding to the question, 'In your opinion, will the extraction of offshore oil improve life in your village?,' more than half of those queried (54 percent) answered in the negative. Twenty-seven percent of respondents indicated that they viewed this develop- ment as having little impact on their current situation, and only 4 percent responded that they viewed such developments as having a positive impact on the lives of local residents. As noted earlier, the level of official unemployment in the rural areas of the republic is currently very high; but, curiously, 593 respondents (62 percent of the total sample) replied in the negative to the question: 'Would you like to be employed in the oil and gas industry?' Taken as a whole, the survey found that residents of these rural settlements along Dagestan's Caspian Sea coast generally view oil and gas development negatively; in turn, the majority is opposed to being employed in this sector. On the one hand, economic interests defer to the desire to live in a clean environment but, on the other hand, few people now believe in the idea of the state as 'good uncle,' with the ability to provide villages with employment in the relatively high-paying oil sector. It is entirely possible that residents of Dagestan's coastal villages are aware of the fact that the oil industry in neighboring Kalmykia currently employs temporary workers, known in Russian as vakhtoviki (F¨ ullsack 2001), who come from outside of the republic. In other words, the respondents realize that they stand to benefit very little from the development of this offshore oil and gas industry.

These findings were further corroborated through responses to the following question: 'Are you for or against the initiation of oil production offshore in the Caspian Sea at a site near your residence?' Almost the entirety of the sample (98 percent) responded that they were against such development if it occurred in proximity to their home. To some extent, survey participants attempted to express their concern with respect to the future condition of the environment, particularly if this was to be affected by an oil spill or other environmental disaster as a result of such offshore development. This type of 'environmental ethic,' in theory, should contribute to our understanding of analogous environmental catastrophes occurring elsewhere in the world.

That the residents of coastal Dagestan are concerned about the potential environmental consequences associated with hydrocarbon development makes sense. Given the increasing use of offshore extraction techniques, an accident on the magnitude of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico could occur in the Caspian Sea (the Russian press speculated on this possibility; see Zhil'tsov 2010); the consequences of such a spill for the environment would be substantially higher, given that the Caspian is shallow, landlocked, and already in a parlous environmental state. 7 Nevertheless, drilling operations with the aim of developing new sites for oil extraction in the waters of the Russian section of the Caspian shelf are likely to proceed. The dependence on oil and gas revenue for Russia's economy is well known, as is the need for the further diversification of supply and the increased development of the economies of Dagestan and the other regions along the Caspian Sea littoral.

## Discussion and Conclusion

Skepticism of the economic benefits of hydrocarbon development among those surveyed could stem from a variety of factors. There is little trust in the resourceextracting monopolies that characterize the Russian market. Primarily due to the legacies of Soviet-era development, these companies disregard local socioeconomic needs, employing shift workers who have little job security or connection to the communities in which they work (F¨ ullsack 2001). This development also lends itself to the defacement of the landscape and environment, resulting in the clogging of the marine environment with oil platforms and similar objects linked to production. To address this negative opinion, greater accountability on the part of oil companies and the state must be achieved through public advocacy and increased awareness about future plans for development in the Russian sector of the Caspian Sea. In reality, however, this work has often been limited to drawing up a colorful booklet with detailed instructions and guarantees of security, despite the impending development of offshore oil fields. Moreover, these attempts at public relations are usually subject to no further scrutiny other than by the oil companies and aligned governmental institutions themselves.

We have little optimism that the findings reported here will lead to the modification by either the companies involved or the Russian state of their approach to offshore hydrocarbon production in the Caspian Sea. The results of our survey in Russia's Dagestan do have resonance with local-scale debates about energy production and associated development that are occurring elsewhere, however. Why should local-level opinion factor in to such discourses? First, the geographies of energy production reflect a shift toward more marginal locations; in Russia, this includes not only the country's Caspian Sea sector but also Sakhalin Island in the Russian Far East and the Arctic Ocean (Bradshaw 2003; Harsem, Eide, and Heen 2011; Graybill 2013). 8 To this end, Hayter, Barnes, and Bradshaw (2003, 16) have called for increased attention in economic geography to resource peripheries, where economic, environmental, cultural, and geopolitical conditions come together in unique ways to structure relations between the core and the margins; 'the reality is that the economic geography of resource production is far from straightforward and seldom just an economic matter.' The paths to development are influenced by decisions occurring at a range of scales and are being made by a variety of actors; as Zimmerer's (2011, 705) recent overview of new energy geographies states: 'The resource systems of energy production, distribution, and consumption are thoroughly entwined as social-environmental interactions occurring across multiple scales.' As with other resource peripheries, the case of Dagestan is unique in its specifics, including the ecological vulnerability of the Caspian Sea, the reliance of locals on subsistence farming and fishing, and the region's ongoing security concerns. More broadly, this particularity reflects the fact that resource systems are entwined with human systems, through which individuals interpret the value of such development, the associated environmental impact, and the need for viable alternatives if this impact is too great. In resource peripheries, which are often viewed solely as sites of production within larger energy economies, the dissenting voices of local residents often go unnoticed; this project articulates public concerns about the environmental impact of oil and gas development in one such periphery.

Second, and building on this interplay of the economic and the environmental, the case of Dagestan reflects the importance of including local-scale preferences in decision making about development paths. With the majority of the sample indicating a preference for tourism as an economic approach in the region, the regional and federal governments (in tandem with the major state oil companies brought on for the project) should address concerns regarding potential spills and their environmental and economic consequences.

Although tourism itself has measurable social impacts (see, e.g., Mansfeld 1992) and security concerns are relevant to any attempts to further develop tourist facilities along Dagestan's coast (Lally 2012), the option of tourism should remain open as a possibility for regional economic development; the extensive development of oil and gas production along the republic's coast would potentially foreclose this option. Tourism facilities would be threatened by any large-scale spill; in the case of the Deepwater Horizon accident in the Gulf of Mexico, preliminary estimates put losses to the travel industry at $ 23 billion over three years (Harzl and Pickl 2012). At the least, the regional and federal governments in Dagestan and Russia should further evaluate how resource development and tourism can coexist.

The particularities of production in resource peripheries-in this case, Russia's sector of the Caspian Sea-reflect specific, localized concerns regarding the economy and the environment. At the same time, our use of surveys identifies a lack of knowledge at the local scale regarding this project; in turn, our findings support the use of surveys as an intervention to generate a baseline of knowledge about and awareness of environmentally impactful development projects. Through such work we have identified potential alternatives in terms of economic development as supported by local populations in the republic of Dagestan. /squaresolid

## Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the article's two anonymous reviewers, as well as Amelie Davis, John O'Loughlin, and Barney Warf for helpful comments at various stages of revision. The inestimable Nancy Thorwardson prepared Figure 1 for publication.

## Funding

This research was funded by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, Grant 09-06-96514-p юг a.

## Notes

- 1 Of secondary interest is the fact that LUKoil has used its Caspian Sea sites to enhance its offshore production; this experience could be applied to offshore production in the Arctic, which is still in the developing stages (Gustafson 2012).
- 2 TheFilanovskiy field is one of a limited set of fields of significance discovered in the mid-2000s (Kj¨ arstad and Johnsson 2009).
- 3 There are parallels between this sampling procedure and snowball sampling, which is commonly used in qualitative research in human geography (Winchester 1999; Browne 2005). As with snowball sampling, data collection was reliant on existing networks to secure respondents. Distinct from much of this work, this survey was not limited to a specific population subgroup but, rather, sought to collect a minimum number of respondents ( N = 50) in each settlement.
- 4 Urban-type settlements are artifacts of the Soviet period and are generally smaller in population than cities and towns but larger than villages. Lewis and Rowland (1969) identified urban-type settlements as ranging from 1,000 to 3,000 persons in population in the 1959 Soviet Census.
- 5 This plan was formally articulated in a September 2010 policy document, entitled 'Strategy for the Socioeconomic Development of the North Caucasus Federal Okrug until 2025.' The text of the document is available in Russian at http://krskfo.ru/en/44 (last accessed 6 October 2013).
- 6 In July 2012, a bomb was found on a beach in Makhachkala and successfully defused. Two years prior, a bomb had exploded on the same beach and maimed a beachgoer (see Lally 2012).
- 7 The survey asked respondents about the Deepwater Horizon spill. Only 13 percent reported that they were aware of the accident. When asked about the possibility of such an accident occurring the Caspian Sea, nearly half agreed that such an event was possible.
- 8 In the United States, a parallel example is the expansion of hydraulic fracturing, commonly referred to as fracking; this technique for extracting natural gas and oil is commonly (although not exclusively) being implemented in economically marginal areas with uncertain longer term consequences for the environment. Negro (2012, 1) wrote succinctly of opposition to fracking: 'In many communities sitting on top of these gas reserves, enthusiasm over domestic drilling has been met with inflamed opposition from citizens and officials who express health, safety and environmental concerns.' We suggest that the fracking debate could also be informed by public opinion research at the sites of production.

## Literature Cited

- Barannik, V., O. Borysova, and F. Stolberg. 2004. The Caspian Sea region: Environmental change. AMBIO: A Journal of the Human Environment 33 (1): 45-51.
- BP. 2013. BP statistical review of world energy, June 2013. http://www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/pdf/statisticalreview/statistical review of world energy 2013.pdf (last accessed 27 January 2014).
- Bradshaw, M. 2003. Prospects for oil and gas exports to northeast Asia from Siberia and the Russian Far East, with a particular focus on Sakhalin. Sibirica: Journal of Siberian Studies 3 (1): 64-86.
- ---.2008. The geography of Russia's new political economy. New Political Economy 13 (2): 193-201.
- Browne, K. 2005. Snowball sampling: Using social networks to research non-heterosexual women. International Journal of Social Research Methodology 8 (1): 47-60.
- Dumont, H. 1995. Ecocide in the Caspian Sea. Nature 377:673-74.Ekho. 2014. Dagestan zaymetsya na Kaspii geologoreavedkoy vmeste s 'Rosneft'yu,' LUKOYLom i 'Gazpromom' [Dagestan will engage in the geological exploration of the Caspian together with Rosneft, LUKoil and Gazprom]. Ekho 15 January 2014. http://www.echo.az/article.php?aid = 55568 (last accessed 27 January 2014).
- Eldarov, E. M., M. I. Abakarov, M.-K. B. Kamilov, and L. A. Gadzhialieva. 2011. Voprosy sotsial'no-ekonomicheskoi i ekologischeskoi bezopasnosti naseleniia primorskogo Dagestana [Socioeconomic issues and environmental safety among the population of coastal Dagestan]. Natsional'nye Interesy: prioritety i bezopasnost' [National Interests: Priorities and Security]; 33 (126): 35-40.
- Eldarov, E. M., E. C. Holland, S. M. Aliyev, Z. M. Abdulagatov, and Z. V. Atayev. 2007. Resettlement and migration in post-Soviet Dagestan. Eurasian Geography and Economics 48 (2): 226-48.
- Eldarov, E. M., and C. N. Ismailov. 2009. Dagestan v neftegazokhimicheskom komplekse Kaspiyskogo regiona [Dagestan in the Caspian region's gas and petrochemical complex]. Regional'nye problemy preobrazovaniia ekonomiki [Regional Problems of Economic Transformation] 6: 123-28.
- F¨ ullsack, M. 2001. Official figures and unofficial realities: Employment rates and their significance in Russia. EuropeAsia Studies 53 (4): 613-25.
- Graybill, J. K. 2013. Mapping an emotional topography of an ecological homeland: The case of Sakhalin Island, Russia. Emotion, Space and Society 8:39-50.
- Gustafson, T. 2012. Wheel of fortune: The battle for oil and power in Russia . Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
- Harsem, Ø., A. Eide, and K. Heen. 2011. Factors influencing future oil and gas prospects in the Arctic. Energy Policy 39 (12): 8037-45.
- Harzl, V., and M. Pickl. 2012. The future of offshore oil drilling-An evaluation of the economic, environmental, and political consequences of the Deepwater Horizon incident. Energy &amp; Environment 23 (5): 757-70.
- Hayter, R., T. J. Barnes, and M. J. Bradshaw. 2003. Relocating resource peripheries to the core of economic geography's theorizing: Rationale and agenda. Area 35 (1): 15-23.
- Henry, L. A., and V. Douhovnikoff. 2008. Environmental issues in Russia. Annual Review of Environment and Resources 33:437-60.
- Hill, F., and F. Fee. 2002. Fueling the future: The prospects for Russian oil and gas. Demokratizatsiya 10 (4): 462-87.
- Joyner, C. C., and K. Z. Walters. 2006. The Caspian conundrum: Reflections on the interplay between law, the environment and geopolitics. International Journal of Marine &amp; Coastal Law 21 (2): 173-216.
- Kaiser, M. J., and A. G. Pulsipher. 2007. A review of the oil and gas sector in Kazakhstan. Energy Policy 35 (2): 130014.
- Kj¨ arstad, J., and F. Johnsson. 2009. Resources and future supply of oil. Energy Policy 37 (2): 441-64.

- Kotkin, S. 2001. Armageddon averted: The Soviet collapse 1970-2000 . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Lally, K. 2012. Russia backs resorts to stem terrorism. Washington Post 4 November. http://articles. washingtonpost.com/2012-11-04/world/35505527 1 skiresorts-dagestan-three-russian-tourists (last accessed 5 March 2013).
- LeVine, S. 2007. The oil and the glory: The pursuit of empire and fortune on the Caspian Sea . New York: Random House.
- Lewis, R. A., and R. H. Rowland. 1969. Urbanization in Russia and the USSR: 1897-1966. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 59 (4): 776-96.
- Mansfeld, Y. 1992. Group-differentiated perceptions of social impacts related to tourism development. The Professional Geographer 44 (4): 377-92.
- Negro, S. E. 2012. Fracking wars: Federal, state and local conflicts over the regulation of natural gas activities. Zoning and Planning Law Report 35 (2): 1-14.
- Oil &amp; Gas Journal . 2013. Lukoil begins second-stage construction for Filanovsky field. Oil &amp; Gas Journal 20 December. http://www.ogj.com/articles/2013/12/lukoil-beginssecond-stage-construction-for-filanovsky-field.html (last accessed 3 February 2014).
- O'Lear, S. 2004. Resources and conflict in the Caspian Sea. Geopolitics 9 (1): 161-86.
- O'Lear, S., and A. Gray. 2006. Asking the right questions: Environmental conflict in the case of Azerbaijan. Area 38 (4): 390-401.
- Pew Research Center. 2009. Global warming seen as a major problem around the world: Less concern in the U.S., China and Russia. http://www.pewglobal.org/2009/12/02/ global-warming-seen-as-a-major-problem-around-theworld-less-concern-in-the-us-china-and-russia/ (last accessed 16 February 2014).
- Radvanyi, J., and P. Thorez. 1976. Le tourisme dans le Caucase [Tourism in the Caucasus]. Annales de G´ eographie 85 (468): 178-205.
- Rutland, P. 2008. Russia as energy superpower. New Political Economy 13 (2): 203-10.
- Sagers, M. J. 2006. The regional dimension of Russian oil production: Is a sustained recovery in prospect? Eurasian Geography and Economics 47 (5): 505-45.
- Shaffer, B. 2010. Caspian energy phase II: Beyond 2005. Energy Policy 38 (11): 7209-15.
- U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2013. Overview of oil and natural gas in the Caspian Sea region. http://www.
- eia.gov/countries/analysisbriefs/Caspian Sea/caspian sea. pdf (last accessed 27 January 2014).
- Winchester, H. P. M. 1999. Interviews and questionnaires as mixed methods in population geography: The case of lone fathers in Newcastle, Australia. The Professional Geographer 51 (1): 60-67.
- Zhil'tsov, S. S. 2010. Zhdet li Kaspiy sud'ba Meksikansogo zaliva [The Caspian Sea is awaiting the fate of the Gulf of Mexico]. Nezavisimaya Gazeta 14 September 2010. http://www.ng.ru/energy/2010-09-14/11 kaspiy.html (last accessed 5 March 2013).
- Zimmerer, K. S. 2011. New geographies of energy: Introduction to the special issue. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 101 (4): 705-11.

ELDAR M. ELDAROV is the Chairman of the Dagestan branch of the Russian Geographical Society and Head of the Department of Economic Geography and Sustainable Development at Dagestan State University, Makhachkala, Dagestan, Russia 367030. E-mail: geodag@mail.ru. His research interests are focused on the study of socioeconomic and environmental processes in the coastal zone of the Caspian Sea.

EDWARD C. HOLLAND is Visiting Assistant Professor in International Studies and Post-Doctoral Fellow with the Havighurst Center for Russian and Post-Soviet Studies at Miami University, 120 MacMillan Hall, 501 E. Spring St., Oxford, OH 45056-1825. E-mail: hollanec@miamioh.edu. His current research interests include social and political change for Russia's national minorities since the end of communism.

MAGOMED-KAMIL B. KAMILOV is Head of the Department of Applied Informatics and Mathematical Methods in Management at Dagestan State University, Makhachkala, Dagestan, Russia 367030. E-mail: kamilov13@mail.ru. His research interests include the design of economic and geographic information systems and the improvement of information technology in administration, production management, and business.