## SELLERS AND NONSELLERS OF LAND FOR NEW RURAL HOUSING*

## Lizbeth A.  Pyle

## West Virginia University

Landowners can  choose either  to  sell  or  to  hold  their  land  in  areas  with active  rural  land  markets.  Sellers and nonsellers are both important because their decisions shape patterns of land use. Analysis of mail survey data from 286 landowners in the Rochester. MN SMSA isolates four characteristics that distinguish sellers from nonseilers: occupation, size of landholding, recent acquisition of land, and interest in selling land. Nonsellers are often farmers with a large landholding and no interest in selling. More information is needed about their non-economic motives for holding land. Key Words:  rural landownership,  rural land markets, land use change.

During the 1970s many urban workers moved beyond the suburbs to gain the amenities of country living. Rural areas within SMSAs and adjacent corridors of growth provided a focus for much of the recent population redistribution [6, 721. Numerous studies have documented the land use changes associated with this intra-regional migration [e.g.,  7 , 201. Ownership changes precede  nearly all  land  use  changes,  but  landownership  studies  have  been  less  common. Popper has suggested that landownership research often is avoided because of the difficulty in assembling landownership data from uncompiled sources,  sidestepped because it can be politically sensitive,  or simply underestimated [741. The entire development process centers on individual landowners whose decisions are crucial because the development process would be halted without them.

Landowners in a market characterized by high demand for residential homesites sort themselves into two groups:  those who offer land for sale and those who withhold their property from the market.  For simplicity's  sake,  these two groups are  referred to as  sellers  and nonsellers,  respectively. My purpose is to isolate distinguishing characteristics  of the two groups of  landowners,  using a case  study  in the  Rochester,  M N  SMSA.  Socioeconomic  and  landholding comparisons of sellers and nonsellers are made to more fully  understand how these two important groups of landowners differ. The strength of case studies lies in their documentation of the observable phenomena which theories try to explain. Case studies serve equally well  both in validating  existing models and  in identifying relevant variables  for  use  in new models.

## l a n d  Markets and landowners

The  dramatic  increase  in  rural  residential  construction  during the  1970s  meant  that  the market for rural homesites increased its share of all market transactions in rural areas. Three trends have emerged that characterize today's  rural land markets: break-up of larger holdings into smaller ownership units, an abundance of nontraditional  rural landowners, and escalated land prices [9].

Rural homeowners do not require the large landholdings that farmers need, so many landholders have split their property into smaller parcels for sale to individuals seeking a home in the country. While farmers may still claim title to the largest landholdings,  their number has dwindled in comparison to individual property owners who simply live on the land or use it for recreation. Higher prices are typically associated with smaller,  more intensively used land. The cost of rural homesites is no exception; the prices of these parcels exceed those for most other rural land uses.

The demand exerted by people seeking homesites seems  irresistible to many  landowners holding property on the rural margins of metropolitan areas. They willingly supply land to the market at a price agreeable to both buyers and sellers. Other landowners opt to withhold their land from the market, weathering the pressure to sell.

*  I  wish lo acknowledge the assistance of the Center for Urban and Regional Affairs,  University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. MN. which supported this research.

The landowners who do not sell exert a demand of their own, termed their 'reservation demand,' a measure  of  the  landowner's  desire to continue  to hold the  property  [8, 761.   The reservation price for the land is its imputed value when continued in its current condition of ownership  and  use.  If an offer from a prospective buyer  exceeds this price, the  landowner might consider  selling the  land.  Many landowners are  strongly  inclined to keep their  land despite the high demand exerted by potential buyers; these landowners have high reservation prices. The supply of land to the market is said to be 'sluggish'  because of the reluctance of many landowners to sell [3,  91.

Ottensmann's  study  relating urban sprawl and land values emphasized the importance of landowners' expectations on their decision-making, which in turn affects the pattern of development [731. Popular wisdom holds that individuals who do not sell their  land at present are waiting  for  a  higher  price  in the future.  Bahl's  theoretical  account  of  this  decision  process demonstrated that landowners refuse to sell their property as long as  its rate of return exceeds its opportunity cost 171.

Neither Ottensmann nor Bahl incorporated empirical data on individual landowners in their studies.  Both concluded that we need more information about individual landowners and the basis for their decisions to sell or hold land  despite the fact that they excused themselves from such an investigation. Some economists have been reluctant to collect primary data from individuals  because such survey data may include subjective variables and the results may not fit neatly into the mathematical equations of economic models [ I ] .

Few studies  have systematically  collected  data  at the  level of  the  individual  landowner. A 1978 federal government survey, the only comprehensive study of its kind since 1947, provided general information about the socioeconomic and property characteristics of rural landowners [2, 101. The survey's broad scope emphasized the interests of its sponsoring agency, the U.S. Department of Agriculture,  so  it was  not particularly useful to policy makers in areas of  rural residential development.

Two more recent studies have contributed to this lean body of literature,  but each emphasized a particular  category of  landowners rather than comparing  sellers and nonsellers in a systematic way. Healy and Short studied land market participants in several areas experiencing different types of rural develpment  [9]. Their work emphasized characteristics of new, nontraditional owners or buyers, rather than sellers. The work by Brown et al. emphasized current landowners  in  urban  fringe  land  markets  (31.  They  interviewed  a  much  smaller  sample  of sellers but did not directly compare sellers and current  landowners. This paper systematically compares  personal and  property characteristics of  sellers  and  nonsellers  in one Minnesota county.

## The Rochester Study

Changes in population and rural land use within the Rochester, M N   SMSA are representative of nationwide trends in the continuing process of urban decentralization [121. Rochester serves as  a regional center for southeastern Minnesota and has a population of 58,000  [It?]. It is centrally  located in Olmsted County, which is the single county in this SMSA. The Mayo Clinic medical facility and a branch plant of IBM employ most urban workers. Agricultural activities in the surrounding  rural areas of  Olmsted County emphasize  feed grains and dairying.  During the 1970s the movement of Rochester's urban workers into the surrounding agricultural areas escalated.  The market for land for  rural homesites has  been active  in recent decades so the area provided a good location for detailed study.

Uncompiled records maintained by state and local government offices provide useful information about landowners and land use.  Locally-filed copies of Minnesota Department of Revenue forms identified the sellers.  The state requires that the value  of real estate be certified when property is transferred;  the document also identifies the buyer and seller  and specifies the buyer's  intended use of the land.

Rural residential landholdings may be one of a number of uniformly-sized parcels in a residential subdivision;  these landholdings are called platted lots. Residential parcels of land that are not part of  a platted residential  subdivision are  referred to as  unplatted.  Nonresidential parcels of  rural land are also considered unplatted land holdings. No sales of platted lots in rural subdivisions were included in this study because the conversion of that land to residential  use  essentially  takes  place when  it is  platted,  not when  it  is  sold to an  individual.  Farm

enlargement  sales were also  excluded because  no major  land use shifts  accompanied these ownership changes. The sales  used to identify sellers  involved either (1) unplatted land (i.e., not part of a rural subdivision) sold for residential use or (2) land reportedly in agricultural use that  had not been purchased to enlarge an existing farm. The latter type of sale signaled the possibility for hobby farms, country estates, or speculative ventures because few people today purchase land to begin full-time,  commercial farming operations.  Between January 1975 and December 1979, 634 sales in rural areas of the SMSA met the criteria established for study.

Some real estate records contained the address of the seller;  other addresses were obtained using telephone or commercial rural directories. Three hundred seventy-one sellers  (59 percent of the 634 sales) whose current mailing  addresses could be located were contacted. Some of these sellers accounted for more than one of the sales, but individuals were surveyed only once.  Employees  of  the  local government  office  where the  records were  housed generally proved unable to provide information that could be used to locate the remaining sellers.

Nonsellers'  names and addresses came from the current tax  roll of rural landowners in the SMSA;  a 20-percent stratified random sample was taken. The sample was stratified by townships to parallel the distribution of sellers.  The total of 225 nonsellers was  selected  randomly within townships. A comparison of names contained in the two groups eliminated the possibility that any landowner would be contacted more than once.

The mail survey instrument followed the methodology developed by Dillman [51. It  included questions about the current landholdings, land market activity, and socioeconomic characteristics of sellers and nonsellers. Landholding and socioeconomic variables such as  size of landholdings or owner's age and occupation traditionally have been emphasized in landownership studies 13, 101. Questions about land market activity provided important information because the sale of land during the five-year period served as the dependent variable  in the data analysis.

After as  many as  three contacts,  returns from the landowners yielded a 60-percent response rate. The rate reflects adjustments made for such problems as recent deaths and undeliverable letters. Usable responses from 150 sellers and 136 nonsellers were included. The land market study by Brown et al.  yielded a similar response rate [ 3 ] . The difficulty of tracing sellers  and getting those who have been traced to respond usually results in the  lower  response rates. These  survey  data  nevertheless  provide a  useful  beginning point despite  their  nonrandom nature.

Contingency table analysis offered an appropriate method to test for significant differences between  sellers  and  nonsellers  because  most  of  the  variables  were  nominally  scaled.  Chisquare served as the test statistic.

## Results and Discussion

If  landowners  can  choose  to supply  land to or withhold  it from the  market, what  distinguishes  sellers  from holders?  Are  nonsellers simply landowners waiting for the  right time to sell? Relatively few characteristics distinguish the two groups from one another (Tables 1 and 2).  The few  differences found suggested  that  sellers  and  nonsellers hold their  land for very different reasons.

## Personal Characteristics

Little variation  existed  between sellers  and  nonsellers when comparing  age,  employment status, and education (Table 1). Few young landowners hold property in rural areas. Less than one-third of the sellers and an equally small proportion of nonsellers were younger than 50. A slightly higher proportion of sellers older than 65  matched the edge that this group also held over nonsellers who had retired. Well over one-half of both groups still worked full- or parttime. A majority of sellers (52 percent) and nonsellers (63 percent) had not pursued their education formally beyond high school. Equal proportions of the two groups had completed college (8 percent), but a few more sellers  (12 percent) than nonsellers (8 percent) had been to graduate school. The landowners chose distinctively different careers despite their generally similar educational backgrounds.

A clear majority of nonsellers farmed their land for a living. The U.S.  Central Feed Grain and Livestock  Region includes the Rochester SMSA and many rural landowners contributed to the agricultural component of its economic base [191. A majority of all farmers  in the study were,

TABLE 1 SELECTED PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS: SUMMARY OF

## CONTINGENCY TABLE ANALYSIS

| Characteristic                    |   Sellers" (in %) |   Nonsellersa (in %) |   D.F. | Chi Sq.   |
|-----------------------------------|-------------------|----------------------|--------|-----------|
| Age 65 or                         |                   |                      |      3 | 7.22      |
| older                             |                37 |                   24 |        |           |
| 50-64                             |                31 |                   45 |        |           |
| 35-49                             |                29 |                   28 |        |           |
| 3 4 or younger                    |                 3 |                    3 |        |           |
| Employment Status                 |                   |                      |      2 | 5.03      |
| Employed                          |                63 |                   73 |        |           |
| Retired                           |                35 |                   23 |        |           |
| Unemployed                        |                 3 |                    5 |        |           |
| Occupation                        |                   |                      |      3 | 14.8Ib    |
| Farmer                            |                35 |                   58 |        |           |
| ProfessionaliTechnicaIiManagerial |                31 |                   18 |        |           |
| CraftsmanlAssembleriLaborer       |                18 |                   16 |        |           |
| SaleslClericaKervice              |                16 |                    8 |        |           |

- a Percentages may not sum to 100 due to rounding.

b Statistically significant at the 0.05  level.

indeed,  nonsellers.  Land  represents  a more  permanent  and  important investment to most farmers. It provides financial security for the future and a source of livelihood in the meantime. Land, as  the basis for a farming operation, is a possession not to be parted with lightly.

Farmers occasionally do sell land, although their  reasons for selling frequently depart from the notion that  high taxes  drive them off their  land (3, 751.  In fact,  the  largest proportion of landowners among sellers as well as  nonsellers claimed farming as their principal occupation, reflecting the strong agricultural base of the study area.

Yet  sellers worked  in a "white  collar"  capacity  almost equally as  often as  they did on the farm. They found employment in professional, technical, or managerial positions nearly twice as  often as  nonsellers. The  medical facilities  associated with  Rochester's  Mayo Clinic and a branch plant of IBM employed many in this group. Many sellers fit the stereotype of "speculators''  [771.  They held property for reasons other than its current economic use.

## Landholding Characteristics

Twenty-nine percent of the landowners who sold rural property between 1975 and 1979 no longer owned any land in rural areas of the Rochester SMSA;  many had moved into the city. Sellers who still owned rural land generally had more modestly-sized landholdings than nonsellers  (Table 2).  Over  one-half of the  sellers who still owned land in rural areas owned less than 40 acres, and they accounted for 90 percent of all landowners in that size class.

Most sellers did not farm their land and a decline in parcel size commonly has accompanied shifts from agricultural  to nonproductive uses of land. Healy and Short  recognized parcelization,  or the splitting of larger  holdings into smaller tracts,  as  one of the major trends in rural land markets [9]. Conversely, the largest proportion of nonsellers owned more than 160 acres. More landowners  in this  group  farmed  and  their  productive  uses  of  land  required  larger holdings than those of sellers.

The  national survey of  landownership  found that 88 percent of all rural  landowners held fewer than 50 acres [701. Both groups of landowners in the study area owned more land than rural landowners nationwide,  because farming  continues to be a mainstay  in the area's economy. The conversion of rural land to residential use near Rochester escalated during the 1970s i n   the county,  but much of its outlying rural area remains in larger agricultural parcels.

Despite differences in the  sizes  of their  landholdings, other  characteristics  of  sellers'  and nonsellers' landholdings were similar. Both groups had owned rural land for an average of 20 years,  but more sellers than nonsellers acquired their rural land during the 1970s. Over half of both  the sellers (58 percent) and the nonsellers (63 percent) held their property in  joint ownership;  most other landowners owned their land individually. Nearly all landowners nationwide held their land in one of these two tenure arrangements [70]. Relatively few legal partnerships

TABLE 2

## SELECTED LANDHOLDING CHARACTERISTICS:  SUMMARY OF CONTINGENCY TABLE ANALYSIS

| Characteristic         |   Sellers' (in %) |   Nonsellers (in %) |   D.F. | Chi Sq.   |
|------------------------|-------------------|---------------------|--------|-----------|
| Acres Owned            |                   |                     |      3 | 72.8gb    |
| fewer than 40          |                53 |                   7 |        |           |
| 41 -80                 |                11 |                  26 |        |           |
| 81-160                 |                16 |                  29 |        |           |
| 161 or more            |                19 |                  38 |        |           |
| Recently Acquired Land |                   |                     |        | 4.07b     |
| Ye5                    |                26 |                  15 |        |           |
| No                     |                74 |                  85 |        |           |
| May Sell Land          |                   |                     |        | 7.58b     |
| Yes                    |                42 |                  24 |        |           |
| No                     |                58 |                  76 |        |           |

or corporations owned rural land in the Rochester SMSA or elsewhere in the U.S. These forms of land tenure typically have been used for larger agribusiness  landholdings.

Sellers,  by  definition,  have  been  active  in the  local  land  market.  They  sold  at  least once between 1975 and 1979, and 28 percent of them had sold two or more parcels. Sellers did not limit their  activity  to land disposal as  nearly 25  percent  also  had purchased additional  rural property during that  time  period. More than one-third (37 percent) who "recently  acquired land"  during this period had acquired two or more parcels.

Most sellers bought the additional acreage for rural residences,  other future development, or farm enlargement purposes. Individuals who have bought or sold land recently are familiar with tile local market and more likely to know about additional land for sale. They often take advantage of "inside"  information and speculate in the land market,  i.e.,  they buy land beyond their immediate needs with the intention of selling it at a higher price.

Some  sellers  who farmed  may  have  sold part  of  their  property with  good frontage  for  a housing site and replaced it with another parcel equally suited to agricultural  use. The additional  parcel might not be adjacent to the farmer's  principal landholding,  but an increasingly smaller proportion of farmers today enjoy the benefits of operating a farm composed of completely contiguous  landholdings [1A.

Fewer nonsellers (15 percent) added to their landholding and most who did acquired a single parcel. Nearly half of them (48 percent) bought land to expand their farming operation.  Farm enlargement sales traditionally dominate rural land market transactions until the wave of development rolls over urban fringe areas.

A smaller group (19 percent) of nonsellers whose landholdings increased in size during the study period received the property as a gift or through inheritance.  lntergenerational transfers of land have always been important in the farming community. Fewer sellers farmed and none had inherited land.

The active role of sellers in the local land market apparently continued beyond the five-year period discussed  here.  Many said that  they  "may  sell  land"  again during the  next five-year period;  42  percent  saw  such  plans on their  horizons.  Individuals simply  investing in  land, rather than making current economic use of it, typically hold the property for a shorter period of time.

Sellers'  plans provided a sharp contrast to those of the nonsellers. Less than one-quarter of the latter group expected to sell any of their rural land within the next five-year  period. Most nonsellers  had not sought  the  opportunity to sell and did not expect their  high reservation demand to waver in the future. Both the research and the planning communities have overlooked these persistent landowners and their strong non-economic  motives for holding rural land that may seem "ripe"  for development. Sentimental family ties to the land or the prestige of landownership have been suggested as  reasons for holding property [7, 81,   but no attempt has been made to document the full nature and extent of reservation demand.

## Conclusions

The decisions o f sellers  and nonsellers are important because they shape patterns of land use. Theoretical works  have emphasized the  importance of  landowner expectations on the decision to sell land, but they have failed to incorporate landowner characteristics  in a model of decision-making. This empirical investigation in the Rochester SMSA identified four characteristics  of sellers and nonsellers that should be included in such a model.

Three  of  the  four  relevant variables  relate to their  landholdings-acreage held,  recent acquisitions of  land, and an interest in selling in the near future.  Only one involved a personal characteristic-the landowner's  occupation.  Sellers as  a group seem  less committed to their land because fewer farm for a living. They see land more as a consumptive good to be bought and sold than  as  a ptoductive good to be retained. More sellers than  nonsellers have been acquiring new land and planning future sales; on balance, they currently hold smaller acreages than nonsellers.

Farmers predominated  among nonsellers in the study area, but not all nonsellers keep their land because of its productive capacity.  A simplistic economic reason for retaining land rests on expectations for its future sale value. This motive provides sufficient explanation for shortterm landowners who hold land in anticipation of  its sale at a  higher price. Long-term landowners also  hold property in areas of rapid growth;  their  reservation demand exceeded the demand exerted by potential buyers in the past and will likely do so in the future.

Further study of  nonsellers is needed, especially  those who have held their  land for longer periods despite the land's potential for sale. Their desire to own rural land runs deeper than its simple economic value. The institution of private property is solidly engrained in our culture and warrants  further attention.  More information on the non-economic  motives for holding land is needed before an adequate model of reservation demand can be developed.

A potentially fruitful  direction for  related research points to the analysis  of public records. They have been underutilized as a source of information on landownership and land use. Craig explored the potential for using building permits to monitor development [ 4 ] , but the reams of forms filed away  in state and local government offices generally have been overlooked. The pattern of  land sales should be monitored more closely because ownership transfers  usually signal  land use changes,  especially near the fringe  of  urban development.  Such information could be incorporated into local land information systems. Conducting feasibility studies and pilot demonstration projects on the use of public records are useful projects.

## Literature Cited

1. Bahl, R.  W. "A  Land Speculation Model: The Role of the Property Tax as a Constraint to Urban Sprawl." journal of Regional Science, 8 (19681, 199-208.
2. Boxley,  R. F. Landownership  Issues in Rural America.  U.S.  Department of Agriculture,  Economic  Research Service, Publication No. 655. Washington:  Government Printing Office,  1977.
3. Brown, H. I . et al. "Land  Markets at the Urban Fringe:  New Insights for Policy Makers."  journal,  American Planning Association,  47 (1981).  131-144.
4. Craig,  W. J. "Monitoring  Minnesota's  Land Using Public Records."  Ph.D. thesis,  University of Minnesota, Department of Geography, 1980.
5. Dillman, D. A. Mailand Telephone Surveys:  The Total Design Method. New York: John  Wiley and Sons, 1978.
6. Hart, 1. F. "Population  Change  in the  Upper Lakes  States."  Annals,  Association of American Geographers, 74 (19841, 221-243.
7. - . "Urban  Encroachment on Rural Areas."  Geographical Review, 66  (1976),  3-17.
8. Healy, R.  G.  and I . L.  Short. The Market for Rural Land:  Trends,  Issues,  Policies. Washington:  The Conservation  Foundation, 1981.
9. - . "Rural  Land:  Market Trends and Planning Implications."  journal,  American  Planning Association,  45  (1979), 305-317.
10. Lewis, J.  A. Landownership in the United States, 1978. U.S.  Department of Agriculture, Economics, Statistics,  and Cooperatives Service;  Agricultural Information Bulletin No. 435. Washington:  Government Printing Office, 1980.
11. Lindeman,  B.  "Anatomy  of  Land Speculation."  journal,  American  Institute  o f  Planners,  42  (1976), 142- 152.
12. Long, L.  and  D.  DeAre.  "Repopulating  the  Countryside:  A 1980 Census Trend."  Science,  217  (1983), 1111-1117.
13. Ottensrnann, 1. R.  "Urban  Sprawl,  Land Values and the Density of  Development."  Land Economics, 53 (1977),  389-400.
14.  Popper, F. 1. "Why  We Should Care About Who Owns the Land."  American Land Forum Magazine, 2, (1981), 15-19.
15.  Pyle, L.  A.  "The  Land Market Beyond the Urban Fringe."  Geographical Review, 75  (19851, 32-43.
16.  Schmid, A. A. Converting Land from Rural to Urban Uses. Baltimore:  Resources for the Future, 1968.
17.  Smith,  E.  G.,  Jr. "Fragmented  Farms  in the  United States."  Annals,  Association of American  Ceographers,  65 (19751, 58-70.
18.  U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1980 Census of Population. Vol. 1, Characteristics ofthe Population, Part 25, Minnesota. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1982.
19. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Land Resource Regions and Malor Land Resource Areas of the United States. Soil  Conservation  Service,  Agricultural Handbook No. 296.  Washington:  Government Printing Office, 1981.
20.  Zeimetz,  K.  A., E. Dillon, E.  E.  Hardy, and R.  C. Otte. Dynamics of Land Use in Fast Growth Areas. U.S. Department of  Agriculture,  Economic  Research Service,  Report No. 325. Washington:  Government Printing Office, 1976.

LIZBETH A. PYLE (Ph.D.,  University of Minnesota, 1983) is on the faculty in the Department of Geology and Geography, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506. Her current research interests include landownership at the urban fringe and structural changes in American agriculture.

Professional  G e o g r a p h e r , 38(4), 1986, 349-358 0 Copyright 1986 by Association  of A m e r i c a n   G e o g r a p h e r s

## EMPLOYMENT DATA AND THE CLASSIFICATION OF URBAN SETTLEMENTS

## Gordon F. Mulligan  and Richard W. Reeves

University of Arizona

Classifications of urban settlements have traditionally  used total employment data in place of basic (export-oriented) employment data.  While  urban analysts agree upon the  superiority of basic employment data  for  these  classifications, usually only total employment data are available. This paper uses the Arizona Community Data Set, a unique survey-generated  body of information that describes the major economic characteristics of numerous Southwestern communities and includes both basic and total employment data, to explore the extent to  which misclassification results when using total employment data. Key Words: classification,  urban settlements,  basic employment,  functional  specialization.

The classification of  urban settlements  has been of long-standing concern t o  geographers, planners,  and other social  scientists [2, 791.  The simplest  and most traditional  forms o f  such classification  have been based solely on the labor force characteristics of urban settlements, but these  methods fail  to  capture the important non-economic (social,  demographic,  etc.) sources of intercity variation that now characterize the technically more advanced societies. As a  result,  factor-ecologic approaches  have  largely  replaced these  traditional classification methods 12, 3, 70, 791.

The traditional labor-force-based classification  methods do remain useful for differentiating among relatively small,  free-standing urban agglomerations. As Berry [2, 3 1 has demonstrated, many nonmetropolitan communities continue to b e  differentiated by a single dominant economic function, whether that b e   an industry (e.g.,  mining) for which nonmetropolitan location factors still prevail o r  a n  activity (e.g.,  education) whose locations are n o t  determined by economic criteria.'  In such cases the community's wider urban characteristics are largely dictated by its narrower economic characteristics  (i.e.,  its economic base).

1 The terms "communily"  and "urban  settlement"  are used interchangeably  in this paper to refer to relatively small,  freestanding urban agglomerations