<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/raag21

## 'We Women Are Suffering': Fragile Water Infrastructure and Gendered Embodied Labor

Marlotte de Jong &amp; Bilal Butt

To cite this article: Marlotte de Jong &amp; Bilal Butt (2025) 'We Women Are Suffering': Fragile Water Infrastructure and Gendered Embodied Labor, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 115:3, 705-724, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2024.2446559

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2024.2446559

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 27 Jan 2025.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 437

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## ' We Women Are Suffering ' : Fragile Water Infrastructure and Gendered Embodied Labor

Marlotte de Jong and Bilal Butt

School for Environment and Sustainability, University of Michigan, USA

One of the core tenets of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6 is the achievement of universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all by 2030. In Kilifi County, Kenya, the official narrative claims all residents have access to clean and safe drinking water. Many residents counter the official narratives, however, saying they experience frequent water supply interruptions and often go months, sometimes years, without access to clean and safe drinking water. Using household surveys, key informant interviews, and participant observations from eighteen months of ethnographic field work in Kilifi County, this research examines the fragility of water infrastructure to elucidate the gendered material, emotional, and embodied experiences of water insecurity in rural and periurban coastal communities. We argue that water security can better be assessed through an understanding of infrastructural fragility than the absolute presence or absence of necessary infrastructure. By recognizing the inherent fragility of water infrastructure systems, this analysis elucidates the material consequences for residents, as reflected through their gendered emotional and embodied experiences of water insecurity. Building on previous scholarship in geographies of the body, space, and infrastructure, this work makes visible the gendered, emotional, and embodied impacts of fragile water infrastructure in Kilifi North and the specific ways in which women ' s bodies become substituted for the decaying infrastructure. Key Words: coastal, emotional political ecology, informal, infrastructural fragility, Kenya, water security.

W eare sitting with Mary under the shade of the msasa 1 tree, stripping maize kernels for drying and grinding into unga. 2 While we struggle and her practiced hands make quick work of the maize, she tells us of her experience collecting water the previous month:

… [O]ur pipe down the road has been dry for many months. My husband and I are both out of work and so we have no money to buy from the private tanks. I walked many kilometers to a tap my sister said had water, but the tap was leaking. Water was spilling out into the mud. I knew this water was dirty, but I had no choice. I put the muddy water into my container, and I went home. We boiled it to drink and make ugali 3 but I could still taste the mud.

Mary ' s story reflects a common reality for many women in coastal Kenya, and the Global South more generally, where water access is often insecure (Adams, Stoler, and Adams 2020; Sultana 2020; Loodin 2023), necessitating additional time, energy, and emotions to procure clean water. Yet, her account and similar stories stand at odds with the

<!-- image -->

official narrative of water security from the state. This was exemplified when we asked an official at the Malindi Water and Sanitation Company (MAWASCO) about these descriptions of water challenges, to which they replied:

… [T]hese people like to complain. There is water. Just look at all the taps we have. There are no troubles with water here.

The contradiction between resident accounts and the official narrative begs critical thought into how areas can be considered water secure when residents often go weeks and months without access to fresh, clean, and safe water. This research engages with two central questions: What accounts for the persistent water insecurity in the region, despite the alleged sufficient water infrastructure? Second, what are the material and bodily impacts of this water insecurity for rural communities?

Drawing on a rich body of literature from critical infrastructure geographies, we examine how development and government actors tend to view completed

water infrastructure as durable and permanent (Furlong 2014). These actors therefore measure water security through points of delivery infrastructures like water taps. According to their metrics, the areas MAWASCO services are water secure, as households are located within one kilometer of a delivery point. Yet, such a view ignores the inherent fragility of the infrastructure ' s lines of delivery (Mitchell 2014; Alda-Vidal et al. 2023), made visible through leaks and blockages, and peoples ' financial constraints that affect alternative strategies when public water infrastructure fails. This is because when municipal points of delivery are inactive due to blockages and leaks, community members are forced to purchase water at higher prices from private taps, boreholes, and storage tanks. As many in these communities already live in severe conditions of poverty, the added financial costs associated with private water provisioning entail making difficult choices of where to prioritize already severely limited resources (e.g., choosing water vs. food vs. school fees vs. rent vs. medical care).

Work within political ecology and feminist geography, among other disciplines, has illuminated how people ' s intersectional identities contribute to differentiated vulnerabilities and experiences of environmental change (Nightingale 2011; Sultana 2011, 2015; Mollett 2017). This work has further highlighted the importance of centering the body and emotion in analyses to draw our attention to the multiple and often overlooked dimensions of how people experience and respond to these changes (Sultana 2015; Nyantakyi-Frimpong 2021).

Gendered intersectional identities significantly influence how environmental change is experienced and understood, wrapped in competing understandings of the environment and the state (Ahlers and Zwarteveen 2009; Sultana 2009). Importantly, centering gender is not about displacing socioeconomic factors, class, and processes of colonial and capitalist exploitation (Mass  e, Giv  a, and Lunstrum 2021). Rather, gender intersects with dynamics of capitalism, colonialism, dispossession, and violence to reshape human -environment relations and related consequences for men, women, and households (Sultana 2011; Mollett and Faria 2013).

Drawing analytical and theoretical inspiration from these works, we argue that viewing water infrastructure as ' complete ' and ' durable ' hides the inherent fragility of these systems and how they create conditions of water insecurity. Such a view renders invisible the everyday struggles of people in the Global South. This framing further masks the gendered physical and emotional labor that emerges from the fragile lines of delivery of water infrastructures. By examining water insecurity to the scale of the individual, using a lens that foregrounds emotions and connectedness, this analysis reveals the everyday realities of water insecurity overlooked by impersonal, technical-driven assessments used by the state. These technical-driven assessments of water security are used by state and international organizations to demonstrate their alleged progress in attaining international targets like the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

Downscaling how water insecurity is experienced at the scale of the individual -emotionally, bodily, and socially -however, illuminates the failures of prevailing development evaluations of water security in effectively addressing human suffering. By theorizing water infrastructure as ' fragile ' and ' incomplete, ' we can better understand and uncover the material, embodied, and everyday impacts of sporadic and inequitable access to water. Doing so, we argue, unveils how labor, embodiment, and space are intertwined through the fragile points and linearities of water infrastructure.

This article is structured as follows. First, we describe the grounding theoretical and conceptual foundations of this work -water security, water as infrastructure, and water as labor. Next, we provide an overview of the field work methods and process. Then, we demonstrate how water infrastructure in Kilifi North subcounty can better be understood through a lens of infrastructural fragility, a framing that accounts for residents ' persistent experiences of water insecurity. We then describe how such infrastructural fragility results in gendered forms of emotional and physical labor, as women ' s bodies become substituted for the decaying infrastructure.

## Situated and Multiple Meanings and Practices of Water

Water as Security

Water security has its roots in 1940s postwar diplomacy and has expanded since the United Nations Ministerial Declaration of the Hague on Water Security in 2000 (Garrick and Hall 2014). Despite the popularity of the term, many scholars

have critiqued its expansiveness and have argued that there is little true consensus on how to define water security (Grey and Sadoff 2007; Bakker 2012; Garrick and Hall 2014). Common to definitions of water security, though, is the need to manage risks associated with too little or too much water and reduce vulnerability (Bakker and Morinville 2013; Hall and Borgomeo 2013; Van Beek and Arriens 2014).

As risk can never be eliminated, such a framing inherently carries with it inequalities in how water insecurity is experienced, as it can be viewed as tolerable at some level and for some individuals. This is compounded by what Cook and Bakker (2012) referred to as the scalar incommensurability latent in research and action on water insecurity. Different disciplines tend to focus on water security at different scales -development studies tend to focus on the national scale (Grey and Sadoff 2007), hydrologists at the watershed scale (Cohen 2012), social scientists tend to work at the community scale (Cook and Bakker 2012), and feminist and indigenous scholars have advocated for the individual as a site of analysis (Awume, Patrick, and Baijius 2020; Huberts et al. 2023). As water security has evolved to focus on managing and tolerating a certain level of risk and insecurity, analyses that focus on a particular scale can overlook and accept the existence of insecurity at subscalar levels (Deitz and Meehan 2019; Meehan et al. 2020). National governments tend to emphasize water security at the national scale to comply with internationally determined targets like the SDGs (Mulwa, Li, and Fangninou 2021). With such an emphasis on national development, it is therefore acceptable for certain communities or groups to remain water insecure if the country ' s national average meets the development targets.

## Water as Infrastructure

Importantly, as the water security literature highlights, the binary between security or insecurity is not defined exclusively by the physical presence or availability of the resource, but also by the infrastructure that delivers it (Padowski, Carrera, and Jawitz 2016; Truelove 2019; Wutich et al. 2022). Critical geography, science and technology studies, and political ecology argue that infrastructure is not simply a material form that is created from technical expertise; rather, it is inherently sociotechnical and shaped by imaginaries, power relations, and social norms that shape environments and everyday life (Carse 2017; Anand, Gupta, and Appel 2018; Bj € orkman 2018; Carse and Kneas 2019).

Geographers have further argued against the idea that infrastructures are highly durable, stable, and reliable, operating silently and seamlessly in the background (Graham and Thrift 2007; Furlong 2014). Anand, Gupta, and Appel (2018) suggested that the conceptualization of infrastructure through a teleological timeline ending in completion misses infrastructure ' s multitude of social and political interruptions. Instead, scholars have pushed for an understanding of infrastructure as always incomplete or unfinished, requiring ongoing attention and inputs to ensure its functionality (Star and Ruhleder 2016; Carse and Kneas 2019; Guma 2021, 2022b).

Bellanova and Glouftsios (2022) highlighted that maintenance is crucial as infrastructure has many points of potential failure that makes visible its shortcomings. These failures, as Ramakrishnan, O ' Reilly, and Budds (2021b) explained, are more than merely moments in time; they are predicated on and produce different material conditions, social perceptions, labor, and socioecological relations. Furlong (2014) proposed the concept of ' infrastructural fragility ' to recognize the continual maintenance and attention needed to ensure the functionality of infrastructures. This lens makes visible the labor -both physical and emotional, formal and informal -required to maintain fragile infrastructure (Carse and Kneas 2019; Guma 2021) and elucidates their unequal experiences across and within households and communities (Alda-Vidal et al. 2023). This analysis draws on this work to emphasize how women ' s bodies, through their emotional and physical labor, become substituted for fragile water infrastructure.

## Water as Labor

Within infrastructural geographies, there has been greater attention to these forms of human labor that enables the flow of materials (De Coss-Corzo 2021; Stokes and De Coss-Corzo 2023), with many arguing that this labor is essential but often invisible and devalued (Fredericks 2014). Moreover, much of these analyses focus on formal labor, failing to recognize that the labors that make infrastructure

functional often extend beyond these formal employment practices. More recently, scholars have called for a widening of what constitutes infrastructural labor, focusing, for example, on unpaid community work (Alda-Vidal et al. 2023; Stokes and Lawhon 2023). Furthermore, feminist scholars have shown how infrastructures are labor-intensive in gendered ways. Fredericks (2018), for example, described how urban waste disposal infrastructure draws on the voluntary work of youth and women. Similarly, Truelove (2021) demonstrated how water infrastructure relies on the unpaid labor of women to the extent that their bodies often become part of infrastructure (Truelove and Ruszczyk 2022).

In this analysis, we build on work in critical infrastructural geographies to illuminate the informal labor -both physical and emotional -that is created by fragile water infrastructures. Analyzing the decay, maintenance, and repair that characterize phases of an infrastructure ' s life uncovers the underrecognized labor enacted by ordinary people to secure their infrastructure (Ramakrishnan, O ' Reilly, and Budds 2021).

Yet this labor is not only physical but also emotional and embodied. Scholars in emotional political ecology and feminist scholarship have demonstrated the unequal emotional burden and suffering embodied by women laboring for water. Examples of this include the stress of negotiating the conditions for borrowing water from employers, fear of harassment when collecting water from illegal sources, and the uncertainty and frustration associated with waiting for the arrival of water tankers (Sultana 2011; Truelove 2011; Van Houweling 2016; Alda-Vidal et al. 2023). Ramakrishnan, O ' Reilly, and Budds (2021) explained that there are distinct sociopolitical struggles, socioecological arrangements, and embodied experiences that emerge during phases of infrastructural decay, repair, and maintenance that differentially affect women ' s bodies and lives and serve to sustain dominant power relations. Tracing these elements makes visible how infrastructure ' s materiality over time is central to the production of social difference, power relations, and access to resources.

The emotional and embodied aspects of environmental, social, and political struggles are emerging as a central analytic within human geography. Emotional geography creates new angles of study by bringing what is traditionally kept behind and out of view (emotions and the body) to the front (Munt 2012; Mollett and Faria 2013; Sultana 2015). Such work highlights emotions ' complex role in people ' s lives and choices. As a variety of scholars within emotional geographies and emotional political ecology have highlighted, the deep emotional ties between people and land make the study of natural resource struggles and resourcebased livelihoods particularly well-suited for an approach that attends to emotions and embodiment (Pini, Mayes, and McDonald 2010; Shiva 2010; Sultana 2011).

Moreover, the body as a site of analysis becomes essential for studies of emotion as the body is the primary site of emotional experience and expression (Davidson and Milligan 2004). Embodiment is understood as ' the process through which the outside physical and social world becomes embedded into our biology -that is, how daily interactions with our social and physical environments ' get under our skin ' to affect our physical, psychological, and emotional well-being ' (Petteway, Mujahid, and Allen 2019, 52). It is thus a way of describing porous, visceral, felt, and enlivened bodily experiences (Krieger 2005; Senanayake and King 2019). Recognition of the inherently emotional nature of embodiment highlights the need to feel -as well as think -through ' the body ' (Davidson and Milligan 2004; Allen 2020).

Analyses of the body and embodiment are deeply rooted in political-ecological approaches to health, where scholars have critically explored changing human -environment relations and implications for health outcomes (Jackson and Neely 2015; Hausermann 2021; Nichols and Del Casino 2021). This analysis builds on work in emotional geography and political ecology, feminist geography, and political ecologies of the body to foreground the emotional and embodied ways that water insecurity is experienced and negotiated. To restate, we argue that, by theorizing water infrastructure as ' fragile ' and ' incomplete, ' we better illuminate the material, embodied, and everyday impacts and gendered labor associated with sporadic and inequitable access to water.

In the next section, we describe the methodology used before elaborating on how and why water infrastructure in the Global South can more accurately be viewed through a lens of infrastructural fragility using the case of Kenya and Kilifi County.

## Methods

Given this context, we now describe the methods we used to answer the research questions. We first begin by describing the positionality of the first author and how it affected field work dynamics. The first author identifies as a White European woman working in Kenya before this research and for several years during it. The second author, a male Kenyan scholar and professor, began working in the area almost twenty-five years ago and had cultivated initial links to interlocutors and respondents at the study sites. Given this and the topic of study, it was paramount that trust and rapport be built between the researchers and the communities of interest while being cognizant of the long history of colonialism, neocolonialism, and racialized environment and development projects. Influenced by work in Indigenous and feminist geographies that emphasize critical reflexivity (Nicholls 2013; Faria and Mollett 2016), the authors and data collectors center themselves within their research to critically examine the power and privilege that influenced the production of this research. It was important for us to be aware of how the communities understand the researchers ' identities and influence the research findings. To do this, we used long-term, place-based research, spending approximately eighteen months immersed in my field site. Moreover, we had worked for several years in Kenya before data collection, from which we developed a strong understanding of local cultures, languages, and customs during preliminary relationships in the field sites.

The research was conducted in four sites across Kilifi North subcounty -Dongo Kundu, Mida Creek, Jilore, and Dakatcha (Figure 1). These sites were selected because (1) they are representative of many rural and coastal peoples in East Africa; (2) they receive their public water from vendors such as MAWASCO and experience significant water supply challenges despite official narratives of water security; and (3) they reflect a gradient of rural (Jilore and Dakatcha) to periurban (Dongo Kundu) communities and each have high poverty rates (Table 1). The broad region has a long and complex history of terrestrial and marine conservation (Adongo 2014; Shepheard-Walwyn 2014; Kaimba, De Villiers, and Wambua 2019; Versleijen and Hoorweg n.d.), expanding beach tourism and hotels (Irandu 2004; McClanahan, Mwaguni, and Muthiga 2005), and political activism associated with multiparty ethnic politics and claims over coastal sovereignty dating back to the colonial era (Moradi 2008; Shanguhyia 2015; Wambua, Wekesa, and Mwangi 2021).

Data collection consisted of seventy-five semistructured key informant interviews with community members in the four sites (Table 2) and ten with MAWASCO employees; 385 household surveys; and a document analysis of fifteen official nongovernmental organization (NGO), government, and

Figure 1. Kilifi County and research sites within Kilifi North subcounty.

<!-- image -->

Table 1. Poverty statistics derived from the poverty model of the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS)

| Ward (study area)                                   | Dabaso (Watamu & Mida Creek)   | Jilore (Jilore)   | Garashi (Dakatcha)   | Malindi Town   | Kenya        |
|-----------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|-------------------|----------------------|----------------|--------------|
| Total population (used in poverty model) a          | 27,500.00                      | 17,300.00         | 25,700.00            | 50,900.00      | 37,565.60    |
| Total households                                    | 4,600.00                       | 2,700.00          | 3,700.00             | 14,100.00      | 8,768,000.00 |
| People living below poverty line                    | 61.80%                         | 84.40%            | 93.40%               | 30.40%         | 45.20%       |
| Contribution to national poverty                    | 0.10%                          | 0.09%             | 0.14%                | 0.09%          | 100.00%      |
| Poverty gap of population living below poverty line | 38.10%                         | 55.00%            | 61.90%               | 12.60%         | 16.80%       |
| Wealth gap of population living above poverty line  | 80.70%                         | 41.80%            | 15.50%               | 144.30%        | 93.20%       |

Note: Total population tallies are derived from the poverty model of KNBS. Source: Wiesmann, Kiteme, and Mwangi (2014).

a In 2009, rounded to hundreds.

Table 2. Breakdown of interview participants

| Location     |   Dongo Kundu |   Mida Creek |   Jilore |   Dakatcha |   Total |
|--------------|---------------|--------------|----------|------------|---------|
| No. of women |            10 |           14 |       15 |          8 |      47 |
| No. of men   |             8 |            6 |        7 |          7 |      28 |
| Total        |            18 |           20 |       22 |         15 |      75 |
| < 30         |             1 |            5 |        0 |          6 |      12 |
| 31 - 50      |             9 |           11 |        8 |          3 |      31 |
| 51 - 70      |             6 |            4 |        9 |          1 |      20 |
| 71 þ         |             2 |            0 |        5 |          5 |      12 |
| Total        |            18 |           20 |       22 |         15 |      75 |

MAWASCO public statements. All households within the four research sites were included in the sampling parameters. Data collection continued until data saturation was reached, totaling 385 households. All households resided within one kilometer of an improved water source (although these sources were not always reliable). An analysis of the demographic breakdown of the households surveyed reflected the area ' s overall demographics. We began by approaching each boma 4 in the area and introduced ourselves and the research before asking household members if they were willing to participate. We then returned at an agreed-on date and time to administer the survey.

Participants were approached and asked to participate, making it clear that they were free to decline, change their minds, refuse to answer questions, or stop the interview or survey altogether. Key interlocutors and local research assistants assisted in identifying and facilitating access to other participants. From there, snowball sampling assisted in the recruitment of additional participants. Interviews and surveys were conducted in Kiswahili or, if by preference of the participant, in the local vernacular, Giriama, which locally recruited research assistants then translated. Interviews were transcribed and analyzed for emergent themes.

Interview questions focused on people ' s experiences with water services, paying attention to their emotional and embodied experiences when public water taps were inconsistent. Participants were asked about how they coped with discrepancies in water availability. For the MAWASCO employees, questions centered around how often they were called to respond to water outages, the common problems facing water provisioning in the area, and their experiences with communities facing water shortages.

The household surveys included sections on family structure, household expenses, sources of livelihoods, and experiences of food and water insecurity to provide context and depth to the interviews and broader demographic trends. The water insecurity section of the household survey was adapted from existing water security indexes to focus more centrally on people ' s emotional and bodily experiences of water security or insecurity. Surveys were conducted in Kiswahili and then translated into English for analysis by local research assistants.

Interviews, surveys, and field notes were analyzed in NVivo using a grounded theory approach (Pidgeon and Henwood 2004) and resultant themes surrounding water infrastructure, access, security, and emotional and physical responses were categorized. Data were then revisited using these themes as lenses and coding group writeups were developed to summarize the main findings. Key representative quotations were also identified for the relevant themes and subthemes.

Using the data gathered from these methods, we now describe the resulting themes and contexts surrounding water infrastructure in the Kilifi North subcounty. As noted previously, we describe these as fragile, resulting in experiences of water insecurity despite prevailing narratives of consistent and widespread water access. This analysis attends to the emotional and embodied experience of struggles with water to highlight the gendered labor that fragile infrastructures demand. In the following sections, we describe our findings according to three themes that capture how rural people ' s livelihoods intersect with water. These are (1) the fragility of water infrastructures, (2) the emotional labor associated with procuring water, and (3) the embodied impacts and physical labor of water.

## Water ' s Fragile Infrastructures

## ' Not Enough ' : Water Availability and Supply

With almost 90 percent of the country ' s land classified as arid or semiarid, Kenya is often a target for water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) interventions developed by the Global North (Alexander et al. 2013; Byrd et al. 2017; Jacob Arriola et al. 2020). Many of these programs, both at the behest of the national government and international actors, tend to focus on urban slums or rural areas that lack access to piped water. In areas like Kilifi North, where piped water infrastructure is present, communities are not considered at risk for water insecurity. This is because, according to Lautze and Manthrithilake (2012), researchers and practitioners tend to conceptualize water security as the percentage of the population with sustainable access (i.e., within one kilometer) to an improved water source (household connections, public standpipes, boreholes, protected dug wells, protected springs, and rainwater collection). Such a technocratic definition fails to account for seasonal and temporal fluctuations in water availability or the financial constraints that limit people ' s ability to access fresh water. This dominant understanding of water security, however, is rooted in an allowable threshold of risk.

Interviews reflect the incompatibility of technocratic definitions of water security with the ' rough and tumble ' of everyday experiences of water access and availability. Individuals across the four research sites detailed significant experiences of water insecurity, despite all residing within the one kilometer of a water access point. Approximately 56 percent of households surveyed (216 households) indicated that their water supply was less than expected or interrupted in some way in the last month. The frequency of water supply interruptions ranged from once a month to almost every day. Additionally, 55 percent of respondents (210 households) shared they or someone from their household was unable to access water from the source they preferred in the last month. The frequency of water interruptions ranged from two or three times a month to as many as seventeen times a month. Three households indicated that they were not able to access the water that they preferred at all for the entire month. Although experiences of water insecurity occurred in all four of the research sites, they were significantly more prevalent in the rural sites of Dakatcha, Jilore, and Mida, where between 68 percent and 80 percent of households described interrupted water supplies. In addition, approximately half of the households surveyed (189) indicated that they experienced a time in the last month when they had the money to purchase water but could not find water anywhere.

Interviews further supported these experiences, with one woman describing how their nearby tap had recently been dry for two weeks, forcing them to pay additional transport costs to fetch water from a further water point. These stories were further corroborated by MAWASCO workers who said, ' there are many problems with water here … there is still not enough water to go around as we source from the river and the boreholes which are too low. ' Another admitted that ' blockages and leaks can take us weeks or even months to repair. So, there will be no water in the taps then. '

These stories reflect the widespread inconsistency in water availability within Kilifi North subcounty, despite the ostensible presence of sufficient water points. Some stated that the dry taps happened sporadically, with one person stating, ' When the taps go dry is random, so you cannot make predictions or plan ahead so you have to prepare to search for water while you pray that the MAWASCO tap will work. ' Others noted seasonal variations, however, saying that water pressure and amount of water tended to be lower during the dry season when the source rivers and boreholes were dry. In contrast, the taps tended to be completely dry for substantial

periods during the rainy season when an influx of rainwater increases pressure in the pipes, causing leaks and bursts.

Residents of Dakatcha and Jilore, the two most rural and arid sites, expressed the most difficulties in procuring consistent water, noting that when the MAWASCO taps were dry, they did not have many alternative water sources. Similarly, residents of Mida Creek also noted significant water supply interruptions, blaming the high salinity of the intertidal areas and a lack of assistance from MAWASCO technicians as responsible for their frequent burst pipes. Dongo Kundu, in contrast, had high instances of water supply interruptions but residents noted that there were sufficient private options if their financial situation permitted. Inconsistent availability and supply of water -which are key attributes of water insecurity -persist despite the presence of water service infrastructure. This insecurity is due to the fragility of this infrastructure, demonstrated through old pipes, frequent leaks, and an inability or unwillingness of authorities to maintain this infrastructure.

## ' Crack, Rust, and Crumble ' : Water ' s Decaying Infrastructure

The fragility of infrastructure stems from its propensity to decay. Borgman et al. (2016) wrote that ' infrastructures are much more fragile than they appear … and they have many points of potential failure (1 -2). Infrastructures, therefore, ' require human communities to maintain them, even as they shape those (and other) communities. … Without maintenance, infrastructures crack, rust, and crumble, and the political projects, promises, and aspirations that they carried dissipate ' (Carse 2014, 219).

The inherent fragility of infrastructure is manifest in Kilifi North ' s water infrastructure in several ways. First, the tendency for the water pipes to break is compounded by the fact that the pipes that serve the Kilifi North subcounty are several decades old and are beginning to decay. MAWASCO workers described how the valves used to relieve pressure on the pipes to prevent them from breaking are frequently stolen, but the MAWASCO head office refuses to send replacements. Instead, workers must plug the holes completely, causing further pressure buildup and leakages.

Second, the dry season also coincides with the tourist season, when Watamu and Malindi see an influx of visitors. As one MAWASCO worker described, the hotels and resorts are situated closer to where the water main diverges into the smaller service lines. Thus, they get the ' first pick of the water ' compared to the villages and bomas 5 that are further downstream. One interview subject corroborated this, explaining:

This time [dry season] is also when the wazungu 6 are here. There are very many people needing water, but it is too hot and dry, so the water is always low. By the time it gets here in Dongo Kundu, very little water remains in the pipe.

The notion that the water infrastructure in Kilifi North subcounty cannot cope with the level of demand was further affirmed by MAWASCO workers. At the source, one worker described how the same three tanks supply water to Kilifi North subcounty, Malindi town, and Kilifi town. The diameter of the pipe carrying water to Malindi town is eight inches, compared to fourteen inches for Watamu and thirty-two inches for Kilifi. As the worker explained, ' the majority of the water share will go to Kilifi then because the pipes are much bigger. ' The diameter of the pipes is based on population density data from forty years prior, and so ' as the populations have grown here, there is now too much demand on the water supply. The pipes are not big enough to bring the water as fast as people use it. '

The high demand on the water supply contributing to water insecurity was further described during interviews, with one woman stating, ' if you get to the tap too late, there might not be any water remaining. ' Another described the long wait times associated with queuing for water: ' There are so many people queuing for water that sometimes we wait for hours. And then it is your turn but the tap is dry and so you must go buy from the businesses or go to the river. ' To cope with this, many of the women interviewed described how they would wake up very early to get to the taps before the queue became too long. This strategy does not always work, however, as one respondent described: ' I go very early to try and get water because the tap is always very busy. But sometimes you wait and wait and there is no water. Then you come back home with nothing. '

Demand exceeding supply was a significant problem across all four sites but especially in Dongo Kundu, particularly during the tourist season. Water interruptions and insecurity were compounded by a household ' s spatial locations along the water pipes, where those located closest to the water mains received a more consistent water supply than those located further away. One person described this to me, saying, ' You see that we are very far away from Watamu town, which means the water must travel a very long way to us. And all the hotels and bomas between town and we get the water first. So little is left in our taps. ' As this statement demonstrates, water security is also mediated by the household ' s physical location at the water infrastructure ' s branch points. The impact of distance on water supply is magnified in old infrastructure areas such as Kilifi North where demand significantly exceeds the quantity of water the pipes can deliver.

Rather than conceptualizing Kilifi North ' s water infrastructure as durable and permanent, an analysis of this infrastructure reveals that its age, outdatedness, and propensity for leaks and blockages reflect its fragility. As the MAWASCO staff described, ' These pipes need constant repair, they are always breaking. ' Contrary to the popular narrative that such water infrastructure is durable and complete, these examples reflect how infrastructure decays almost from the moment that it is constructed. Analyses of water security that focus solely on the presence or absence of water infrastructure fail to recognize this inherent fragility and so overlook the everyday experiences of insecurity that coincide with fragile infrastructure. Whether the pipes bring consistent water appears to be less important to the county and national government ' s estimation of overall water security than the existence of the infrastructure itself. This is apparent as MAWASCO employees regularly told me that they lack the resources necessary to maintain and fix the infrastructure to ensure a consistent water supply, despite their requests for support from the county and national government. Moreover, these estimations of water security focus on community-level water supplies, failing to account for temporal or spatial variations in water within the community at the level of the household and individual.

Thus, there are myriad ways in which water infrastructure in the Kilifi North subcounty can be understood through Furlong ' s (2014) conceptions of fragility, as it begins to decay and break almost as soon as it is completed and requires constant maintenance and repair to respond to changing social, political, and environmental dynamics. Categorizing water security simply based on the presence or absence of water infrastructure is an insufficient measure, failing to recognize how infrastructure is cyclical -made of periods of decay and repair -which creates water insecurity for residents that is mediated by space and time. There are material consequences to this fragility, reflected through the creation of emotional and embodied labor associated with ensuing water insecurity.

## Emotional Labor

The fragility of the water supply and the consequent water insecurity it creates results in material impacts on people ' s lives in these communities that align with people ' s gendered and intersectional identities, as women are responsible for water collection duties in coastal Kenya. Although our focus in this article is on the gendered labor caused by fragile water infrastructure, that is not to say that men and nonbinary people did not experience similar emotional and physical labor. Throughout this research, many men described similar emotional experiences surrounding water access. We choose to focus on women in this analysis for two central reasons, however. First, water collection in rural Kenya is a gendered household responsibility, meaning that the bulk of the emotional and physical labor from water infrastructure ' s fragility falls on women and girls. Second, many women who participated in this research described feelings of voicelessness in their daily experiences. One woman captured this idea, saying, ' In Kenya, no one ever listens to us women. They do not ask about our struggles or see them. We must be brave through our pain. ' From these conversations, we believe that it is critical to address these feelings of disempowerment by bringing women ' s voices and stories to the center of analysis (Sultana 2021).

Next, we outline the various emotional labors that women perform while navigating the daily impacts of fragile water infrastructures. We divide these emotional labors into the following subsections: worry and anxiety, anger, and shame. Residents often described how these emotions overlap and coincide or build on each other during their

labors for water, however. We divide them into these sections for analytical clarity, remaining cognizant not to oversimplify people ' s emotional experiences.

## ' Without Water, We Will Die ' : Worry and Anxiety

The emotional labor that residents perform is one of the largest impacts of the Kilifi North subcounty ' s fragile water infrastructure. Worry or anxiety about unpredictable water access and availability was prevalent across the sites, with 53 percent of households saying that they, in the last four weeks, worried about not having enough water to meet their household needs. This was more prevalent in Dakatcha (74 percent), Jilore (67 percent), and Mida (73 percent) compared to Dongo Kundu (26 percent). The frequency ranged from once in the month to more than two weeks out of the month. Anxiety or worry about finding enough water for the household was also commonly expressed during interviews. Much of the anxiety discourse echoed the MAWASCO slogan of ' water is life, ' which is prominently displayed above MAWASCO community water taps. One woman told me, ' Of course, I worry about my family having enough water. I worry because human beings depend on water. Without water, we will die. Water is life. '

Respondents also expressed worry and anxiety about alternative strategies to find water. When the MAWASCO taps run dry, many people in the communities fetch water from the river Galana or the small seasonal lakes that dot the landscape during the rainy season. Yet, the idea of walking to the river is anxiety-inducing for many due to the distance from home, dangers on the road, and the potential to encounter wildlife like hippos or crocodiles. One woman said, ' I am very worried when I have to go to the river to get water. The path is very long and goes through places I do not like going. It makes me feel afraid. ' Fear and anxiety were further expressed in the household surveys, where 26 percent of respondents indicated that, in the last month, they worried about the safety of the person getting water for their household.

Another area of worry surrounded the financial cost of water. A commonly cited strategy when the public taps were dry was to purchase water from private water taps which, although typically much more expensive, usually still had water flowing. Many residents in Kilifi North already live on the margins, however, where even ten extra shillings (equivalent to US$0.05) of daily expenditure can cause significant financial hardship. One woman, Grace, revealed:

I feel like crying when the MAWASCO tap is empty because then I have to go to the private water taps. They are very far so I will have to take a piki piki [motorbike] and I have to pay ten shillings for twenty liters. I will have to pay money I do not have. So, then my children will eat little that day or I cannot pay the school fees.

The trade-off that Grace described of having to choose where to spend limited household resources is a key form of emotional labor that people, typically women, must perform when navigating water insecurity from fragile infrastructure. Frequently during interviews, women explained the emotional stress associated with navigating the consequences of decision-making when constrained by limited resources. One woman epitomized this when she said:

It is terrible. When you have only 100 shillings to spend and you use that to buy water, it means there will be no food that day. And when the children are crying that they are hungry, but I cannot do anything because there is no money left, it makes me feel so bad.

Another woman explained how this is a gendered form of emotional labor:

Men can go wherever and sleep or leave the house. But women have the children crying, saying they are hungry, they are thirsty. We get more stress. It is a challenge we face to have nothing to give to them. It is very difficult.

This gendered emotional labor also extends to how, given the gendered division of child caregiving in Kenya, it is the women who perform most of the labor of comforting and explaining to children a lack of water. One woman told us:

It is difficult to explain to the children why they can have only one cup of water -they get upset and so I try to distract them, so they don ' t ask many questions. I feel bad that I can ' t help. It makes me want to cry. I just pray that God will make things better.

As both child care and water collection are primarily women ' s responsibility in much of the Global South, the emotional labor of worry and stress associated

with fragile water infrastructure is fundamentally gendered. Ignoring the disproportionate impacts of this fragility risks minimizing the experiences of women and further rendering their struggles invisible.

## ' We Have Been Abused ' : Anger and Frustration

This quotation further demonstrates the uncertainty that surrounds insufficient and inconsistent water supplies in Kilifi North. The lack of transparency from MAWASCO, combined with the difficulties in predicting when the taps will and will not have water, resulted in people feeling confused about their water supply. One respondent summarized this, saying, ' MAWASCO never tells us what is happening. We are just left to wonder. Two weeks of no water and no explanation or apology. It makes the situation very difficult for us. '

The uncertainty that stems from the water infrastructure ' s fragility gives rise to another emotional labor for residents -anger. Thirty-eight percent of households surveyed reported that, in the last month, they felt angry about their water situation. This was most pronounced in the Mida area, where sixty-one households (64 percent) said they felt angry about their water supply. Experiences of water insecurity were pronounced in Mida for several potential factors. First, Mida is a significantly more rural area than nearby Dongo Kundu and has little built-up tourist infrastructure like resorts, restaurants, or hotels. As such, there are significantly fewer and smaller pipes supplying Mida Creek. Second, Mida Creek is an intertidal zone, resulting in high saltwater incursions of wells, boreholes, and other surface water sources. Therefore, when the MAWASCO taps are dry, the people of Mida have few alternative water options. Finally, based on survey data, Mida has a higher rate of unemployment compared to the other sites. The unemployment rate in Mida among surveyed households was 32.6 percent, compared to an overall unemployment rate across the four sites of 20.7 percent. The unemployment rates of the other surveyed sites were 11.2 percent in Dongo Kundu, 18.3 percent in Jilore, and 14.0 percent in Dakatcha. Given these high rates of joblessness in Mida, households experience greater financial strains in procuring water from alternative sources when the MAWASCO taps are dry.

Interviews with the MAWASCO tap workers further highlighted the anger residents feel concerning water supply interruptions. One worker told us of a neighborhood in Mida where the people routinely chase after the meter readers demanding to know where their water is. He told us:

People are very angry at us [MAWASCO] because they blame us for the problems with the water. In some places if you come to read the meter, the people will beat you. '

## Another worker told us

We [meter readers] have been abused. We have gone to exchanging blows with people over the water. People are very angry, and they take it out on us.

This anger is another example of the emotional labor that residents of Kilifi North subcounty perform as they navigate a decaying and fundamentally fragile water infrastructure. This anger was exacerbated by the fact that residents felt their struggles were unacknowledged given the dominant technocratic assessments of water security. When we questioned whether the local or national government had provided or planned to address their water struggles, one woman laughed, saying, ' They [the government] say there is no problem here with water. Our struggles mean nothing to them. '

## ' I Have to Beg and Cry ' : Shame and Water Infrastructure

Fragile water infrastructure in Kilifi North and the resultant water insecurity also cultivated feelings of shame for many of those interviewed. Respondents described the vulnerability needed to ask to borrow money from neighbors or friends to purchase water or to ask private tap owners to allow one to take a line of credit. Taking loans or borrowing water was a commonly cited strategy for residents who faced financial hardship when trying to procure sufficient water. As one woman described:

If there are times that we have no water because we have no money or there is no water from the taps, I borrow from my neighbor or the owner of the tap and I promise to pay it back when I get my own water.

Results from the household survey confirmed this strategy, revealing that 32 percent of respondents took a loan to purchase water or borrowed water from private tap owners. This was most prevalent in

Dakatcha (40 percent of households), Jilore (52 percent of households), and Mida (45 percent of households). The frequency of how often respondents took loans or borrowed water ranged from once to almost every time they needed water in the six months.

Despite the prevalence of this strategy in coping with fragile water infrastructure, many described the shame and embarrassment associated with asking for loans or borrowing water. One woman explained, ' It makes me feel so bad to borrow water. I know many people are struggling and so I feel ashamed to ask for help. But I have no option. ' Again, this is primarily a gendered emotional labor as women are tasked with procuring water for the family and must therefore negotiate with neighbors, tap owners, and friends to borrow water. One woman described this when she said:

My husband does not tell me where to get water, only that it is my responsibility to get it. If the MAWASCO taps are empty and we do not have enough money to buy from the private taps, I will have to borrow. Sometimes, it is easy but other times, if we have borrowed too much that month or the tap owner is angry, I have to beg and cry. Even then, I sometimes will not get water.

In addition to the labor of negotiating and performing for water, the women interviewed also frequently described a discomfort associated with feeling reliant on others. One woman explained, ' It is not nice to rely so much on other people to get water because sometimes they will talk angrily to you or say you cannot have water. It is a bad feeling. ' As she described, women are often forced into a vulnerable position of asking others for assistance to meet a basic need and the uncertainty surrounding how that request will be received. It was not uncommon for the women to tell me that they had been denied their requests to borrow water or receive a loan, leaving them feeling ashamed and defeated.

## Embodied Impacts and Physical Labor

The fragile water infrastructure of Kilifi North also creates embodied impacts and physical forms of labor for residents. We interrogate here the material impacts on the body and outline how the physical labor associated with fragile water infrastructure similarly aligns with gendered subjectivities. Similar to the preceding section, we separate the bodily impacts into categories to organize the results (thirst, consuming unsafe water, physical labor), but these categories can sometimes overlap. For example, someone ' s thirst might drive them to consume seemingly unsafe water or walk long distances carrying heavy jerrycans. In this section, we want to demonstrate that emotional labor can result in different kinds of physical and emotional impacts and effects.

## ' My Throat and Mouth Become So Dry That It Is Painful ' : Thirst and Water

One of the most acute embodied impacts of water insecurity described by residents is thirst. Quantitatively, 92 households (24%) indicated that someone in their household went to sleep thirsty because there was no water available to drink at least once throughout the preceding month. This was most prevalent in Dakatcha (52% of households) and Mida (45% of households). The frequency of this occurring ranged from once to up to 15 times in a single month.

Interviews further highlighted these experiences of thirst. One woman described the physical discomfort of thirst: ' My throat and mouth become so dry that it is painful. ' Another woman, Martha, who works as a beach operator selling beaded bracelets and carved soapstone animals to tourists, told me of a time when she suffered from heat exhaustion and dehydration:

It was so hot that day and I had been walking up and down the beach since the morning (trying to sell the curios to tourists who stay along the kilometers of sandy beaches) and I had only a little water to drink. My son had been sent home from school because we couldn ' t pay the school fees, so I was trying to save everything I made that day. My head was hurting, and my mouth was so dry. I sat in the shade for some minutes and, when I tried to stand, it went black, and I fell over.

Martha ' s embodied experience tells us the story of water insecurity. An inability to procure sufficient drinking water due to her family ' s financial position and resource allocation needs came to bear on her embodied experience of thirst and heat exhaustion. Martha could not bring herself to spend the fifty shillings (US$0.39) on a bottle of water that she desperately needed that day.

Interviews additionally reflected that the physical discomfort of thirst was also gendered, as mothers reduced their own water consumption to allow their children sufficient water. For example, several women remarked that they would limit their water intake to one or two small cups per day to ensure that their children would not suffer from thirst. Another woman, Anne, summarized why this action was typically performed by women:

The men, they work as mjengos 7 or they drive the piki piki 8 so they need the water. But we women who don ' t have jobs, we can sacrifice for the family.

As the political ecology of the body highlights, health -in this case, thirst -is more than just the well-being of an individual body. Rather, it is a product of political, ecological, and gendered dynamics that shape how individuals interact with and experience socio-ecosystems and infrastructures.

## ' You Cannot Drink from Them ' : Drinking Unsafe or Unclean Water

In addition to the embodied experiences of thirst, residents also described the physical discomfort of drinking unclean or unsafe water. For many who could not afford the additional cost of paying for water from private taps or were unable to borrow water, the only options available when the MAWASCO taps are dry are to drink well water or to fetch water from the river or seasonal lakes. Residents explained, however, that, due to the salinization of the wells and boreholes along the coast, the wells are largely unusable for drinking water: ' they are too salty now. You cannot drink from them, or you will get very sick. We can only use this water for washing clothes or dishes. ' Others described how the river and lake water was unclean and so not a desirable source of water. One woman told me how she would fetch water from the seasonal lakes to save money when household resources are limited. She explained:

These lakes are not very clean as everyone goes and uses them to bathe or wash clothes or take their livestock to drink. You have to boil it very well, so it is a big effort. I feel better with the MAWASCO water because it is treated so you know it is safe. But, if the taps are empty and we have no money, what choice do we have?

The household survey reflected this perception, as 35 percent of households indicated that they, or someone in their household, had drunk unsafe water in the last four weeks. This was most pronounced in Jilore, where 74 percent of households surveyed indicated this. Additionally, 36 percent of households surveyed expressed that, in the last four weeks, they or someone in their households consumed water that looked, smelled, or tasted bad. Again, this was most significant in Jilore at 62 percent of households, and Mida at 58 percent of households. Those interviewed remarked that, allegedly, people rarely became physically ill from drinking unclean water as they ' are used to it. It is normal for us to drink this water, ' but many described the discomfort associated with consuming water that appeared dirty or unsafe.

This statement captures the physical and mental discomfort associated with feeling forced to consume dirty or unclean water. The biophysical need to consume water every day necessitates that residents turn to these less desirable solutions when public taps are dry and they do not have sufficient financial resources to purchase private water, enduring the physical discomfort to survive.

## ' The Men Don ' t See This ' : Physical Labor

In addition to these embodied experiences of water insecurity, fragile water infrastructure also requires forms of physical labor from residents. Limitations of the public water supply meant that women had to wake up earlier in the morning and be prepared to potentially stand in line for many hours to wait their turn at the water tap. As one woman explained, ' You must leave very early though to make sure you get water because the tap is always very busy. ' Another described how she often spent several hours queuing for water, which affected her ability to work as a mama karanga 9 : ' When I have to wait long to get water, I am late to buy the fish from the fishermen. I am left with the small fish that the others don ' t want. So, I sell less those days. '

In addition to long wait times that affected their other responsibilities, the women also described the physical impacts of standing for long periods and traveling longer distances to find working taps or to fetch water from the river. One woman explained that ' though the Galana is free water, it is very far and there are lots of hills to climb and it is very difficult for me physically. I will leave at around three in the morning and it takes me

six hours to fetch one jerrycan of water. ' The women explained that, after standing in line for several hours or walking long distances carrying full jerrycans of water, they were exhausted. Another told me, ' After walking to the Galana for water, I come home so tired. And then I still have to cook and wash the clothes. All I want to do is sleep but I can ' t. '

Thus far, this article has largely focused on the emotional and embodied experiences of infrastructural decay. Residents of Kilifi North, however, are also performing maintenance labor in their quest to procure sufficient water that is largely ignored by the state. Importantly, as we have described previously, securing water is a gendered household activity, as it is generally the responsibility of women and girls. This maintenance laboring is also fundamentally gendered. One such facet of gendered labor performed is the reporting of leaks or dry taps. For example, as one woman explained,

Because we [women] are fetching the water, we see when the taps are dry or when water is leaking. The men don ' t see this -they are not there at the water taps! So, we must tell MAWASCO so they can fix it.

Her statement reflects the gendered aspect of this maintenance labor, where women and girls are disproportionately burdened with the responsibility of identifying and reporting symptoms of decaying infrastructure.

In addition to reporting decays in the water infrastructure, women are also primarily responsible for monitoring whether repairs have been made. One woman described the efforts she takes to determine whether her nearby tap has water:

If the tap has been dry, I will call my neighbors before I go to check if the tap has water. If they tell me, it is dry, I will check if we have money to go to the private tap. If not, we [her and her neighbors] will walk to the Galana together to fetch water there. On the way, we look for MAWASCO workers to tell them to fix our tap. '

Her statements capture the multitudes of maintenance labors that women perform: identifying interruptions, monitoring them, procuring alternative sources of water, and reporting issues to MAWASCO. This labor is ignored within official discourses of water insecurity in Kilifi North, failing to acknowledge the gendered dynamics latent in fragile water infrastructures.

## Discussion

This analysis has argued that to understand the persistent water insecurity in Kilifi North despite the presence of water taps, the area ' s water infrastructure must be understood through a lens of fragility (Furlong 2014). Such a framing recognizes that infrastructure is not static and durable, but that periods of breakdown, maintenance, and repair are critical components of an infrastructure ' s life cycle. This perspective highlights how, as soon as infrastructures are constructed or repaired, they begin to decay and require continuous care and maintenance to remain functional. Recognizing this inherent fragility of infrastructure ' s lines of delivery illuminates why assessments that frame water insecurity as stemming solely from an absence of nearby water taps fail to capture the lived realities of communities facing water insecurity (Satterthwaite 2016; Lawhon et al. 2018). Although geographers have examined the fragility of infrastructure, such critiques have been devoid of embodiment. By examining how fragile infrastructure and embodiment intersect, this analysis exposes the vulnerabilities and labors hidden within the points and linearities of water infrastructure.

As this research suggests, frequent water supply interruptions due to old and decaying water infrastructure are the norm in much of Kilifi North. The fragility of this infrastructure results in profound experiences of water insecurity that create emotional and physical labor for residents, particularly women. Dominant analyses of water insecurity in the coastal provinces of Kenya tend to focus on the absence or presence of water taps (points of delivery) at the community level, rarely interrogating how insecurity can persist in the lines of delivery, even when sufficient water infrastructure ostensibly exists. Moreover, analyses that do extend beyond the community level tend to focus on quantifying water insecurity, failing to engage with the daily material and embodied struggles of residents facing water insecurity. Attention to the gendered emotional and physical labors performed by residents as they navigate water insecurity is wholly left out of official discussions of water struggles along the Kenyan coast.

Scholars of sociotechnical and socioecological systems have recently begun to understand the labor of maintaining and repairing such systems as acts of care (Corwin and Gidwani 2021). These acts of care are frequently rendered invisible and devalued and

are typically performed by those who are most burdened by their decay. Furthermore, this labor, although rarely acknowledged by the state, is understood as necessary to ' keep modern societies going ' as it is through such practices that ' the constant decay of the world is held off ' (Graham and Thrift 2007). Thus, although the national government and the county government of Kilifi North view its water infrastructure as complete and constant, it is the labor of residents -reporting leaks, following up with repair technicians, and finding novel strategies through which to navigate interrupted and inadequate water supply -that manages this fragility.

Feminist scholars like Saldanha (2020) have examined how these infrastructural failures are produced, maintained, and unequally experienced within communities. Responding to Ramakrishnan, O ' Reilly, and Budds ' s (2021) prompt to consider ' when, why, how, and by whom is infrastructure maintained, repaired, or left to decay, ' they have argued that the gendered dimensions of infrastructure fragility and maintenance labors have been little interrogated. This analysis explicitly examines the gendered emotional and physical labor that stems from fragile water infrastructure. As women are responsible for collecting water in much of the Global South, they experience these emotional struggles more centrally -worrying about securing sufficient water, making difficult decisions about resource allocation, feeling shame and embarrassment when asking for assistance from others, and comforting family members. Scholars have pointed to the unequal emotional burden and suffering embodied by women laboring for water collection. From this analysis, we endeavor to add to the growing scholarship demonstrating how infrastructural fragility intersects with women ' s gendered subjectivities to amplify the emotional and physical burden of water collection borne by women (Sultana 2011; Alda-Vidal et al. 2023).

Water insecurity research has pointed to its link to stress, emotional distress, symptoms of depression and anxiety, and ill mental health. Initial work by Ennis-McMillan (2001, 2006) in Mexico established that social inequity in water shortages was closely linked to feelings of distress, especially for women and people in lower socioeconomic classes. Women and men experience water insecurity differently given differing social expectations and roles (Wutich 2009; Sultana 2011; Tsai et al. 2016). Water insecurity is associated cross-culturally with distress, despite the diverse and culturally specific ways in which water is used for health, hygiene, rituals, and symbolism globally. For example, Sultana ' s (2011) work on arsenic-laden wells in Bangladesh and how women navigated procuring safe water shed important light on how a focus on emotion creates space for discussions about the gendered, intimate, and power-laden embodiments of daily unequal socionature experiences. Building from her work and that of other emotional political ecologists like GonzalezHildago, this analysis examines how negotiating fragile water infrastructure is a fundamentally emotional experience. As the interviews and household surveys reflect, anxiety, anger, and shame are all central to the lived experiences of communities that experience various forms of water insecurity. This ' daily suffering, ' as many described it, must be centered in contemporary investigations of water insecurity to fully grasp how the fragility of water infrastructure comes to bear on the daily lives of people.

This analysis has further uncovered how navigating fragile water infrastructure additionally creates gendered physical and embodied forms of labor for residents. Scholars of embodiment argue for the body as a key site of analysis as the body is a ' material and symbolically saturated site of everyday environmental subject formation and politics ' (Doshi 2017) and as a crucial site for understanding how emotions, subjectivity, and everyday life shape and are shaped by environmental struggles (Elmhirst 2015; Sultana 2015). Moreover, as Krieger (2005) noted, ' bodies tell stories that people cannot or will not tell ' (350). By attending to residents ' descriptions of physical and embodied experiences of water insecurity like thirst, consuming unclean or risky water, and the physical pain associated with walking long distances and carrying heavy jerrycans, women ' s bodies tell the story of fragile water infrastructure.

Importantly, testimonies from residents reflect how women ' s bodies are substituted for the decaying pipes. As Truelove (2021) explained, women ' s bodies, through their labor, ' become the infrastructure by which water is secured and moved ' (1019). Through their labors, women in the Kilifi North subcounty have become integral components of the water infrastructure, as it is through their emotional and physical labor that the infrastructure remains workable. This physically and emotionally demanding labor is wholly hidden in official narratives of

the Kilifi subcounty ' s water security, further marginalizing women. By analyzing the decay and fragility that characterize water infrastructure ' s life in Kilifi North, we seek to illuminate the physical and emotional labor enacted by ordinary people to secure water -a labor that often goes unacknowledged. From suffering from the physical discomforts of thirst and dirty water to the physical labor required to walk long distances or queue for significant periods of time, fragile water infrastructures require women to perform embodied and physical labor. These labors, which are wholly missed when viewing infrastructure as durable, profoundly affect residents ' lives.

## Conclusions

Through an examination of water access in the Kilifi North subcounty, this analysis interrogates the existence of water insecurity among residents despite official narratives of water security and the material impacts of this conflicting narrative. In so doing, we argue that water security can better be assessed through an understanding of infrastructural fragility rather than the absolute presence or absence of necessary infrastructure. By recognizing the inherent fragility of water infrastructure systems, this analysis has elucidated the material consequences for residents, as reflected through their gendered emotional and embodied experiences of water insecurity.

This work builds from the analysis of Ramakrishnan et al. (2021b), who argued that there are distinct sociopolitical struggles, socioecological arrangements, and embodied experiences that emerge during phases of infrastructural decay, repair, and maintenance that enable the uneven distribution of water that differentially affects women ' s bodies and lives. This work has built on existing scholarship to make visible the gendered emotional and embodied impacts of fragile water infrastructure in Kilifi North and the specific ways in which women ' s bodies become substituted for decaying pipes.

Foregrounding the emotional and physical labors of women navigating conditions of water insecurity is essential to capture how gendered intersectional identities influence how environmental change is experienced and understood. A recognition of the importance of gender does not negate the importance of other factors in experiences of environmental change but pushes for an understanding of human -environment relations through intersecting dynamics of gender, capitalism, colonialism, and violence.

Just as Guma (2022a) and others have argued that traditional one-size-fits-all approaches to development often fail due to the unique social, economic, and environmental conditions present, this research further underscores this sentiment by highlighting the deeply personal emotional and bodily experiences women (and men) go through as they navigate conditions of infrastructural fragility in their water system. Attending to these daily, intimate experiences is not only essential for acknowledging the suffering of these individuals but also for the varied ways that communities cope with and navigate conditions of insecurity. Doing so, we argue, positions us as scholars and development practitioners to challenge dominant, technocratic understandings of infrastructure and water security and develop contextually grounded interventions that better address these conditions. This analysis progresses the existing geographical scholarship on infrastructural fragility by explicitly examining how infrastructures, embodiment, and labor come together through the points and lines of water delivery to expose the gendered vulnerabilities of rural communities.

In the final days of field work, the first author sat with Esther, a resident of Mida Creek and a mother of four, discussing the water challenges facing her community. Her story echoes those that have been described here, detailing the worry, shame, and physical and emotional pain she navigates in her efforts to provide clean water for her family. Despite this, she remains hopeful. She tells me of her hopes that MAWASCO will fix the pipes and that one day she might be able to install a private tap at her boma . Esther and the first author have become close through her extensive field immersion, and she admitted to her that she is surprised by her optimism. ' You really think that MAWASCO will follow through on their promises to fix the pipes? ' Esther thought for a moment before responding: ' If we do not have hope, we have nothing. If enough of us cry out that we are suffering, eventually they will hear us. '

## Disclosure Statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

## Notes

1. Commonly known as the zebrawood tree ( Brachystegia spiciformis ).
2. Flour.
3. Traditional cornmeal.
4. Homestead encompassing multiple structures, including cattle sheds.
5. Homesteads.
6. White people (also used to denote foreigners).
7. Laborers.
8. Motorbikes.
9. Local women who buy fish from the fisherman and then fry and resell them along the roads.

## References

- Adams, E. A., J. Stoler, and Y. Adams. 2020. Water insecurity and urban poverty in the Global South: Implications for health and human biology. American Journal of Human Biology 32 (1):e23368. doi: 10.1002/ ajhb.23368.
- Adongo, C. 2014. The effects of utilization of tree products on conservation of Kaya Mudzimuvya Forest in Kilifi County, Kenya . Unpublished thesis, Kenyatta University.
- Ahlers, R., and M. Zwarteveen. 2009. The water question in feminism: Water control and gender inequities in a neo-liberal era. Gender, Place &amp; Culture 16 (4):409 -26. doi: 10.1080/09663690903003926.
- Alda-Vidal, C., M. Lawhon, D. Iossifova, and A. L. Browne. 2023. Living with fragile infrastructure: The gendered labour of preventing, responding to and being impacted by sanitation failures. Geoforum 141:103724. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2023.103724.
- Alexander, K. T., R. Dreibelbis, M. C. Freeman, B. Ojeny, and R. Rheingans. 2013. Improving service delivery of water, sanitation, and hygiene in primary schools: A cluster-randomized trial in western Kenya. Journal of Water and Health 11 (3):507 -19. doi: 10. 2166/wh.2013.213.
- Allen, I. K. 2020. Thinking with a feminist political ecology of air-and-breathing-bodies. Body &amp; Society 26 (2):79 -105. doi: 10.1177/1357034X19900526.
- Anand, N., A. Gupta, and H. Appel. 2018. The promise of infrastructure . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Awume, O., R. Patrick, and W. Baijius. 2020. Indigenous perspectives on water security in Saskatchewan, Canada. Water 12 (3):810. doi: 10.3390/w12030810.
- Bakker, K. 2012. Water security: Research challenges and opportunities. Science 337 (6097):914 -15. doi: 10. 1126/science.1226337.
- Bakker, K., and C. Morinville. 2013. The governance dimensions of water security: A review. Philosophical Transactions: Series A. Mathematical, Physical, and Engineering Sciences 371 (2002):20130116. doi: 10. 1098/rsta.2013.0116.
- Bellanova, R., and G. Glouftsios. 2022. Controlling the Schengen Information System (SIS II): The infrastructural politics of fragility and maintenance. Geopolitics 27 (1):160 -84. doi: 10.1080/14650045. 2020.1830765.
- Bj € orkman, L. 2018. The engineer and the plumber: Mediating Mumbai ' s conflicting infrastructural imaginaries. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 42 (2):276 -94. doi: 10.1111/1468-2427. 12526.
- Borgman, C. L., A. E. Sands, P. T. Darch, and M. S. Golshan. 2016. The durability and fragility of knowledge infrastructures: Lessons learned from astronomy. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology 53 (1):1 -10. doi: 10.1002/pra2.2016. 14505301057.
- Byrd, K., A. Williams, H. N. Dentz, M. Kiprotich, G. Rao, C. D. Arnold, A. C. Null, K. G. Dewey, and C. P. Stewart. 2017. Differences in complementary feeding practices within the context of the wash benefits randomized, controlled trial of nutrition, water, sanitation, and hygiene interventions in rural Kenya. The FASEB Journal 31 (Suppl. 1):165.161. doi: 10. 1096/fasebj.31.1\_supplement.165.1.
- Carse, A. 2014. Beyond the big ditch: Politics, ecology, and infrastructure at the Panama Canal: Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Carse, A. 2017. The infrastructure challenge. Issues in Science &amp; Technology 33 (3):5.
- Carse, A., and D. Kneas. 2019. Unbuilt and unfinished: The temporalities of infrastructure. Environment and Society 10 (1):9 -28. doi: 10.3167/ares.2019.100102.
- Cohen, A. 2012. Rescaling environmental governance: Watersheds as boundary objects at the intersection of science, neoliberalism, and participation. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 44 (9):2207 -24. doi: 10.1068/a44265.
- Cook, C., and K. Bakker. 2012. Water security: Debating an emerging paradigm. Global Environmental Change 22 (1):94 -102. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.10.011.
- Corwin, J. E., and V. Gidwani. 2021. Repair work as care: On maintaining the planet in the capitalocene. Antipode. Advance online publication. doi: 10.1111/ anti.12791.
- Davidson, J., and C. Milligan. 2004. Embodying emotion sensing space: Introducing emotional geographies . London and New York: Taylor &amp; Francis.
- De Coss-Corzo, A. 2021. Patchwork: Repair labor and the logic of infrastructure adaptation in Mexico City. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 39 (2):237 -53. doi: 10.1177/0263775820938057.
- Deitz, S., and K. Meehan. 2019. Plumbing poverty: Mapping hot spots of racial and geographic inequality in US household water insecurity. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 109 (4):1092 -1109. doi: 10.1080/24694452.2018.1530587.
- Doshi, S. 2017. Embodied urban political ecology: Five propositions. Area 49 (1):125 -28. doi: 10.1111/area. 12293.
- Elmhirst, R. 2015. Feminist political ecology. In The Routledge handbook of gender and development , ed. T. Perreault, G. Bridge, and J. McCarthy, 82 -90. London and New York: Routledge.
- Faria, C., and S. Mollett. 2016. Critical feminist reflexivity and the politics of whiteness in the ' field. ' Gender, Place &amp; Culture 23 (1):79 -93. doi: 10.1080/ 0966369X.2014.958065.

- Fredericks, R. 2014. Vital infrastructures of trash in Dakar. Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East 34 (3):532 -48. doi: 10.1215/ 1089201X-2826085.
- Fredericks, R. 2018. Garbarge citizenship: Vital infrastructures of labor in Dakar, Senegal . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Furlong, K. 2014. STS beyond the ' modern infrastructure ideal ' : Extending theory by engaging with infrastructure challenges in the South. Technology in Society 38:139 -47. doi: 10.1016/j.techsoc.2014.04.001.
- Garrick, D., and J. W. Hall. 2014. Water security and society: Risks, metrics, and pathways. Annual Review of Environment and Resources 39 (1):611 -39. doi: 10. 1146/annurev-environ-013012-093817.
- Graham, S., and N. Thrift. 2007. Out of order: Understanding repair and maintenance. Theory, Culture &amp; Society 24 (3):1 -25. doi: 10.1177/ 0263276407075954.
- Grey, D., and C. W. Sadoff. 2007. Sink or swim? Water security for growth and development. Water Policy 9 (6):545 -71. doi: 10.2166/wp.2007.021.
- Guma, P. K. 2021. Situating urban smartness: ICTs and infrastructure in Nairobi ' s informal areas. In Shaping smart for better cities , ed. A. Aurigi and N. Odendaal, 321 -38. UK: Academic Press.
- Guma, P. K. 2022a. On tackling infrastructure: The need to learn from marginal cities and populations in the Global South. Journal of the British Academy 10:29 -37. doi: 10.5871/jba/010.029.
- Guma, P. K. 2022b. The temporal incompleteness of infrastructure and the urban. Journal of Urban Technology 29 (1):59 -67. doi: 10.1080/10630732. 2021.2004068.
- Hall, J., and E. Borgomeo. 2013. Risk-based principles for defining and managing water security. Philosophical Transactions: Series A. Mathematical, Physical, and Engineering Sciences 371 (2002):20120407. doi: 10. 1098/rsta.2012.0407.
- Hausermann, H. 2021. Spirit hospitals and ' concern with herbs ' : A political ecology of healing and being-incommon in Ghana. Environment &amp; Planning E: Nature &amp; Space 4 (4):1313 -29.
- Huberts, A., D. Palma, A. C. Bernal Garc  ı a, F. Cole, and E. F. Roberts. 2023. Making scarcity ' enough ' : The hidden household costs of adapting to water scarcity in Mexico City. PLoS Water 2 (3):e0000056. doi: 10. 1371/journal.pwat.0000056.
- Irandu, E. M. 2004. The role of tourism in the conservation of cultural heritage in Kenya. Asia Pacific Journal of Tourism Research 9 (2):133 -50.
- Jackson, P., and A. H. Neely. 2015. Triangulating health: Toward a practice of a political ecology of health. Progress in Human Geography 39 (1):47 -64. doi: 10. 1177/0309132513518832.
- Jacob Arriola, K. R., A. Ellis, A. Webb-Girard, E. A. Ogutu, E. McClintic, B. Caruso, and M. C. Freeman. 2020. Designing integrated interventions to improve nutrition and WASH behaviors in Kenya. Pilot &amp; Feasibility Studies 6:1 -16.
- Kaimba, A., S. De Villiers, and S. Wambua. 2019. Does protection of marine areas safeguard coral reefs from human-source pollution? Frontiers in Environmental Science 7:89. doi: 10.3389/fenvs.2019.00089.
- Krieger, N. 2005. Embodiment: A conceptual glossary for epidemiology. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 59 (5):350 -55. doi: 10.1136/jech.2004.024562.
- Lautze, J., and H. Manthrithilake. 2012. Water security: Old concepts, new package, what value? In Natural resources forum , vol. 36 (2), 76 -87. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
- Lawhon, M., D. Nilsson, J. Silver, H. Ernstson, and S. Lwasa. 2018. Thinking through heterogeneous infrastructure configurations. Urban Studies 55 (4):720 -32. doi: 10.1177/0042098017720149.
- Loodin, N. 2023. Emotionality in domestic water use in the Global South: Who cares who is deprived of? Environment and Social Psychology 9 (2):1 -9. doi: 10. 54517/esp.v9i2.2099.
- Mass  e, F., N. Giv  a, and E. Lunstrum. 2021. A feminist political ecology of wildlife crime: The gendered dimensions of a poaching economy and its impacts in Southern Africa. Geoforum 126: 205 -14.
- McClanahan, T., S. Mwaguni, and N. Muthiga. 2005. Management of the Kenyan coast. Ocean &amp; Coastal Management 48 (11 -12):901 -31. doi: 10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2005.03.005.
- Meehan, K., J. R. Jurjevich, N. M. Chun, and J. Sherrill. 2020. Geographies of insecure water access and the housing -water nexus in US cities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 117 (46):28700 -7. doi: 10.1073/pnas. 2007361117.
- Mitchell, T. 2014. Introduction: Life of infrastructure. Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa &amp; the Middle East 34:437 -39. doi: 10.1215/1089201X-2826013.
- Mollett, S. 2017. Gender ' s critical edge: Feminist political ecology, postcolonial intersectionality, and the coupling of race and gender. In Routledge handbook of gender and environment , ed. S. MacGregor, 146 -58. London and New York: Routledge.
- Mollett, S., and C. Faria. 2013. Messing with gender in feminist political ecology. Geoforum 45:116 -25. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2012.10.009.
- Moradi, A. 2008. Confronting colonial legacies -Lessons from human development in Ghana and Kenya, 1880 -2000. Journal of International Development 20 (8):1107 -21. doi: 10.1002/jid.1514.
- Mulwa, F., Z. Li, and F. F. Fangninou. 2021. Water scarcity in Kenya: Current status, challenges and future solutions. OALib 8 (1):1 -15. doi: 10.4236/oalib.1107096.
- Munt, S. R. 2012. Journeys of resilience: The emotional geographies of refugee women. Gender, Place &amp; Culture 19 (5):555 -77. doi: 10.1080/0966369X.2011.610098.
- Nicholls, R. 2013. Research and Indigenous participation: Critical reflexive methods. In New methods in social justice research for the twenty-first century , ed. A. Possamai-Inesedy and G. Gwyther, 18 -27. London and New York: Routledge.

- Nichols, C. E., and V. J. Del Casino, Jr. 2021. Towards an integrated political ecology of health and bodies. Progress in Human Geography 45 (4):776 -95. doi: 10. 1177/0309132520946489.
- Nightingale, A. J. 2011. Bounding difference: Intersectionality and the material production of gender, caste, class and environment in Nepal. Geoforum 42 (2):153 -62. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2010.03.004.
- Nyantakyi-Frimpong, H. 2021. Climate change, women ' s workload in smallholder agriculture, and embodied political ecologies of undernutrition in northern Ghana. Health &amp; Place 68:102536. doi: 10.1016/j. healthplace.2021.102536.
- Padowski, J. C., L. Carrera, and J. W. Jawitz. 2016. Overcoming urban water insecurity with infrastructure and institutions. Water Resources Management 30 (13):4913 -26. doi: 10.1007/s11269-016-1461-0.
- Petteway, R., M. Mujahid, and A. Allen. 2019. Understanding embodiment in place-health research: Approaches, limitations, and opportunities. Journal of Urban Health: Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine 96 (2):289 -99. doi: 10.1007/s11524-01800336-y.
- Pidgeon, N., and K. Henwood. 2004. Grounded theory. In Handbook of data analysis , ed. M. Hardy and A. Bryman, 625 -48. London: Sage.
- Pini, B., R. Mayes, and P. McDonald. 2010. The emotional geography of a mine closure: A study of the Ravensthorpe nickel mine in Western Australia. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 11 (6):559 -74. doi: 10. 1080/14649365.2010.497850.
- Ramakrishnan, K., K. O ' Reilly, and J. Budds. 2021a. Between decay and repair: Embodied experiences of infrastructure ' s materiality. Environment &amp; Planning E: Nature &amp; Space 4:669 -73. London: Sage. doi: 10. 1177/2514848620980597.
- Ramakrishnan, K., K. O ' Reilly, and J. Budds. 2021b. The temporal fragility of infrastructure: Theorizing decay, maintenance, and repair. Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space 4 (3):674 -95. doi: 10.1177/ 2514848620979712.
- Saldanha, A. 2020. A date with destiny: Racial capitalism and the beginnings of the Anthropocene. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 38 (1):12 -34. doi: 10.1177/0263775819871964.
- Satterthwaite, D. 2016. A new urban agenda? Environment &amp; Urbanization 28:3 -12. doi: 10.1177/ 0956247816637501.
- Senanayake, N., and B. King. 2019. Health -environment futures: Complexity, uncertainty, and bodies. Progress in Human Geography 43 (4):711 -28. doi: 10.1177/ 0309132517743322.
- Shanguhyia, M. S. 2015. Population, tradition, and environmental control in colonial Kenya . New York: Boydell &amp; Brewer.
- Shepheard-Walwyn, E. 2014. Culture and conservation in the sacred sites of Coastal Kenya . Canterbury, UK: University of Kent.
- Shiva, V. 2010. Resources. In The development dictionary: A guide to knowledge as power , ed. W. Sachs, 228 -43. London: Zed.
- Star, S. L., and K. Ruhleder. 2016. 20 steps toward an ecology of infrastructure: Design and access for large information spaces. In Boundary objects &amp; beyond: Working with Leigh Star , ed. G. Bowker, S. Timmermans, A.Clarke, and E. Balka, 377-417. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Stokes, K., and A. De Coss-Corzo. 2023. Doing the work: Locating labour in infrastructural geography. Progress in Human Geography 47 (3):427 -46. 03091325231174186. doi: 10.1177/03091325231174186.
- Stokes, K., and M. Lawhon. 2023. What counts as infrastructural labour? Community action as waste work in South Africa. Area Development &amp; Policy 9:1 -21.
- Sultana, F. 2009. Fluid lives: Subjectivities, gender and water in rural Bangladesh. Gender, Place &amp; Culture 16 (4):427 -44. doi: 10.1080/09663690903003942.
- Sultana, F. 2011. Suffering for water, suffering from water: Emotional geographies of resource access, control and conflict. Geoforum 42 (2):163 -72. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2010.12.002.
- Sultana, F. 2015. Emotional political ecology. In The international handbook of political ecology , ed. R. Bryant, 633 -46. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
- Sultana, F. 2020. Embodied intersectionalities of urban citizenship: Water, infrastructure, and gender in the Global South. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 110 (5):1407 -24. doi: 10.1080/24694452. 2020.1715193.
- Sultana, F. 2021. Political ecology 1: From margins to center. Progress in Human Geography 45 (1):156 -65. doi: 10.1177/0309132520936751.
- Truelove, Y. 2011. (Re-) Conceptualizing water inequality in Delhi, India through a feminist political ecology framework. Geoforum 42 (2):143 -52. doi: 10.1016/j. geoforum.2011.01.004.
- Truelove, Y. 2019. Rethinking water insecurity, inequality and infrastructure through an embodied urban political ecology. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water 6 (3):e1342.
- Truelove, Y. 2021. Gendered infrastructure and liminal space in Delhi ' s unauthorized colonies. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 39 (6):1009 -25. doi: 10.1177/02637758211055483.
- Truelove, Y., and H. A. Ruszczyk. 2022. Bodies as urban infrastructure: Gender, intimate infrastructures and slow infrastructural violence. Political Geography 92:102492. doi: 10.1016/j.polgeo.2021.102492.
- Tsai, A. C., B. Kakuhikire, R. Mushavi, D. Vo  rechovsk  a, J. M. Perkins, A. Q. McDonough, and D. R. Bangsberg. 2016. Population-based study of intrahousehold gender differences in water insecurity: Reliability and validity of a survey instrument for use in rural Uganda. Journal of Water and Health 14 (2):280 -92.
- Van Beek, E., and W. L. Arriens. 2014. Water security: Putting the concept into practice . Stockhlm, Sweden: Global Water Partnership.
- Van Houweling, E. 2016. ' A good wife brings her husband bath water ' : Gender roles and water practices in Nampula, Mozambique. Society &amp; Natural Resources 29 (9):1065 -78. doi: 10.1080/08941920.2015.1095377.

- Versleijen, N., and J. Hoorweg. 2008. From farming to fishing: Marine resource conservation and a new generation of fishermen. Western Indian Ocean Journal of Marine Science 7 (1).
- Wambua, C. K., P. W. Wekesa, and S. Mwangi. 2021. The impact of colonial policies on the Waata people of Kilifi County, Kenya, 1895 -1963. East African Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies 4 (1):44 -55. doi: 10. 37284/eajis.4.1.508.
- Wiesmann, U. M., B. Kiteme, and Z. Mwangi. 2014. Socio-economic atlas of Kenya: Depicting the national population census by county and sub-location . Nairobi: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics.
- Wutich, A. 2009. Intrahousehold disparities in women and men's experiences of water insecurity and emotional distress in urban Bolivia. Medical Anthropology Quarterly 23 (4):436 -54.
- Wutich, A., W. Jepson, C. Velasco, A. Roque, Z. Gu, M. Hanemann, and W. W. Li. 2022. Water insecurity in the Global North: A review of experiences in US colonias communities along the Mexico border. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water 9 (4):e1595.

MARLOTTE DE JONG is a PhD Candidate in the School for Environment and Sustainability at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. E-mail: dejongmc@umich.edu. Her work is rooted in emotional and embodied political ecology and feminist geography and seeks to understand how communities know and experience environmental and social change.

BILAL BUTT is an Associate Professor in the School for Environment and Sustainability at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. E-mail: bilalb@umich.edu. His research focuses on the environmental politics of life and death, environmental and social change under uncertainty in East African drylands, and ecological and health dynamics in the tropics. He teaches classes on power, geopolitics, conservation, and environmental violence.