## CREATIVE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, SUSTAINABILITY, AND EXCLUSION IN RURAL AREAS*

## RACHEL C. FLEMING

ABSTRACT. Creative  economy projects appear appropriate for sustainable rural development, but the benefits and challenges of initiating a creative economy in a rural setting are not well understood. Descriptive data and qualitative research with artists, planners, and residents of Chatham County, North Carolina, suggest that, in terms of sustainability, creative  economic development projects can be more effective as economic strategies than as environmental and social justice strategies. In this article I  suggest that  difficulties stem  from  conditions specific to a rural setting, including a particular relationship with landscape, scarce resources for arts-based development, social isolation and fragmentation, different concerns for artists and planners, and the nature of rural gentrification. In Chatham County, arts-development discourse, particularly  the idea of 'arts space,' is  used  as a way  in which  to envision the diverse rural community that artists value yet may work to obscure the exclusionary processes based on race and class that operate in rural gentrification. Keywords: creative economy, discourse, North Carolina, sustainability, rural gentrification.

It  could be a market  niche, 'Pittsboro, the antidote to the hectic life.'. . . Someone needs to write a scenario to see what Pittsboro could be like in ten years if we use art, or if we have pawn shops and fast food. It's a crossroads community: it could be a disaster or a diamond. Art is the difference.

-Artist, Chatham County, North Carolina g s rural economies restructure, will creative economy strategies that nurture the arts and heritage  resources be appropriate for the transition? Creative economy strategies often build on existing assets and are relatively economically and environmentally sustainable when  compared  with large-scale industry. Arts-based projects also recognize  the value of art  in our society  and can be an important source of pride in rural communities. However, the benefits and challenges of initiating a creative economy in a rural setting, and its links to the concept of sustainability, are not well understood.

In this article I seek to determine the unique characteristics  of creative economy strategies  in Chatham County,  North Carolina and,  in a context of rural gentrification, examine links between the creative economy and sustainability I address quantitative trends and describe creative projects in the county, then turn to qualitative research on the challenges and benefits of creative economy in a rural setting and a critical examination of sustainability,  exclusion, and discourse. Although creative strategies

~-

* I  thank Harvey Goldstein, Nichola Lowe, Sarah Butzen, Stuart Rosenfeld, Donna  Goldstein, Marnie Thomson, Joni Palmer, Bill  Fleming, Jeanie  Puleston Fleming, Brian O'Connor, the editors of the Geographical Review, two anonymous reviewers, Susan Buckinghani, and Rob Krueger, for guidance and insightful  comments that  have greatly improved this manuscript. Above all, I  wish to thank those in Chatham County who offered me their time and good will during this project. The opinions expressed and any errors remain my sole responsibility.

rX, Ms. FLEMING is a doctoral candidate in anthropology at the University of  Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 08390.

appear to contribute more effectively to economic goals than to environmental and social  justice goals, as is often the case in urban locales, conditions specific to a rural setting affect  the outcome.  These conditions include ideas about landscape and community change, few formal resources for artists, the nature of  rural gentrification, social isolation, and debates over art and development.

Economic development strategies based on the arts are part of a larger shift in economic theory that prioritizes knowledge, ideas, and creativity (Castells 1996; Venturelli 2001). Arts advocates, academics, and governments treat cultural or creative industries as a fundamental part of modern, particularly urban, economies (Mount Auburn Associates 2000; Scott 2000; Psilos and Rapp 2001; O'Connor and others 2003). Richard Florida argued that arts activity will help encourage a socially tolerant atmosphere and a revitalized downtown, which in turn will attract knowledge-based workers, or the creative class (2002). Arts projects are often put forth as examples of sustainable development because they improve community collaboration, learning outcomes for children, and civic participation, bridge ethnic and class divides, and contribute to environmental sustainability through connections with nature and 'clean' industry (Darlow 1996; Matarasso 1997; Adams and Goldbard 2001; Reardon 2005).

Much of the literature on creative economies has focused on urban settings,  yet many artists choose to live in rural locations near metropolitan  areas because of affordable living costs, access to markets, and the attractiveness  of a rural landscape (Bunting and Mitchell 2001; Mitchell, Bunting, and Piccioni 2004). Based on evidence from case studies in rural Minnesota, Ann Markusen finds that artists' centers, artist live/work spaces, and performing arts facilities are attracting extralocal spending and new residents (Markusen 2007). And David McGranahan and Timothy Wojan apply quantitative analyses based on Florida's model to find that natural amenities in U.S.  rural areas  are the strongest lure for creative class workers (McGranahan and Wojan 2007). Rural examples of successful arts-based strategies -such as the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art in North Adams, Massachusetts; Asheville, North  Carolina  and  its surrounding counties; and the Rockingham Arts and Museum Project in Bellows Falls, Vermont-share key characteristics, such as long-term backing by energetic leaders and multiple organizations, locations with established tourism ties, access to larger populations,  and a historic downtown building stock (Zukin 1995; R.  Phillips 2004; Handmade in America 2007). It is also important to consider sustainability in a rural community as different from that in an urban setting. A rural landscape is a place of imagination and idealized lifestyles, resulting in complex layers of  urban-to-rural migration, class conflict, and land-use change (Cloke and Thrift 1987; M. Phillips 1993; Halfacree 2006). Rural gentrification can stimulate rural economies and environmental preservation in a simultaneous, if contested, process (Ghose 2004); and rural environmental justice movements, particularly in the U.S.  South, have linked social justice  and environmental  aims under  a concept of  'just sustainability' (Bullard 2000; Ageman, Bullard, and Evans 2003).

Examining creative projects in terms of sustainable development offers insight into the complexities of rural and creative economies. Sustainable  development is most often defined as 'development that meets the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs,' from the 1984 U.N. World Commission on Environment and Development meetings (WCED 1987, 43), further refined by the 1995 U.N. World Summit on Social Development's  'Copenhagen Declaration'  to include 'economic development, social development and environmental protection' (United Nations 1995). Many authors  have  explored  contradictions in  the  combination of 'sustainable' and 'development' (O'Riordan 1985; Sneddon 2000); others argue that  sustainability discourse  is used in a superficial  manner to make development projects appear more palatable (Wilbanks 1994; Gunder 2006). The search for alternative development strategies is taking place in the context of neoliberal restructuring, in which cities and regions have had to become increasingly entrepreneurial (Harvey 1989; Jessop 1997). Place-marketing competition, which includes creative city development, can lead to increased surveillance and elite-controlled spaces (Zukin 1995; Peck and Tickell 2002), and creative  strategies  often neither address  social  inequality  nor benefit local residents (Waterman 1998; Eisinger 2000). Malcolm Miles and Jamie  Peck both contend that, although in theory creative economy rhetoric promotes social tolerance and environmental preservation, its implementation facilitates status quo urban development and elite-centered policies (Miles 1998; Peck 2005).

The relationship between creativity and the economy is complex and problematic, for the value of  the creative process cannot be explained in economic terms and cannot be directly induced by policy (Grant 1991; Caves 2000; Leslie and Rantisi 2006). The concept of 'cultural economy' has been the subject of lively debate in recent geographical literature that, according  to Chris Gibson and Lily Kong (2005), has focused both on the economic geography of creative activities and on a more poststructural  understanding of culture and the economy as mutually constitutive ideas (Bridge and Smith 2003; Castree 2004; Amin and Thrift 2007). David Throsby suggested  that we add 'cultural capital'  to traditional economic categories of physical,  human, and natural capital,  as a way of measuring items and activities that have cultural value in that they contribute to 'shared elements of human experience,' such as a historic building, a novel or a poem, a work of art or a piece of music (i999,6). Cultural capital, which Throsby also suggests using to evaluate 'culturally sustainable development' (2005,13), is a particularly useful concept for rural settings, for it not only relates to economic value and tangible products but also encompasses subjective qualities such as place, well-being, and aesthetic values.

## LINKING  ARTISTS, ECONOMIC  DEVELOPMENT, AND SUSTAINABILITY

This study derives from interviews and participant  observation conducted in the winter and spring of 2005 in  Chatham County, North  Carolina. While studying economic and community development  at the University of North  Carolina at Chapel Hill, I worked with a local nonprofit  organization assessing the economic

impact of the arts in the state. Because many arts-based policy ideas come from macrolevel economic data, I sought to discover and address the practical obstacles in implementing arts-development  projects on the ground. I chose Chatham County, south of Chapel Hill, as a research site because it has a well-established artist community and arts activities  with economic development implications,  yet official economic policies do not center on the arts.' In addition, the county is experiencing intense development pressure, has a growing Latino community, a historic African American population, and marked income inequality, making it well suited to an exploration of questions about arts-based economic development, rural transition, inclusion, and equity.

My approach builds on the extended case study method, combining qualitative research with  quantitative contextual data  (Burawoy 1998; Yin 2003), and on the ethnographic 'snowball'  method, which asks an initial set of contacts to name additional contacts (Bernard 2000,179). I collected social,  political, and economic statistics about Chatham County and identified organizations and actors likely to be involved in economic development and arts-related  activities. I identified artists through the directory of local artists and word of mouth, attempting to gather a diverse group in terms of  financial success, affiliations with local arts groups, ethnic background, and artistic medium. For arts organizations, I began with the Chatham County Arts Council and extended my research to other organizations and artsrelated businesses, such as galleries, cafks, and music and art stores. I identified economic development actors by focusing  on local planning,  administrative,  educational, and community development entities.

I  interviewed thirty-eight  people, including fifteen  artists, fourteen arts-support  actors, and nine economic development actors (Table I).'  Approximately 80 percent of my interviews were formal, lasting from twenty to ninety minutes, most often at the interviewee's home though occasionally at a public caf6, and the remainder on the telephone, all recorded in handwritten  notes. I focused my questions on whether my interviewees saw a role for the arts in economic development and on whether they perceived obstacles or useful strategies in potential and existing arts-related  project^.^  I also attended several arts events-including a play, gallery openings, music concerts, an annual studio tour, and street fairs-participated in three Arts Council board meetings and one planning board meeting, and made several site visits to arts projects.

## ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS IN  CHATHAM COUNTY

Chatham County is in central North Carolina, adjacent to two major metropolitan areas  with more than 1 million inhabitants each: the Research Triangle area, encompassing Raleigh, Durham, and Chapel Hill, three major research universities, and Research Triangle Park; and the Piedmont Triad area, including Greensboro, Winston-Salem, and High Point (Figure 1). Chatham County, by contrast is rural, with a population density of seventy-two  people per square mile in 2000, compared with the state average of 165 people per square mile (U.S. Census Bureau 2001). It had a

TABLE I-CHARACTERISTICS OF CHATHAM COUNTY, NORTH CAROLINA STUDY PARTICIPANTS

|                                                         |   TOTAL |   MALES |   FEMALES |
|---------------------------------------------------------|---------|---------|-----------|
| Group                                                   |         |         |           |
| Artists                                                 |      15 |       7 |         8 |
| Arts-supportorganizations,arts-relatedsmall businesses  |      14 |       8 |         6 |
| Economic development, local, and county representatives |       9 |       6 |         3 |
| Total                                                   |      38 |      21 |        17 |
| Ethnicbackground                                        |         |         |           |
| White                                                   |      31 |      17 |        14 |
| AfricanAmerican                                         |       4 |       2 |         2 |
| Hispanic                                                |       3 |       2 |         1 |
| Total                                                   |      38 |      21 |        17 |
| Medium                                                  |         |         |           |
| Visual arts (painting, ceramics,sculpture,woodworking)  |      10 |         |           |
| Music (bluegrass,blues, old time)                       |       3 |         |           |
| Literature                                              |       1 |         |           |
| Drama                                                   |       1 |         |           |
| Total                                                   |      15 |         |           |

population of more than 55,000 in 2004 and is growing fast, with a population increase of nearly 12 percent between 2000 and 2004,5.5 percent higher than the state as a whole for this period (NCOSBM 2004) (Figure 2).

The county's municipalities comprise Pittsboro, 2007 population 2,490, on the county's eastern side, Siler City, population 8,372, on the western side, Goldston, population 352, on the southern end of the county, and part of Cary, population 88, a Raleigh suburb that barely stretches into Chatham County ( NCOSBM 2008) (Figure 3). Residential development is generally dispersed, most  often  single-family homes surrounded by acres of open space but with several upscale planned communities  between Pittsboro and Chapel Hill. Between 1990 and 2000 the white population in Chatham County increased  by 21 percent; the African  American population decreased by 5 percent, and the Latino population  increased by a remarkable 741 percent  (Table 11). In 2000, Chatham's population of about 50,000 was 72 percent white, 17 percent African American, and 10 percent Hispanic or Latino. Significantly, the white population of Pittsboro grew 36 percent but decreased in Siler City by 18 percent, the African  American population of Pittsboro grew 48 percent yet decreased by 5 percent in the county as a whole, and the Hispanic populations in both towns grew by more than  1,000 percent  (US. Census Bureau 1991, 2001). In 2007, only one-fifth of the county's population lived in its municipalities. Between 2000 and 2007, Pittsboro  grew nearly 12 percent, Siler City grew 20 percent, and the part of Cary that lies in Chatham County grew 363 percent, indicating suburban growth (NCOSBM 2008).

Chatham County's economy historically relied on agriculture, livestock, and textile production, but these have declined because the residential tax base now far outpaces commercial revenue. The homeownership rate was about 77 percent in 2000,

FIG. 1-The total population of North Carolina in 2000. Source: U.S.  Census Bureau 2001, based on a map at NCSDC 2000. (Cartography by William A. Allen, Columbine, Inc. of Maine)

<!-- image -->

I

FIG. 2-North Carolina population change, 2000-2004. Sources: U.S.  Census Bureau  2001, 2005, based on a map at NCREDC 2004. (Cartography by William A. Allen, Columbine, Inc. of Maine)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

FIG.  3-The Chatham County region. (Cartography  by William A. Allen, Columbine, Inc. of Maine)

TABLE 11-DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGE IN PITTSBORO, SILER CITY, AND CHATHAM COUNTY, NORTH CAROLINA, 1990 AND 2000

|                |        | WHITES   | WHITES    | AFRICAN AMERICANS   | AFRICAN AMERICANS   | HISPANICS   | HISPANICS   |
|----------------|--------|----------|-----------|---------------------|---------------------|-------------|-------------|
|                | TOTAL  | Number   | YO Change | Number              | YO Change           | Number      | % Change    |
| 1990           |        |          |           |                     |                     |             |             |
| Pittsboro      | 1,436  | 1,001    |           | 412                 |                     | 17          |             |
| Siler City     | 4,808  | 3,393    |           | 1,293               |                     | 184         |             |
| Chatham County | 38,759 | 29,194   |           | 8,794               |                     | 564         |             |
| 2000           |        |          |           |                     |                     |             |             |
| Pittsboro      | 2,226  | 1,362    | 36        | 610                 | 48                  | 196         | 1,053       |
| Siler City     | 6,966  | 2,774    | -18       | 1,336               | 3                   | 2,740       | 1,389       |
| Chatham County | 49,329 | 35,322   | 21        | 8,355               | -5                  | 4,743       | 74 1        |

Sources: U.S. Census Bureau 1991,2001.

and the median value of an owner-occupied house was $127,000, both  above state medians. The median household income  was nearly $43,000 in 2000,  the sixth highest in the state; median incomes in Pittsboro and Siler City were nearly 20 percent lower (U.S. Census Bureau 2003). In 2000, more than 55 percent of Chatham residents commuted outside the county for work (U.S. Census Bureau 2002). In 2007, the private sector accounted for 94 percent of all county employment; manufacturing,  for 31 percent; and arts, for less than 2 percent (BLS 2008). Finally, Chatham had the lowest retail sales in the region in 2005, having lost an estimated 55 percent of  its potential retail sales to surrounding counties ( CCE 2006).

FIG.  4-Downtown Pittsboro, Chatham County, North Carolina. (Photograph by the author, spring 2005)

<!-- image -->

FIG. 5-Muralist Stacye Leanza's depiction  of  the diverse history  of  this hardware  store in downtown Siler City, Chatham County, North Carolina. (Photograph by the author, spring 2005)

<!-- image -->

Demographic and economic trends in Chatham County indicate challenges in providing employment, retail establishments,  and infrastructure for its growing population. In coming years the county will likely struggle to update its roadways, sewer and water pipelines,  reservoirs,  and school system,  given the 15,000  new homes whose construction had been approved for construction over the next ten years and given a populace reluctant to vote for increased property taxes (Friedman 2007). Residential development is a source of fierce controversy,  as a local newspaper report noted: 'Chatham, which has long offered an affordable retreat for young professionals,  retirees, artists and nature-lovers, is headed for widespread clear-cutting in the Triangle's  most unregulated county' (Strom 2004).  The controversy has effectively split the county: The eastern  portion, tied to Chapel Hill and Raleigh, has organized several antigrowth citizen advocacy groups; the western portion, more closely tied to the Piedmont Triad area, is generally progrowth because it will benefit from greater tax revenue without landscape change or infrastructure problems. Although the situation in 2005 was characterized by growth, the current downturn in the housing market  and overall economy is affecting the outlook for housing construction and population increase in Chatham County, at least in the short term. For example, residential building permit requests have dropped sharply, and some developments have been put on hold or are seeing slow home sales because of general problems in the housing market (Eby 2008).

## ARTS  ACTIVITIES IN CHATHAM COUNTY

Chatham has historically been home to potters, craft artists, bluegrass and blues musicians, and writers. Since the 1970s artists have been drawn to the county by the rural landscape, affordable housing, proximity to an academic community and metropolitan areas, and, over time, by the presence of established artist networks (Figure 4). More than 240 artists live in the county, working in visual, literary, and performing arts, and several arts-based projects related to development are in the area.

Many projects and activities in Chatham help artists participate in the community and local economy. A long-running annual studio tour features nearly sixty juried  artists, clustered mainly in and north  of  Pittsboro, who sell their work to visitors from their home studios. An arts-based small business incubator, funded in part by state and local government  and recently opened in downtown Siler City, provides business assistance, inexpensive studio space,  and a gallery for twenty artists. Siler City also has a public art program, including murals on downtown buildings (Figure 5 ) . The Chatham County Arts Council coordinates an online Artists' Directory ( CCAC zoos), a gallery in Pittsboro, business-skills  workshops for artists, an artist-in-residence program for local schools, a summer arts festival,  and charity fund-raisers  using donated art (Figure 6). Pittsboro also has a contemporary art gallery,  a cafk that presents live music and sells work by more than fifty local artists, and a renovated textile mill containing small businesses, an organic food cooperative, and art and performance space. Tourists visit the county for writing work-

shops  run  by local  authors,  cooking  schools  at  high-end restaurants,  and  agrotourism at one of the more than forty organic farms,  some of which also offer work by local artists. Several public music events are held, such as a summer music series at a historic general store near Pittsboro and a large-scale, three-day music festival at a nearby farm.

Artists have made innovative connections with environmental  and social  justice causes. Several artists who first worked together making life-size chess sets from scrap metal recently founded a biodiesel plant,  which makes alternative  vehicle fuel. They use their metalworking skills in their new enterprise and draw visitors to the grounds through large outdoor sculptures,  informal dance performances,  and amateur film shoots. Artists are also part of a green building boom in Chatham, collaborating with builders on homes that feature green design and custom interior painting and detailing. The local community college is a site of informal networks, drawing artists and environmentalists  through thriving programs in ceramics, sustainable farming, and green building. In addition, artists volunteer their time in local schools and social service organizations,  help run a foundation that supports local blues musicians, and regularly donate work to charity fund-raisers.

Minority populations in Chatham have a wealth of talented artists and artistic entrepreneurs who are not well represented in formal art organizations. African American artists in Chatham include painters, quilters, writers, and a large group of musicians who draw on traditions in blues and bluegrass-style  string music. One African American musician and entrepreneur owns a successful  music staging  business, allowing it to employ local youth, support gospel music in church, and run a small recording studio at reduced rates. An artist from the substantial Latino community in Siler City creates complex airbrush paintings for automobiles and restaurants, and another makes decorations  from dolls,  glassware,  and craft trimmings for weddings, baptisms, birthdays, quincifieras, and other events. Latino artisans are employed in the construction industry, and musicians play in mariachi bands for hire. However, at the time of this research, the Chatham County'Arts  Council board had only  one Latino member and no African American member ( CCAC 2008), very few minority artists are listed in the Arts Council's Artists' Directory,  and none is either on the studio tour or represented at the arts in~ubator.~

## SETTING

## CREATIVE ECONOMY IN A  RURAL

Its rural setting offers a particular set of resources to artists in Chatham, who expressed a great appreciation for the beauty of the rural landscape, in addition to county's affordability,  access to a large market, and nearby university communities. One successful  artist explained that he had moved to a rural part of Chatham from elsewhere in the state for several reasons, including 'the beauty of the county, its artistic  reputation, a diverse  and tolerant community,  and the ability  to afford a nice house.'  Another artist described  the intangible  value of the setting,  saying,  'I live in an old farmhouse on many acres that feed my growth and development but that wouldn't show up on economists' radars!'

FIG. &amp;The Chathani Arts Gallery in Pittsboro,  Chatham  County,  North Carolina.  (Photograph  by the author,  spring 2005)

<!-- image -->

All  groups expressed some ambivalence about the role of  the arts as an economic engine and provider of a social good. Most of the economic development actors considered the arts important for society but did not think they should be publicly subsidized, in part because of  their  subjective, unquantifiable value and because other demands, such as maintaining the county's  infrastructure, were more pressing. Arts supporters countered that arts should be publicly subsidized because of their role in the community, variously stating that the arts 'enrich people's lives through enjoyment and participation,'  'contribute to learning, especially for children,' 'create a unique identity for Chatham  and Pittsboro,'  and foster an inclusive community by 'creating meeting places for different people.' Although some artists referred to their role in the local economy,  they emphasized how art contributes to personal growth, helping people express their identity and putting emotions into tangible form. Artists were split about whether they should receive subsidies, some insisting they should succeed or fail like other entrepreneurs, others explaining that the market does not account for the full value of  their work. One artist expressed both a desire for support and fierce economic independence: 'I'd love to be able to work less and be paid more! But so does everybody else in the world. My biggest need is for the economy  to remain healthy, for people to have good incomes

to spend on art. I also need more time to develop my ideas. I'd like more freedom from economic constraints, .  .  . but I'm not expecting it to be given to me.' Despite this  tension,  artists  suggested  many avenues for government  assistance,  such  as helping them find health insurance, marketing the arts, giving grants to individual artists and art in the schools programs, and sponsoring festivals and performance venues.

Art differs from other industries because of its solitary  nature, which is amplified in a rural setting.  All of the artists said they tend to work alone, and a writer added, 'Writing doesn't have any visual or immediate result. .  .  . It's very contained, solitary, reserved work.' One person suggested that artists in general are individualistic and hard to organize, so, without a representative organization or an official spokesperson,  their concerns are difficult to represent to politicians. Most artists also pointed out that the arts are difficult to promote in an organized way because they are so diverse and unique, explaining that word of mouth and self-promotion were more effective than formal marketing campaigns. They did, however, appreciate limited collaboration in the Artists' Directory, participation in the studio tour, and sharing Web site and mailing costs. Other artists said they do not need local promotion because their market is international and Internet based.

The individual  isolation  of artists  and paucity of resources  for arts projects  contribute to a fractious  environment for arts-support groups.  The Arts Council negotiates a tension between its aim to assist artists and its need for artists'  donations and volunteer time. After collaborating for more than ten years, the studio tour formally split from the Arts Council,  at least in part because artists on the tour felt that the council was more involved in bringing art to the public, often by asking artists to donate work or volunteer for charity events and festivals,  than in assisting artists as businesspeople. Other artists chose not to participate in the tour because it is juried, which they viewed as overly exclusive. Most artists were skeptical  about the incubator project, one because it only allows incubator artists, not artists from the studio tour, to display their work in the gallery; and another described 'geographical cliques' of artists in particular areas of the county.

I found little interaction between artists and economic development  actors,  due in large part to the divergent nature of their daily  activities,  and almost  no common places where artists and government representatives cross paths or have occasions to work together. For example, both groups considered the cafk  in Pittsboro that sells  art  a  gathering  place for artists  but not government  representatives,  even though it is adjacent to municipal buildings. None of my interviewees was a member of both an arts organization and the county's economic development commission, and few artists or arts supporters had participated in local government beyond antigrowth advocacy. Furthermore, planning and creating art are fundamentally different  activities.  One  planner insightfully  characterized  the difference:  'Art  is transformative,  while business is a transaction, and can the two ever meet?'  The planner went on to note that planning has a regulatory nature and takes a long time to produce something, whereas art is not regulated, does not need much infrastruc-

ture in order to create, and visible results occur relatively quickly.  Artists speculated that they differed from economic development actors because they did not prioritize economic success. For example, some artists said they did not want to expand their business, despite high demand, because they were satisfied with their current level of work and income, and other artists said they would not sell their work to developers or other projects with which they did not agree.

Each group's perceptions of the other groups of  interviewees were generally misinformed  and at times overtly judgmental. Several in the economic development group speculated that  artists would be difficult to work with because they imagined artists to be poorly organized and not serious businesspeople. One suggested that, for artists to be taken seriously,  'They have to dress the part-they have hands covered in paint and clay, or they're in tie-dye dresses-they must come in with a business plan.' Some countered that they saw artists as intelligent and hard working; others stressed their respect for artists who held a second job, as many of them did. However, several interviewees wanted to see economic data on the contribution of the arts to the local economy and expressed concern about artists who avoid paying sales tax on their work by selling it 'under the table.' When informed of these speculations, the artists emphasized that they did pay sales taxes; one exclaimed, 'I'd be afraid not to!' When asked whether they worked with 'economic development officials' on any projects, many artists thought I meant developers. When I clarified that I meant local government officials,  several artists reported that they did not work with economic development entities except when applying for home studio permits.  Planners, however, did not see themselves as aligned with developers, but rather as intermediaries; as one said, 'We're more involved in just dealing with all the new development requests and trying to manage them in a controlled way.' A businessperson remarked, 'The common ground is money: Everyone wants money, but it will take work. Each group needs to come to the table and let down the barriers,' suggesting that a partnership between artists and planners must come from mutual interests.

Social fragmentation also affected the involvement of minority groups in the arts. As noted, few minorities were involved in the studio tour, Arts Council, or the arts incubator despite some efforts to reach out. For example,  when the Arts Council noticed that few minorities were at a summer music festival in 2003, they invited local African American gospel choirs and a school step group to the 2004 event. These performances attracted a large African American audience, but, as an observer noted, 'the  council got people there, but they still stood separately.'  A  spokesperson told me that the arts incubator was trying to establish ties with Siler City's Latino population by working with a nearby Hispanic store owner and by looking for a translator, remarking, 'We've been trying desperately to get Hispanics here .  . . and we've been doing some things for low-income people as well, such as offering free  space  and help with  business  plans.' However, another  incubator affiliate thought that the Latino community was 'more interested in soccer and their own social events'  and added that the language barrier was a major problem. An African

American arts supporter suggested that the low level of  minority participation in formal arts activities  had to do  with a lack of initial  contact and cultural differences: 'There's talent out there, but who's tapping it? No one is bringing them forward. African American artists do want to become known, but they don't know who to ask about how to do it and aren't comfortable asking people of another culture about it. They need to have a place [in which] people feel welcome, comfortable,' African  American musicians  were also negatively  affected  by the lack of performance venues and the critical mass of people and other musicians who typically support live music in urban settings.

Given the level of  social disconnects in Chatham's creative economy, how do people connect through art projects?  Art engages people in dialogue because it is often intentionally challenging or disturbing; as an arts supporter noted, 'People are afraid of art. If it's cows it's fine, but a naked woman! Not fine.' Several  projects rely on people who have experience in many social groups and work as intermediaries, translating literally and culturally. For example, the art incubator's founding director convinced public officials to offer financial support because he could, as one explained, speak to them 'in numbers.'

## RURAL  DEVELOPMENT, SUSTAINABILITY, AND EXCLUSION

Groups in Chatham County saw the role of development differently, each in a distinctly rural context and with different implications  for sustainability.  For the most part, economic  development  actors saw the definition  and purpose of development in terms of growth, specifically  attracting commercial  and industrial development, creating jobs, and increasing the tax base. Many felt that economic development should also contribute to the quality of life in an area,  and one mentioned 'sustainable growth as important. A major concern for economic development actors was the lack of infrastructure in the county, in terms of  old or insufficient water and sewer systems, roads, and public schools, whose maintenance directly affects lowincome populations. Many were concerned that residential taxes would rise due to development,  resulting in a lack of affordable  housing, and many felt an urgency to attract industry and commercial development to relieve some of this tax burden. One lamented Chatham's uneven wealth distribution, noting that the county does not qualify  for many state rural development  grants due to its wealthy northeastern section. Artists saw development in a similar way, in that they believed it should provide jobs and help county residents make money. However, all respondents emphasized that maintaining a high quality of  life is  a crucial goal of economic development,  and several  talked about  equitable  distribution  of benefits  from growth, environmental stewardship, growing in a 'controlled  way,' and improving educational opportunities for  residents.  Arts  supporters also  thought development  should improve the local economy and quality of life for everyone. Significantly,  most also thought the purpose of economic development was not to develop the county too much or too fast, stressing the need for sustainable  small businesses, maintaining the character of the area, reducing out-commuting, and encouraging  tourism. One

planner remarked, 'There is no good communication; everyone says they're not in the loop with development.' Overall, most of my interviewees seemed confused about the evolving characteristics of impending development.

The nature of rural gentrification seems to pit  different groups in Chatham County against one other. Many artists and arts supporters saw this division as one side of  the county against the other, or as liberal newcomers against conservative old-timers, and as a choice between 'good development, with  arts-based businesses and restaurants in small  towns surrounded by  preserved countryside, or  'bad' development, in the form of  homogeneous subdivisions and big-box stores. Although some artists and arts supporters realized that they could not begrudge new residents-because some are recent arrivals themselves-they wanted the county to retain a sense of  rural beauty and uniqueness. An arts supporter argued that the county needed to attract people with innovative ideas, 'well-paid people with time on their hands to support the arts,'  through promoting the arts, a healthy environment, and other amenities, such as 'dark night skies, a rural landscape, a healthy riparian  zone, recreational  opportunities, and high-tech connectivity'; an artist suggested that arts-based businesses would 'bring quality people out.' This awareness of the benefits of attracting the 'creative class' acknowledges  that this type of growth has a better chance of supporting the arts and protecting the environment than do other types-and also that it is a form of gentrification.

When discussing the issues of  impending development, gentrification,  social divisions, or what government could do to support the arts, artists and arts supporters expressed a desire for 'arts space'  or 'community space,'  often envisioned as a way to 'bring people together,' twenty-six times in twenty-nine interviews. Representative examples of arts space discourse are:

A performing arts center.. . with gallery space,  and exhibits.. . would bring community together, artists together.

A performing  arts center would foster community  spirit.

Art space could bring a sense of cohesiveness. . . . Y o u ' d  work with people  you're not politically  aligned with, you could help at-risk  teenagers,  there would be less litter, less crime. It would be a good image for the town.

We need venues for artists to sell work and for performing[ ,]  . .  . we need a space for crossing  over of social and economic  groups.

Public music brings  different populations  together in Chatham.

The problem is there is [a  lack of] community  space in Chatham;  there is no regular space in Chatham  where I see black people  and will run into them. How can w e  have economic  development  and arts without having space to have a burger with a black person?  The dilemma is  [that] most people in Chatham .  .  . like diversity and are open-minded,  but it's also [highly]  segregated.

We   need  a community space, but it's not on the agenda because the energies are directed now for or against the new development.

People from different backgrounds and social groups do communicate through creating and consuming art, and public art programs have turned out to be impressive  community development  strategies.  However, in Chatham what art spaces  would offer minorities or low-income residents,  or how they would bring people together, is not clear. Just because people are in the same room does not necessarily mean that they will make a genuine connection or that institutionalized racism or poverty will be affected.  The sentiment reveals good intentions about a figurative space to connect with  different  people,  and perhaps  anxiety about the trade-offs  of gentrification, in that the arts community clearly values a diverse community and wants to help  marginalized  people.  The artists' antigrowth  efforts  may  slow gentrification, which  may keep the cost of living affordable, but  neither  result is guaranteed. If sustainability includes meaningful action to improve the quality of life for low-income residents, then  the economic development actors, who must address infrastructure  and affordable housing due to the nature of their jobs, are thinking more concretely about equity. Members of  the arts community involved in social justice charity and volunteer work are also working toward social equity. Instead of talking openly about race, class, and gentrification, however, envisioning a future with a physical space for the arts becomes a way to avoid these uncomfortable topics while expressing a desire for social and economic equity. Arts development discourse is not used in a pernicious way to justify capitalist  development,  but it can nonetheless work subtly to steer the debate away from equity and toward obscuring the injustice of gentrification.

## TOWARD MEANINGFUL SUSTAINABILITY IN  RURAL  CREATIVE ECONOMIES

My study of Chatham County identified several challenges to sustainability efforts in rural creative economies, with implications for geographical theory, further research,  and practical application in terms of resource availability, social fragmentation, and the  role of  arts discourse in  gentrification. First, rural settings have resources, such as natural beauty, rural landscapes,  and small-town social communities, that are not necessarily available elsewhere. However, rural governments and organizations do not often have the resources to support artists formally, because of  a lack of  funds, but  also because the artists are relatively few in number and because supporting entities do not have common goals. Building trust through projects that benefit both policymakers and artists, along with understanding creative workers  as a diverse group, are important  features of  successful creative economy projects (Banks and others 2000; Lloyd 2002; Markusen 2006).

Second, although arts organizations run by artists themselves seem to be most useful in negotiating for artists'  needs, in rural settings artists are often socially and geographically isolated, making organizing or planning projects more challenging. In addition, though by no means limited to rural settings, lack of  social overlap between artists and planners contributes to competing discourses. Social fragmentation can be exacerbated by the particularities of rural development, which in this case is relatively secretive and divisive. A clear, open dialogue between developers

and community members would help guide development to fit the landscape and community goals.

Third, gentrification  and exclusion are complex processes whose ties to race and class are referenced in  particular discourse. In his study of urban  change in London, Peter Jackson found that race is talked about not directly but through discourse about 'modernity,'  'neighborhood change,' and 'Englishness' (1998,103). Loretta Lees found that governments in the United States  and the United Kingdom use the terms 'livability,'  'environmental sustainability,' and 'sense of community' to promote urban  redevelopment  and obscure the inherent  inequality in gentrification processes (2000,393).  Although the presence of artists often presages gentrification, David Ley reminded us that this is not the artists' fault but the result of factors largely beyond their control, with artists often themselves the victims of rising prices (2003).  In North Carolina, as elsewhere, Community Land Trusts have been effective in creating affordable housing for artists as well as other low-income residents and merit consideration for more widespread application.

Further study of rural gentrification through the lens of creative economy, using qualitative and quantitative methods, would contribute to understanding the role and meaning of art in our communities. Music is a promising topic for research on social interaction, particularly for understanding minority participation in the creative economy. In addition, it would be useful to more specifically  characterize social relationships, such as applying a networks concept to trace economic interactions and social processes, and to better define the role of intermediaries. Finally, if  the goal of sustainability is to benefit everyone in a community, under what conditions can arts-based activities effectively accomplish it?  Further defining the meaning of sustainability for creative projects will shed light on this and other issues in the culture/economy debate.

In the preface to his treatise on arts and the economy Bruno Frey stated, 'Without a sound economic base, art cannot exist, and without creativity the economy cannot flourish (2000,  v).  In practice,  creativity  and economics  are  intertwined Artists must become businesspeople  to have a career; a strong economy leads to greater support  for the arts; and innovation  and creativity contribute to ideas and a vibrant society. Still, involving art in a planned  project is  complicated, in part because art expresses intangible values and ideas that are intensely personal, intuitive, and resistant to being induced. As the situation in Chatham County indicates,  we should strive to better understand the complexity  of these projects. Involving artists in sustainable planning holds great potential, but such efforts, if implemented with the boilerplate superficiality present in so many civic arts plans and without talking directly about uncomfortable issues like race and inequality, will lack the vitality and meaningful treatment of sustainability that inspire personal commitment and true innovation.

## NOTES

- 1 . The Chatham County Arts Council lists more than 240 member artists in its online directory, but because there is a fee for listing, many artists are not included in it (CCAC zoos).

2. In order to protect the confidentiality of my interviewees'  statements, I describe my respondents only in general terms. The real world is not as simple as my three-part grouping suggests: Many interviewees fit more than one category, each category is nuanced, and views differ markedly within each group.
3. Although  I  used specific questions  to guide formal  interviews, I  allowed interviewees to expand on topics that interested them. The questions covered such items as: how the interviewees defined 'the arts'  and 'economic development'; what they thought the role of the arts  and of economic development should be in the community; whether they believed that the arts had a role in economic development and, if so, how the arts were currently contributing to these strategies or could be used in the strategies; whether tensions or barriers might be preventing these strategies from working or being initiated; and what means of addressing tensions were currently working. I also asked artists about their  major career concerns and whether any organization or network was helping  them in their work, and questioned both artists and economic development actors about whether they could see benefits or drawbacks to working with each other. I ended each interview with  an open-ended question about any issues the respondents believed were important but had not yet been addressed.
4. I evaluated minority participation in arts organizations in 2005 through personal experience with the Chatham Councy Arts Council board meetings and by cross-checking member directories with personal communications and some field visits. Because statistics on ethnicity are not recorded for these organizations, no definitive figures on minority participation exist, but by investigating several sources I believe my evaluations are reasonably accurate.

## REFERENCES

- Adams, D., and A. Goldbard. 2001. Creative Community: The Art ofcultural Development. New York Rockefeller Foundation.
- Agyeman, J., R. D. Bullard, and B.  Evans, eds. 2003. Just Sustainabilities:  Development in an Unequal World. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
- Amin, A., and N.  Thrift. 2007. Cultural-Economy and Cities. Progress  in Human  Geography 31  (2): 143-161.
- Banks, M., A. G. Lovatt, J.  O'Connor, and C. Raffo. 2000. Risk and Trust in the Cultural Industries. Geoforum 31  (4):  453-464.
- Bernard, H. R.  2000. Social Research  Methods: Qualitative  and Quantitative Approaches. Thousand Oaks, Calif.:  Sage Publications.
- BLS  [Bureau of Labor Statistics]. 2008. Occupational Employment Statistics: May 2007 State Occupational Employment  and Wage Estimates, North Carolina.  [www.bls.gov/OES/current/oes-nc .htm].
- Bridge, G., and A. Smith. 2003. Intimate Encounters: Culture-Economy-Commodity. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 21 ( 3 ) : 257-268.
- Bullard,  R. D.  2000. Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class, and Environmental  Quality. 3rd ed. Boulder,  Colo.: Westview Press.
- Bunting, T. E., and C. I. A. Mitchell. 2001. Artists in Rural Locales: Market Access, Landscape Appeal and Economic Exigency. Canadian Geographer 45  (2):  268-284.
- Burawoy,  M. 1998. The Extended Case Method. Sociological Theory 16  (I): 4-30.
- Castells, M. 1996. The Rise ofthe Network Society. Oxford Blackwell.
- Castree, N. 2004. Environmental Issues: Signals in the Noise? Progress  in Human  Geography 28  (I): 79-90.
- Caves, R. E. 2000. Creative Industries: Contracts between Art and Commerce. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
- CCAC [Chatham County Arts Council]. 2008. Artists' Directory. [www.chathamarts.org/artists /artists.html].
- CCE [Center for Competitive Economies]. 2006. Chatham County Economic Scan, Retail Pull Factor. Compiled by Brent Lane and Jason Jolley. Chapel Hill, N.C.:  University of North  Carolina Kenan-Flagler School of Business.
- Cloke, P. ,   and N. T h r i f t . 1987. Intra-Class  Conflict in Rural Areas. Journal ofRural Studies 3 (4):  321-333.
- Planning Practice
- Darlow,  A. 1996. Cultural Policy and Urban Sustainability: Making a Missing Link? and Research 11 (3): 291-301.

- Eby, R. 2008. Development Stutters in Chatham County. Carrboro [North  Carolina] Citizen, 13  March. [ www.carrborocitizen.com/main/~oo8/o~/i~/development-stutters-in-chatham-county/] .
- Eisinger, P. 2000. The Politics of Bread and Circuses: Building the City for the Visitor Class. Urban Aflairs Review 35 (3):  316-333.
- Florida, R. 2002. The Rise ofthe Creative Class:  And How It's  Transforming Work,  Leisure, Community and Everyday Life. New York Basic Books.
- Frey, B.  2003. Arts and Economics: Analysis and Cultural Policy. New York Springer.
- Friedman, L.  2007.  Schools Leader Resigns. News Q Observer [Raleigh,  N.C.], 15 November, §B, 3.
- Ghose, R. 2004.  Big Sky or Big Sprawl? Rural Gentrification and the Changing Cultural Landscape of Missoula, Montana. Urban Geography 25 (6): 528-549.
- Gibson, C., and L.  Kong.  2005.  Cultural Economy: A Critical Review. Progress in Human Geography 29  (5):  5 4 1 - 5 6 1 .
- Grant, D. 1991. The Business ofBeing an Artist. New York Allworth Press and the American Council for the Arts.
- Gunder, M. 2006. Sustainability: Planning's Saving Grace or Road to Perdition? Journal of Planning Education and Research 26 ( 2 ) : 208-zzi.
- Halfacree, K.  2006.  From Dropping out to Leading on? British Counter-Cultural Back-to-the-Land in a Changing Rurality. Progress in Human Geography 30 (3):  309-336.
- Handmade in America.  2007.  Handmade in America Web site. [www.handmadeinamerica.org].
- Harvey, D.  1989.  From Managerialism to Entrepreneurialism: The Transformation of Urban Politics in Late Capitalism. Geografiska Annaler 71B (1): 3 - 1 7 .
- Jackson, P . 1998.  Constructions of 'Whiteness' in the Geographical Imagination. Area 30 (2): 99106.
- Jessop,  B.  1997.  The Entrepreneurial City: Re-Imaging Localities,  Redesigning  Economic Governance, or Restructuring Capital?  In Transforming Cities:  Contested Governance and New Spatial Divisions, edited by N. Jewson and S. MacGregor, 28-41. London: Routledge.
- Lees, L. 2000. A Reappraisal of Gentrification: Towards a 'Geography of Gentrification.' Progress in Human Geography 24 (3): 389-408.
- Leslie, D., and N. M. Rantisi. 2006. Governing the Design Economy in Montreal, Canada. Urban  Aflairs Review 41  (3):  3 0 ~ 3 3 7 .
- Ley,  D.  2003.  Artists, Aestheticisation and the Field  of Gentrification. Urban Studies 40 (12): 25272544.
- Lloyd, R.  2002.  Neo-Bohemia: Art and Neighborhood Redevelopment in Chicago. Journal o f Urban Aflairs 24 ( 5 ) : 517-532.
- Markusen, A.  2006.  Urban Development and the Politics of a Creative Class: Evidence from a Study of Artists. Environment and Planning A 38 (10): 1921-1940.
- . 2007. A Consumption Base Theory of Development: An Application to the Rural Cultural Economy. Agricultural and Resource Economics Review 36 (1): 9-23.
- Matarasso, F . 1997. Use or Ornament? The Social Impact o f Participation in the Arts. Stroud, England Comedia.
- McGranahan, D., and T. Wojan.  2007.  Recasting the Creative Class to Examine Growth Processes in Rural and Urban Counties. Regional Studies 41 (2): 197-216.
- Miles,  M.  1998. A Game of Appearance:  Public  Art and Urban  Development-Complicity or Sustainability?  In The Entrepreneurial City, edited by T. Hall and P .   Hubbard, 203--224.  Chicester, England Wiley.
- Mitchell, C. J. A., T. E. Bunting, and M. Piccioni. 2004. Visual Artists: Counter-Urbanites in the Canadian Countryside? Canadian Geographer 48 ( 2 ) : 152-167.
- Mount Auburn Associates. 2000. The Creative Economy Initiative: The Role ofthe Arts and Culture in New England's Economic Competitiveness. Boston: New England Council.
- NCOSBM [North Carolina Office of  State Budget and Management].  2004. 2004 Revised  County Population Estimates. Raleigh: North Carolina Office of State Budget and Management.  [www .osbm.state.nc.us/ncosbm/facts\_and-figures/socioeconomic-data/population-estimates/demog /revoqpa.html].
- . 2008.  July 2007 Municipal  Estimates by County.  Raleigh: North Carolina Office of State Budget and Management. [ www.osbm.state.nc.us/ncosbm/facts\_and-fi~res/socioeconomic-data /population~estimatesdemog/munpopQX.html].

- NCREDC [North Carolina Rural Economic Development Center]. 2004 . [North Carolina] Population  Change, 2000-2004. Map. Raleigh: North Carolina Rural Economic Development Center. [ www.ncruralcenter.org/databank/trendpage~Population.asp].
- NCSDC [North Carolina State Data Center]. 2000. Total NC Population, 2000. Map. Raleigh: North Carolina Office of State  Budget  and  Management. [ www.osbm.state.nc.us/ncosbm/facts-and-figures /census/maps/tot-pop.html] .
- O'Connor, J.,  A. G. Lovatt, M. Banks, and C. Raffo. 20 0 3 . Cultural Industries  and  the  City. London: Sage.
- O'Riordan, T. 1 9 8 5 . Research Policy and Review 6 : Future Directions in Environmental Policy. Environment and PlanningA 1 7   ( 1 1 ) : 14 3 1 - 1 4 4 6 .
- Peck, J.  2 0 0 5 . Struggling with  the Creative Class. International Journal of Urban and Regional  Research 2 9   ( 4 ) : 74 0 - 7 7 0 .
- Peck, J . , and A. Tickell. 2002 . Neoliberalizing Space. Antipode 34  ( 3 ) : 380- 4 0 4 .
- Phillips,  M. 1993 . Rural Gentrification and the Processes of Class Colonisation. Journal of Rural Studies 9 (2): 12 3 - 1 4 0 .
- Phillips, R. 2004 . Artful Business: Using the Arts for Community Economic Development. Community Devdopment Journal 3 9   ( 2 ) : 1 1 2 - 1 2 2 .
- Psilos, P.,  and K. Rapp. 20 0 1 . The Role of the Arts in Economic Development. Economic and Technology Policy Studies, Issue Brief. Washington, D.C.:  National  Governors Association, Center for Best  Practices. [www.nga.org/cda/files/o6~5oiARTSDEV.pdf].
- Reardon, C. 20 0 5 . Deep in the Arts of Texas. Ford  Foundation Report, Winter, 1 6 - 2 1 .
- Scott, A. J.  2 0 0 0 . The Cultural Economy of Cities. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.
- Sneddon, C. S. 2000. 'Sustainability''  in Ecological Economics, Ecology and Livelihoods:  A Review. Progress in Human Geography 24  ( 4 ) :   521-549.
- Strom, J. 2004. Paradise Tossed. Independent Weekly [Durham,  N.C.], 7 January. [www.indyweek.com /durham/~oo~-oi-o~/cover.html].
- Throsby, D. 19 9 9 . Cultural Capital. Journal ofcultural Economics 23 (I): 3-12 .
- . 2005 . On the Sustainability of Cultural  Capital.  Research Papers, 5 1 0 . Sydney, Australia: Macquarie University, Department of Economics. [www.econ.mq.edu.au/research/zoo~/cult~cap throsby.pdf] .
- U.S. census  Bureau. 1991. Census  of Population  and Housing, 1 9 9 0 . Summary  File 1  ( S F I ) . [http://facthder .census.gov] .
- . 20 0 1 . Census of  Population and Housing, 2000. Summary File 1 ( S F i ) . [http://factfinder .census.gov] .
- . 2002. Census of Population  and Housing, 2000. Summary File 3 (SF3). (http://factfinder .census.gov].
- . 2003 . Census of Population and Housing, 2000. Summary File 4 (SF4).  [http://factfinder .census.gov].
- . 2005. Annual Estimates of the Population for Counties of North Carolina: April 1 ,  2 0 0 0 to July 1 ,   2 0 0 4   (CO-ESTzooq-01-37). [www.census.gov/popest/counties/tables/CO-EST~oo~-oi - 3 7 . x l S l .
- United Nations. 1 9 9 5 . Introduction, Point 6, Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development. World Summit for Social Development. [www.un.org/esa/socdev/wssd/decl~intro.html].
- Venturelli, S. 20 0 1 . From  the Information Economy to the  Creative Economy: Moving Culture to  the Center oflnternational Public Policy. Cultural Comment Series.  Washington, D.C.: Center for Arts and Culture.
- Waterman, S. 19 9 8 . Carnivals for Elites? The Cultural Politics of Arts Festivals. Progress  in  Human Geography 22 ( 1 ) : 5 4 - 7 4 .
- WCED [World Commission on Environment and Development]. 1 9 8 7 . Our Common Future [The Brundtland Report]. New York Oxford University Press.
- Wilbanks, T. J. 19 9 4 . 'Sustainable Development' in Geographic Perspective. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 84  ( 4 ) : 5 4 1 - 5 5 6 .
- Yin, R. K.  2 0 0 3 . Case Study Research Design and Methods. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage. Zukin, S. 1 9 9 5 . The Cultures of Cities. Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell.