<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Dividing 'Above' and 'Below': Constructing Territory for Ecosystem Service Conservation in the Ecuadorian Highlands

## Audrey Joslin

To cite this article: Audrey Joslin (2020): Dividing 'Above' and 'Below': Constructing Territory for Ecosystem Service Conservation in the Ecuadorian Highlands, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2020.1735988

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2020.1735988

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 27 Apr 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Dividing ' Above ' and ' Below ' : Constructing Territory for Ecosystem Service Conservation in the Ecuadorian Highlands

## Audrey Joslin

Department of Geography and Geospatial Sciences, Kansas State University

Payments for ecosystem services (PES) arrangements aim to influence human activities in critical ecosystems that produce, among other services, water, biodiversity, and carbon sinks. In practice, PES arrangements ultimately seek to redefine and territorialize space for conservation. Establishing control over activities within a targeted area is challenging, however, particularly when these areas are carved from landscapes where people are living and working. Drawing on an empirical case study of a water fund PES from Ecuador called Fondo para la Proteccion del Agua (FONAG), this article employs data from participant observation, key informant interviews, and archival documents to examine labor of the p  aramo guards, the local residents directly paid as employees of FONAG for their work as intermediaries between the water fund and rural Andean communities. Their labor goes toward (1) patrolling the p  aramo ecosystem ' above ' in higher elevations and (2) recruiting the collective labor of their neighbors to do conservation work from ' below ' in lower elevations. The p  aramo guards ' labor directly contributes to enforcing FONAG ' s territorial claim on the land, necessary to pursue the commodification of ecosystem services that are derived from it. In highlighting the tensions and contradictions that emerge from the guard position, this article demonstrates how territorial claiming through market-based environmental governance entails labor and multiple governmentalities to circulate value. Key Words: ecosystem services, governmentality, labor, p  aramo grasslands, territory.

进 行 生 态 系 统 服 务 支 付 (PES) 的目 标 , 是 为了 在 生 产 水 、 生 物 多 样 性 和 碳 汇 等 重 要 生 态 系 统 中 影 响 人 类 的 行 为 。 在 实 际 应 用 中 , PES 措 施 的 最 终 目的 是 为了 重 新 定 义 和 划分 保 护 空 间 。 然 而 , 在 目 标 地 点 中 对 活 动 进 行 控 制 的 难 度 很 大 , 尤 其 是 从人 类 正 在 生 活 和 工 作 的 地 点 中 划分 出 来 的 保 护 空 间 更是 如 此 。 本 文 基 于一份 实 证 案 例 研 究 , 该 研 究 来 自 厄 瓜 多 尔 一 个 名 为 Agua Fonda para Proteccion del (FONAG) 的 水 基 金 所 进 行 的 PES, 使 用 了 来 自 参 与 者 观 察 、 关 键 知 情 人 采 访 和 档案 文 件 的 数 据 , 来 对 帕 拉 莫 护 卫 队 的 工 作 情 况 进 行 考 察 。 帕 拉 莫 护 卫 队 是 由 当 地 人 组 成 的 , 其 由 FONAG 聘 用 并 支 付 报 酬 , 这 也 是 水 基 金 与 安 第 斯 农 村 社 区 之 间 的 中 间 环 节 。 他们主 要 负责 两 项 工 作 : (1) 在 较 高 海 拔 的 帕 拉 莫 生 态 系 统 ' 上 方 ' 中 巡 逻 , 以 及 (2) 在 较 低 海 拔 ' 下 方 ' 招 募 邻 里 人 员 , 通 过 集 体 劳动 进 行 保 护 工 作 。 帕 拉 莫 护 卫 队 的 工 作 可 直 接 帮 助 FONAG 实 施 对 这 片 土地 的 领 土 主 张 , 也 使 得 这 片 土地 所 产 生 的 生 态 系 统 服 务 实 现 商 品 化 。 本 文 重 点 讨论 了 护 卫 队 这 一 角 色 所 引 发 的 紧 张 和 矛 盾 , 显 示 出 通 过 基 于 市 场 的 环 境 治 理 进 行 领 土 主 张 , 如 何 帮 助劳动 群 体 和 多 重 政 府 行 为 进 行 价 值 流 通 。 关 键 词 : 生 态 系 统 服 务 , 政 府 性 , 劳动 , 帕 拉 莫草 原 , 领 土 。

Los pagos por acuerdos de servicios ecosist  emicos (PES) pretenden influir las actividades humanas en aquellos ecosistemas cr  ı ticos que producen, entre otros servicios, agua, biodiversidad y sumideros de carbono. En la pr  actica, los acuerdos PES en  ultimas buscan redefinir y territorializar el espacio para la conservaci  on. Sin embargo, establecer controles sobre las actividades dentro de un  area enfocada como objetivo se convierte en todo un reto, particularmente cuando tales  areas son determinadas a expensas de paisajes donde ha habido gente viviendo y trabajando. Con base en un estudio de caso emp  ı rico del PES para un fondo del agua en Ecuador, denominado Fondo para la Protecci  on del Agua (FONAG), este art  ı culo emplea datos derivados de observaci  on participativa, entrevistas con informantes claves y de documentos de archivo, para examinar el trabajo de los guardas del p  aramo, residentes locales pagados directamente como empleados del FONAG por su trabajo como intermediarios ente el fondo del agua y las comunidades rurales andinas. Su trabajo apunta a (1) patrullar el ecosistema del p  aramo ' por arriba ' , en las elevaciones m  as altas, y (2) reclutar el trabajo colectivo de sus vecinos para realizar trabajo conservacionista ' por abajo ' en elevaciones

menos altas. El trabajo de los guardas del p  aramo contribuye directamente a hacer cumplir la reclamaci  on territorial del FONAG sobre la tierra, necesaria para proseguir en la comodificaci  on de los servicios ecosist  emicos as  ı generados. Al destacar las tensiones y contradicciones que surgen de la posici  on de la guardia, este art  ı culo demuestra c  omo la reclamaci  on territorial a trav  es de la gobernanza ambiental basada en el mercado implica trabajo y gobernabilidades m  ultiples, para circular valor. Palabras clave: gobernabilidad, pastizales de p  aramo, servicios ecosist  emicos, territorio, trabajo.

A rrangements of payments for ecosystem services (PES) aim to manage human activities in critical landscapes for the protection and enhancement of ecosystem service production. As such, PES programs necessarily involve the establishment of conservation territories in which new claims to authority and access over natural resources are constructed (Joslin and Jepson 2018). The territorialization of space for conservation aims to control ' what people do and their access to natural resources ' (Vandergeest and Peluso 1995, 388). Among the practices necessary to achieve territorialization are the construction and vigilance of conceptual and physical boundaries on the ground (Gabriel 2011). Aside from any physical structures that might exist, borders are created socially through repeated encounters and exchanges and require continuous maintenance to be recognized and to avoid decay (Haraway 2008; Nail 2016). Without interventions aimed at attributing new meaning to the spaces of freshly defined territories, people living in and around those spaces will be unaware of, refuse to accept, or simply forget alternate meanings attributed to space through new territorial claims (Delaney 2005).

In traditional, state-led conservation arrangements such as parks, territorializing space can be thought of as spatial reorganization prompted through the insertion of state authority in landscapes otherwise managed by local institutions (Roth 2008). The onthe-ground process of boundary making to establish new social meaning within a landscape is often done by guards, empowered by the state, through practices of bordering (Valdivia, Wolford, and Lu 2014). The creation of market-oriented conservation territories derived from nonstate authority, however similarly requires boundary making and bordering at targeted sites to imbue those spaces with new meaning. Market-oriented conservation schemes such as PES may likewise employ guards. Indeed, the payment of local guards can qualify a program as a PES because it involves an exchange of money for labor in a targeted ecosystem (Wunder 2005). It is therefore unsurprising that guards frequently appear in discussions of PES.

R. L. Goldman et al. (2008), for example, noted the substantial presence of guards in their study involving thirty-four cases in the Americas, of which nearly 20 percent included directly hiring guards to maintain ecosystems that produce services.

Despite their importance, the treatment of the role of guards in PES literature is chiefly limited to counting them as a group of beneficiaries (e.g., Corbera, Kosoy, and Martinez-Tuna 2007; Tallis et al. 2008) or agents for monitoring and control (e.g., Farley et al. 2011). Recent work in conservation has discussed the labor of guards in bordering activities such as forming city parks (e.g., Gabriel 2011) or protected areas (e.g., Valdivia, Wolford, and Lu 2014). Others place the labor of local guards into a role clouding insider -outsider categories that generally muddles the visions of state planners or nongovernmental organization (NGO) representatives (Robbins 2000; Agrawal 2005). With a few exceptions (e.g., Sodikoff 2009; Poppe 2012; Valdivia, Wolford, and Lu 2014), the discussion of labor and production within the roles of local conservation guards, however, is lacking in the broader scholarly literature (Sodikoff 2009). This important intersection has yet to be explored in literature addressing neoliberal conservation schemes that include PES.

To further develop theory concerning the role of guards within PES, I conduct a case study of Fondo para la Proteccion del Agua (FONAG), a water fund PES based in Quito, Ecuador, that serves as an inspiration for programs established by the Latin American Water Fund Partnership (Veiga et al. 2015; Kauffman 2017). FONAG began in 2000 as a partnership between Quito ' s public water utility company and The Nature Conservancy (TNC). It has since added four more constituents that pay into its nondeclining trust fund supporting conservation within watersheds surrounding the city. Practitioners -based out of an office in Quito and overseen by a technical secretary -implement the conservation initiatives, including financing development projects in rural communities in exchange

for agreements to pursue conservation activities (Kauffman 2014). Included in its initiatives, FONAG hires local people called p  aramo guards (PGs) to serve as key intermediaries linking the urban-based FONAG to the rural communities living in and around targeted ecosystems.

My work in this article focuses on the positions inhabited by the guards as brokers and how value is generated through their work of creating and maintaining new territories for a PES arrangement. Specifically, this article endeavors to illuminate the processes and practices enabling water funds to operate and pays particular attention to the dynamics of power and context as central to territorialization. I collected the majority of the data informing this article between 2012 and 2014 as a part of a longterm case study of FONAG that began in 2010. The data sources consist of documents and materials from FONAG and its collaborating organizations, key actor interviews conducted with FONAG administrators and the PGs who work directly with rural communities, and participant observation of a two-day FONAG training workshop of PGs in October 2013.

The following section examines conservation guards as positioned in neoliberal environmental governance arrangements. I next discuss the historical origins of FONAG ' s intermediaries and the transition of guards as a technology of the state to a technology of a market-oriented public -private partnership. I then examine the spatiality of guard labor practices as they divide the landscape into zones of production and conservation. Finally, I discuss how the guard ' s labor and position as both a conservation agent and a subject contribute to the production and circulation of value that ultimately enables Ecuadorian water fund PES to exist.

## Guards as Brokers of Neoliberal Conservation

PES arrangements are a form of market-oriented environmental governance predicated on neoliberal theory that envisions markets as the primary mediator of interactions within society and between people and their environment (B € uscher 2012). It is based on a logic that interprets environmental degradation as a response to improper valuation of ecosystems and natural resources and thus views shifts in economic valuation and external incentives as the primary way to influence natural resource and land use decisions (Muradian 2013). Individuals are assumed to be self-interested rational actors who will display the proper behaviors if given appropriate incentives (Fletcher 2010).

Neoliberal conservation discourses emphasize ecosystems themselves as producing economically valuable services (Dempsey 2016). As so-called fictitious commodities, however, ecosystem services are not products that can be held or transferred between human hands. Ecosystem service generation is inseparable from the lands that ultimately produce them. Rather, to transform ecosystem services into commodities, complex social and political exercises are necessary to create the mechanisms that ultimately require human labor and capital circulation (Brockington 2011; B € uscher 2013). Ecosystems themselves cannot receive payment for the services they produce. Rather, as B € uscher et al. (2012) noted, ' Payments go to those able to capture them, rather than directly to nature ' (8). Thus, neoliberal narratives convert local people -typically identified as the most proximate threats to conservation -into caretakers of the environment if they accept market values and the proper incentives can be achieved (Leach, Fairhead, and Fraser 2012). PES arrangements thus discursively reframe local people as workers charged with protecting and maintaining ecosystems that generate valuable ecosystem services.

Situating PES schemes within this context, my engagement with the territorialization labor of PES guards requires discussion of power within neoliberal conservation. In whatever form of conservation arrangement, guards are an extension of power because they are entrusted by the governing body to organize local populations to ensure the envisioned on-the-ground compliance. Power can be exerted in multiple forms, and governmentality is an analytic that frequently appears in the work of political ecologists striving to unpack the exercise of power in environmental governance regimes (Valdivia 2015). Governmentality refers to the practices and tactics by which groups of people and individuals are rendered governable subjects. As Foucault (2008, 186) describes, "it is the way in which one conducts the conduct" of people. This concept developed over time into plural ' arts of government ' or modes of governance (Foucault 2008, 313).

Foucault (2008) identified four interwoven governmentalities that may ' lean on each other, challenge each other, and struggle with each other ' (313).

Truth governmentality compels behavior by drawing on accepted knowledge regimes. Described by Foucault (2008) as undisputable knowledge and beliefs about ' religious texts, revelation, and the order of the world ' (311), it is the only mode of governance that is ' derived from the accordance with the fundamental nature of life and the universe ' (Fletcher 2010, 176). This governmentality draws on established beliefs about the world. The next three governmentalities, however, work on principles of rationality. Sovereign governmentality entails the threat of punishment to enforce compliance of subjects; disciplinary governmentality compels subjects ' internalization of particular norms, values, and ethical standards to regulate themselves and others via fears of immorality; and neoliberal governmentality relies on market logics to motivate behavior. As such, neoliberal governmentality focuses on reframing interventions in terms of external incentives, cost -benefit characteristics, and emphasizing the benefits to economic growth over other forms of wellbeing (Fletcher 2010, 2017).

Each of these diverse forms of governmentality can be employed in a single conservation arrangement, although emphasis within a conservation arrangement might be given to one particular form over another (Fletcher 2017). Although Foucault ' s work does not directly engage with environment and conservation projects, it does address the ordering of territory as central to controlling a population and guiding the trajectory of societal development (Valladares and Boelens 2019). Governmentality research in geography thus increasingly emphasizes the interconnection between the control of populations and the control of land -a central theme of conservation and natural resource management (Rutherford 2007; Rose-Redwood 2012; Eldon 2013; Bluwstein 2017; Valladares and Boelens 2019).

Numerous scholars over the last two decades have built on governmentality to analyze environmental governance arrangements, employing terms such as environmentality (Agrawal 2005), green governmentality (Rutherford 2007), and eco-governmentality (M. Goldman 2001, 2005). Many of these approaches focus heavily on the process of internal subjugation through discipline. Yet, Foucault ' s multidimensional concept of governmentality has proven beneficial in illuminating the exercise of power and the practices (and counterpractices) of territorial reconfiguration (Bluwstein 2017; Valladares and Boelens 2019). Absent from the multidimensional analyses of governmentality are studies examining labor. Ruminating on the work of Marx, Foucault pointed out that neoliberal analysis renders the worker and his or her labor not as ' the object of supply and demand in the form of labor power ' but instead ' as an active economic subject ' (Foucault 2008, 221) and thus it should be an important facet of analysis.

Environmental conservation arrangements have increasingly diversified from protected areas that emphasize practices of sovereign governmentality to ever more neoliberal approaches that have embraced the concepts of market-oriented conservation and aim to reframe and organize entire landscapes according to value produced for human consumers (B € uscher et al. 2012). These approaches to conservation, although supported by the state, are often initiated and led by nonstate actors and expand over diverse forms of property (Adams, Hodge, and Sandbrook 2014). Promoters widely endorse these approaches as voluntary, noncoercive forms of environmental conservation that combine economic benefits to promise a win -win outcome for local people and their environment (Muradian et al. 2013).

Yet, ecosystem service commoditization is a complicated and messy process (Robertson 2006, 2007). One aspect of the complicated commoditization process is that ecosystems do not follow boundaries often used by people as units of governance. Even watersheds -a popular unit for natural resource governance -do not uniformly generate ecosystem services because climate, soils, and environmental interactions are spatially uneven within them (Egoh et al. 2008). Thus, we see an influx of new tools, such as the Natural Capital Project ' s InVEST, designed to accurately target the most economically valuable sites of ecosystem service production so that interactions with land managers can be efficiently focused. As market-oriented conservation schemes that focus on mosaicked and inhabited landscapes become ever more popular, alternative expressions of territoriality and strategies for the control of land and resources are developing within diverse political, cultural, and historical contexts.

Conservation guards have historically functioned as a technology of the state to enforce and perform borders that delimit meaning into space. Although traditionally viewed as agents of a governance arrangement, guards might take on a new position as they become beneficiaries of a PES scheme or facilitators of transactions between local land managers (i.e., ecosystem service producers) and downstream

consumers of ecosystem services. If acting as intermediaries to rural communities, their labor becomes entwined in the transaction costs of PES that include the expenses of negotiating contracts and generating data for scientific baseline studies in addition to monitoring and enforcing contracts (Jack, Kousky, and Sims 2008).

Guards, then, are themselves not only agents but environmental subjects to be regulated and governed through wages (Valdivia, Wolford, and Lu 2014). In other words, guards are the extension of territorializing power into a target area but often double as local community members included as a focus of neoliberal transformation themselves. They are the ' blur between implementer and target ' of conservation interventions (Sodikoff 2009, 444). Ideally fitting the role of mediators between the PES organization and the community, the position of the guards is subject to demands stemming from both their local community and the PES organization. Thus, as intermediaries, PGs can be conceptualized as brokers of FONAG ' s contract agreements with rural communities that offer productive projects in return for conservation practices.

Value production in relationship to territorialization and the labor of conservation guards has only been lightly addressed within existing scholarship. An examination of an integrated conservation and development project in Madagascar, for example, suggests that value from guard labor directly derives from the act of protecting the forest while degrading it through continued subsistence agricultural work (Sodikoff 2009). Research in Burkina Faso furthermore expands on discussions of guard labor to assert that guards occupy a multitude of ambiguous positions that simultaneously place them at advantages and disadvantages, depending the context and with whom they are interacting (Poppe 2012). The broader literature lacks discussion, however, of the guards as agents and subjects in neoliberal conservation and their labor toward territorialization as it produces and circulates value. The next section discusses the transition of guard labor from maintaining state-led conservation territories to becoming brokers for water fund PES.

## From Park Guards to Paramo Guards: Shifting Environmental Governance Regimes in Ecuador

Early biodiversity conservation efforts in Ecuador were characterized by the rapid creation of protected areas (PAs) supported by international agencies and organizations (Lewis 2000; U.S. Agency for International Development [USAID] 2011). Embroiled in neoliberal political reforms that engulfed much of Latin America by the 1990s, Ecuador moved toward policies of decentralization in nearly all facets of government including conservation and natural resource management (Harris and Roa-Garcia 2013). Nonstate actors and subnational governments gained influence and promoted shifts toward participatory and market-oriented models as the state diversified its structure of conservation areas (Himley 2009). In this context, Ecuador has become a site for numerous PES-based conservation programs (Rodr  ı guez-de-Francisco, Budds, and Boelens 2013; Rodr  ı guez-de-Francisco and Boelens 2014). USAID and TNC are two particularly influential players in shaping the trajectory of conservation initiatives beyond PAs and into the surrounding inhabited landscapes (Birchard 2005).

The Condor Bioreserve is an informal conservation region encompassing roughly 21,000 km2 west of Quito (Benitez 2003). As a manifestation of a landscape approach to conservation, it includes seven PAs and the mixed-use spaces that stretch between them (Gonzalez and Martin 2007). Although the name has no legal recognition in Ecuador, practitioners began using the term for the territory in the midst of the Sustainable Use of Biological Resources (SUBIR) conservation initiatives spearheaded by TNC and USAID (Clark and Padwe 2004; Nyce 2004). The SUBIR initiatives aimed to ' test and develop economically, ecologically, and socially sustainable management models ' (Abramovitz 1994, 11). Ultimately, SUBIR catalyzed the idea for FONAG as a funding mechanism to conserve the Condor Bioreserve (Nyce 2004). This connection gave rise to a strategy for establishing territorial control through guards that FONAG inherited.

Earlier approaches to producing and maintaining conservation territories in Ecuador had emphasized a sovereign mode of governmentality. Regulations within PAs strictly limited acceptable practices to scientific research and tourism activities, largely excluding the land use practices previously integrating the lands into local livelihoods (Martinez 2011; USAID 2011). Guards punished violations of park regulation through confiscating equipment such as firearms or fishing supplies, issuing fines, or -in extreme cases -detaining offenders. Yet, very few

guards existed to enforce boundaries and thus USAID and other organizations classified most Ecuadorian PAs as ' paper parks ' (USAID 2011, 9). With few interactions with park guards and excluded from the process of determining park boundaries, some local communities were furthermore never informed of state-designated territories or failed to acknowledge them altogether (Ford 2004). Reports characterized interactions between local communities and park guards as conflictual and uncooperative (Ufelder 1998). Overall, the state ' s aloof interactions with the local communities it aimed to manage resulted in ineffectual territorialization (Joslin and Jepson 2018).

A key part of SUBIR, then, was the development of a Community Park Guard program to address these shortcomings. SUBIR propelled the Community Park Guard program into existence in 1993 through support from TNC, USAID, the Cooperative for American Relief Everywhere, and the Ecuadorian Institute for Wildlife and Natural Areas that is now known as Ecuador ' s Ministry of the Environment (MAE; Ufelder 1998). As TNC and its partners expanded their conservation focus to incorporate the spaces between PAs, they revised their strategy for territorial control. TNC pushed to amend the duties of PA guards to extend their presence outside of parks and into the adjacent communities, identified as producing the majority of conservation threats (Ford 2004).

Emphasis within the work of the guards then shifted away from practices of sovereign governmentality underscoring the state ' s authority and onto additional strategies for environmental subject making. TNC, MAE, and local conservation organizations redefined local people from adversaries to collaborators and recruited them into paid and volunteer Community Park Guard positions. As described by TNC ' s former Community Conservation Program manager for the Andean and Southern Cone region, ' Rather than viewing nearby communities solely as threats, the [Community Park Guard] program turns those threats into conservation opportunities ' (Ufelder 1998, 42). Community Park Guards still shared some characteristics with the traditional park guard program, such as discouraging undesirable activities within or adjacent to the PAs and informing communities of legal regulations (Ford 2004; Martinez 2011). Yet, their new duties included imparting conservation values and skills to their communities via the implementation of environmental education programs. The discursive reframing also now emphasized practices of disciplinary governmentality.

Describing the shift in practice via interviews with Condor Bioreserve practitioners conducted in 2001, Ford (2004) noted that ' the conservation strategy of the past was to protect land, [while] the new strategy tries to help people understand all the ways in which they can value the land ' and ' [the Condor Bioreserve] community park guards have a ' moral connection ' to their communities, and are protectors not only in the sense of control, but also in the sense of promoting positive activities ' (261). Furthermore, the Community Park Guard work began to incorporate the implementation and management of small-scale development projects (FONAG 2010; USAID 2011). NGOs and PA managers believed that the projects had the potential to offset some of the needs of the communities that they thought drove the use of PA resources (Ufelder 1998).

Fundaci  on Antisana, a local NGO supported by TNC and USAID, designed the Community Park Guard position and its training program. According to the proceedings of a 1995 training session, the goal of the community park guards was to ' be the facilitators of a medium and long term process of community transformation, with support and coordination of the public and private sectors, toward selfsufficiency through collective initiative and work ' (as cited in Ufelder 1998, 39). The Community Park Guard program emphasized disciplinary strategies of governmentality as guards were tasked with influencing community member activities through teaching values and making moral appeals for self-regulation. NGOs also drew on approaches of disciplinary governmentality to influence the behaviors of the community park guards themselves and convinced them to expend unpaid time, energy, and the use of their own equipment on conservation for the perceived greater benefit of their communities. Many volunteers found it difficult to prioritize between their roles as community members and community park guards (Ufelder 1998).

The funding issue for territorialization became a pivot point leading to FONAG ' s creation and a new emphasis in governance. Unlike traditional park guards, the remuneration of community park guards varied. Some were employed by the state, but others were appointed in unpaid positions (Ufelder 1998; Gonzalez and Martin 2007). TNC and partners

viewed the unsteady funding to provide for guard salaries as well as for the small-scale development projects within communities as a significant challenge to the viability of the Community Park Guard programs. Although the practices of disciplinary governmentality would continue into the future, a neoliberal governmentality approach deepened as the conservation territory itself was revised to emphasize economic value to ecosystem service consumers and relationships within communities came to emphasize transactions through contract agreements.

FONAG emerged as a part of a plan to generate funds for the Condor Bioreserve. TNC linked the landscape ' s hydrological services to Quito and then asked urban water users to pay for conserving them. TNC eventually discarded the idea of FONAG financially supporting conservation for the entire Condor Bioreserve after observing that potential partners were unsupportive of applying their funds to areas without urban hydrological importance (Brown and Stem 2005). As a result, FONAG itself became the focus of TNC and partners. It expanded from a simple mechanism for financing conservation into an environmental governance arrangement on its own with a distinct conservation territory that formally followed watershed boundaries (Joslin and Jepson 2018). Through the connections with the Condor Bioreserve initiative, early FONAG guards were a continuation of the SUBIR Community Park Guard program that supported MAE ' s ability to manage PA boundaries (Martinez 2011). The first title of the FONAG ' s guard program reflects this relationship: the Surveillance and Monitoring of Protected Areas.

After two years of integration with MAE ' s Community Park Guard program, FONAG hired a separate coordinator in 2006 and began defining its own guard program (Escand  on and Rojas 2008). Changing the program name to the Control and Surveillance of Priority Areas, FONAG hired local guards to operate in private, communal, and public lands. FONAG employed guards to focus their work not only in the PAs but also in lands owned by Quito ' s water company and properties held in common by communities neighboring national parks.

Unlike the preceding guard programs, the ecosystem type dictates where FONAG guards focus efforts more than property type. The high-altitude humid p  aramo grassland ecosystem forms at elevations ranging between 3,000 and 4,800 m (Luteyn 1992), contains hundreds of endemic species (Leon-Yanez 2011), and directly provides for approximately 85 percent of Quito ' s water (Buytaert et al. 2006). Framed in terms of its financial benefit to constituent water users willing to pay into the fund, p  aramo became the focus of governance and intervention efforts and the source of the PG title that further differentiates the FONAG guard position from the state ' s PA guards.

The historical roots of FONAG ' s PG reflects the broader shifts in emphasis between modalities of governing power in Ecuador. The state has relied on sovereign power to order the landscape and direct land management practices since European colonization (Boelens, Hoogesteger, and Rodriguez de Francisco 2014). Nonetheless, Latin America ' s neoliberal turn in the 1980s and 1990s -emphasizing decentralization, privatization, and the formation of public -private partnerships to replace centralized state institutions -represented a new shift in governance and how power is exercised (Boelens, Hoogesteger, and Baud 2015). Foucault (1995) asserted that the imposition of oppressive and prohibitive power would not command obedience from populations forever. Yet, power can also be exercised through conduct from the bottom up. Via disciplinary and neoliberal governmentalities, indirect government techniques can be employed to direct society and support acceptance while legitimizing itself through promising to maximize benefits to the broader population.

Neoliberal governmentality gained prominence in Ecuadorian natural resource management over time. As conservation territories were broadly redefined to follow market rationalities, the emphasis in the work of those mediating power changed. The guards themselves, however, are subjects as well as agents of neoliberal governmentality. The cultural context of the rural Andes adds further complexity to the imposition of market rationalities on local populations. The next section investigates the labor of the guard to order space in communities and create value that can further entrench the landscapes within market frames and definitions.

## Producing an Ecosystem Services Landscape

FONAG ' s PGs now pertain to the Areas of Sustainable Water Conservation Program, which is a

recent name change from the Control and Surveillance of Priority Areas Program. It is one of FONAG ' s five core programs and the only one to exert direct influence on the land use activities of rural communities managing p  aramo. As such, it is also the material link between FONAG, rural communities, and the p  aramo ecosystem. Described by FONAG as its ' visible face, ' PGs are the FONAG representatives that interact most with members of targeted communities (FONAG 2014b).

The PG program is responsible for managing the land that FONAG deems important to its mission and within its territory. FONAG ' s priority areas consist of the p  aramo ecosystem within the Guayllabamba and other watersheds that contribute to the water supply of Quito (FONAG 2010). A 2014 report indicates FONAG ' s PGs are responsible for 38,316.53 hectares of land (FONAG 2014a). 1 The area consists of a mosaic of properties that can be divided into three types: that of Ecuador ' s Ministry of Environment with 13,890.64 hectares, Quito ' s public water utility company with 13,382.87 hectares, and collective property of rural communities with 11,042.83 hectares (FONAG 2014a). Although community lands account for slightly less than 30 percent of the properties directly targeted by FONAG, they remain a major focus of intervention. As the FONAG PG coordinator explained in a 2012 interview, FONAG is concerned about local community interaction with ecosystem services because ' [the people] live inside of the protected areas, buffer zones, and their actions cause immediate damage [to the p  aramo ecosystem]. '

Contemporary knowledge of the spatial organization of Andean landscapes is heavily influenced by the concept of verticality, originally used to describe pre-Colombian production patterns based on ecological gradients found on mountain slopes (Murra 2002). Although stressing the influence of ecological gradients on social organization, verticality has subsequently been employed to understand contemporary divisions in land use in relation to elevation zones in Andean communities. The term production zone amends verticality to use agriculture for distinguishing zones, recognizes Andean land use patterns as a product of human agency, and underscores land use decisions made within a communal context (Mayer 2002).

In the region around Quito where FONAG operates, agrarian reform actively shaped the highlands from the 1960s until the 1990s. The state typically expropriated hacienda lands located in the less arable higher elevations, which were then redistributed to cooperatives made up of the former indigenous tenant farmers (Chiriboga and Chehab 2007). The cooperatives often followed historic land use patterns and designated high-elevation terrain in the harsh p  aramo climates as communal grazing lands (Hess 1990). Land in private parcels was designated for homes and a variety of crops at successively lower elevations (Ram  on 2009). Despite a variation in property rights and access to resources across production zones, divisions between private and communal property are hazy because the irrigation that sustains individual agricultural plots is managed communally (Knapp 1991; Gelles 1999). Communal labor and institutions of mutual dependence are entrenched in the management of Andean highland waterscapes. They are systems vital to agropastoral livelihoods and contribute toward both the cultural identity and continued survival of rural montane populations (Boelens 2014).

Zimmerer (1999) demonstrated that spatial patterns in agricultural zones reflect patchworks developed in response to environmental, political, and socioeconomic factors. Forms of crop production are more limited in the higher elevations because periodic freezing makes most aboveground agriculture difficult. Highland populations actively manage p  aramo, however, as an area of uncultivated production that provides irrigation water, land for grazing, medicinal products, and supplementary meat through hunting. Because p  aramo lands are embedded into community histories, they furthermore provide a source of cohesion and collective pride (Farley and Bremer 2017). Although most studies of Andean production zones omit consideration of uncultivated landscapes, they are still produced landscapes imbued with meaning and enmeshed in community livelihood strategies (Himley 2009; Maxwell 2011).

Referencing the vertical orientation of communities, FONAG ' s PGs frequently used the relative terms above and below to describe their work between the upper elevations of collectively managed p  aramo and the lower elevations of individual parcels with homes and agricultural plots within a community. The specific objectives of the Control and Surveillance of Priority Areas Program that determine PG labor follow these divisions. According to FONAG ' s (2014c) program description, they are as follows:

1. Maintain control and surveillance of hydrologic areas of interest to comply with current laws and norms.
2. Monitor flora and fauna.
3. Train local communities on environmental themes and implement productive projects to lessen human impacts on the ecosystem.

The first objective is work done in both realms because PGs are charged with observing, recording, and influencing local natural resource use. The second objective addresses work above as PGs record observations on the health of the ecosystem. Finally, the third objective identifies with the work below, or the work in the local communities of creating and supervising FONAG ' s productive projects.

In both of the realms of above and below, PG work contributes to the process of territorialization, which requires performance to establish meaning. Their work of producing the landscape into one that generates tradable value for ecosystem services involves compartmentalization and the interaction of multiple governmentalities. The following two sections elaborate on this performance.

## The Work Above: Within the P  aramo

PGs patrol above in the p  aramo ecosystem that FONAG targets for conservation. FONAG assigns PGs to routes within five surveillance zones, 2 and the labor performed in patrols contributes to the production of p  aramo as conservation space. Although the experience might vary slightly between locations, there are two main components to the work above in patrols as described by FONAG: surveillance and control. Ultimately, surveillance work does not require direct contact with local people; rather, it is a practice of recording ' all of the internal processes of the p  aramo ' (FONAG P  aramo Guard coordinator, personal interview 2012).

Despite the hydrologic importance of p  aramo, much is still unknown about how the ecosystem functions to produce those services. The scarcity of hydrological and meteorological data on p  aramo ecosystems and a lack of studies on p  aramo soils contribute to the gaps within scientific knowledge of overall ecosystem processes and hydrology of p  aramo landscapes (De Bievre, Iniguez, and Buytaert 2011; Podwojewski and Poulenard 2011). Some researchers assert that p  aramo evolved directly through human habitation and intervention, leading to debates on the role of people in the ecosystem (Ellenberg 1979; Laegaard 1992). Given the limited state of knowledge on how p  aramo ecosystems function, FONAG supports its own program of scientific research focused on p  aramo vegetation and hydrology. It collects further information on the p  aramo through its network of climate monitors and PGs. Thus, a large part of PG duties includes generating data.

With cameras, Global Positioning System units, and notebooks, the work requires recording and reporting everything that occurs in relationship to the p  aramo. This includes information about natural phenomena, such as wildlife sightings, weather conditions, and changes in vegetation, as well as human activities like agriculture, hunting, grazing, burning, or tourism. As a FONAG employee told the guards during training, PGs ' walk with the eyes of FONAG above in the p  aramos. '

This work is crucial to the process of territorialization, as keeping records holds power to convert space into an object for governance, rendering an area as ' legible ' (Scott 1998). The importance of legibility is reflected in a comment by a FONAG administrative employee during paramo guard training, who explained to the PG ' s that their ' job is to observe to help [FONAG] make decisions about what you all have seen. ' She continued, ' If you do not tell us [in Quito ' s office], how are we supposed to make decisions? ' .

Data from the patrols serve as a baseline to determine improvement -or deterioration -of the p  aramo ecosystem. FONAG ' s interpretation of data works favorably to support its continued intervention. Improvement in the health of the ecosystem is positively attributed to the interventions of FONAG, whereas declines serve as evidence for the need for FONAG ' s interventions. Consequently, the reports are necessary not only to create the p  aramo as an object for governance but to legitimize and strengthen FONAG ' s claim to the ecosystem. There will always be a continued need for FONAG based on the assumption that all human disturbance within the p  aramo is detrimental. Thus, the practice of surveillance aligns closely with Foucault ' s truth form of governmentality and serves to maintain a regime of knowledge.

The second part of the PG ' s work above in patrols is control. For the PG, control relates to intervention in the conduct of people in the p  aramo. As a FONAG program coordinator explained, ' The guard has to convey the norms and rules of behavior regarding the environment ' (personal interview 2012). This means deterring activities that FONAG

deems to be environmentally damaging to the p  aramo, such as burning or grazing the p  aramo, hunting, dumping trash, and cutting trees.

Charged with maintaining order, FONAG PGs are agents of the market-oriented conservation mechanism of the water fund and not the state and therefore do not have legal authority and cannot impose punishments for any rule infraction. As stated by a FONAG employee during PG training,

Us with FONAG, we cannot give permission to absolutely anybody to enter or not the properties in which we are [working]. Who gives permission? MAE for reserves, the water company for their private land, and the communities for their land.

Whether they are patrolling community land, a national PA, or property owned by Quito ' s public water utility company, they cannot give or deny permission to any individual to enter the property. FONAG PGs cannot directly intervene in an individual ' s actions during a patrol, aside from talking with that individual and telling that individual that his or her actions negatively affect the ecosystem. Thus, unlike their state-employed park guard predecessors, they cannot draw on sovereign power to influence conduct.

When PGs directly interact with an individual who is behaving contrary to FONAG ' s norms, the strategy for control is to influence the individual through explanation and appealing to either (or both) neoliberal or disciplinary rationalities. A FONAG employee described the process of control as ' having problems and giving solutions ' with the experience and confidence that the PG possesses. The urban-based FONAG facilitators during PG training emphasized Quito ' s claim on water resources to justify intervention and drew on neoliberal rationalities to do so. As a FONAG facilitator explained to the PGs:

Why do we want to have control? The main objective is to maintain the quality and quantity of the water for the city of Quito. This is the work that we have been hired to do. If we are not capable of improving the quality and quantity of water, we are not doing anything here.

The preceding quote identifies water as a product that is created from the paid work of the guards. Although water is a product for the city, labor happens in the outside rural areas. Discussing surveillance zones, a FONAG facilitator asked PGs to begin with a description of where they work and to ' explain how those places protect the interests of the Metropolitan District of Quito. ' Describing situations that required the engagement of others in the p  aramo, the FONAG facilitator repeatedly suggested that the guards explain that activities harmed the ecosystem and therefore harmed water resources for the city of Quito. Yet the lack of authority concerned many guards, who indicated reluctance to approach unknown people without visible identification. This issue appears as a continuation of one that existed during MAE ' s Community Park Guard program, as Ufelder (1998) observed that ' [m]any hunters in the Reserve come from wealthy Ecuadorian families and think nothing of threatening a campesino farmer, particularly with no uniform ' (41).

The position of the guard as a local member of the community, then, gains importance in exchanges with local people. In discussions of how PGs influence their neighbors, PGs distance themselves from the resource claims of Quito. Rather than telling individuals that they are harming the ecosystem that provides water services to Quito, the guards regularly invoked relationships of the lands to local communities to influence behaviors of people in the p  aramo. One PG discussed how he approached people fishing or hunting by explaining to the offenders the importance of respecting the environment:

I tell them that it is not for [FONAG or the Ministry of the Environment], is not for me, but instead is for the future of the grandchildren, of the children. The resources are [for us] to consume, but in an equitable form so that hopefully they will never run out.

This quote demonstrates how one PG directly distances himself from the known authority of the state in an exchange of ' control. ' Furthermore, the PG does not mention the city of Quito or FONAG ' s claim to the resources. Rather, the PG focuses on local relationships to dissuade behaviors, demonstrating this mixed identity between employee for FONAG and local community member in a process that aligns with disciplinary governmentality.

Along with this mixed position of identity, the quote demonstrates the performance of subject making by the PG. FONAG pays for the performance of PGs to disseminate water conservation into the space of the p  aramo. Yet, PGs draw on moral narratives emphasizing community values rather than

ones that emphasize economic value or value to the city. Thus, despite the economic and market rationalities that underscore the FONAG facilitator ' s descriptions and motivations of the PG work, these narratives do not frame the PGs ' descriptions of their interactions with local residents. I now turn to the work below.

## The Work Below: Within the Community

The work of the PG shifts when focused below in the lower elevations that constitute the working landscape of the community. FONAG calls this part of the PG position the ' community management component, ' framing PGs as environmental managers within their communities (FONAG 2010). In this position, PGs are responsible for developing and supervising productive projects funded through FONAG and its donors. Harkening back to its roots in the SUBIR Community Park Guard program, the main objective of the FONAG PGs ' work inside of the community is to transform the community ' s perception of the guards from ' prohibitionists ' to ' managers ' (Escand  on and Rojas 2008, 18). These titles imply that rather than simply discouraging certain land use activities, a PG as a manager actively directs land use activities and the labor behind them. This work is also done with a mixed frame of disciplinary and neoliberal governmentalities.

FONAG envisions PGs to take a leadership role in the community, to be respected, and to disseminate their environmental knowledge to other community members. Under the direction of FONAG, PG will occasionally facilitate environmental education workshops in their communities about the importance of the p  aramo ecosystem and the correct management of it. Because environmental education aims to instill values of norms of behavior in a population, it is widely considered a technique of disciplinary governmentality (Fletcher 2010).

The central means to gain support for the PG within the community, however, are through productive projects. As a PG remarked, ' You can arrange talks, but after one [or] two talks, the third will have fewer [people] and nobody will show up for a fourth. We need to come with projects or people will lose interest ' (PG Training October 2013). The productive projects are formalized agreements between FONAG and communities requiring the dedication of collectivized labor toward conservation activities as a condition to receive FONAG ' s material and financial support for a productive project. PGs could propose productive projects in their home community or within a nearby community in their surveillance region. After consulting with community members, the PGs offer project ideas to FONAG ' s PG coordinator. If the coordinator decides that the ideas align with FONAG ' s goals, he or she will present a proposal in a community assembly.

To receive financial support for a project, a community as a whole must agree to put its labor toward (1) the productive project itself and (2) conservation activities. The community president is required to sign the document to promise that the contract will be upheld. Since 2004, productive projects have included support for ecotourism, raising small animals such as guinea pigs, creating organic gardens, improving pastures at lower elevations, and developing a small-scale irrigation system. Tangible conservation activities within the p  aramo are an important focus of the agreements. As a FONAG program coordinator commented,

The [conservation] agreements always have been focused on more than the themes of labor and community work but on concrete environmental agreements, like reducing the livestock load, reducing hunting, reducing fires, and in some cases, planting trees and restoration including collecting garbage from the river. They are environmental agreements that you can see. (Personal interview 2012)

Activities that are visible can also be counted and used as metrics to determine or prove effectiveness and efficiency of investment. This, in turn, is also a way to make the landscape legible.

According to FONAG ' s technical secretary, each productive project is designed to promote intensification at lower elevations to relieve land use pressure on the p  aramos at higher elevations. These contracts discursively separate land into zones of production and conservation. FONAG publications describe productive projects as having a purpose ' to reduce the exploitation or inadequate uses of natural and productive spaces ' (Escand  on 2010, 10). Contracts also include a map depicting zones of production and conservation and quantify the area that will be conserved through the conservation agreement. This metric then, is used as evidence of success (see Joslin 2019).

Through the work above and below, the PG becomes the broker of an in-kind exchange between FONAG with its urban constituents and the rural communities whose labor processes go toward producing ecosystem services. In other words, the work of the PG allows access to space as well as the community labor in this PES arrangement. The PG and his or her simultaneous performances as FONAG employee and community member, however, create tensions that are not easily reconciled.

## Between Above and Below: Value through Bordering and Subjectivity

In the context of water fund PES, the PG serves as a broker between rural communities at the sites of ecosystem services production and urban-based FONAG. Guards enable FONAG access to community p  aramos and contribute toward the legibility of the ecosystem and its surrounding landscape as an object of governance. Guards furthermore negotiate contracts in which FONAG finances productive projects if the community agrees to put their collective labor toward conservation practices directed at maintaining or restoring ecosystem services. This exchange between urban consumers and rural producers of ecosystem services enables FONAG to exist as a PES arrangement requiring capital circulation. In other words, PGs enable the water fund PES to function by building -and themselves becoming -connections through which economic value can circulate. This circulation of capital, however, is not solely between FONAG, PGs, and communities. The PG work toward defining the landscape as an object for governance also allows capital circulation between FONAG and its urban constituents and international donors.

The work of the guard serves to reorder and compartmentalize the landscape and reinforce ideological positions regarding human relationships with the environment. The p  aramo historically serves as a site of uncultivated production that is integrated into indigenous Andean livelihoods and culture. That relationship is erased with the redefinition of p  aramo as a conservation space. As B € uscher et al. (2012) remarked, neoliberal conservation entails ' a particular set of governmentalities that seeks to extend and police profitable commodification processes based on artificial and arbitrary separations of human society from biodiverse-rich (non-human) nature ' (23). The reordering of a landscape into conservation and productive zones with a specific set of acceptable practices creates new territories that require continued investment in their maintenance. Thus, this new formation of space facilitates the expansion of markets. This case study, however, underscores that the production of value in a water fund PES involves much more than simply transferring capital between consumers and producers of ecosystem services.

Embedded within these practices, subjectivity is inextricable from value production that translates to capital circulation. Researchers have highlighted instances where conservation guards engage in subsistence agriculture and local natural resource use, while being hired to control those same activities (Sodikoff 2009). This results in a paradox within production, in which a guard ' s job exists because of his activities in another role. Most of FONAG ' s PGs, for example, also engage in subsistence farming and own cattle grazing lands in higher elevations. The work of FONAG ' s PGs similarly fall into that paradox, and this labor furthermore requires a negotiation between competing demands of the community and FONAG.

Although FONAG officially defines the work of the PGs, pays them, and holds them accountable as a neoliberal subject, the process of hiring a PG is typically dependent on the local community. FONAG typically enlists the community to identify and approve potential candidates for the position with the promise of enabling future development projects. FONAG considers the PG to be a link that allows them access to the community, but the community elects a PG with the perspective that the person in that position leverages benefits for the community. The position therefore conveys accountability to the community on the PG. This is evidenced in a publication of FONAG on their guard program, describing concerns of the guards whose ' reputation was at stake, in case of not obtaining financing for the [productive] projects ' (Escand  on and Rojas 2008, 18). Rather than having accountability to only FONAG and motivation of the salary, the PG also has accountability to the community. Thus, PGs frequently emphasized the importance of productive projects to their missions during interviews.

Tensions between subjectivities also became evident when PGs struggled to reconcile their lived experience and rationalities as a PG with the expectations of the FONAG office. During training,

the FONAG coordinator admonished PGs for patrolling areas that were adjacent to, but not directly in, FONAG ' s targeted watershed boundaries. A PG attempted to justify the patrol because the area was adjacent to the boundaries and had a variety of flora and fauna important to the p  aramo and served as an important source of irrigation water for local communities. ' Ask yourself: Does it serve to secure water resources for the city of Quito? If not, then that is not what you are hired to do, ' responded a FONAG facilitator. Furthermore, the misalignment of p  aramo guard subjectivities was evident in the forms of accounting and reporting of the p  aramo guards.

This goal and desire to serve the city of Quito appeared to be internally rejected by PGs or actively ignored. These incongruencies with the desires of FONAG and the PGs frequently appeared in the training. Disagreements on the logic of record keeping or areas of most importance for monitoring, for example, frequently arose in the meetings, showing that the PGs regularly applied a logic and judgment to situations that differed from that of FONAG. Reporting issues furthermore occurred on accounts of labor. As an employee, FONAG pays PGs for a predetermined number of hours per week. PGs are required to record their hours of work, but what might appear to FONAG office workers as a simple task is often daunting to the PGs. Marking proper hours is particularly difficult for them. One PG commented that the work never gives exactly eight hours in the field because there are always unexpected circumstances that demand their attention, and travel time to and from the p  aramo itself might take a few hours per day. Consequently, many of the guards write down hours that they were expected to work rather than the actual hours that they worked. None of the PGs at the training workshop indicated that it would be an easy matter to write down the true hours, because true hours exceeded the expected hours and were irregularly completed.

Additionally, PGs reported often using their own money to fuel their transportation during their patrols and to repair FONAG equipment. Occasionally they used their own motorbikes or horses for patrols, because those from FONAG were not readily available. FONAG demonstrated the desire to fairly compensate the guards for their time and to pay for the necessary costs of conducting the work, but the lived experience of the job required more hours than could be compensated based on program budget allowances.

Yet, the PGs continued their work. At this point, the guards ' own environmental subjectivity could be considered a subsidy of the mechanism of FONAG because their labor, much of it unpaid, ultimately generates value for FONAG to function.

Although FONAG acknowledges and has expressed the desire to compensate PGs for the problem of practical working conditions and their hours of labor, the expectations of the job do not line up with the physical requirements of the position. All of the PGs agreed that it was not possible to do what was asked of them in the time that was expected of them. The willingness of PGs to continue the practices of FONAG, despite the inability of FONAG to compensate them ultimately subsidizes FONAG because they derive an extra value from the PGs to complete their job. PGs might justify potential exploitation of labor as work in their other role as concerned community members attempting to protect resources for their community.

Foucault (2008) asserted that the four governmental rationalities of truth, sovereignty, discipline, and neoliberalism ' overlap, lean on each other, challenge each other, and struggle with each other ' (313). These four governmental rationalities can simultaneously be employed in concert with varying levels of emphasis and could likewise be challenged by those they seek to manage. As Valladares and Boelens (2019) stated, ' There is no unidirectional relationship of government-to-governed, but a two-way flow of interactions and influences ' (69). Thus, we see in the p  aramo guards how their work contributes to various governance techniques that complement a neoliberal landscape, yet they themselves struggle with various subjectivities. That struggle itself, however, also supports the creation of the neoliberal territory.

## Conclusions

This article examines the work of the guards and their contributions to territorialization and the production of value within water fund conservation in the Ecuadorian Andes. Water funds are a form of neoliberal conservation inspired by PES and focus on conserving critical ecosystems across a variety of property regimes rather than on enclosing lands via traditional state-designated parks or land purchases. Neoliberal conservation landscapes often take the form of property mosaics supported by state institutions but operated by nonstate actors in a

public -private partnership (B € uscher et al. 2012). The process of establishing territorial control and influencing activities within these spaces is complex.

Although neoliberal conservation territories might involve traditionally state-employed technologies for territorialization such as guards, I argue that the labor process itself is paramount for producing and circulating value that ultimately enables the environmental governance arrangement to function. Guards are incorporated into PES arrangements as producers of ecosystem services through their work to maintain or improve the functioning of a targeted ecosystem. In FONAG, this work includes patrolling the p  aramo ecosystem ' above ' to record and report on the ecosystem and to dissuade any human activities that FONAG deems inappropriate and recruiting the collective labor of local communities from lower elevations ' below ' to perform conservation land use practices in exchange for small-scale productive projects. This labor cuts across property divisions and serves to compartmentalize the landscape into new spaces of conservation and production. It results in quantifiable measurements of conservation territory, the mobilization of rural labor, and the employment of multiple subjectivities. All of these aspects of PGs ' labor produce and circulate value that is incorporated into the PES arrangement.

This article has demonstrated how the PGs ' labor is necessary for FONAG to render the p  aramo ecosystem as legible for governance but also as quantifiable and thus exchangeable in a neoliberal conservation arrangement. The new forms of territories and the subjectivities that are produced in the process are strategic and performative but are also imbued with tension that might be exploited by the conservation arrangement. Although this study has given further insight into the labor process and subjectivities involved in the production of a marketoriented conservation territory, the guards only represent one node in the labor of a ' fictitious ' commodity chain that bring ecosystems services into being a tradeable good.

## Acknowledgments

Along with thanking the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments, I thank Wendy Jepson, Christian Brannstrom, Kathleen O ' Reilly, and Thomas Lacher for their feedback on an early draft of this work.

## Funding

The research presented in this article was funded by a National Science Foundation Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant (#BSC-1303138), the Melborn G. Glasscock Center for Humanities Research, and the National Science Foundation IGERT Applied Biodiversity Sciences Program at Texas A&amp;M University. Additional support for the development of this article was provided by the Geography &amp; Geospatial Sciences Department at Kansas State University.

## Notes

1. FONAG has since acquired private properties through funds from constituents.
2. Information is provided from a 2013 interview with the FONAG Paramo Guard coordinator.

## References

- Abramovitz, J. N. 1994. Biodiversity conservation and sustainable use: USAID program overview . Washington, DC: The Environment Center, United States Agency for International Development.
- Adams, W. M., I. D. Hodge, and L. Sandbrook. 2014. New spaces for nature: The re-territorialization of biodiversity conservation under neoliberalism in the UK. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 39 (4):574 -88. doi: 10.1111/tran.12050.
- Agrawal, A. 2005. Environmentality . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Benitez, S. P. 2003. The Condor Bioreserve in Ecuador. Mountain Research and Development 23 (3):212 -14.
- Birchard, B. 2005. Nature ' s keepers . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
- Bluwstein, J. 2017. Creating ecotourism territories: Environmentalities in Tanzania ' s community-based conservation. Geoforum 83:101 -13. doi: 10.1016/j. geoforum.2017.04.009.
- Boelens, R. 2014. Cultural politics and the hydrosocial cycle: Water, power and identity in the Andean highlands. Geoforum 57:234 -47. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2013.02.008.
- Boelens, R., J. Hoogesteger, and M. Baud. 2015. Water reform governmentailty in Ecuador: Neoliberalism, centralization, and the restraining of polycentric authority and community rule-making. Geoforum 61:281 -91. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2013.07.005.
- Boelens, R., J. Hoogesteger, and J. C. Rodriguez de Francisco. 2014. Commoditizing water territories: The clash between Andean water rights cultures and payment for environmental services policies. Capitalism Nature Socialism 25 (3):84 -102. doi: 10.1080/10455752.2013.876867.
- Brockington, D. 2011. Ecosystem services and fictitious commodities. Environmental Conservation 38 (4):367 -69. doi: 10.1017/S0376892911000531.

- Brown, M., and C. Stem. 2005. Lessons learned learned across several sites using watershed valuation as a conservation strategy. Report prepared for the Nature Conservancy Foundations of Success.
- B € uscher, B. 2012. Payments for ecosystem services as neoliberal conservation: (Reinterpreting) evidence from the Maloti -Drakensberg, South Africa. Conservation and Society 10 (1):29 -41. doi: 10.4103/0972-4923.92190.
- B € uscher, B. 2013. Nature on the move: The value and circulation of liquid nature and the emergence of fictitious conservation. New Proposals: Journal of Marxism and Interdisciplinary Inquiry 6 (1 -2):20 -36.
- B € uscher, B., S. Sullivan, K. Neves, J. Igoe, and D. Brockington. 2012. Towards a synthesized critique of neoliberal biodiversity conservation. Capitalism Nature Socialism 23 (2):4 -30. doi: 10.1080/10455752.2012.674149.
- Buytaert, W., R. C  elleri, B. De Bi  evre, F. Cisneros, G. Wyseure, J. Deckers, and R. Hofstede. 2006. Human impact on the hydrology of the Andean p  aramos. Earth-Science Reviews 79 (1 -2):53 -72. doi: 10.1016/j. earscirev.2006.06.002.
- Chiriboga, M., and C. Chehab. 2007. The role of institutions in rural territories that have undergone land reform. Discussion Paper Series No. 16. Research Programme Consortium on Improving Institutions from Pro-Poor Growth, Manchester, UK.
- Clark, T. W., and J. Padwe. 2004. The Ecuadorian Condor Bioreserve initiative. Journal of Sustainable Forestry 18 (2 -3):297 -324. doi: 10.1300/J091v18n02\_14.
- Corbera, E., N. Kosoy, and M. Martinez-Tuna. 2007. Equity implications of marketing ecosystem services in protects areas and rural communities: Case studies from Meso-America. Global Environmental Change 17 (3 -4):365 -80. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.12.005.
- De Bievre, B., V. Iniguez, and W. Buytaert. 2011. Hidrolog  ı a del P  aramo [Hydrology of the P  aramo]. In P  aramo: Paisaje estudiado, habitado, manejado e institucionalizado , ed. P. Mena Vasconez, A. Castillo, S. Flores, R. Hofstede, C. Josse, S. Lasso, G. Medina, N. Ochoa, and D. Ortiz, 81 -97. Quito, Ecuador: Abya-Yala.
- Delaney, D. 2005. Entering the territory of territory . Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
- Dempsey, J. 2016. Enterprising nature: Economics, markets and finance in global biodiversity politics . New York: Wiley.
- Egoh, B., B. Reyers, M. Rouget, D. M. Richardson, D. C. Le Maitre, and A. S. van Jaarsveld. 2008. Mapping ecosystem services for planning and management. Agriculture Ecosystems &amp; Environment 127 (1 -2):135 -40. doi: 10.1016/j.agee.2008.03.013.
- Eldon, S. 2013. How should we do the history of territory? Territory, Politics, Governance 1 (1):5 -20.
- Ellenberg, H. 1979. Man ' s influence on tropical mountain ecosystems in South America. The Journal of Ecology 67 (2):401 -16. doi: 10.2307/2259105.
- Escand  on, S. 2010. Programa de Vigilancia y Monitoreo: La comunidad trabaja en favor de la naturaleza [Program of surveillance and control: The community works in favor of natu]. Agua-a-Fondo , January 10.
- Escand  on, S., and O. Rojas. 2008. Guardaparques, gestores de la protecci  on del agua [Park guards, managers of water protection]. Quito, Ecuador: Fondo para la Proteccion del Agua.
- Farley, K. A., W. G. Anderson, L. L. H. Bremer, and P. Carol. 2011. Compensation for ecosystem services: An evaluation of efforts to achieve conservation and development in Ecuadorian paramo grasslands. Environmental Conservation 38 (4):393 -405. doi: 10. 1017/S037689291100049X.
- Farley, K. A., and L. L. Bremer. 2017. ' Water is life ' : Local perceptions of paramo grasslands and land management strategies associated with payment for ecosystem services. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 107 (2):371 -81. doi: 10.1080/24694452. 2016.1254020.
- Fletcher, R. 2010. Neoliberal environmentality: Towards a poststructuralist political ecology of the conservation debate. Conservation and Society 8 (3):171 -81. doi: 10.4103/0972-4923.73806.
- Fletcher, R. 2017. Environmentality unbound: Multiple governmentalities in environmental politics. Geoforum 85:311 -15.
- Fondo para la Proteccion del Agua. 2010. Programa de Vigilancia y Monitoreo [Surveillance and Monitoring Program]. Pamphlet produced by FONAG and USAID, Quito, Ecuador.
- Fondo para la Proteccion del Agua. 2014a. FONAG Rendici  on de Cuentas 2013 [Accountability report], ed. N. Puente. Quito, Ecuador: Fondo para la Proteccion del Agua.
- Fondo para la Proteccion del Agua. 2014b. Guardap  aramos en capacitaci  on permanente [P  aramo Guards in ongoing training]. Accessed August 27, 2014. http://www.fonag. org.ec/inicio/noticias/28-noticias\_/31-guardap%C3% A1ramos-en-capacitaci%C3%B3n-permanente.html.
- Fondo para la Proteccion del Agua. 2014c. Nuestros programas [Our programs]. Accessed March 3, 2014. http:// www.fonag.org.ec/inicio/en/que-hacemos/programas.html.
- Ford, M. 2004. Environmental education in the Condor Bioreserve. Journal of Sustainable Forestry 18 (2 -3):257 -75. doi: 10.1300/J091v18n02\_12.
- Foucault, M. 1995. Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison . New York: Penguin Social Sciences.
- Foucault, M. 2008. The birth of biopolitics . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Gabriel, N. 2011. The work that parks do: Towards an urban environmentality. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 12 (2):123 -41. doi: 10.1080/14649365.2011.545139.
- Gelles, P. 1999. Water and power in highland Peru . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Goldman, M. 2001. The birth of a discipline: Producing authoritative green knowledge, World Bank-style. Ethnography 2 (2):191 -217. doi: 10.1177/14661380122230894.
- Goldman, M. 2005. Imperial nature: The World Bank and the making of green neoliberalism . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Goldman, R. L., H. Tallis, P. Kareiva, and G. C. Daily. 2008. Field evidence that ecosystem service projects support biodiversity and diversify options. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 (27):9445 -48. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0800208105.
- Gonzalez, A. M., and A. S. Martin. 2007. Park guards in the conservation of protected areas. Innovations in conservation series. Parks in Peril Program . Arlington, VA: The Nature Conservancy.

- Haraway, D. 2008. When species meet . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Harris, L. M., and M. C. Roa-Garcia. 2013. Recent waves of water governance: Constitutional reform and resistance to neoliberalization in Latin America (1990 -2012). Geoforum 50:20 -30. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2013.07.009.
- Hess, C. G. 1990. ' Moving up-moving down ' : Agropastoral land-use patterns in the Ecuadorian Paramos. Mountain Research and Development 10 (4):333 -42. doi: 10.2307/3673495.
- Himley, M. 2009. Nature conservation, rural livelihoods, and territorial control in Andean Ecuador. Geoforum 40 (5):832 -42. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2009.06.001.
- Jack, B. K., C. Kousky, and K. R. E. Sims. 2008. Designing payments for ecosystem services: Lessons from previous experience with incentive-based mechanisms. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 (28):9465 -70. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0705503104.
- Joslin, A. J. 2019. Unpacking ' success ' : Applying local perceptions to interpret influences of water fund payments for ecosystem services in the Ecuadorian Andes. Society &amp; Natural Resources 32 (6):617 -37. doi: 10.1080/08941920.2018.1559379.
- Joslin, A. J., and W. E. Jepson. 2018. Territory and authority of water fund payments for ecosystem services in Ecuador ' s Andes. Geoforum 91:10 -20. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2018.02.016.
- Kauffman, C. M. 2014. Financing watershed conservation: Lessons from Ecuador ' s evolving water trust funds. Agricultural Water Management 145:39 -49. doi: 10. 1016/j.agwat.2013.09.013.
- Kauffman, C. M. 2017. Grassroots global governance: Local watershed management experiments and the evolution of sustainable development . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Knapp, G. 1991. Andean ecology: Adaptive dynamics in Ecuador . Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Laegaard, S. 1992. Influence of fire in the grass p  aramo vegetation of Ecuador. In P  aramo: An Andean ecosystem under human influence , ed. H. Balslev and J. L. Luteyn, 151 -70. London: Academic.
- Leach, M., J. Fairhead, and J. Fraser. 2012. Green grabs and biochar: Revaluing African soils and farming in the new carbon economy. Journal of Peasant Studies 39 (2):285 -307. doi: 10.1080/03066150.2012.658042.
- Leon-Yanez, S. 2011. La flora de los p  aramos Ecuatorianos [Vegetation in the Ecuadorian p  aramos]. In P  aramo: Paisaje estudiado, habitado, manejado, e instatucionalizado , ed. P. Mena Vasconez, A. Castillo, S. Flores, R. Hofstede, C. Josse, S. Lasso, G. Medina, N. Ochoa, and D. Ortiz, 25 -39. Quito, Ecuador: Abya-Yala.
- Lewis, T. 2000. Transnational conservation movement organizations: Shaping the protected area systems of less developed countries. Mobilization: An International Quarterly 5 (1):103 -21.
- Luteyn, J. L. 1992. P  aramos: Why study them? In P  aramo: An Andean ecosystem under human pressure , ed. H. Balslev and J. L. Luteyn, 1 -15. London: Academic.
- Martinez, L. 2011. La experiencia de manejo de los paramos en la Reserva Ecologica Cayambe-Coca [The experience of managing the p  aramos in the Cayambe-Coca Ecological Reserve]. In Paramo: Paisaje estudiado, habitado, manejado e institucionalizado , ed. P. Mena Vasconez, A. Castillo, S.
- Flores, R. Hofstede, C. Josse, S. Lasso, G. Medina, N. Ochoa, and D. Ortiz, 357 -60. Quito, Ecuador: Abya-Yala.
- Maxwell, K. 2011. Beyond verticality: Fuelscape politics and practices in the Andes. Human Ecology 39 (4):465 -78. doi: 10.1007/s10745-011-9393-z.
- Mayer, E. 2002. The articulated peasant: Household economies in the Andes . Boulder, CO: Westview.
- Muradian, R. 2013. Payments for ecosystem services as incentives for collective action. Society &amp; Natural Resources 26:1155 -69. doi: 10.1080/08941920.2013.820816.
- Muradian, R., M. Arsel, L. Pellegrini, F. Adaman, B. Aguilar, B. Agarwal, E. Corbera, D. Ezzine de Blas, J. Farley, G. Froger, et al. 2013. Payments for ecosystem services and the fatal attraction of win -win solutions. Conservation Letters 6 (4):274 -79. doi: 10.1111/j. 1755-263X.2012.00309.x.
- Murra, J. V. 2002. El ' control vertical ' de un m  aximo de pisos ecol  ogicos en la econom  ı a de las sociedades andinas -1972 [The vertical control of a maximum of ecological tiers in the economy of Andean societies]. In El mundo andino: Poblaci  on, medio ambiente, y econom  ı a , 85 -126. Lima, Peru: Instituto de Estudios Peruanos.
- Nail, T. 2016. Theory of the border . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Nyce, C. M. 2004. The decentralization of protected area management in Ecuador. Journal of Sustainable Forestry 18 (2 -3):65 -90. doi: 10.1300/J091v18n02\_04.
- Podwojewski, P., and J. Poulenard. 2011. Los suelos de los p  aramos de Ecuador [The soils of Ecuador ' s p  aramos]. In P  aramo: Paisaje estudiado, habitado, manejado e institucionalizado , ed. P. Mena Vasconez, A. Castillo, S. Flores, R. Hofstede, C. Josse, S. Lasso, G. Medina, N. Ochoa, and D. Ortiz, 63 -80. Quito, Ecuador: Abya-Yala.
- Poppe, J. 2012. Conservation ' s ambiguities: Rangers on the periphery of the W Park, Burkina Faso. Conservation and Society 10 (4):330 -43. doi: 10.4103/ 0972-4923.105538.
- Ram  on, G. 2009. Conocimiento y pr  acticas ancestrales [Knowledge and ancestral practices]. In Gente y ambiente de p  aramo: Realidades y perspectivas en el Ecuador , ed. J. S. Mart  ı nez, 13 -22. Quito, Ecuador: Ecociencia-Abya Yala.
- Robbins, P. 2000. The rotten institution: Corruption in natural resource management. Political Geography 19 (4):423 -43. doi: 10.1016/S0962-6298(99)00087-6.
- Robertson, M. M. 2006. The nature that capital can see: Science, state and market in the commodification of ecosystem services. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 24 (3):367 -87. doi: 10.1068/d3304.
- Robertson, M. M. 2007. Discovering price in all the wrong places: The work of commodity definition and price under neoliberal environmental policy. Antipode 39 (3):500 -526.
- Rodr  ı guez-de-Francisco, J. C., J. Budds, and R. Boelens. 2013. Payments for environmental services and unequal resource control in Pimampiro, Ecuador. Society &amp; Natural Resources 26 (10):1217 -33. doi: 10. 1080/08941920.2013.825037.
- Rodr  ı guez-de-Francisco, J. C., and R. Boelens. 2014. Payment for environmental services and power in the Chamach  an watershed in Ecuador. Human Organization 73 (4):351 -62. doi: 10.17730/humo.73.4.b680w75u27527061.

- Rose-Redwood, R. 2012. With numbers in place: Security, territory, and the production of calculable space. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102 (2):295 -319.
- Roth, R. J. 2008. ' Fixing ' the forest: The spatiality of conservation conflict in Thailand. Annals Association of American Geography 98 (2):373 -391.
- Rutherford, S. 2007. Green governmentality: Insights and opportunities in the study of nature ' s rule. Progress in Human Geography 31 (3):291 -307. doi: 10.1177/ 0309132507077080.
- Scott, J. C. 1998. Seeing like a state . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Sodikoff, G. 2009. The low-wage conservationist: Biodiversity and perversities of value in Madagascar. American Anthropologist 111 (4):443 -55. doi: 10.1111/ j.1548-1433.2009.01154.x.
- Tallis, H., P. Kareiva, M. Marvier, and A. Chang. 2008. An ecosystem services framework to support both practical conservation and economic development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 (28):9457 -64. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0705797105.
- Ufelder, W. H. 1998. The community park ranger program in the Cayambe-Coca Ecological Reserve. International Journal of Wilderness 4 (2):39 -42.
- United States Agency for International Development. 2011. Economic sustainability within biodiversity conservation programs in Ecuador (1990 -2010) . Washington, DC: United States Agency for International Development.
- Valdivia, G. 2015. Eco-governmentality. In The Routledge handbook of political ecology , ed. T. Perreault, G. Bridge, and J. McCarthy, 467 -80. London and New York: Routledge.
- Valdivia, G., W. Wolford, and F. Lu. 2014. Border crossings: New geographies of protection and production in the Gal  apagos Islands. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 104 (3):686 -701. doi: 10.1080/ 00045608.2014.892390.
- Valladares, C., and R. Boelens. 2019. Mining for mother earth: Governmentalities, sacred waters and nature ' s rights in Ecuador. Geoforum 100:68 -79. doi: 10.1016/ j.geoforum.2019.02.009.
- Vandergeest, P., and N. L. Peluso. 1995. Territorialization and state power in Thailand. Theory and Society 24 (3):385 -426. doi: 10.1007/BF00993352.
- Veiga, F., A. Calvache, S. P. Benitez, J. Le  on, and A. Ramos. 2015. Water funds as a tool for urban water provision and watershed conservation in Latin America. In Water and cities in Latin America: Challenges for sustainable development , ed. I. AguilarBarajas, J. Malhknecht, J. Kaledin, M. Kjellen, and A. Mejia-Betancourt, 235 -55. London: Earthscan.
- Wunder, S. 2005. Payments for environmental services: Some nuts and bolts. CIFOR Occasional Paper No. 42. CIFOR, Bogor, Indonesia.
- Zimmerer, K. S. 1999. Overlapping patchworks of mountain agriculture in Peru and Bolivia. Toward a regionalglobal landscape model. Human Ecology 27 (1):135 -65.

AUDREY JOSLIN is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography and Geospatial Sciences at Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506. E-mail: ajoslin@ksu.edu. She studies conservation incentives, rural land management, and social responses to environmental change.