This article was downloaded by: [University of Connecticut]

On: 05 October 2014, At: 00:30

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954

Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH,

UK

<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Land, Labor, and Rural Development: Analyzing Participation in India's Village Dairy Cooperatives

Pratyusha Basu a &amp; Jayajit Chakraborty a

a University of South Florida

Published online: 04 Jun 2008.

To cite this article: Pratyusha Basu &amp; Jayajit Chakraborty (2008) Land, Labor, and Rural Development: Analyzing Participation in India's Village Dairy Cooperatives, The Professional Geographer, 60:3, 299-313

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330120801985729

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## Land, Labor, and Rural Development: Analyzing Participation in India's Village Dairy Cooperatives ∗

## Pratyusha Basu and Jayajit Chakraborty

University of South Florida

Livestock-based livelihoods are currently being promoted by international development agencies as part of global efforts to combat poverty. India's dairy development program, organized around village cooperatives, has become an important model for such efforts. This article aims to identify household characteristics that influence membership in India's rural dairy cooperatives by comparing two villages representing different degrees of success. Utilizing logistic regression methods, data collected through a comprehensive survey of all households in the two villages are analyzed to examine (1) how variables describing animal ownership, agricultural attributes, and household labor availability contribute to explaining membership in the dairy cooperative; and (2) whether factors influencing membership differ across the two villages. Our results indicate that although agricultural property ownership influences cooperative membership in both villages, the kind of dairy animal used and labor utilized for dairying work also have a significant and context-specific effect on household participation. Key Words: agriculture, cooperatives, dairying, land, rural development.

国际发展机构正在积极鼓励以畜牧业为基础的生计作为全球消除贫穷的措施之一。印度围绕着农村 合作社的乳制品业发展计划已成为能够代表这种措施的一个重要模式。通过比较两个拥有不同程度 成功的村庄，这篇文章旨在确认影响印度乡村合作社会员率的住户特征。采用逻辑斯蒂回归法来分 析在两个村庄所有住户调查所收集的数据，我们探讨了（1）描述动物拥有权，农业属性和住户可支 配人力的变数如何有助于解释乳制品合作社的会员率；以及（2）两个村庄影响会员率的因素是否 有所出入。我们的研究结果显示，农业资产所有权虽然影响了两个村庄的合作社会员率，乳品动物 的种类和用于乳业工作的人力对于住户的参与也有显著以及具体的影响。关键词：农业，合作社， 乳品事业，土地，农村发展。

Actualmente las agencias de desarrollo internacional est´ an promoviendo el sustento basado en la ganader´ ıa como parte de los esfuerzos globales para combatir la pobreza. El programa de desarrollo l´ acteo de India, organizado alrededor de cooperativas comunales, se ha convertido en un importante modelo de tales esfuerzos. Este art´ ıculo tiene como objetivo identificar las caracter´ ısticas familiares que influyen en la afiliaci ´ on a las cooperativas rurales l´ acteas de India comparando dos comunidades que representan diferentes grados de ´ exito. Los datos recopilados mediante encuestas exhaustivas de todas las familias de las dos comunidades se analizaron mediante m´ etodos de regresi´ on log´ ıstica para examinar (1) c´ omo las variables que describen la propiedad de animales, los atributos agr´ ıcolas y la disponibilidad de mano de obra en la familia contribuyen a explicar la afiliaci ´ on a las cooperativas l´ acteas; y (2) si los factores que influencian la afiliaci ´ on difieren entre las dos comunidades. Nuestros resultados indican que aunque la posesi´ on de propiedades agr´ ıcolas influye en la afiliaci ´ on a las cooperativas en ambas comunidades, la clase de ganado usado y la labor utilizada para el trabajo lechero tambi´ en tienen un efecto significativo y espec´ ıfico del contexto en la participaci´ on de la familia. Palabras claves: agricultura, cooperativas, trabajo lechero, tierra, desarrollo rural.

A lthough the United Nations' Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) have placed poverty at the center stage of international development, less attention has been paid to the mechanisms through which antipoverty programs will be delivered at the local level. India's national dairy development program, organized around cooperative institutions for the

∗ Field work for this research was supported by the International Dissertation Field Research Fellowship Program of the Social Science Research Council (with funds from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation) and by a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Award from the National Science Foundation (BCS-0000280). The authors wish to thank Hetal Patel and Sandip Patel from Gujarat, India, and Urmila Patidar from Madhya Pradesh, India, for their assistance with the fieldwork.

collection and marketing of milk, becomes especially significant in this regard because it is regarded as an example of successful rural development (Banerjee 1994; Fulton and Bhargava 1994; Kurien 1997). The association between India's dairy program and the antipoverty goals outlined in the MDGs is also highlighted by the incorporation of cooperative dairying into the Food and Agriculture Association's Pro-Poor Livestock Policy Initiative (Hemme, Garcia, and Saha 2003; Garcia et al. 2006). In fact, livestock-related programs (Thornton et al. 2003) and cooperatives in general (Logue and Yates 2006) are receiving renewed attention in terms of the structuring of development to promote equity.

The inclusion of impoverished households in India's dairy cooperatives, however, is not as clear-cut as implied in official accounts, and the dairy program has been subject to vigorous criticism by both development activists and scholars. Such criticisms have focused on the program's dependence on international funding agencies, the consequences of new dairying technologies for existing agricultural economies, and challenges posed to participation by class and gender inequalities (Alvares 1985; George 1985, 1988; Attwood and Baviskar 1988; Doornbos et al. 1990). Although mainstream development discourses have not utilized such insights to produce more complex portrayals of the dairy program, critical analyses of the dairy program by themselves also do not adequately clarify reasons for the continuing presence and growth of village dairy cooperatives. An especially striking characteristic of the program is the unevenness of its outcomes across the contexts of its implementation, so that the success of dairy development is usually associated with the place where it originated, and cooperative dairying has not achieved similar levels of success in places where it has been replicated (George 1988; Candler and Kumar 1998). Yet, dairy development has rarely been approached in terms of attentiveness to differences between places, with most studies seeking to trace its success or failure to institutional factors (Mascarenhas 1988; Shah 1995). Questions related to dairy development, therefore, remain in need of clarification, especially with regard to the nature of participation in dairy cooperatives.

The goal of this article is to identify and analyze the household characteristics that influence membership in India's rural dairy cooperatives through a comparison between two villages, one representing success and the other associated with less successful implementation of dairy development. Data for this study were collected on the basis of a comprehensive survey of all households in the two villages chosen as case studies. Household characteristics identified as relevant in terms of dairying are categorized into three groups: animal ownership, agricultural attributes, and availability of household labor. The specific objectives of the study are to examine (1) how variables in each group contribute to explaining membership in the dairy cooperative, and (2) whether factors influencing membership remain constant or vary across the two villages. Overall, this article seeks to understand how the characteristics of the rural population that can benefit from livelihoodsbased antipoverty programs are related to the social and agrarian environments in which the programs are established.

## Linking Dairying to Land and Labor: The Role of Assets in Participation

Development strategies related to poverty can be distinguished between a long-standing focus oneconomicgrowthandamorerecentconcern with the participation and empowerment of marginalized groups. Whereas income generation programs are congruent with international development's emphasis on economic growth, the shift to questions of power and inequalities can be traced to the failure of programs exclusively focused on income generation, and growing resistance to the social exclusions of development (Kabeer 1994; Escobar 1995; Peet and Hartwick 1999). India's dairy development program is officially represented as fitting in with both economic and participatory development, by linking dairy farmers to urban markets and providing them a fair price for high-quality milk, as well as enabling the formation of collective spaces for social and political interaction through its cooperatives (NDDB 1987; Candler and Kumar 1998). The extent to which official discourses of participation translate into practices that address systemic inequalities has been the subject of considerable debate in development studies (Cooke and Kothari

2001; Kumar and Corbridge 2002; Hickey and Mohan 2004), but this article focuses on the link between material assets and participation, which also represents a significant subject of inquiry (Moser 1998; Bebbington 1999; Barrett and Swallow 2004) and one that transfers attention from the development program to its local participants.

Studies that focus on the value of dairy developmentforrural communities and marginalized groups suggest that the program is particularly well-suited for poverty alleviation. Thus, to the extent that dairying is already an activity in which poorer households are engaged, a focus on dairying is equivalent to targeting the poor (Candler and Kumar 1998, 60). Alongside, possible resistance by elite sections is avoided because of the focus on an economic activity instead of a social group (Tendler 1989, 1039). Village-level analyses of dairy development, however, have shown that membership in dairy cooperatives is linked to land ownership, so that landless sections are usually excluded (Baviskar 1988; Patel 1988). The role of assets, especially agricultural assets, in enabling households to combat poverty is reinforced through other studies on rural communities. Thus, Krishna (2006), on the basis of a survey of villages in southern India, shows that land improvements and access to diverse sources of income are key to enabling rural households to escape poverty. A similar study on movement of households in and out of poverty conducted in Uganda also shows that land-related factors are significant in explaining the move out of poverty (Krishna et al. 2006).

In contrast, Winters, Davis, and Corral (2002) focus on rural Mexico to indicate that a combination of household assets (which they define in terms of land, household members, migration, access to credit, and regional location) and community-level social capital (community facilities, such as health care and schools, and participation in community organizations) are significant in enabling households to participate in a wider array of incomegeneration activities. According to their study, improvements in agriculture per se are not as significant, as rural residents are more likely to divert agricultural property toward nonagricultural livelihoods. This finding is consistent with other studies that seek to show that globalization is being manifested in ru- ral communities through recourse to 'dispersed livelihoods' (de Haan and Zoomers 2003), including diversification of income sources and multilocale livelihoods (Rigg 1998). Additionally, the notion of resources is currently being revised to include nontangible assets or social capital, especially the value of social networks made possible through the cooperative, both within the community and with the development program (Bebbington et al. 2006).

The issue of land ownership feeds into larger and more long-standing debates within rural development studies of whether the introduction of technological improvements (such as those provided through Green Revolution technologies) are sufficient in themselves, or need to be combined with land reform policies to ensure that all households can benefit from new income-generation opportunities (Harriss 1982; Lipton and Longhurst 1989; de Janvry and Sadoulet 2002, 2005). Bardhan (1984) has focused on rural India to demonstrate the value of small amounts of land ownership for mitigating household-level risks associated with participation in inadequately compensated agricultural labor markets. More recently, Finan, Sadoulet, and de Janvry (2005) indicated that access to even small amounts of land increases the welfare of rural communities in Mexico. The focus on land in this article seeks to contribute to the debate between the relative value of new technologies versus land reform policies, by examining whether new dairying technologies are more likely to be taken advantage of in the presence of land ownership. The role of land in enabling participation in development also needs to be situated in context, as this role, in terms of both its quantity and quality, is likely to vary with the kind of development program being considered.

The emphasis on land, however, is not sufficient in the case of dairy development because the program has to locate itself within agricultural practices as much as agricultural assets. One of the main aims of the dairy development program in India has been to improve cattle breeds, so that the crossbred cow has become central to how the program evaluates its success (Candler and Kumar 1998). The crossbred cow in India is derived from combining European species (like Jersey and Holstein-Friesian) with indigenous Zebu species, and is primarily

suited to milk production. Yet, in many agricultural communities in India, cows are mainly used as draft animals for plowing, weeding, and transportation, and buffaloes are utilized for dairying purposes (George 1990). Moreover, crossbred cows require specialized feed, veterinary, and artificial insemination services that promote dependence on the dairy cooperative. Thus, the symbiosis between dairying and agriculture that is a hallmark of agrarian livelihoods in India has to be taken into account to understand participation in dairy cooperatives (Doornbos et al. 1990, 277). An understanding of the link between dairy farming and crop farming will also illuminate the ways in which agriculture remains significant for rural livelihoods, despite access to nonagricultural employment.

Another significant feature of dairy development, and one that has not been studied in terms of its influence on membership, is the gendered nature of dairying work. Studies on women and dairy cooperatives have focused on the ways in which dairy cooperatives have contributed or failed to contribute to women's economic and political empowerment(Tendler1989;SharmaandVanjani1993; Mayoux 1995). In the process, the contribution of women's labor to the success of dairy cooperatives has not been considered, even as women are usually represented as being traditionally associated with dairying (Shiva 1988), and access to unwaged family labor is likely to lower costs associated with dairy development. Women's self-help groups are currently being promoted as key to enabling women's empowerment (Jakimow and Kilby 2006), and the focus on women and dairy cooperatives helps in understanding the extent to which rural development programs are already dependent on women's work, and hence on the gender division of labor existing within rural households.

This article thus seeks to update existing studies on dairy cooperatives, and contribute to wider debates on the ways in which household assets, both in terms of ownership of agricultural land and access to family labor, are related to participation in development programs that seek to augment rural livelihoods. Membership in dairy cooperatives is related to three sets of household characteristics identified in studies of dairy development, and the wider literature on development, as significant for explaining ability to participate in and benefit from development: (1) kind of animals utilized for dairying; (2) agricultural land, in terms of both its quantity and quality; and (3) kind of labor utilized for dairying, with an emphasis on gender. The key research questions addressed are as follows:

- /a114 In each village, what are the characteristics of households that are members of the dairy cooperative? The goal here is to examine the significance, relative contribution, and direction of influence of variables included within the three categories identified earlier for participation in the dairy cooperative.
- /a114 How do variables that influence participation vary across the two villages chosen as case studies? The goal here is to verify whether factors explaining dairy participation remain similar or differ in accordance with the context in which the program is sought to be implemented.

## Background and Study Areas

This article focuses on two village dairy cooperatives: one is located in Mahdol 1 village in the state of Gujarat and is associated with successful dairy development; the other is located in Saundara village in the state of Madhya Pradesh, representing a less successful implementation of the program (Figure 1). Although a number of studies on dairy development in India have focused on the scale of the village cooperative (Doornbos et al. 1990), these studies have not explicitly sought to produce a comparison across regional differences in the program.

India's dairy development program is popularly traced to a struggle launched in 1946 by farmers residing in villages around Anand, a small town in the state of Gujarat. The farmers were protesting the grant of monopoly milk procurement rights to Polson, a private dairy company, by the British colonial government and linked their struggle to the larger anticolonial movement and its leaders in Gujarat. Faced with this resistance, the British government rescinded the grant and the farmers won the right to organize milk marketing on their own terms. This led to the formation of the Kheda District Milk Producers Cooperative Union (KDMPCU), more popularly known as AMUL, the

Figure 1 Location of study villages: Mahdol (Gujarat) and Saundara (Madhya Pradesh).

<!-- image -->

brand name of its dairy products. In 1965, rural cooperatives were elevated to the status of a national model for dairy development. The National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) was established in Anand and entrusted with the task of replicating Anand pattern dairying throughout rural India (NDDB 1987).

The village of Mahdol is located in Anand district and although it was not part of the initial 1946 struggle, its dairy cooperative having been established in 1961, the village has become an important site within which dairy development displays its success. Consequently, a number of visitors arrive to view and learn from Mahdol's dairy cooperative. As many as 69 percent of the households in Mahdol are members of the cooperative and the village dairy cooperative supplies 2,000 liters of milk per day to the AMUL dairy plant. The presence of refrigeration facilities, which enable the cooperative to store the daily milk collection until the refrigerated tanker arrives once a day to carry it away, and the use of computers for measuring milk quantity and payment, which speeds up the task of collecting milk, serve to provide visible proof of the success of dairying in the village. Moreover, veterinary and artificial insemination services are also available through the cooperative. From the perspective of the dairy program, the widespread use of crossbred cows for dairy- ing within the village and the role played by womenindairying, as evidenced by the fact that a large number of women can be seen depositing milk and collecting money from the cooperative, denotes the success of the village dairy cooperative.

In contrast to Mahdol, the village of Saundara is part of the replication of the Anand model of rural cooperative dairying. In 1974, the World Bank provided its first loan to India's dairy program, and these funds were earmarked for the states of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Karnataka. The Indore Milk Union was established in the state of Madhya Pradesh in 1977, and Saundara's dairy cooperative was organized and affiliated with the Indore Union in 1986. The inability of dairy development in Madhya Pradesh to achieve the levels of success attributed to Gujarat is documented in studies conducted by the World Bank (Mergos and Slade 1987; Hiremath, Singh, and Mergos 1997) and highlighted by the World Bank's withdrawal of funding for dairy development in 1996 (Candler and Kumar 1998). Although the cooperative at Saundara does not meet dairy development's definitions of success, it is considered successful by its residents, as very few of the surrounding villages have organized cooperatives or have been able to sustain them. The presence of a paved road that connects

Saundara to the highway and the absence of such roads for other villages partly explains the village's ability to link itself with dairy development.

The difference between Saundara and Mahdol is particularly highlighted by the fact that Saundara's cooperative produces 400 liters of milk per day and only 12 percent of Saundara's households are members of the cooperative. Dairying in Saundara is based on buffaloes and the crossbred cow has not been adopted here, although there is a possibility that a few households will move to crossbred cows in the future. In addition, refrigeration facilities are not available in the village and milk is transported twice a day to the nearest chilling plant by a milk union vehicle. Automated milk measurement and payment calculation machines were also not available in the village until very recently. In terms of the wider economy, whereas Mahdol has access to nonagricultural employment in the nearby town and is also part of international migration networks, households in Saundara remain primarily dependent on agriculture. More strikingly, most women do not participate in dairying work in Saundara, citing agriculture as their main work.

The analysis that follows seeks to examine whether differences between Mahdol and Saundara, in terms of cooperative services and agricultural arrangements, also emerge as differences in the characteristics of households that have become members of the dairy cooperative.

## Data

The data used in this study were collected on the basis of surveys conducted between January 2001 and September 2001 in the villages of Mahdol and Saundara. These surveys incorporated all households in the village and consisted of a structured questionnaire that was filled out by a female research assistant from each of the two villages. The first author conducted preliminary field work from November 1999 to April 2000 to ensure that people had become familiar with the purpose of the research and were more likely to be forthcoming with information about their household. Initial guidance regarding the filling of the questionnaires was provided by the first author. The research assistants obtained information through discussions with, and in the presence of, both men and women in the household. Questions were asked in the local language and forms were completed in Hindi by each research assistant. Translation of responses into English and data entry were conducted by the first author. The research assistants were acquainted with all households in the village by virtue of being village residents, but also due to the fact that one of them had served as an elected village representative in a local administrative body and the other held the position of a health worker in the village dairy cooperative. Data collection methods and the information collected were also verified by the first author when the completed survey forms were retrieved, between August and September 2001.

The names and definitions of all variables used in this study are summarized in Table 1. Participation in the dairy cooperative, a categorical indicator recorded for each household, was used as the dependent variable in our statistical analyses. This dichotomous variable was coded as 1 if the household was a member of the dairy cooperative and 0 if it was not a member. The other variables used in the study are described in more detail next.

## Animal Ownership

This category consists of quantitative variables representing the number of animals, specifically cows (crossbred cows in the case of Mahdol), buffaloes, and goats, that are owned by each household. It is expected that crossbred cows would be positively related with dairy membership in Mahdol, and number of buffaloes would show the same relationship in Saundara. Goats are kept for both milk and meat in Saundara, but this is mostly by landless households that are not members of the dairy cooperative. It is expected, therefore, that in the case of Saundara, goats would show a negative relationship with membership. Because very few households own goats in Mahdol, the number of goats and dairy membership is expected to show a weak relationship in the case of this village.

## Agricultural Attributes

The next category of independent variables describes the agricultural characteristics of each household in the village. The amount of

## Variable

## Definition and measurement

| Dairy membership Animal ownership Number of cows Number of Number of goats Agricultural attributes Land owned Number of bullocks Private irrigation Private grazing land   | 1 = if member of dairy cooperative, 0 = if not a member                  |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                            | Number of cows owned by the household                                    |
| buffaloes                                                                                                                                                                  | Number of buffaloes owned by the household                               |
|                                                                                                                                                                            | Number of goats owned by the household                                   |
|                                                                                                                                                                            | Total agricultural land owned by the household in acres                  |
|                                                                                                                                                                            | Number of bullocks owned by the household                                |
| source                                                                                                                                                                     | 1 = own private means of irrigation (e.g., well, pipeline), 0 = do not   |
|                                                                                                                                                                            | 1 = own private land for grazing, 0 = do not own                         |
| Tractor ownership                                                                                                                                                          | 1 = own a tractor, 0 = do not own                                        |
| Annual laborer hire                                                                                                                                                        | 1 = hire laborers on annual basis for agricultural work, 0 = do not hire |
| Household labor availability                                                                                                                                               |                                                                          |
| Household size                                                                                                                                                             | Total number of people in household                                      |
| Proportion female in household                                                                                                                                             | Ratio of females in household to total household size                    |
| Family labor for dairying                                                                                                                                                  | 1 = use family labor for dairying, 0 = do not use family labor           |

agricultural land (in acres) and number of bullocks owned by each household are represented as quantitative variables. It is expected that land ownership will show a positive association with membership in dairy cooperative. Because access to private irrigation further improves the ability to benefit from land owned, this variable is expected to show a relationship similar to land. In the village of Saundara, part of the land owned by the household is in the form of grazing land, and access to private grazing land is also expected to have a positive influence on membership. In Mahdol, no households set land aside for grazing, so this variable is not included here. Bullocks are valuable in both Saundara and Mahdol as draft animals, used for plowing, seed planting, weeding, and transportation, but ownership of bullocks is relatively more widespread in Saundara. Tractors are utilized in both villages. Ownership of bullocks can influence dairy membership in two ways. It can have a negative influence to the extent that maintenance of bullocks means that fewer resources can be directed toward dairy animals. Given that bullocks and tractors also contribute to agricultural productivity, however, they can be expected to have a positive relationship with membership. The hiring of agricultural laborers on an annual basis is prevalent in Saundara. This is expected to have a positive relationship with dairy membership as it increases availability of labor for dairying. Agricultural laborers are not used for dairying in Mahdol, and agricultural land is contracted out rather than agricultural labor being hired, so that this variable is not significant here.

## Availability of Household Labor

The number of people in the household, the proportion of household members who are female, and the use of family labor for dairying were also used as explanatory variables. We expected that number of female family members would have a positive relationship with participation in Mahdol, because women are mainly responsible for dairying here.

Table 2 provides summary statistics for all variables used in this study and can be used to compare the two villages in terms of various household characteristics. As many as 191 (69.0 percent) of the 277 households in Mahdol identified themselves as members of the dairy cooperative, compared to only 57 (12.2 percent) of the 469 households in the village of Saundara. The survey data on animal ownership indicate that more than one-half of households in Mahdol own crossbred cows. In Saundara, one-fifth of households own local breeds of cows. The share of households that own at least one buffalo is about 7 percent higher in Mahdol. In terms of goats, the proportion of households owning goats in Mahdol (1.4 percent) is substantially smaller than in Saundara (35.4 percent).

About one-third of households in Saundara own agricultural land, with a mean of about

Table 2 Descriptive statistics for variables analyzed

| Variable                      |   Min |   Max |    M |   SD | Households with value >   |
|-------------------------------|-------|-------|------|------|---------------------------|
| Mahdol (N = 277 households)   |       |       |      |      |                           |
| Dairy membership              |     0 |     1 | 0.69 | 0.46 | 69.0%                     |
| Animal ownership              |       |       |      |      |                           |
| Number of cows                |     0 |    11 | 1.35 | 1.86 | 54.5%                     |
| Number of buffaloes           |     0 |     4 | 0.53 | 0.85 | 35.7%                     |
| Number of goats               |     0 |     5 | 0.03 | 0.34 | 1.4%                      |
| Agricultural attributes       |       |       |      |      |                           |
| Land owned (acres)            |     0 |    20 | 1.7  | 2.5  | 61.7%                     |
| Number of bullocks            |     0 |     2 | 0.06 | 0.31 | 4.7%                      |
| Private irrigation source     |     0 |     1 | 0.05 | 0.21 | 4.7%                      |
| Private grazing land          |     0 |     0 | 0    | 0    | 0.0%                      |
| Tractor ownership             |     0 |     1 | 0.04 | 0.2  | 4.0%                      |
| Annual laborer hire           |     0 |     1 | 0.02 | 0.13 | 1.8%                      |
| Household labor availability  |       |       |      |      |                           |
| Household size                |     1 |    17 | 5.46 | 2.55 | 100.0%                    |
| Prop. female in household     |     0 |     1 | 0.41 | 0.15 | 99.3%                     |
| Family labor for dairying     |     0 |     1 | 0.64 | 0.48 | 63.9%                     |
| Saundara (N = 469 households) |       |       |      |      |                           |
| Dairy membership              |     0 |     1 | 0.12 | 0.33 | 12.2%                     |
| Animal ownership              |       |       |      |      |                           |
| Number of cows                |     0 |     5 | 0.27 | 0.64 | 19.6%                     |
| Number of buffaloes           |     0 |    10 | 0.73 | 1.51 | 28.6%                     |
| Number of goats               |     0 |    25 | 1.64 | 3.84 | 35.4%                     |
| Agricultural attributes       |       |       |      |      |                           |
| Land owned (acres)            |     0 |    60 | 3.11 | 7.4  | 34.5%                     |
| Number of bullocks            |     0 |     6 | 0.57 | 1.15 | 24.1%                     |
| Private irrigation source     |     0 |     1 | 0.22 | 0.41 | 22.0%                     |
| Private grazing land          |     0 |     1 | 0.19 | 0.39 | 18.6%                     |
| Tractor ownership             |     0 |     1 | 0.03 | 0.16 | 2.8%                      |
| Annual laborer hire           |     0 |     1 | 0.09 | 0.29 | 9.2%                      |
| Household labor availability  |       |       |      |      |                           |
| Household size                |     1 |    36 | 5.65 | 3.16 | 100.0%                    |
| Prop. female in household     |     0 |     1 | 0.36 | 0.17 | 98.3%                     |
| Family labor for dairying     |     0 |     1 | 0.52 | 0.5  | 51.6%                     |

3.1 acres per household and a maximum of 60 acres. Although 61.7 percent of households own land in Mahdol, land holdings are smaller with a mean of only 1.7 acres and a maximum of 20 acres. In Mahdol, less than 5 percent of households own bullocks or private means of irrigation, and no household owns private land for grazing. In contrast, almost one-fourth of households in Saundara own bullocks, 22 percent own private means of irrigation, and 18.6 own private land for grazing. Tractor ownership rates are less than 5 percent in both villages, and the proportion of households hiring laborers on an annual basis for agriculture is substantially higher in Saundara (9.2 percent) compared to Mahdol (1.8 percent). Table 2 also shows that average household size and proportion female in each household are similar in the two villages. However, the proportion of households using family labor for dairying purposes in Mahdol (64.1 percent) exceeds the corresponding proportion in Saundara (51.6 percent).

## Methodology and Results

To identify the factors affecting dairy participation in the two villages, logistic regression was used to analyze the dichotomous dependent variable: membership in the dairy cooperative. Logit models were estimated for the probability of being a member of the dairy cooperative, as a function of the explanatory variables describing various household characteristics presented earlier in Table 1. For each logit model, the natural logarithm of the odds that a household is a dairy cooperative member is assumed to be a linear function of relevant independent variables and the maximum

likelihood method is used to estimate the model. To aid in interpreting the regression results, we also report the odds ratio or the exponent of the regression coefficient produced by each logistic model. This ratio can be interpreted as a multiplier of the odds of being a member of the dairy cooperative. When this odds ratio exceeds one, the likelihood of being a dairy cooperative member increases that many times for each unit of change in the independent variable in the model. On the other hand, odds ratios less than one imply that the likelihood of dairy cooperative membership decreases.

The first phase of this analysis uses bivariate logistic regression where the independent variables are entered singly in each model and zeroorder effects of each variable are estimated. The second phase utilizes multivariate logistic regression where all independent variables described previously are entered into the model simultaneously.

## Bivariate Analysis

Binary logistic regression was used to separately examine the effect of each explanatory variable on the dichotomous indicator of dairy membership. The logit (zero-order) coefficients and corresponding odds ratios from each bivariate model are provided in Table 3, which allows comparison of household characteristics that influence dairy cooperative participation in the two villages.

All variables describing animal ownership and household labor availability in Mahdol indicate a statistically significant relationship ( p &lt; 0 . 10) with dairy membership, when entered singly in the logistic model. Although the number of both crossbred cows and buffaloes significantly increase the likelihood of membership in the dairy cooperative in Mahdol, the number of crossbred cows yields the highest odds ratio and thus suggests a substantially greater impact compared to other variables that show a significant relationship with dairy membership in this village. Goat ownership, on the other hand, leads to a significant decline in the odds of dairy membership. The probability of being a member of the dairy cooperative increases significantly with household size and proportion female in the household, and also if the household used family labor for dairying purposes. The odds of being a dairy member increase by about 97 percent for every one-acre increase in agricultural land owned by a household. With the exception of the amount of land owned, none of the agricultural variables show a significant impact on dairy membership in the village of Mahdol. Thus agricultural attributes do not show the expected relationship with dairy participation in Mahdol.

For the village of Saundara, all variables in Table3indicate a statistically significant impact

Table 3 Logit coefficients and odds ratios (OR) from bivariate analysis of dairy membership

|                                | Mahdol (N = 277)   | Mahdol (N = 277)   | Saundara (N = 469)   | Saundara (N = 469)   |
|--------------------------------|--------------------|--------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| Variable                       | Coefficient        | OR                 | Coefficient          | OR                   |
| Animal ownership               |                    |                    |                      |                      |
| Number of cows                 | 1.739 ∗∗∗          | 5.104              | 1.103 ∗∗∗            | 5.690                |
| Number of buffaloes            | 0.513 ∗∗∗          | 1.670              | 0.922 ∗∗∗            | 2.151                |
| Number of goats                | - 1.377 ∗          | 0.252              | -0.383 ∗∗∗           | 0.682                |
| Agricultural attributes        |                    |                    |                      |                      |
| Land owned                     | 0.676 ∗∗∗          | 1.966              | 0.118 ∗∗∗            | 1.125                |
| Number of bullocks             | 0.557              | 1.746              | 0.991 ∗∗∗            | 2.695                |
| Private irrigation source      | 2.475              | 11.882             | 3.131 ∗∗∗            | 22.897               |
| Private grazing land           | -                  | -                  | 2.595 ∗∗∗            | 13.397               |
| Tractor ownership              | 2.464              | 11.752             | 2.248 ∗∗∗            | 9.469                |
| Annual laborer hire            | 0.598              | 1.818              | 3.862 ∗∗∗            | 47.560               |
| Household labor availability   |                    |                    |                      |                      |
| Household size                 | 0.224 ∗∗∗          | 1.251              | 0.125 ∗∗             | 1.133                |
| Proportion female in household | 2.759 ∗∗∗          | 15.784             | 1.408 ∗              | 4.088                |
| Family labor for dairying      | 2.252 ∗∗∗          | 9.507              | -0.517 ∗             | 0.596                |

Table 4

|                                                    | Mahdol (N = 277)   | Mahdol (N = 277)   | Saundara (N = 469)   | Saundara (N = 469)   |
|----------------------------------------------------|--------------------|--------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
|                                                    | Coefficient        | OR                 | Coefficient          | OR                   |
| Animal ownership                                   |                    |                    |                      |                      |
| Number of cows                                     | 1.479 ∗∗∗          | 4.388              | 0.026                | 1.027                |
| Number of buffaloes                                | 0.283              | 1.301              | 0.664 ∗∗∗            | 1.943                |
| Number of goats                                    | - 1.191            | 0.304              | - 0.098              | 0.906                |
| Agricultural attributes                            |                    |                    |                      |                      |
| Land owned                                         | 0.247 ∗            | 1.280              | -0.040               | 0.961                |
| Number of bullocks                                 | 0.151              | 1.163              | 0.143                | 1.154                |
| Private irrigation source                          | 2.490              | 12.058             | 1.149 ∗∗             | 3.155                |
| Tractor ownership                                  | 1.718              | 5.572              | 1.239                | 0.290                |
| Annual laborer hire                                | - 3.162            | 1.245              | 2.130 ∗∗∗            | 8.416                |
| Household labor availability                       |                    |                    |                      |                      |
| Household size                                     | 0.081              | 1.085              | - 0.089              | 0.915                |
| Proportion female in household                     | 3.162 ∗∗           | 23.608             | 0.769                | 2.157                |
| Family labor for dairying                          | 1.226 ∗            | 3.409              | 0.708                | 2.031                |
| Constant                                           | - 2.974 ∗∗∗        | 0.051              | - 3.732 ∗∗∗          | 0.024                |
| Nagelkerke R 2                                     | 0.540              |                    | 0.523                |                      |
| -2 Log likelihood ratio                            | 191.04             |                    | 196.88               |                      |
| Percent of cases correctly classified (at π = 0.5) | 90.8               |                    | 91.6                 |                      |

∗ p &lt; 0 . 10. ∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 05. ∗∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 01.

( p &lt; 0.10) on dairy membership, when entered singly in the logistic model. The number of cows and buffaloes again show a significant and positive effect on dairy membership, but every additional buffalo leads to a greater increase in the odds of dairy membership in Saundara compared to the effect observed in Mahdol. Similarly, the number of goats owned also leads to greater declines in the odds of dairy membership in Saundara compared to Mahdol. In contrast to Mahdol, all agricultural attributes show a strong positive association with dairy membership in Saundara. Households that own bullocks, private means of irrigation, private grazing land, tractors, and hire laborers for agricultural work are significantly more likely to be dairy members. However, the odds of being a dairy member increase by about 12.5 percent for every one-acre increase in agricultural land owned by a household, which is a smaller positive effect of land ownership than was observed in Mahdol. The probability of being a member of the dairy cooperative in Saundara also increases with household size and proportion female, although the proportion female in the household indicates a smaller effect than in Mahdol. The use of family labor for dairying purposes, however, shows a negative effect on dairy membership in Saundara, unlike the positive effect noted in Mahdol. In other words, households that utilize family labor are signifi- cantly less likely to participate in the cooperative at Saundara, but are more likely to be dairy members in Mahdol.

## Multivariate Analysis

The next phase of the analysis uses logistic regression to investigate the impact of household characteristics on membership in the dairy cooperative, after including all independent variables in a single model. By examining the effects of all explanatory factors simultaneously, we intend to identify the extent to which each variable exerts independent effects on dairy cooperative membership, even when the impacts of other relevant variables are considered. The logit coefficients and odds ratios from our multivariate logistic regression analysis are presented in Table 4. Ownership of private grazing land in Saundara was not included due to collinearity concerns with amount of land owned in the same model. Because no household in Mahdol owns private grazing land, the exclusion of this variable (ownership of private grazing land) does not affect our comparison of factors affecting dairy participation in the two villages.

Our multivariate logit models yield negative log likelihood ratios of high magnitude and the log likelihood (chi-square) test indicates significance for the overall model ( p &lt; 0.001) in both

villages. The Nagelkerke R 2 , analogous to the R 2 used in ordinary least squares regression, exceeds 52 percent for both models, as shown in Table 4. In both villages, more than 90 percent of observed dairy members and nonmembers were correctly predicted or classified to be members and nonmembers by the multivariate logit model. When explanatory variables describing animal ownership, household labor availability, and agricultural attributes are added to the same equation, the sizes and significance of most coefficients are reduced but the effects generally remain in the same direction.

In Mahdol, variables indicating a statistically significant association with dairy membership in the multivariate model include the number of crossbred cows owned, acres of land owned, proportion female in the household, and use of family labor for dairy purposes. After controlling for other household characteristics, the odds of being a dairy member in Mahdol increase significantly with the same variables. The largest odds ratios are observed for the number of crossbred cows and proportion of female household members, thus confirming the strong influence of these variables on dairy membership in Mahdol, even after controlling for other explanatory factors. Although the number of buffaloes, number of goats, and household size suggested a significant individual relationship with dairy membership in Mahdol when entered singly in the logit model (Table 3), these characteristics do not show a significant effect when other explanatory variables are included in the model for this village.

The only variables showing a significant association with dairy membership in Saundara after including the effects of all household characteristics include the number of buffaloes, ownership of private irrigation source, and hiring of agricultural laborers. In terms of dairy animal ownership, the number of buffaloes increases the odds of dairy membership significantly in Saundara, in contrast to Mahdol, where a similar impact was observed for the number of crossbred cows. Ownership of private means of irrigation and hiring annual laborers for agricultural work reveal a strong positive impact on dairy membership in Saundara and yield the highest odds ratios. Although other agricultural attributes such as agricultural land ownership and number of bullocks indicated a significant and positive relationship with dairy membership in our bivariate analysis of Saundara, their effects are reduced substantially in the presence of other explanatory variables in the model. Similarly, variables representing the availability of household labor in Saundara are not significantly related to dairy membership when other variables are included in the model.

In summary, our multivariate logit analysis suggests a different array of household characteristics that can be used to explain dairy participation in the two villages. Variables showing a significant and positive impact on dairy membership in Mahdol include the number of crossbred cows owned, quantity of agricultural land, the proportion of female household members, and the use of family labor for dairy purposes. In Saundara, variables indicating a significant and positive relationship with dairy participation include the number of buffaloes owned, presence of private irrigation source, and the hiring of laborers for agricultural work.

## Discussion

India's cooperative dairying program has long been viewed as a preeminent example of successful rural development, and its importance is being reiterated through contemporary antipoverty strategies promoted by international development institutions. This article has shown that agricultural land and its quality explain membership to a larger degree, so that the emphasis on social capital, or the role of intangible and community assets in enabling participation, has to be tempered by an understanding of the continuing role of material assets, at least in terms of rural livelihood programs (Radcliffe 2004; Blomley 2005). The article also provides a contextual analysis of dairy development to show that the specifics of its membership vary across space in accordance with agrarian and social environments, so that differences in extent of dependence on agriculture and the role of women in dairying work produce differential outcomes for membership.

In terms of animal ownership, dairying is more closely aligned with the dairy program's promotion of the crossbred cow in Mahdol. This can be traced to the availability of ser- vices for the maintenance of the crossbred cow

through the dairy cooperative, less utilization of cattle for agricultural work and hence ability to maintain cattle for dairying purposes, and the presence of nonagricultural job opportunities in the adjoining town and through regional and international migration, which enables agricultural land to be diverted to fodder cultivation. In contrast, the use of bullocks as draft animals in Saundara makes the crossbred cow's exclusive focus on dairying a less attractive option.

The analysis of agricultural attributes confirms that, in both villages, households participating in the dairy cooperative own more agricultural land than those who do not participate. This suggests that land ownership is a major determinant of participation in cooperative dairying. However, household agricultural characteristics (number of bullocks, ownership of private grazing land, private irrigation source, tractors, and the hiring of annual laborers) significantly increase the likelihood of dairy membership only in Saundara, and are not related to dairy participation in Mahdol. This finding can be explained, in part, by the fact that most dairy members in Saundara own moderate amounts of land. Few households owning very small or large amounts of agricultural land in Saundara participate in the dairy cooperative. Consequently, the ownership of a private irrigation source and hiring of annual laborers for agricultural work are the only agricultural attributes that remain significant in the presence of other explanatory variables in Saundara. Because very few households in Mahdol own private irrigation sources, bullocks, and tractors, land becomes a significant explanatory factor for dairy membership.

These differences between the two villages also reflect the different ways in which cooperative dairying fits into the local agricultural economy. In Mahdol, although agricultural land is devoted to dairying purposes, the quality of agricultural land is not crucial for dairying. In contrast, households that show higher levels of agricultural development, especially in terms of quality of land, are more likely to be cooperative members in Saundara. In other words, dairying has emerged as separate from agricultural development in Mahdol, whereas in Saundara, the link between agriculture and dairying continues to be salient.

Variables related to labor availability show the greatest difference between the two villages.

In Mahdol, the proportion of female household members and use of family labor continue to show a significant and positive influence on dairy membership when all explanatory variables are included in our model. In contrast, none of the variables representing household labor availability indicate a significant effect on dairy participation in Saundara. The significance of hired agricultural labor for dairying in Saundara, but not in Mahdol, can also be explained in terms of the gender distribution of dairying work. Because women are not responsible for cooperative dairying work, the ability to hire agricultural laborers on an annual basis provides the labor required for dairying in Saundara.

Overall, this article provides support for the position that land ownership continues to significantly influence participation in antipoverty programs associated with promoting rural livelihoods. The diversification of rural livelihoods, therefore, does not signify a shift away from dependence on agricultural resources. In addition, development programs are also dependent on availability of household labor, so that gendered distributions of household work contribute to the ability to benefit from rural development. Although this study indicates that development initiatives tend to work within existing class and gender arrangements, it also suggests that the antipoverty orientation of the MDGs within international development institutions is likely to benefit from a focus on improving agricultural livelihoods (Adato and Meinzen-Dick 2002), a concern that does not emerge in the current listing of the MDGs.

Although our study is limited by its focus on two cases, it can be argued that because dairying practices differ markedly between the two villages in terms of principal dairy animal and use of women's labor within households, the reported relationship between land and cooperative participation is not affected by regional differences. Yet, such regional differences also suggest that the replication of cooperative dairying cannot be undertaken in the form of a uniform model. Given that dairy cooperatives are being promoted more widely across developing countries, with India's dairying institutions being promoted as model for East African countries (George 1994), it becomes imperative for future studies to continue investigating

the role of contextual characteristics in enabling livelihoods based on dairying. The relationship between dairying activities and ability to participate in off-farm activities is another important area for future research. According to de Janvry and Sadoulet (2000), off-farm employment is accounting for a larger share of rural incomes, even in the case of land-owning households. Cooperative dairying in rural India, therefore, needs to be situated also in the wider rural economy to understand its role in enabling either persistence of, or exit from, primary dependence on agricultural land by rural households.

## Note

- 1 The names Mahdol and Saundara are pseudonyms for the actual village names. The actual names of these villages are not reported in this article because information regarding ownership of land and other agricultural assets was obtained on the assurance that confidentiality would be maintained in the dissemination of research results.

## Literature Cited

- Adato, M., and R. Meinzen-Dick. 2002. Assessing the impact of agricultural research on poverty using the sustainable livelihoods framework. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). http://www.ifpri.org/divs/eptd/dp/ eptdp89.htm (last accessed 16 June 2007).
- Alvares, C., ed. 1985. Another revolution fails: An investigation into how and why India's Operation Flood Project, touted as the world's largest dairy development programme, funded by EEC, went off the rails. Delhi, India: Ajanta Publications.
- Attwood, D., and B. S. Baviskar, eds. 1988. Who shares? Co-operatives and rural development . Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
- Banerjee, A. 1994. Dairying systems in India. World Animal Review 79 (2). http://www.fao.org/ag/ AGa/AGAP/WAR/warall/t3080b/t3080b07.htm (last accessed 16 June 2007).
- Bardhan, P. 1984. Land, labor, and rural poverty: Essays in development economics. New York: Columbia University Press.
- Barrett, C., and B. Swallow. 2004. Dynamic poverty traps and rural livelihoods. In Rural livelihoods and poverty reduction policies, ed. F. Ellis and A. Freeman, 16-27. London: Routledge.
- Baviskar, B. S. 1988. Dairy co-operatives and rural development in Gujarat. In Who shares? Cooperatives and rural development, ed. D. Attwood and B. S. Baviskar, 345-61. Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
- Bebbington, A. 1999. Capitals and capabilities: A framework for analyzing peasant viability, rural livelihoods and poverty. WorldDevelopment 27(12): 2021-44.
- Bebbington, A., L. Dharmawan, E. Fahmi, and S. Guggenheim. 2006. Local capacity, village governance, and the political economy of rural development in Indonesia. World Development 34 (11): 1958-76.
- Blomley, N. 2005. Remember property? Progress in Human Geography 29 (2): 125-27.
- Candler, W., and N. Kumar. 1998. India: The dairy revolution: The impact of dairy development in India and the World Bank's contribution. Washington, DC: World Bank.
- Cooke, B., and U. Kothari, eds. 2001. Participation: The new tyranny? London: Zed Books.
- de Haan, L., and A. Zoomers. 2003. Development geography at the crossroads of livelihood and globalisation. Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 94 (3): 350-62.
- de Janvry, A., and E. Sadoulet. 2000. Rural poverty in Latin America: Determinants and exit paths. Food Policy 25:389-409.
- ---.2002. World poverty and the role of agricultural technology: Direct and indirect effects. The Journal of Development Studies 38 (4): 1-26.
- ---. 2005. Access to land and development. Working paper for New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd ed., ed. S. Durlauf and L. Blume. London: Palgrave Macmillan. http://are.berkeley.edu/ ∼ sadoulet/papers/Palgrave.pdf (last accessed 16 June 2007).
- Doornbos, M., F. van Dorsten, M. Mitra, and P. Terhal. 1990. Dairy aid and development: India's Operation Flood. Delhi, India: Sage.
- Escobar, A. 1995. Encountering development: The making and unmaking of the Third World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Finan, F., E. Sadoulet, and A. de Janvry. 2005. Measuring the poverty reduction potential of land in Mexico. Journal of Development Economics 77 (1): 27-51.
- Fulton, J., and M. Bhargava. 1994. The results of a marketing intervention: Dairy cooperatives in India. Journal of International Food and Agribusiness Marketing 6 (1): 33-58.
- Garcia, O., A. Saha, K. Mahmood, A. Tdambi, and T. Hemme. 2006. Dairy development programs in Andhra Pradesh, India: Impacts and risks for small-scale dairy farms. Pro-Poor Livestock Policy Initiative (PPLPI) Working Paper No. 38. www.fao.org/ag/AGAinfo/projects/ en/pplpi/docarc/wp38.pdf (last accessed 16 June 2007).
- George, S. 1985. Operation Flood: An appraisal of current Indian dairy policy. Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.

- ---. 1988. Co-operatives and Indian dairy policy: More Anand than pattern. In Who shares? Co-operatives and rural development, ed. D. Attwood and B. S. Baviskar, 394-426. Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
- ---.1990.Agropastoral equations in India: Intensification and change of mixed farming systems. In The world of pastoralism: Herding systems in comparative perspective, ed. J. G. Galaty and D. L. Johnson, 119-43. New York: Guilford.
- ---.1994. A matter of people: Co-operative dairying in India and Zimbabwe. Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
- Harriss, J. 1982. Capitalism and peasant farming: Agricultural structure and ideology in northern Tamil Nadu. Mumbai, India: Oxford University Press.
- Hemme, T., O. Garcia, and A. Saha. 2003. A review of milk production in India with particular emphasis on small-scale producers. Pro-Poor Livestock Policy Initiative. www.fao.org/ag/AGAinfo/projects/ en/pplpi/docarc/wp2.pdf (last accessed 16 June 2007).
- Hickey, S., and G. Mohan, eds. 2004. Participation: From tyranny to transformation? Exploring new approaches to participation in development. London: Zed Books.
- Hiremath, B. N., K. Singh, and G. Mergos. 1997. Impact of operation flood in Madhya Pradesh: A resurvey. Anand, India: Institute of Rural Management, Anand (IRMA).
- Jakimow, T., and P. Kilby. 2006. Empowering women: A critique of the blueprint for self-help groups in India. Indian Journal of Gender Studies 13 (3): 375-400.
- Kabeer, N. 1994. Reversed realities: Gender hierarchies in development thought. London: Verso.
- Krishna, A. 2006. Pathways out of and into poverty in 36 villages of Andhra Pradesh, India. World Development 34 (2): 271-88.
- Krishna, A., D. Lumonya, M. Markiewicz, F. Mugumya, A. Kafuko, and J. Wegoye. 2006. Escaping poverty and becoming poor in 36 villages of central and western Uganda. Journal of Development Studies 42 (2): 346-70.
- Kumar, S., and S. Corbridge. 2002. Programmed to fail? Development projects and the politics of participation. Journal of Development Studies 39 (2): 73103.
- Kurien, V. 1997. The AMUL dairy cooperatives: Putting the means of development in the hands of small producers in India. In Reasons for hope: Instructive experiences in rural development, ed. A. Krishna, N. Uphoff, and M. Esman, 105-19. West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press.
- Lipton, M., and R. Longhurst. 1989. New seeds and poor people. London: Unwin Hyman.
- Logue, J., and J. Yates. 2006. Cooperatives, workerowned enterprises, productivity and the interna-
- tional labor organization. Economic and Industrial Democracy 27 (4): 686-90.
- Mascarenhas, R. C. 1988. A strategy for rural development: Dairy cooperatives in India. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
- Mayoux, L. 1995. Alternative vision or utopian fantasy? Cooperation, empowerment, and women's cooperative development in India. Journal of International Development 7 (2): 211-28.
- Mergos, G., and R. Slade. 1987. Dairy development and milk cooperatives: The effects of a dairy project in India. Washington, DC: World Bank.
- Moser, C. 1998. The asset vulnerability framework: Reassessing urban poverty reduction strategies. World Development 26 (1): 1-19.
- National Dairy Development Board (NDDB). 1987. From a drop to a flood. Anand, Gujarat, India: NDDB.
- Patel, A. S. 1988. Co-operative dairying and rural development: A case study of AMUL. In Who shares? Co-operatives and rural development, ed. D. Attwood and B. S. Baviskar, 362-77. Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
- Peet, R., and E. Hartwick. 1999. Theories of development. New York: Guilford.
- Radcliffe, S. 2004. Geography of development: Development, civil society and inequality-Social capital is (almost) dead? Progress in Human Geography 28 (4): 517-27.
- Rigg, J. 1998. Rural-urban interactions, agriculture and wealth: A Southeast Asian perspective. Progress in Human Geography 22 (4): 497-522.
- Shah, T. 1995. Making farmers' cooperatives work: Design, governance, and management. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
- Sharma, M., and U. Vanjani. 1993. When more means less: Assessing the impact of dairy 'development' on the lives and health of women in rural Rajasthan (India). Social Science and Medicine 37 (11): 1377-89.
- Shiva, V. 1988. Staying alive: Women, ecology and development in India. Delhi, India: Kali for Women.
- Tendler, J. 1989. What ever happened to poverty alleviation? World Development 17 (7): 1033-44.
- Thornton, P. K., R. L. Kruskaa, N. Henningerb, P. M. Kristjansona, R. S. Reida, and T. P. Robinson. 2003. Locating poor livestock keepers at the global level for research and development targeting. Land Use Policy 20:311-22.
- Winters, P., B. Davis, and L. Corral. 2002. Assets, activities and income generation in rural Mexico: Factoring in social and public capital. Agricultural Economics 27:139-56.

PRATYUSHA BASU is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620. E-mail:

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 00:30 05 October 2014

pbasu@cas.usf.edu. Her research interests include rural development, agriculture, environmental movements, and gender issues.

JAYAJIT CHAKRABORTY is an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography, Univer- sity of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620. E-mail: jchakrab@cas.usf.edu. His research interests include vulnerability to hazards, environmental justice, environmental health, information technology and society, and quantitative methods for geographic research.