This article was downloaded by: [George Washington University]

On: 23 February 2015, At: 00:31

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954

Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH,

UK

<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

Infrastructure Upgrades and Rural-Urban Connectivity: Distance Disparities in a Tri-National Frontier in the Amazon

Stephen G. Perz a , Alexander Shenkin a , Xanic Rondon a &amp; Youliang Qiu a

a University of Florida-Gainesville

Published online: 03 Feb 2012.

To cite this article: Stephen G. Perz , Alexander Shenkin , Xanic Rondon &amp; Youliang Qiu (2013) Infrastructure Upgrades and Rural-Urban Connectivity: Distance Disparities in a Tri-National Frontier in the Amazon, The Professional Geographer, 65:1, 103-115, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2011.639636

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2011.639636

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or

Downloaded by [George Washington University] at 00:31 23 February 2015

indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## Infrastructure Upgrades and Rural-Urban Connectivity: Distance Disparities in a T ri-National Frontier in the Amazon

## Stephen G. Perz, Alexander Shenkin, Xanic Rondon, and Youliang Qiu

University of Florida-Gainesville

New infrastructure reorganizes spaces by modifying connectivity among locations. We report findings pertaining to rural-urban connectivity in the southwestern Amazon, a tri-national frontier with varying levels of infrastructure due to recent highway paving. We compare distances to nearest markets and distances to primary markets reported by community leaders. The findings show many differences, so we model distance disparities featuring variables derived from location theory. The models show that communities without road paving are more often connected to more distant markets. During the process of infrastructure upgrades, regions experience adjustments in connectivity among locations that deviate from equilibrium expectations of location theory. Key Words: Amazon, connectivity, infrastructure, road, rural.

新的基础设施通过修改地点之间的连接性来重组空间。我们报道有关在西南亚马逊，由于近 期的高速公路铺设而具有不同程度基础设施的三国边境，农村与城市之间的连接性。我们比 较由社区领导所反映的到最近市场的距离和到主要市场的距离。调查结果显示许多差异，因 而我们模拟了从定位理论派生出的变量的距离间的差异。该模型显示，没有铺路的社区更通 常地与更加遥远的市场相连。在基础设施升级的过程中，地区经验能调整偏离定位理论的均 衡期望的位置之间的连接性。关键词：亚马逊，连通性，基础设施，道路，农村。

La nueva infraestructura reorganiza los espacios modificando la conectividad entre las localizaciones. En este escrito reportamos hallazgos relacionados con la conectividad rural-urbana en el Amazonas sudoccidental, que es una frontera tri-nacional con variados niveles de infraestructura debido a la reciente pavimentaci´ on de las carreteras. Comparamos las distancias a los mercados m´ as cercanos y distancias a los mercados primarios seg´ un informes de l´ ıderes comunitarios. Como los hallazgos muestran muchas diferencias, modelamos las disparidades de distancias a la luz de variables derivadas de la teor´ ıa locacional. Los modelos muestran que las comunidades sin pavimentaci´ on de sus v´ ıas a menudo est´ an conectadas con mercados situados a mayor distancia. Durante el proceso de actualizaci´ on de la infraestructura, las regiones experimentan ajustes en la conectividad entre localizaciones que se desv´ ıan de las expectativas de equilibrio asumidas por la teor´ ıa locacional. Palabras clave: Amazonas, conectividad, infraestructura, carretera, rural.

I nterest in spatial connectivity is longstanding in geography and regional science, as distance costs, central places, and related ideas have long pervaded work on the organization of space. In this article, we focus on rural-urban connections in a region experiencing a major infrastructure upgrade. Our analysis draws on location theory and takes up two questions: (1) Do rural communities sell produce to nearby markets unless there are larger if more distant markets available? (2) Does road paving facilitate community interactions with more distant markets? In pursuing these questions, we seek to make three contributions to prior work on the organization of space: (1) We focus on rural-urban connectivity, relatively less studied than connectivity among urban nodes; (2) we pursue international and yet regional comparisons by evaluating connectivity in a tri-national frontier area; and (3) we focus on market connections in a dynamic region where spaces might be changing due to new infrastructure.

We take up the case of the southwestern Amazon, specifically the tri-national frontier where Bolivia, Brazil, and Peru meet. We report findings from a survey of rural community leaders across the tri-national frontier, focusing

on information regarding towns to which their communities primarily market their produce. We compare distances from rural communities to the nearest town and the distances from communities to the primary market town reported by community leaders and focus on the disparity between the two. We then model distance disparities across the tri-national frontier using variables including urban market sizes and road paving status. The findings confirm some expectations from location theory but also show that space is organized in some surprisingly different ways across the tri-national frontier.

## Background: Location Theory and New Infrastructure

Spatial analysis of travel among locations invokes ideas from transport geography pertaining to the organization of space (Taafe and Gauthier 1994). When related to the movement of people, produce, and goods, transport geography and the organization of space are intertwined with economic geography (Fujita, Krugman and Venables 1999).

The theoretical foundations for understanding the spatial organization of economies are of course not new. Von Th¨ unen's pioneering work highlighted the crucial role of distance costs for profitability, which in turn define the spatial allocation of economic activities (Beckmann 1999). Where greater distances imply greater travel costs, the corresponding reductions in profitability reduce economic activities until a frontier is reached beyond which productive activities for trade become unviable (Walker 2004).

Christaller and L¨ osch elaborated models of central places in landscapes (King 1984). Transport infrastructure, whether horse paths or highways, was assumed to follow minimum distance routes between market nodes. To maximize regional connectivity, Christaller designed hexagonal market areas for central places, highlighting the proportionality between the size of urban populations and the market areas they commanded. L¨ osch elaborated on transport networks for specific products, noting that the greater the distance costs, the less affordable a product became for rural consumers.

Such ideas have been applied previously in various regions around the world. Bohannan and Dalton (1962) and others (e.g., E. P. Scott 1972) took up the spatial organization of rural markets in Africa; Skinner (1964) provided a detailed analysis of trade among 'standard markets' in China; and Ortiz (1967) offered a similar type of analysis for a rather different market system in Colombia. Such research evaluated the applicability of location theory to various rural societies shifting from subsistence production to market-oriented trading systems.

Most such research defined local markets with small market areas, linked in turn to larger markets encompassing the local market areas. The resulting premise was that local rural produce was sold in local markets but often left surpluses, then hauled by traders 'up' to larger markets in the urban hierarchy. At the same time, industrial and imported goods were brought by traders 'down' the hierarchy, from large metropoles to local markets.

Location theory, however, suffered critiques and various adjustments (e.g., Parr and Denike 1970). Prominent among the questions raised was the reorganization of space through integration initiatives, which have enormous potential to transform rural productive activities (Timmer 1997). Economic geography subsequently shifted its scale of analysis to the global level to better understand urban and regional change in the context of global commodity circuits (Storper 1997; A. J. Scott 1998; Fujita, Krugman, and Venables 1999).

In this context, infrastructure projects in developing regions have become a major policy priority (Bourguignon and Pleskovic 2008). As a complement to trade agreements and other legal instruments, infrastructure provides the physical basis for regional integration and global market incorporation. The impacts of infrastructure nonetheless become evident at the local and regional levels.

We therefore revisit questions concerning the organization of space, by considering the impacts of new infrastructure in a developing region as regards rural-urban market ties. In so doing, we shift the focus from that of previous work, where emphasis was usually placed on the location and size of markets or the flow of goods along trade routes as managed by middlemen. Instead, on the assumption that infrastructure improvements such as highway paving reduce

transport costs and thereby raise profitability and increase demand for transport, we focus on the urban market nodes where rural communities primarily sell their surplus produce. This offers a basis for evaluating infrastructure impacts through a reappraisal of the organization of space from the perspective of rural producers. Even where new infrastructure provides links to global markets, such an approach returns us to the regional level and links producers to local and regional markets, often the first step in longer market chains (cf. Teltscher 1994).

In this context, the concept of connectivity becomes our focus. Connectivity is key in the history of location theory, evident in classic statements by von Th¨ unen and later Christaller and L¨ osch, with developments around equilibrium models of the regional science school (Isard 1956) and quantitative elaboration (Haggett, Cliff, and Frey 1977). We follow elements of this lineage by appropriating the concept of connectivity among particular nodes in transportation networks. We are interested in rural communities in terms of their market connectivity, so we focus on the connections from a given community to a given market within a transportation network.

Connectivity encompasses not only ease of access but also the extent of interactions among locations. One dimension of connectivity therefore involves access connectivity, defined here in terms of road paving and market distance, with the implied transportation costs being greater on unpaved roads and over greater distances. A second dimension of connectivity is interaction connectivity, which refers to actual exchanges between rural communities and urban centers.

Location theory assumes that accessibility should correspond to interactions. However, connectivity is also affected by the relative sizes of markets, such that producers might sell to closer although smaller markets or to more distant but larger markets. This might reflect price differentials that arise from local market saturation, which necessitates travel over larger distances for marketing. This motivates our first research question, which concerns the urban markets to which rural communities primarily sell their produce. Per location theory, we anticipate that rural communities primarily sell surplus produce in the nearest market, unless there are large differences in market sizes, which motivates sales in larger, more distant market towns.

Further, infrastructure upgrades bear direct and indirect effects on connectivity: directly, to the extent that road paving reduces transport costs, communities become more likely to sell produce to more distant markets; indirectly, road paving could stimulate growth in towns receiving paving, enlarging their market areas along unpaved roads as well, potentially shifting connectivity among locations in a region, part and parcel of the reorganization of space. This motivates our second research question, concerning the impact of highway paving on the distances over which communities will market produce. We expect that rural communities will be more likely to sell surplus produce in more distant markets where there are paved highways.

## Study Region

We take up these questions of rural-urban connectivity between communities and market towns in the presence of infrastructure upgrades using a study case in the Amazon. This region is appropriate for these purposes as it has incurred past infrastructure projects (Goodland and Irwin 1975; Katzman 1977; Smith 1982; Schmink and Wood 1992; Browder and Godfrey 1997; Walker et al. 2011). Such projects generated positive and negative outcomes, ranging from demographic and economic growth to violent conflicts over natural resources and deforestation. Such outcomes yielded debates regarding the wisdom of infrastructure investments in the Amazon, but there is agreement that such investments reorganized spaces in the region (Browder and Godfrey 1997; Walker et al. 2011).

The Amazon is now incurring a new generation of infrastructure projects, under the Initiative for the Integration of Regional Infrastructure of South America (IIRSA; Centro Peruano de Estudios Internacionales [CEPEI] 2002; Killeen 2007; IIRSA 2008; Dourojeanni, Barandiar´ an, and Dourojeanni 2010). IIRSA was constituted by a meeting of presidents from twelve South American countries in 2000. IIRSA was presented as a spatial strategy organized around 'axes of integration' targeted for infrastructure investments. Such axes constitute strategic growth corridors for expanding regional commerce. IIRSA meetings led to

agreements to fund 350 projects at a total projected cost of $ 38 billion. However, IIRSA has given rise to questions about environmental impacts (Killeen 2007; Dourojeanni, Barandiar´ an, and Dourojeanni 2010) as well as the extent of the economic benefits (Moreira Mesquita 2007; Van Dijk and den Haak 2007). IIRSA projects have thus renewed debates over infrastructure in the Amazon.

One of IIRSA's priorities is the InterOceanic Highway, which will link Atlantic ports in southern Brazil to Pacific ports in Peru (CEPEI 2002). The key to completing the Inter-Oceanic Highway is the Peru-Brazil axis of integration, where paving is needed to permit year-round transportation for expanded cross-border commerce (CEPEI 2002). In particular, attention has focused on the tri-national 'MAP' frontier where Madre de Dios, Peru, meets Acre, Brazil, and Pando, Bolivia (Brown et al. 2002; van Oosten 2004; Mendoza et al. 2007; Iniciativa MAP 2008). It is in MAP that road paving is advancing.

The southwestern Amazon was long settled by indigenous groups when the Rubber Boom attracted new populations in the nineteenth century (Santos 1980; Weinstein 1983). Mercantile settlements grew along rivers, which served as transport routes bringing in goods and hauling out rubber. By the mid-twentieth century, overland routes were opened, connecting regional capitals to the rest of Bolivia, Brazil, and Peru. Since the late 1960s, road construction was paired with colonization projects, stimulating roadside land occupation, especially in Acre (Bakx 1988) and Madre de Dios (Chavez 2009). Primary roads often connected long-established towns at road-river crossings, but new construction also prompted the emergence of new towns amidst growing roadside populations (cf. Walker et al. 2011). In this context, IIRSA represents a continuation of previous infrastructure improvements by paving the Inter-Oceanic Highway.

Two characteristics of infrastructure improvements in the MAP frontier merit further comment. First, IIRSA stands in a line of exogenous forces driving infrastructure in the southwestern Amazon. Whereas many studies of location theory highlighted endogenous growth processes in the formation of central places, new infrastructure in the Amazon yields urban expansion via the influx of outside populations. Exogenous drivers have resulted in distinct patterns of rural-urban and urban-urban connectivity (Browder and Godfrey 1997). This raises questions about the assumptions of location theory and the connections among rural communities and markets of varying size and distance in the southwestern Amazon under IIRSA. Second, highway paving differs across the three sides of the MAP frontier. Whereas paving of the Inter-Oceanic Highway in Acre, Brazil was completed by the end of 2002, it has been underway in Madre de Dios, Peru, since 2006, and paving has been announced but not yet implemented in Pando, Bolivia. These differences provide the basis for a tri-national and yet regional comparison of connectivity among rural communities and urban markets. The differences in paving might yield contrasts in rural-urban connectivity across the sides of the MAP frontier.

## Methods and Data

Rural communities in the MAP frontier rely to varying degrees on natural resource management for their livelihoods. This involves a combination of forest extraction, agriculture, ranching, and other activities, both for subsistence consumption and commercial sales. Some products are consumed locally, and others are sold locally, of which some are then exported, notably timber and casta˜ na nuts.

We draw on a tri-national survey of rural communities along the Inter-Oceanic Highway and other key roads in the MAP frontier (Perz et al. 2010). Using secondary data sources (censuses, zoning plans, cadastral maps, etc.), we identified communities in a geographic information system (GIS) as distinct land tenure units or rural population centers along major roads in the MAP frontier. We focused on the Inter-Oceanic Highway in Madre de Dios, Peru, and Acre, Brazil, as well as primary roads in Pando, Bolivia, in and near the area of influence of the Inter-Oceanic Highway. We then sampled communities systematically along primary roads to ensure variation in terms of distance from regional capitals and (in Pando) distance from the Inter-Oceanic Highway.

In the selected communities, we interviewed one or more key informant 'leaders' (i.e., current or past community representatives or longtime residents). Such informants had lived in their community for at least five years and

were identified by themselves and community members as representatives in a position to speak on behalf of their community. In Madre de Dios, we visited forty-one communities and conducted eighty-eight interviews; in Acre, we visited twenty-five communities and conducted ninety-three interviews; and in Pando, we visited thirty-seven communities where we conducted 111 interviews. Overall, we obtained 292 interviews in 103 communities. 1

We employed a structured questionnaire that included items on interviewee characteristics, general information about the community (including Global Positioning System points for community centers), and sections on specific topics, including community population, livelihood activities, and marketing of key products. In particular, we asked about the roads a community used to reach market towns and the town where community members primarily sold their produce.

From this information we derived two measures of access connectivity between rural communities and urban markets. For the first measure, we assumed that communities primarily interacted with the nearest market town. The second measure used the responses from the interviewees as to which town communities actually interacted. In both cases, we calculated distances along the primary and secondary roads indicated from the community center to the market towns indicated (i.e., not Euclidean distances). We then compared the distances from communities to the nearest and reported markets for each respondent.

## Findings

Our analysis proceeds in three steps: (1) we statistically evaluate disparities between the distances to the nearest and reported markets; (2) we compare the distance disparities across the three sides of the MAP frontier and among communities with and without paving; and (3) we model the size of the distance disparity using a suite of independent variables to evaluate our two questions.

## Distance Disparities

Of 291 interviewees with valid responses, 39 percent reported the nearest market, 47 percent indicated a different town, and 14 percent reported two or more towns. Thus, most respondents indicated different towns than the nearest market. Figure 1 shows the links from the communities to their nearest markets, and Figure 2 does the same for the reported markets. Comparisons of these figures reveal differences in several areas of the MAP frontier, such that reported community-town distances are greater in southern Madre de Dios and in many parts of Pando. We note that these are the two areas that lacked road paving.

Table 1 therefore presents mean distances to the nearest and reported markets, overall and among the three sides of the MAP frontier. For the tri-national frontier, nearest markets averaged 20 km from communities, but reported markets averaged over 50 km from the communities, a difference that was highly statistically significant (paired samples t test).

## Distance Disparities in Comparative Perspective

Table 1 also shows that the size of the distance disparities varied across the MAP frontier. Disparities are smallest in Acre where paving was completed; they are largest in Madre de Dios where paving is underway; and they are large in Pando where paving is planned. Table 1 shows that disparities differed significantly across the sides of the MAP frontier. These findings suggest that the onset of paving reorganizes

Table 1 Distances from rural communities to nearest and reported market towns, Madre de Dios, Acre, and Pando, 2007-2008

| Distance measure (km)   | Nearest market   | Reported market   | Difference   | t Test    |
|-------------------------|------------------|-------------------|--------------|-----------|
| MAP frontier            | 20 . 54          | 53 . 78           | 33 . 30      | 10 . 82 ∗ |
| Madre de Dios, Peru     | 16 . 47          | 65 . 12           | 48 . 72      | 9 . 57 ∗  |
| Acre, Brazil            | 27 . 83          | 34 . 89           | 7 . 01       | 5 . 37 ∗  |
| Pando, Bolivia          | 20 . 64          | 51 . 11           | 30 . 67      | 5 . 61 ∗  |
| F test                  | 13 . 78 ∗        | 9 . 98 ∗          | 19 . 70 ∗    | N/A       |

Figure 1 Euclidean distances from rural communities to nearest market, tri-national MAP frontier. We used Euclidean distances to better separate lines linking different communities to a market, which was impossible for lines along roads. Where communities appear closer to a market to which they are not connected, there is either no road between those locations or Euclidean distances differ from distances by road used to establish nearest market connections. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

regional spaces and increases disparities in nearest and reported distances, but completed paving yields more distance-efficient transportation systems with smaller distance disparities.

Table 2 compares results for interviewees in communities with and without highway paving. The top part of the table refers to the MAP frontier. The findings are highly significant; disparities are much larger in communities without paving than in communities with paving. Of course, there are other explanations. Onecould argue that communities in Madre de Dios, which has received numerous migrants in recent years, remain tied to the Andes as a sending region. The bottom panel of Table 2 begins to address this argument by comparing communities with and without paving in

Madre de Dios. The difference remains large and significant. Nonetheless, the communities with paving were those in Tahuamanu and thus the farthest from the Andes; communities without paving could still be indicating ties to the Andes because they were relatively closer.

## Multivariate Analysis of Distance Disparities

Wethereforepursueamultivariate analysis that seeks to account for variation in distance disparities. Table 3 presents descriptive statistics for distance disparities. Raw disparity values exhibited a skewed distribution, so we calculated the natural log of the disparity to normalize the distribution for modeling.

Table 3 also presents independent variables, with descriptive statistics and expected effects

Figure 2 Euclidean distances from rural communities to first reported market, tri-national MAP frontier. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

on distance disparity. The independent variables include respondent characteristics, side of the tri-national frontier, interaction connectivity, urban population ratio, and road paving. In addition, we considered selected interaction terms. We also considered other factors not dis- cussed here, such as marketing via buyers and primary livelihood activities. These were never significant in models and did not modify the effects of the variables we discuss.

Respondent characteristics include duration of residence, leadership status, and state of

Table 2 Distances from rural communities to nearest and reported market towns, paved and unpaved highways, tri-national MAP frontier, 2007-2008

| Distance measure (km)   | Nearest market   | Reported market   | Difference   | t test    |
|-------------------------|------------------|-------------------|--------------|-----------|
| MAP frontier            | 20 . 54          | 53 . 78           | 33 . 30      | 10 . 82 ∗ |
| Paved highway           | 21 . 52          | 30 . 48           | 8 . 94       | 7 . 35 ∗  |
| Unpaved highway         | 19 . 78          | 71 . 97           | 52 . 32      | 10 . 65 ∗ |
| F test                  | 0 . 77           | 54 . 14 ∗         | 58 . 70 ∗    | N/A       |
| Madre de Dios, Peru     |                  |                   |              |           |
| Paved highway           | 13 . 78          | 15 . 44           | 1 . 66       | 0 . 97    |
| Unpaved highway         | 17 . 00          | 74 . 98           | 58 . 06      | 10 . 10 ∗ |
| F test                  | 1 . 07           | 22 . 68 ∗         | 18 . 94 ∗    | N/A       |

Table 3 Descriptive statistics for distance disparities for reported and nearest markets and independent variables, community leaders, tri-national MAP frontier, Bolivia, Brazil, and Peru, 2007-2008

|                                             | M        | SD       | Skewness   | Expected effect on distance disparity   |
|---------------------------------------------|----------|----------|------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Dependent variable                          |          |          |            |                                         |
| Raw distance disparity                      | 33 . 298 | 52 . 459 | 1 . 802    | 1                                       |
| Logged distance disparity                   | 1 . 909  | 2 . 029  | 0 . 301    | 1                                       |
| Respondent characteristics                  |          |          |            |                                         |
| Duration of residence (years)               | 23 . 250 | 15 . 751 | 1 . 429    | -                                       |
| Leadership status (0 = not, 1 = leader)     | 0 . 426  | 0 . 495  | 0 . 299    | -                                       |
| Born in this state (0 = no, 1 = yes)        | 0 . 500  | 0 . 501  | 0 . 011    | -                                       |
| Side of the MAP frontier                    |          |          |            |                                         |
| Pando, Bolivia                              | 0 . 176  | 0 . 382  | 1 . 704    | -                                       |
| Madre de Dios, Peru                         | 0 . 530  | 0 . 499  | -0 . 121   | -                                       |
| Acre, Brazil (excluded)                     |          |          |            |                                         |
| Livelihood activities                       |          |          |            |                                         |
| Timber most important (0 = no, 1 = yes)     | 0 . 100  | 0 . 295  | 2 . 759    | +                                       |
| NTFPs most important (0 = no, 1 = yes)      | 0 . 210  | 0 . 410  | 1 . 409    | -                                       |
| Crops most important (0 = no, 1 = yes)      | 0 . 410  | 0 . 493  | 0 . 364    | -                                       |
| Cattle most important (0 = no, 1 = yes)     | 0 . 210  | 0 . 405  | 1 . 460    | +                                       |
| Wages most important (0 = no, 1 = yes)      | 0 . 006  | 0 . 235  | 3 . 785    | +                                       |
| Market interaction connectivity             |          |          |            |                                         |
| Logged absent member families               | 1 . 791  | 1 . 680  | 0 . 492    | +                                       |
| Logged families settling in last five years | 2 . 678  | 1 . 777  | 0 . 078    | +                                       |
| Product marketing (products, means)         | 3 . 503  | 1 . 579  | 0 . 702    | -                                       |
| Reported/nearest market population          | 11 . 047 | 13 . 341 | 2 . 495    | +                                       |
| Road paving status (0 = unpaved, 1 = paved) | 0 . 438  | 0 . 497  | 0 . 253    | +                                       |

Note : N = 292. NTFP = non-timber forest product.

birth. All three are proxies for place attachment; respondents who had lived longer in their community, occupied leadership positions, or were born in the same state should demonstrate greater place attachment by reporting closer markets and thus lower distance disparities.

Beyond respondent characteristics, we consider community characteristics. First, we differentiate among the three sides of the MAP frontier. We use Acre, Brazil, as the reference category. Earlier tables indicated much larger distance differentials in Madre de Dios, Peru, and Pando, Bolivia. This might simply reflect paving status, which we discuss later, or it could also reflect differences in regional development across the MAP frontier.

We also consider interaction connectivity, or the extent of interactions between rural communities and urban markets. For social interactions, we use two variables: the number of families who are considered community members but reside elsewhere and the number of families who settled in a community in the previous five years. Both quantify the extent of community social interactions with other locations. Both had large skews, so we present logged values in Table 3 for use in the models. We anticipate that communities with more absent families and recent arrivals will have leaders more likely to report ties with more distant markets and thus larger distance disparities. In addition, we employ a measure of market interaction connectivity. We created an index of the number of products marketed by the community (timber, casta˜ na nuts, crops, cattle, and other) and the number of ways each product is marketed (buyers come to the community, community members take produce to town, produce sold through a cooperative, and other). The more products marketed, and the more ways each product is marketed, the higher the market interaction value. Although greater market interaction might coincide with interactions with more distant markets, based on anecdotal observations in the study region, we expect that more diversified livelihood systems are more locally oriented. Thus, the market interaction index should be inversely related to the distance disparity.

The foregoing variables serve as controls for our remaining variables, which permit analysis of our two research questions. Per location

theory, larger population centers draw people and resources from larger regions. We therefore calculated the ratio of the reported market's urban population to that of the nearest market's urban population. 2 With this ratio, we evaluate our first research question concerning urban market size and distance to market. A larger ratio should exert a positive effect on the distance differential as a reflection of a larger although more distant market attracting produce from a rural given community. Although it has a skew, we did not log-transform this variable because raw results were strong and it exhibits significant interactions, which we discuss later.

Road paving should also be important for distance disparities. Location theory suggests that insofar as paving reduces transport costs, it should facilitate connections with more distant markets. Paving is thus key to evaluating our second question. The direct effect of paving should foster more distant market connectivity, but previous tables indicated that communities with paving had much smaller distance disparities.

Finally, we consider selected interaction terms, especially those involving the sides of the tri-national frontier and other variables. We tested several interactions, notably Peru with road paving, as paving was not yet completed in Peru at the time of fieldwork. However, the most important interactions that emerged involved the side of frontier and the urban population ratio. We discuss this interaction further in our findings.

Wepursued several model specifications due to issues that arose in initial models. First, we found evidence of heteroskedasticity in preliminary models, so we report models with robust standard errors. Second, although we use data for informants, respondents speak for communities of varying sizes. We therefore weighted informants by community size in terms of the number of resident member families and the number of respondents in that community. Informants received larger weights if they lived in larger communities or were among fewer informants in their community. Third, many informants reported the nearest market, so the distance disparity measure will be zero. Because a large minority of cases had zeros, we consider the effects of a truncated distribution using Tobit regression.

Table 4 reports the findings for the logged disparity measure. We present results of three models: ordinary least squares (OLS)

Table 4 Models of distance disparity for reported and nearest markets, logged values, community leaders, tri-national MAP frontier, Bolivia, Brazil, and Peru, 2007-2008

|                                             | OLS, robust a   | WLS, robust b   | Tobit            |
|---------------------------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|------------------|
| R 2 /Likelihood ratio X 2 ( df )            | 0 . 714 ∗∗      | 0 . 608 ∗∗      | 248 . 89 ∗∗ (12) |
| Constant                                    | 0 . 895 ∗∗      | 2 . 169 ∗∗      | -0 . 558         |
| Respondent characteristics                  |                 |                 |                  |
| Duration of residence                       | -0 . 010 ∗      | -0 . 012        | -0 . 017 +       |
| Leadership status                           | 0 . 226 +       | 0 . 414         | 0 . 560 +        |
| Born in this state                          | -0 . 037        | -0 . 217        | -0 . 078         |
| Side of the MAP frontier                    |                 |                 |                  |
| Pando, Bolivia                              | -0 . 993 ∗∗     | -1 . 333 ∗∗     | -2 . 741 ∗∗      |
| Madre de Dios, Peru Acre, Brazil (excluded) | -0 . 380        | 0 . 040         | -1 . 196 +       |
| Market interaction connectivity             |                 |                 |                  |
| Logged absent member families               | 0 . 000         | -0 . 004        | 0 . 048          |
| Logged families settling in past five years | 0 . 125 ∗       | 0 . 063         | 0 . 284 ∗        |
| Product marketing                           | 0 . 003         | -0 . 209 +      | 0 . 044          |
| Reported/nearest market population          | 0 . 048 ∗∗      | 0 . 049 ∗∗      | 0 . 078 ∗∗       |
| Road paving status                          | 0 . 406 +       | 0 . 953 ∗       | -0 . 834         |
| Interaction terms                           |                 |                 |                  |
| Peru ∗ Population ratio                     | 0 . 081 ∗∗      | 0 . 046 +       | 0 . 128 ∗∗       |
| Bolivia ∗ Population ratio                  | 0 . 247 ∗∗      | 0 . 278 ∗∗      | 0 . 407 ∗∗       |

Note : OLS = Ordinary least squares estimation with robust standard errors; WLS = Weighted least squares estimation with robust standard errors.

+ p &lt; 0.15.

∗∗ p &lt; 0.01.

∗ p &lt; 0.05.

regression with robust standard errors, weighted least squares (WLS) with robust standard errors, and the Tobit output. The findings are strong and largely consistent among the specifications, especially for the most important independent variables. In general, there were larger distance disparities (1) in Madre de Dios and Acre compared to Pando, (2) in communities with more newly settled families, and (3) where reported markets had larger population ratios to nearest markets. The urban population ratio effect was larger in Madre de Dios, Peru, and especially in Pando, Bolivia, than in Acre, Brazil. Duration of residence, leadership status, location in Peru, and road paving all had weaker or inconsistent effects.

The findings confirm location theory insofar as urban population ratios exert strong effects on the distance disparity. In most cases where a more distant market was reported, the market was the regional capital, and the regional capitals in all three sides of the MAP frontier are larger than local towns. Rio Branco, Acre, had more than 269,000 residents (Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estat´ ıstica 2008); Puerto Maldonado, Madre de Dios exceeded 56,000 (Instituto Nacional de Estad´ ıstica e Inform´ atica [INEI] 2008); and Cobija, Pando had roughly 32,000 (Instituto Nacional de Estad´ ıstica 2008). The next largest market in the study area was Brasil´ eia-Epitaciolˆ andia, at 21,470. This addresses our first research question about market size and distance and confirms our expectations.

That said, the urban population ratio effect differs across the MAP frontier. Specifically, a given urban ratio in Madre de Dios or Pando results in a larger distance disparity than in Acre. 3 This is not a reflection of differing urban population ratios across the MAP frontier; an analysis of variance indicated only weakly significant differences across the three sides ( F = 2.230, p = 0.109). Other model specifications also indicated strong interaction effects like those in Table 4.

The significant coefficients for interactions of urban population ratios and side of the frontier indicate that rural communities exhibit differing connectivity to urban areas of varying distances. In particular, distance disparities are greater where primary roads are unpaved, especially in Pando but also in Madre de Dios. We interpret this finding as the indirect effect of road paving. Although the road paving variable itself evaluated the direct effect of paving and indicated weak evidence that paving expands distances to markets among communities with paving, the significant urban ratio-country interaction suggests that communities without paving are nonetheless attracted to distant markets in areas with paving. The strong findings for the interactions thus suggest that place does matter and is related to infrastructure insofar as the effects of the urban ratios vary among sides of the MAP frontier with differing degrees of road paving. This answers our second question about paving and connectivity but runs counter to expectations.

## Conclusion

Our findings support expectations concerning our first research question, in that larger and more distant urban populations help account for larger distance disparities between nearest and reported markets. The results fail to confirm the anticipated finding for the second question, however, as distance disparities were larger in areas that lacked highway paving.

Whereas our first conclusion concerning population ratios and market distances is unsurprising and confirms location theory, our second conclusion regarding the indirect effect of road paving on distance to markets merits further comment. Especially in Pando but also in Madre de Dios, leaders of communities without paving indicated larger distance disparities because they reported marketing not only in larger towns but also in towns along the InterOceanic Highway.

We therefore interpret our second key finding in light of the ongoing process of paving the Inter-Oceanic Highway and the consequent reorganization of space in the MAP frontier. In Pando, the highway runs along the bordering lands in Acre and Madre de Dios. Even distant communities in Pando were primarily oriented to Cobija, which does have a larger market center but which is also where the Inter-Oceanic Highway has crossings into Pando. The significant effects for both the urban population ratio as well as its interaction with place indicate that it is the combined effect of the regional capital and its proximity to paved portions of the Inter-Oceanic Highway that affects connectivity between rural communities and urban

markets. A similar effect appears in Madre de Dios insofar as several southwestern communities, which also lacked paving, all exhibit ties to the east with Puerto Maldonado, in the direction of that from which road paving was proceeding at the time (see also Figure 2). We note that this finding undermines the explanation for larger distance disparities in Madre de Dios based on migrant populations still tied to Cusco and other parts of the Andes, which are located to the south and west of Madre de Dios.

The larger implication arising from this study is that new infrastructure reorganized space in affected regions. Although this is perhaps a truism previously established indirectly as via observations of emerging cities, it has been less clearly documented with regard to rural-urban connectivity. Our findings indicate that communities that lack road paving tend to be connected to towns with road paving, even if those towns are not the nearest markets to the communities in question. This indicates that highway paving itself, and not merely larger towns, attracts production from more distant communities. This attraction becomes evident in frontier areas with differentiated spaces in terms of the status of highway paving. The MAP frontier provides a study case to examine differentiated spatial organization through a tri-national but regional comparison of community-market connectivity under differing conditions of road paving. In the case of MAP, even road paving elsewhere, whether across a national border or in a different part of a given state, can catalyze connections between communities and relatively distant regional markets. Further, new infrastructure has spatially variant impacts depending on how far upgrades have advanced. In Pando, despite the lack of road paving, the completion of paving in neighboring Acre seems to exhibit a considerable pull on marketed produce in Pando via its capital of Cobija. And in Madre de Dios, where paving was underway, communities without paving exhibited connections to towns with paving, even those that were more distant than the nearest market.

We suggest that the varying spatial pattern of distance disparities, where disparities are larger among communities lacking road paving, reflects the incomplete status of road paving across the MAP frontier. In turn, incomplete paving implies that the process of reorganiz- ing market spaces in the MAP frontier is also incomplete. All of this suggests a nonequilibriumstate as paving of major infrastructure progresses, although this might prove temporary. If Acre is any indication, once paving is complete in Madre de Dios, we might anticipate reduced distance disparities there in the future. Under those conditions, distance disparities in Madre de Dios would fall. But at the same time, if Pando still lacked paving, we would anticipate the persistence of large distance disparities there, which would decline only if paving arrived in Pando. This, of course, presumes market integration across frontiers, which highway paving is intended to facilitate. The exact dynamics of adjustments in the organization of space were a point of critique of central place theory (Parr and Denike 1970), and the scenarios we outline provide the basis for empirical questions that present further opportunities for research. /squaresolid

## Notes

1 Weuseinformantsastheunitofanalysis rather than communities. This is because some informants gave differing markets in their responses. We weighted our informants based on the size of their communities and the number of informants per community. The analysis therefore reflects communities in terms of their size, without losing information from different community leaders. One might question the use of data from informants to draw conclusions about communities. We suggest that community leaders serve as informants insofar as such leaders represent community members and adjudicate relationships involving community members, including relationships with buyers. We recognize that there is some theoretical debate about relations among individuals and aggregate social entities (cf. Giddens 1984), including over the question of whether it is only individuals who exercise agency by taking decisions or whether social aggregates such as communities can also exercise agency (Hindess 1986; Long 2001).

- 2 To obtain urban populations for the market towns, we consulted demographic censuses for Bolivia, Brazil, and Peru. Both Brazil and Peru conducted population counts in 2007, and we employ municipal and district urban populations for that year (IBGE 2008; INEI 2008). The most recent Bolivian census was in 2001. We therefore used official projections (INE 2008) to obtain an estimated 2007 urban population for Cobija, the only officially designated urban area. Although Bolivia does not recognize other market centers as officially

- urban, census data do list communities as populations attached to central places. We therefore used those 2001 population figures, projected to 2007, to obtain population estimates for other central places aside from Cobija. In Acre, Brazil, the towns of Brasil´ eia and Epitaciolˆ andia are literally side by side, so we combined their populations to constitute a single market area. Cobija is also across a river from Brasil´ eia and Epitaciolˆ andia, but we consider Cobija separately. Bolivian and Brazilian informants differentiated Cobija from Brasil´ eia and Epitaciolˆ andia.
- 3 Onecouldarguethat this finding is an artifact of our not having combined Brasil´ eia and Epitaciolˆ andia with Cobija. We therefore reran the analysis using the combined populations of Brasil´ eia, Epitaciolˆ andia, and Cobija. The results are very similar to those reported, and the interaction terms have similar coefficients and levels of significance.

## Literature Cited

- Bakx, K. 1988. From proletarian to peasant: Rural transformation in the state of Acre, 1870-1986. The Journal of Development Studies 24 (2): 14160.
- Beckmann, M. J. 1999. Lectures on location theory . Berlin: Springer.
- Bohannan, P., and G. Dalton. 1962. Markets in Africa . Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
- Bourguignon, F., and B. Pleskovic, eds. 2008. Rethinking infrastructure for development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
- Browder, J. O., and B. J. Godfrey. 1997. Rainforest cities: Urbanization, development and globalization of the Brazilian Amazon. New York: Columbia University Press.

Brown, I. F., S. C. H. Brilhante, E. Mendoza, and I. Ribeiro de Oliveira. 2002. Estrada de Rio Branco, Acre, Brasil aos Portos do Pac´ ıfico: Como Maximizar os Benef´ ıcios e Minimizar os Preju´ ızos para o Desenvolvimento Sustentable da Amazˆ onia SulOcidental [The highway from Rio Branco, Acre to Pacific ports: How to maximize the benefits and minimize the problems for sustainable development in the Southwestern Amazon]. In La Integraci´ on Regional Entre Bolivia, Brasil y Peru , ed. A. Wagner Tiz´ on and R. S. Gadea Duarte, 281-96. Lima, Peru: CEPEI.

- Centro Peruano de Estudios Internacionales. 2002. La integraci´ on regional entre Bolivia, Brasil y Peru [Regional integration between Bolivia, Brazil and Peru]. Lima, Peru: CEPEI.
- Chavez, A. 2009. Public policy and spatial variation in land use and land cover in the Southeastern Peruvian Amazon. Doctoral dissertation, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
- Dourojeanni, M. J., A. Barandiar´ an, and D. Dourojeanni. 2010. Amazon´ ıa Peruana en 2021 [The Peruvian Amazon in 2021]. Lima, Peru: SPDA.
- Fujita, M., P. Krugman, and A. J. Venables. 1999. The spatial economy: Cities, regions and international trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Giddens, A. 1984. The constitution of society. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
- Goodland, R. J. A., and H. S. Irwin. 1975. Amazon jungle: Green hell to red desert? A discussion of the environmental impact of the highway construction program in the Amazon basin. New York: Elsevier.
- Haggett, P., A. D. Cliff, and A. Frey. 1977. Locational analysis in human geography. New York: Wiley.
- Hindess, B. 1986. Actors and social relations. In Sociological theory in transition , ed. M. I. Wadell and S. P. Turner, 113-26. Boston: Allen and Unwin.
- Iniciativa MAP. 2008. http://www.map-amazonia. net (last accessed 20 January 2008).
- Iniciativa para la Integracion del a Infraestructura Regional de America del Sur. 2008. http:// www.iirsa.org (last accessed 20 January 2008).
- Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estad´ ıstica. 2008. Sistema IBGE de Recuperacao AutomaticaBancos de Dados Agregados (SIDRA) [IBGE system for automatic data queries-Aggregate databases (SIDRA)]. http://www.ibgr.gov.br (last accessed 1 September 2008).
- Instituto Nacional de Estad´ ıstica. 2008. Banco de Datos-Censos de Poblaci´ on y Vivienda [Database-Censuses of population and housing]. http://www.ine.gov.bo (last accessed 1 September 2008).
- Instituto Nacional de Estad´ ıstica e Inform´ atica. 2008. Censos de Poblaci´ on y Vivienda [Censuses of population and housing]. http://www.inei.gob.pe (last accessed 1 September 2008).
- Isard, W. 1956. Location and space-economy: A general theory relating to industrial location, market areas, land use, trade, and urban structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT/Wiley.
- Katzman, M. T. 1977. Cities and frontiers in Brazil: Regional dimensions of economic development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Killeen, T. J. 2007. A perfect storm in the Amazon wilderness: Development and conservation in the context of the Initiative for the Integration of Regional Infrastructure of South America (IIRSA). Arlington, VA: Conservation International.
- King, L. J. 1984. Central place theory. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
- Long, N. 2001. Development sociology: Actor perspectives. London and New York: Routledge.
- Mendoza, E., S. G. Perz, M. Schmink, and D. Nepstad. 2007. Participatory stakeholder workshops to mitigate impacts of road paving in the southwestern Amazon. Conservation and Society 5:382407.

- Moreira Mesquita, M. 2007. Trade costs and economic fundamentals of the Initiative for Integration of Regional Infrastructure of South America (IIRSA). INTAL-ITD Working Paper No. 30, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, DC.
- Ortiz, S. 1967. Colombian rural market organization: An exploratory model. Man 2 (3): 393-414.
- Parr, J. B., and K. G. Denike. 1970. Theoretical problems in central place analysis. Economic Geography 46 (4): 568-86.
- Perz, S. G., L. Cabrera, L. A. Carvalho, J. Castillo, and G. Barnes. 2010. Global economic integration and local community resilience: New infrastructure projects and demographic change in the southwestern Amazon. Rural Sociology 75:300-25.
- Santos, R. 1980. Hist´ oria Econˆ omica da Amazˆ onia (1800-1920) [The economic history of Amazonia (1800-1920)]. S˜ ao Paulo, Brazil: T. A. Queiroz.
- Schmink, M., and C. H. Wood 1992. Contested frontiers in Amazonia. NewYork: Columbia University Press.
- Scott, A. J. 1998. Regions and the world economy: The coming shape of global production, competition, and political order. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Scott, E. P. 1972. The spatial structure of rural northern Nigeria: Farmers, periodic markets, and villages. Economic Geography 48 (3): 316-22.
- Skinner, G. W. 1964. Marketing and social structure in rural China: Part 1. The Journal of Asian Studies 24 (1): 3-43.
- Smith, N. J. H. 1982. Rainforest corridors: The transamazon colonization scheme. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Storper, M. 1997. The regional world: Territorial development in a global economy . New York: Guilford.
- Taafe, E. J., and H. L. Gauthier. 1994. Transportation geography and geographic thought in the United States: An overview. Journal of Transport Geography 2 (3): 155-68.
- Teltscher, S. 1994. Small trade and the world economy:InformalvendersinQuito,Ecuador. Economic Geography 70 (2): 167-87.
- Timmer,C.P.1997.Farmersandmarkets:Thepolitical economy of new paradigms. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 79 (2): 621-27.
- Van Dijk, P., and S. den Haak. 2007. Troublesome construction: IIRSA and public-private partnerships in road infrastructure . Amsterdam: Cuadernos del CEDLA.
- van Oosten, C. 2004. Fading frontiers? Local development and cross-border partnerships in southwest Amazonia. Utrecht, The Netherlands: University of Utrecht.
- Walker, R. 2004. Theorizing land-cover and landuse change: The case of tropical deforestation. International Regional Science Review 27 (3): 24770.
- Walker, R., S. G. Perz, E. Arima, and C. Simmons. 2011. The Transamazon Highway: Past, present, future. In Engineering Earth , ed. S. D. Brunn, 569-99. New York: Springer.
- Weinstein, B. 1983. The Amazon rubber boom, 1850-1920. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

STEPHEN G. PERZ is Associate Professor of Sociology at the University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611. E-mail: sperz@ufl.edu. His research focuses on the manifold impacts of new infrastructure in social-ecological systems.

ALEXANDER SHENKIN is a PhD candidate in the School of Natural Resources and Environment, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611. E-mail: ashenkin@ufl.edu. His research interests include ecological modeling in the Bolivian lowlands.

XANIC RONDON is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611. E-mail: rondonxj@gmail.com. Her research focuses on modeling of landscape change and estimation of carbon emissions from forest management and fragmentation.

YOULIANGQIUisanAssistant Professor of Geography, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611. E-mail: yqiu@ufl.edu. His research interests highlight the use of geographic information systems and spatial analysis in the study of regional integration and land science.