## Home-working in Rural Bali: The Organization of Production and Labor Relations*

## Markus Hassler

Ruhr-University Bochum

This article aims to explore the role of home-based production networks within the industrialization process of rural areas in developing countries and its impact on the labor involved. Based on the structures of the Balinese clothing industry, the article explores the organization of production, provision of production and working capital, and composition and origin of labor. This article shows that home-based batik and embroidery clothing production in Bali is one of very few sources of income beyond agricultural work for immobile, rural labor. However, these production networks within the Balinese clothing industry are defined by weak labor relations vis-a `-vis the clothing firm's exceptionally strong position. Key Words: Bali, clothing industry, home-working, Indonesia, rural development, spatial disparities.

## Introduction

C lothing manufacture has been a major facilitator in the industrialization of the Indonesian economy (Hill 1991, 1992, 1997; Pangestu 1997; Hassler 2004a). Throughout a general transition of the national economy, the overall share of agriculture declined within the gross national product, while manufacturing attained ever-increasing importance. Within this process, clothing production became the largest contributor to Indonesia's manufacturing sector (Aswicahyono 1997). As a result, Indonesia has established itself as the ninth largest clothing exporter within the global economy (WTO2002). The contribution of the national clothing sector to the Indonesian gross national product, however, is far from evenly distributed within the country. In fact, pronounced spatial disparities and concentration of economic activities are common phenomena in developing countries (e.g., see Xiaobin 1996; Lyons 1998; Zhao and T ong 2000; Rigg 2003). This is also the case in Indonesia, where Java has a clear primacy as a center for clothing production (BPS 2002) and is reflected in the spatial distribution of clothing firms on a subnational level. Of the total of around 3,200 Indonesian clothing firms in 2000, more than 90 percent are based on Java (BPS 2002). Although Bali and

Sumatra are also locations of clothing manufacturing in Indonesia, their share in the number of firms is somewhat marginal. Five percent of all clothing firms are located in Bali, while Sumatra was the location of around 3 percent in 2000 (BPS 2002). In addition to these disparities on a subnational level within the archipelago, there are significant subregional disparities concentrating industrial manufacturing activities in urban areas, whereas rural areas often are still dominated by agricultural activities.

Although the actual number of clothing firms on Bali is marginal in comparison to Java, its manufactured products and organization of production are distinct and differ significantly from those of Java. While export-oriented clothing production on Java is highly involved in the manufacture of Western-style clothing (Dicken and Hassler 2000; Hassler 2003a, b, 2004b), Balinese clothing companies have specialized in batik and embroidery garments (Cole 1998). In addition to these types of manufactured clothing products, the production of clothing in Bali is also distinct in terms of its actual industrial organization. Clothing production in Bali is largely organized within a network of rural home industries.

This industrial organization of home-working leads to specific forms and structures of

* Peter Dicken has been an exceptional source of encouragement and support while doing research on the clothing industry of Indonesia. I am grateful for all his insightful and helpful suggestions throughout the research process. I also acknowledge the constructive comments provided by Heiner Du ¨rr and three anonymous referees on earlier drafts of this paper. The usual disclaimer applies.

contractor-subcontractor transactions and labor relations. In general, the organization of home-working has been defined as ''the production of goods or the provision of services for an employer under an arrangement whereby the work is carried out at the place of the worker's own choosing, often the worker's own home. It is normally carried out without direct supervision by the employer or contractor'' (ILO 1994, cited in Pru ¨ gl and Boris 1996, 5). This form of industrial organization can often be found within clothing production. As Pru ¨ gl and Boris (1996, 10) argued, ''The garment industry lends itself to home-based work throughout the world.'' Therefore, various studies have focused on home-working within this particular industrial sector (e.g., see Peck 1992; Miraftab 1996; Rangel de Paiva Abreu and Sorj 1996; Pelagidis 1997; Baylina and Garcia-Ramon 1998).

Furthermore, as is the case in Indonesia, home-working is common in developing countries. Various studies have investigated subnational home-production systems within Indonesia of different manufacturing sectors. The island of Java has provided regional case studies for research on batik printing (Rebecca 1987), roof-tile making (Sandee and Weijland 1989), fabric weaving (Mizuno 1996), and clothing manufacturing (Susilastuti 1996). As these studies of Indonesian home-production systems have also shown, home-based work and production are common in rural areas. In fact, home-basedworkplaysamajorrolewithinrural development and very often provides entry level to industrial work for agricultural labor. The importance of home-based work, however, is usually the result of the lack of factory-based employment opportunities and the unwillingness or inability of the involved labor to migrate to areas where such opportunities exist. Therefore, the providers of home-based work often operate with a near monopoly in rural areas.

Within this context, this article aims to explore the role of home-based employment for the industrialization processes of rural areas in developing countries and their impacts for the involved labor. It aims, in particular, to contribute to the understanding of how contractorsubcontractor relations are organized in homebased rural production systems within developing countries and to unravel aspects such as the organization of production, the provision of production and working capital, and the specific labor relations within these processes.

Theresearch process on which the findings in this article are based had a focus on close dialogue with key actors using semistructured interviews. Since close dialogue involves subtle and not-so-subtle roles and relationships (Clark 1998, 74), the semistructured interviews were conducted in a way to ensure that open-ended conversations could emerge with regard to the interviewee's concerns and understandings. A major benefit of the relatively informal nature of questioning was the ability to respond to particular strains of information. For example, whenever the informant had particularly good knowledge about one area under discussion, questions were guided toward exploring this indepth knowledge.

The empirical evidence for this article is based on a larger research project on the Indonesian clothing industry, during which a total of eighty-five interviews were conducted on Java and Bali. The specific information used for this article, however, is gained from twenty interviews conducted on Bali in 1998 and 2001 with clothing companies selected from a directory provided by the regional office of the Indonesian Association of T extile Manufacturers (API) on this island. Around half of the interviewed companies were dealing with batik garments; the other half were producing embroidery garments. Interview partners were managerial employees and owners of clothing companies. Since none of the home-workers who were met during fieldwork were able to speak English, this was the only way of getting direct access to information without using a personal translator. Although this created a rather one-sided source of information, in particular on issues of labor and labor relations, the results of fieldwork allowed a relatively complete picture of the production system and its individual processes to emerge. Various places of homebound production were visited during stays in Bali and visual evidence was taken of the circumstances of production. This allowed an analysis and interpretation of the organization of individual production and labor processes.

The article is structured in three sections. In the first section, the general organization of production will be explored. This section also includes an investigation of capital provision for production capital such as sewing machines, as

well as for working capital such as fabric and thread. The second section will explore the composition of labor for different positions of the business hierarchy. This also includes an analysis of the geographical origin of labor. The third and final section includes some concluding comments.

## Rural Home Production in Bali: The Batik and Embroidery Industry

The focus of Balinese clothing firms on the manufacture of two product groups, batik and embroidered garments, is largely the result of the demand for local souvenirs by the growing tourist population on this island. This development started in the 1970s, when beach market retailers started to sell batik sarongs and embroidered Kebaya (women's traditional blouses) to tourists visiting Bali. These items were initially collected by Balinese retailers first in Bali and then in East Java (Cole 1998, 262). Soon after, this domestic business generated multiplier effects, in which visitors to Bali started to purchase these items for resale in their home countries. Because of the market success of Balinese batik and embroidered summer wear in Australia, the United States, and Europe (Cole 1998, 265), these initially informal export businesses started to grow, and they experienced a rapid expansion during the 1980s. During this period, an increasing number of international buyers started business relations with Balinese clothing firms. At the same time, the number of people visiting Bali grew substantially (see Hassler 2005).

This growth of exports and increasing demand for souvenirs continued throughout the 1990s (Cole 1998, 270) and was reflected in the number of workers employed within the Balinese clothing industry. Although there was no registered labor in 1980, the number of registered employees grew within two decades to a total of around 12,000 in 2000 (BPS 2002). However, since only workers in formal work relations are registered, the number of workers involved in clothing production in Bali is much higher than this figure indicates. Most workers producing batik and embroidered garments in Bali are not registered. Instead, they are working within informal work relations of homebased production.

In fact, the production system of Balinese batik and embroidered garments displays a pronounced geographical pattern and is based on a distinct division of labor. The key actors within this production system are clothing companies as contractors, home-based workers as subcontractors, and middlepersons as linking intermediaries. In terms of spatial patterns, the clothing companies, which are at the organizational core of the home-based production system, are mainly located in the city of Denpasar, the island's capital, while home workers are scattered in peripheral, rural areas of the island. Middlepersons usually belong to the group of home-workers and, therefore, are also based in rural areas. The way these individuals interact with one another has resulted in specific forms of organization and divisions of labor. Figure 1

Figure1 Home-working in the Balinese clothing industry.

<!-- image -->

demonstrates how network relations are organized within the Balinese clothing industry.

Although the bulk of clothing is produced by external, rural home-workers, most Balinese clothing companies have direct employees working within specific processes of the production system. It is common for Balinese clothing firms to maintain a centralized small production unit for sample making and for bulk production of more difficult styles (Figure 1). These production units are usually also the location for the entire product development process of design and sample making. They are responsible for procuring raw material, cutting raw materials, and coordinating production. Furthermore, the key processes of sales, marketing, and communication with buyers are based at the headquarters of clothing firms. These firms also employ people to visit the places of home-based production occasionally to check and advise individual home-workers. However, communication between contractor and subcontractor is mainly organized by intermediaries (Figure 1). These intermediaries, or middlepersons, are usually workers themselves and part of a cluster of rural homeworkers. In effect, they are spokespersons for the cluster they are working in. These intermediaries have a certain managerial responsibility and fulfill important roles for both sides of the home-working system: contractor and home-worker. They allow a continuous information and material flow, which includes distributing precut fabric and wages to individual workers and collecting and redistributing the finished work to the contractors.

Although home-workers are effectively external producers for the clothing company, there are strong ties between the two. This is the result of the financing made available for the initial purchase of production equipment. Since all home-workers have to provide their own sewing machines, the barrier of entering this type of semi-industrial work is relatively high. Finding the initial capital is a major obstacle for rural households seeking entry into work beyond the agricultural sector. These households are usually not endowed with the capital necessary to purchase the manufacturing equipment. In addition to confronting very high interest rates, access to bank credit is difficult for this social group. Clothing companies, therefore, provide loans so that individuals can purchase a sewing

machine.

In fact, the financial support of the clothing companies is an important factor of rural industrialization in Bali. These loans have a short-to-medium-term payback period and are repaid on a monthly basis. Despite these close financial ties, clothing companies state that there is no demand for exclusive business relationships by the contractor and creditor. They only demand priority treatment during peak production times. However, the seasonal pattern affects most Balinese clothing companies in a similar way, which makes it difficult for the home-producers to find work in periods of low season and demand. In consequence, homeworkers are actually bound to a single contractor, who is also their creditor, despite the fact that the latter does not demand exclusive treatment. Priority treatment in peak times basically means, however, that home-workers have to provide their labor whenever their creditor demands it. In addition, periods of low demand also represent a time of little income since there is no guaranteed work. Therefore, home-workers often struggle to find sufficient means to repay their monthly installment during periods of low demand. Such periods last from June until mid-October;peaktimesarefrommid-October until April/May.

Besides providing financing to home-workers so they can purchase sewing machines, clothing firms also often organize bulk procurement of these machines for resale to home-workers. This policy aims to simplify the home-workers' acquisition of these machines.

We have mainly manual machines. Foot-operated machines. In the villages we have more than 2000 machines. We supplied the home-workers with the machines, and they installed them for us. Because they don't have enough money to buy the machines. So our company bought more than 2000 machines to give them. Every month they have to pay us some money back. They don't rent the machines. They had to buy them from us. But we financed these machines for them because they don't have the money to buy the machines. Otherwise, we cannot get the workers if they don't have the machines. A machine costs around 200.000 rupiah. At the moment we have enough workers. So we don't do it at the moment anymore

-(Interview with Balinese clothing company [Embroidery])

The machines used within the production networks of home-based workers have an extremely low technical standard and are mainly manual, pedal-powered sewing machines of Indonesian origin-basically, old-fashioned household machines. The very low prices, in comparison to standard industrial sewing machines, are the main advantage of this production equipment. In addition, the poor infrastructure of remote rural areas and consequent regular power breakdowns are factors in favor of these manual machines.

In addition to this basic mechanization of production, the manufacturing of batik and embroidery garments demands manual work beyond the assembly and sewing processes. For example, the use of buttons based on natural materials such as shells and wood make the use of button-sewing machines impossible. Manufacturing laces and nets of embroidery or knots of batik sarongs is solely based on manual work and limits the use of any technical equipment. These are design features that create and support the handmade image and character of these garments and add value to the products. Therefore, the garment styles and consequent applied manufacturing processes define, to a large extent, the competitive advantage of Balinese clothing. The irregularities in appearance of these handicraft-styled garments is a major feature and a marketing factor. Global buyers have a clear preference for this type of product.

I sold my customers a batik print that was a machine print. We have bought this machine to increase our output and also to increase the printing quality. But the buyers just replied that they don't like the prints because it is too perfect. I said it is good. But they said, ''I like the handmade stuff much better, because it is individual and gets higher prices on the markets. The craftsmanship is admired by the customers.''

-(Interview with Balinese clothing company [Batik])

However, this specific buyer's preference for handmadeBalineseclothingproductscreatesan obstacle for generating a certain industrial upgrading within the Balinese clothing industry. Productivity improvements are solely based on higher labor productivity. But the substitution of labor with technology, at least in the printing process, is not an option because changes in production technology result in changing the nature of the product's appearance to one not admired by the buyers. This creates limits to changes in the industrial organization of Balinese clothing production.

At the moment, along with a distinct organizational and spatial separation of the production processes, there is a major difference between the Balinese and the usual organization of industrial clothing production. While it is common in industrial clothing production to separate the entire clothing assembly process into single operations, the Balinese clothing industry is organized in a way in which single operators are usually responsible for sewing an entire garment. This production process is predominantly the result of the actual location of the workers and the number of the home-based producers in terms of employment. Clothing manufacturing by scattered, individual, homebased workers does not allow an operator-specific separation of the sewing processes. However, even in cases where home-workers form geographically composed clusters of fifteen to twenty-five workers, the small number involved limits a division of the sewing process. The uneven time intensity of individual operations makes it difficult to split the sewing process into single, separate operations. T o guarantee a continuous product flow and to achieve a simultaneous final assembly of the semifinished products demands different numbers of operators per sewing operation. This means more workers in the case of a slow operation than in the case of fast and easy operations. Therefore, a limited number of workers limits the separation of labor processes.

The limitation to the separation of labor processes is also reflected in the way wages are calculated. Unlike the usual calculation in industrial clothing manufacturing, based on hourly wage costs plus bonuses, wages within rural Balinese home-based industries are calculated on completed garments. In effect, there are two distinct ways of calculating wages, depending on the manufactured product type. In the case of batik garments, the calculation is based on the fabric demanded for a single garment, while in the case of embroidery products, it is based on the thread used for the stitching of the ornaments. As a clothing company official dealing with embroidery garments described it,

Let's say one piece or garment needs ten bundles of thread. So we pay them for one thread 1750 rupiah. So the cost of the garment is easy to calculate by ten times 1750. We don't look at the time, only look at the amount of thread they have to use for the embroidery. Everybody is doing the same in Bali.

-(Interview with Balinese clothing company [Embroidery])

The clothing company supplies the home-producers with the amount of thread calculated during sample making. Payment is therefore only a matter of the actual thread quantity per garment and not how fast the workers actually stitch the ornaments. Again, as a result of this informal working relationship, home-workers only generate an income when they are actually able to work or when the contractor supplies them with work. In addition, payment based on output results in varying incomes of homeworkers according to their level of experience. More experienced workers are able to earn muchmoreduring the same period of time then less experienced workers since there is no basic hourly income. This is also reflected in the fact that clothing firms create distinctions in payment according to the delicacy of the product. Tocreate an incentive, more difficult ornaments or fatiguing colors, such as black, are likely to be higher paid because there are not that many workers who are actually capable of making them.

Big embroideries can take up to three days to finish and might get boring for one person. In the cases of small ornaments, several per day may be finished. Projects like these seem easier and less boring to the workers. The finishing of anentire garment can easily take up to one week. Therefore, the payment of bonuses is used to achieve certain targets and delivery deadlines within embroidery production. These bonuses can reach up to 15 percent of the actual contract value-a significant pay increase. Deadlines are set up to two months in advance because of the lengthy process of embroidery production. However, there are also deductions of the previously agreed wages if delivery times are exceeded and the manufactured product quality is suboptimal. In extreme cases, home-workers would have a double loss: the actual costs of the damaged fabrics and no wages for the conducted work.

## The Labor Composition of the Balinese Clothing Industry

The labor composition of the Balinese clothing industry is strongly localized because of the nature of the product and the organization of the production network. In contrast to the Javanese export clothing industry (Dicken and Hassler 2000; Hassler 2004b), there is no employment of foreigners, and even the involvement of workers from Java is small. Workers who are directly employed by Balinese clothing companies are usually involved in product development, marketing, quality control, and the production stages prior to, and after, sewing, while indirectly employed homeworkers are primarily in charge of sewing and the manual, labor-intensive production processes.

Fieldwork evidence suggests that employees in higher managerial functions such as accounting and sales belong to a well-established social network of neighbors and school friends. Trust is the main factor underlying this structure. The employmentoffamilymembersisunusual.This is in contrast to the usual organization of employment within Chinese business networks (e.g., see Hamilton 1991; Kao 1993; Redding 1995; Weidenbaum and Hughes 1996; Suryadinata 1997; Yeung 1998). Balinese company owners argue that close family members would expect too many privileges within the company. However, most clothing companies have a very flat hierarchical structure because of their size. Responsibilities are mainly concentrated with the company's owner. For example, his responsibility would always be to deal with international buyers because of the importance of sales and marketing and the usual demand by customers to deal directly with a decision maker.

Demand for production management is generally low for Balinese clothing companies-a direct consequence of the externalized production system. However, a large group of direct employees comprises the supervisory level. These employees are mainly in charge of organizing production, including guiding the intermediaries of the external production network in terms of sewing procedures and product quality. The managerial staff are usually from Denpasar, while the directly employed workers

are rural in origin. This reflects the strong urban-rural educational disparities of this developing society. Recruitment of these workers is primarily based on social networks among the workers and word-of-mouth promotion. Workers generally have a Balinese origin and tend to prefer to stay on this relatively small island. There is little intranational migration to the industrial locations of Java, a consequence of the fact that any place in Bali is within a few hours of Denpasar and allows regular weekend visits back home to see family and friends. However, clothing companies prefer to create a diverse (by local origin) group of workers because of the village-specific nature of religious customs of Balinese Hinduism.

We want to have people from different places and villages. Because there are certain religious customs in every village. Every village has its own holiday time. And if we have a concentration of workers on some villages, they are all going home at the same time. So we try to split and to get workers from different places. We actually accept and respect that they want to go home for religious reasons. We will not stop them, because we are from Bali as well. And happy workers are good workers. In Bali we don't have too many holidays anyway.

-(Interview with Balinese clothing company [Batik])

Home-working overwhelmingly involves immobile housewives and young girls. They have little, if any, choice of employment beyond agricultural work. There are hardly any opportunities for industrial employment beyond clothing manufacturing because of the low economic industrial development of rural Bali. Manufacture of tourist souvenirs and handicrafts are the only alternatives to clothing production. Again, manufacturing of these products is also embedded within a production network of home-based producers. Permanent employment within factories or the tourist industry would always result in a temporary migration. Therefore, domestic home-working has the advantage to the workers of being able to look after children, while the seasonal demands of production allows work in the paddy field when it is needed.

However, the fact that few employment alternatives exist puts the clothing companies in an extremely favorable position, and pressures to improve working conditions are low. Social benefits are not granted, and wages are not even at the level of the minimum wage because the purchase of labor for temporary subcontracted work need not be compensated according to Indonesian labor laws. While payments of directly employed workers are according to government-imposed minimum wages, this is not the case for home-workers. Employers/contractors are not legally bound to follow government regulations. Wages for home-workers are entirely market regulated and exclude any social benefits. This reflects the strong dependency of labor on capital. The workers only have a chance to generate an income if their labor is actually demanded. But there is no income if there is no work. Consequently, this also means no income during times of sickness or other reasons of inability to work.

Theimmobility of labor results in a high, but, from a worker's perspective, unwanted, loyalty toward the clothing company and guarantees the constant availability of a relatively experienced labor force, which even has to provide its own production equipment. In addition, the involvement of child labor is inevitable within home-based industries because of hidden domestic production. This is particularly relevant for entirely manual production processes. It might not be a full working day, but it is certainly common for a child to help her mother a few hours a day to increase her performance. This even results in household internal training and transfer of manufacturing skills, whereby the mother shows her child the specific production processes. Because a higher household-specific performance leads to a higher disposable income of the family, the additional income from the additional output is usually not distributed individually but contributes to the family funds. The involvement of child labor has never been openly approved by the clothing companies, but it has never been explicitly denied. The responsibility for labor recruitment is always transferred to the rural intermediary and group leader, and international buyers rarely check the production facilities of rural home producers. Their only interest is in getting a cheap, quality product, regardless of who and where it is produced. Therefore, the Balinese batik and embroidery industry is far from meeting ethical trading standards (e.g., see Hale 2000; Hale and Shaw 2001).

## Conclusion

As this article has shown, home-based clothing manufacturing is an important source of employment within rural Bali and therefore has an important role within the industrialization process of rural areas. Clothing firms provide work and job opportunities for a rural labor force that otherwise would struggle to find employment beyond agricultural work. The developmental stage of large parts of rural Bail is still reflected in the lack of possibilities for finding factory-based employment. In fact, local employment alternatives are few for the rural labor involved in Balinese batik and embroidery production. Apart from agricultural work, employment can only be found in other areas of the informal sector or in the extensive tourist industry. However, to engage in formal work relations of the tourist industry would demand temporary migration, which most of the workers involved in clothing production are unable to pursue. Therefore, home-based work is a significant source of income for immobile rural labor.

However, as this article has also shown, the fact that labor and production capital have a combined and external organization results in a very strong position for the clothing company. Despite the initial financing so that home producers can procure their production equipment, these loans have to be repaid, and they create dependencies toward a single contractor. Therefore, the company that loans the money has access to its external cluster of home-workers whenever it needs their production capacity. In turn, home-workers have to provide their labor whenever it is demanded. In theory, they could work for other contractors whenever their core-contractor was not in need of their labor. However, the similar patterns of demand affecting the entire Balinese clothing industry leave very few alternatives of working for other contractors in times of low demand for the core-contractor.

Despite the immense concentration of risk and responsibility, home-workers have very little bargaining power in their choices of business cooperation and partners once their financial relations are set up. The home-workers are bound to a single company until the loan is repaid, which can take a long time. In addition, their wages do not include social benefits and often bypass government-imposed minimum wages. Instead, they essentially operate as individual entrepreneurs in the economy since they have to budget their operational finances and carry a huge part of the entrepreneurial risks. Furthermore, the commonly implemented single-piece manufacturing excludes almost any economies of scale. However, this has effectively no consequence for the clothing companies because they do not pay basic wages, and the production capital is owned by the workers. Therefore, the emphasis on labor productivity is entirely neglected and results in an extreme accumulation of power for the clothing company. In turn, this demonstrates the exceptionally weak position and dependency of labor. In consequence, rural clothing production networks in Bali are defined by weak and temporary labor relations typical of domestic production. '

## Literature Cited

Aswicahyono, H. 1997. Transformation and structural change in Indonesia's manufacturing sector. In Waves of change in Indonesia's manufacturing industry , ed. M. Pangestu and Y. Sato, 1-28. T okyo: Institute of Developing Economies.

Baylina, M., and M. D. Garcia-Ramon. 1998. Homeworking in rural Spain: A gender approach. European Urban and Regional Studies 5 (1): 55-64.

BPS( Biro Pusat Statistik/ CentralBureauofStatistics). 2002. Direktori Industri Pengolahan/Manufacturing Industry Directory . Jakarta: Indonesian Central Bureau of Statistics.

Clark, G. L. 1998. Stylized facts and close dialogue: Methodology in economic geography. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 88:73-87.

Cole, W. 1998. Bali's garment export industry. In Indonesia's technological challenge , ed. H. Hill and K. W. Thee,255-78.Singapore:Australian NationalUniversity/Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.

Dicken, P., and M. Hassler. 2000. Organizing the Indonesian clothing industry in the global economy: The role of business networks. Environment and Planning A 32:263-80.

Hale, A. 2000. What hope for 'ethical' trade in the globalised garment industry? Antipode 32:349-56.

Hale, A., and L. M. Shaw. 2001. Women workers and the promise of ethical trade in the globalised garment industry: A serious beginning? Antipode 33:510-30.

Hamilton, G. ed. 1991. Business networks and economic development in East and Southeast Asia . Hong Kong: Centre of Asian Studies. University of Hong Kong.

- Hassler, M. 2003a. Crisis, coincidences and strategic market behavior: The internationalization of Indonesian clothing brand-owners. Area 35 (3): 241-250.
- ---. 2003b. The global clothing production system: Commodity chains and business networks. Global Networks 3 (4): 513-31.
- ---. 2004a. Changes in the Indonesian clothing industry: Trade and regulation. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 25 (1): 64-76.
- ---.2004b. Raw material procurement, industrial upgrading and labor recruitment: intermediaries in Indonesia's clothing industry. Geoforum 35 (4): 441-51.
- ---. 2005. Global markets, local home-working: governance and inter-firm relationships in the Balinese clothing industry. Geografiska Annaler 87B (1): 31-43.
- Hill, H. 1991. The Emperor's clothes can now be made in Indonesia. Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies 27:89-127.
- ---.1992. Indonesia's textile and garment industries: developments in Asian perspective . Occasional Paper 87. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. ---.1997. Indonesia's industrial transformation . Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
- ILO (International Labour Office). 1994. Home work . Report V(1). 82nd Session. 1995. Geneva: International Labour Conference.
- Kao, J. 1993. The Worldwide Web of Chinese business. Harvard Business Review , March-April: 24-36.
- Lyons, T. P . 1998. Intraprovincial disparities in China: Fujian province, 1978-1995. Economic Geography 74 (4): 405-32.
- Miraftab, F. 1996. Space, gender, and work: homebased workers in Mexico. Homeworkers in global perspective , ed. E. Boris and E. Pru ¨ gl, 63-80. New York: Routledge.
- Mizuno, K. 1996. Rural industrialization in Indonesia: a case study of community based weaving industry in West Java . IDE Occasional Papers Series No. 31. T okyo: Institute of Developing Economies.
- Pangestu, M. 1997. The Indonesian textile and garment industry: Structural change and competitive challenges. In Waves of change in Indonesia's manufacturing industry , ed. M. Pangestu and Y. Sato, 2959. T okyo: Institute of Developing Economies.
- Peck, J. A. 1992. 'Invisible threads': Homeworking, labour-market relations and industrial restructuring in the Australian clothing trade. Environment and Planning D, Society and Space 10:671-89.
- Pelagidis, T. 1997. Labour flexibility in the clothing and textile sector of Northern Greece. Relations Industrielles - Industrial Relations 52 (1): 114-37.
- Pru ¨ gl, E., and E. Boris. 1996. Introduction. In Homeworkers in global perspective , ed. E. Boris and E. Pru ¨ gl, 3-17. New York: Routledge.
- Rangel de Paiva Abreu, A., and B. Sorj. 1996. 'Good housewives': seamstresses in the Brazilian garment industry. In Homeworkers in global perspective , ed. E. Boris and E. Pru ¨ gl, 93-110. New York: Routledge.
- Rebecca, J. 1987. Worker, middlewomen, entrepreneur: Women in the Indonesian Batik industry . Bangkok: The Population Council.
- Redding, S. G. 1995. Overseas Chinese networks: Understanding the enigma. Long Range Planning 28:61-69.
- Rigg, J. 2003. Southeast Asia: The human landscape of modernization and development (2nd ed.). London: Routledge.
- Sandee, H., and H. Weijland. 1989. Rural cottage industry in Transition: The roof tile industry in Kabupaten Boyolali, Central Java. Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies 25 (2): 79-99.
- Suryadinata, L. 1997. Theculture of the Chinese minority in Indonesia . Singapore and Kuala Lumpur: Times Books International.
- Susilastuti, D. H. 1996. Home-based work as a rural survival strategy: a central Javanese perspective. In Homeworkers in global perspective , ed. E. Boris and E. Pru ¨ gl, 129-41. New York: Routledge.
- Weidenbaum, M., and S. Hughes. 1996. The bamboo network: How expatriate Chinese entrepreneurs are creating a new economic superpower in Asia . New York: Free Press.
- WTO. 2002. Annual Report 2002 . Geneva: World Trade Organization.
- Xiaobin, S. Z. 1996. Spatial disparities and economic development in China, 1953-92: A comparative study. Development and Change 27 (1): 131-63.
- Yeung, H. W.-C. 1998. Transnational corporations and business networks: Hong Kong firms in the ASEAN region . London: Routledge.
- Zhao, X. B., and S. P . T ong. 2000. Unequal economic development in China: Spatial disparities and regional policy reconsideration, 1985-1995. Regional Studies 34 (6): 549-61.

MARKUS HASSLER is a lecturer in economic geography at the Department of Geography, RuhrUniversity Bochum, Germany. E-mail: markus. hassler@ruhr-uni-bochum.de. His research interests include the geographies of commodities, global economic change, transnational corporations, and Southeast Asia.