## Migration Patterns During a Period of Political and Economic Shocks in the Former Soviet Union: A Case Study of Yaroslavl' Oblast'

## Beth Mitchneck and David Plane

University o f Arizona

This paper  examines migration in Russia  during the period  that preceded the breakup  of the former Soviet Union (FSU)  and during the current transition period. An unusually rich  dataset is used to conceptualize  the impact that the  political  and  economic collapse  of  a  world  superpower has  on  a  migration  system. A regional  case  study of migration in Yaroslavl' Oblast h-om 1989 through 1992 is used to examine the relevance of expected outcomes given standard theories of migration, empirical regularities  found in capitalist economies, and past trends in the FSU. The data clearly show a migration system undergoing political and economic shocks. A significant decline of the volume of flows and a relative increase in the importance of interrepublic movement indicate disruptions. Increased  relative mobility  for  those  in  thc  later  years  of  the  working-age  population  and  increased  importance  of  urban-to-rural migration  flows  are  also  important  changes  evident  in  this  migration  system  undergoing  shock. Key  Words: migration, Russia, USSR, economic shocks.

## Introduction

e  unprecedented social  and  economic Th changes in successor states of  the former Soviet Union have attracted  attention  largely because  of  the  apparent  failure of  a  political and  economic system.  But  the  effects  of  restructuring  on  population  dynamics,  such  as migration patterns, remain relatively unknown. Internal migration flows in the former Soviet Union have received little attention. In part  this  is  due  to  a  lack  of  information  on current migration patterns in Russia. The lack of  relevant  comparative experience  in  world history  as a  basis  for understanding  changing migration  patterns  in  Russia  also explains the gap.

The purpose  of  this paper is  to use  an unusually rich  dataset on current migration  patterns  in  one  region  to  examine  population flows during the breakup of the former Soviet Union  (FSU). We conceptualize how the political and economic collapse of a world superpower  influences  a  migration  system. A regional  case  study  of  migration  in  Yaroslavl' Oblast (Fig. 1) from  1989  through 1992 is used to examine the relevance of expected outcomes given standard theories of migration, empirical regularities found in capitalist economies, and past trends in the FSU.

Little  is  known  about how  population  mobility  changes  during  political  and  economic shocks  not  occurring  during  armed  conflict. This paper contributes knowledge on the Soviet  and  Russian cases,  which provide an unprecedented  example  of  decolonization,  economic  depression, and  political restructuring. Although a large body of conceptual work exists  on  migration  in  market  economies  and developing economies, few have theorized migration in  the centrally planned and transition cases  (Mitchneck  1990).  The  direction  and composition  of current migration  flows  in Russia  remain  largely unexplored. For  example,  while  scholarly  literature  has  begun  to look at international migration out of the FSU (Larrabee  1992), 'international'  flows  in  the FSU with Russia as a destination have received little attention in the scholarly  literature (Dunlop  1993). This  paper  presents  and  analyzes information on recent flows using an unparalleled, detailed dataset.

Using  knowledge  of  the  Soviet  migration system and  general migration  trends,  we  hypothesize that the severe economic and political shocks will cause immediate changes in the

'This  research was supported by  the National Council for Soviet and East European Research. The authors would like to thank George Demko, Jeffrey FIahn, Gregory loffe, Robert Kaiser, and oollrapurs in Yaroslavl' for helpful comments and Kurt Fangmeier for h s research assisunce. The authors take responsibility for any remaining errors.

Figure 1: Relative location of Yaroslavl' Oblast.

<!-- image -->

Russian migration system in seven areas. Hypotheses regarding  the  volume,  composition, and direction of the migration system are generated. The seven hypotheses cover the following expectations: (1) decreasing volume of  migration; ( 2 ) increasing proportion of long-distance  flows; (3)  changing gender  differentials to include more women migrating; (4) changing ethnic differentials  to reflect return migration  to historic homelands; (5)  changing agespecific mobility with  greater  mobility across age groups; (6) declining importance of  ruralto-urban migration and increasing importance of  urban-to-rural  migration; and ( 7 ) changing patterns  of  interurban  migration  flows  at  the interrepublic and interoblast scales.

The paper has two main sections. The first section reviews  relevant work  that  may  assist with conceptualizing  expected stages of migration flows and reviews migration trends in Soviet  Russia  prior  to  the  disintegration  of  the FSU. The second section presents the regional case study of  Yaroslavl'  Oblast, a  Russian oblast in central Russia about 175 miles northeast of Moscow, during one of the phases of postshock migration. (Oblasts are subnational administrative  units  sometimes  referred  to  as provinces.)  The  final  section  concludes  with reference to the value of  conceptualizing current migration trends in Russia.

## Review of Migration Trends

For  Western  social  scientists conceptualizing migration  patterns  in  Russia,  standard  tools such as Ravenstein's laws of migration, life-cycle  theory,  the  Harris-Todaro  model,  public choice models, and many others may be useful. These  models  help  us  to  predict  migration patterns  according  to  variables  such  as  distance,  gender,  age,  unemployment,  and  local government policy. The relevancy of these traditional models, however, to non-Western, developing countries has been questioned (Brown  and  Sanders  1981). Approaches  that relate to both  less developed and more developed  contexts should be  considered here  due to  the  prevalence  of  multiple  development contexts in Russia and the USSR.

In  the  particular  context of  the  disintegration  of  the FSU, we  question the relevancy of previous  work  on  forced  refugee  flows  and international return migration, particularly repatriation. Most of this literature explains refugee flows during times of violent revolution or temporary labor migrations related to refugee

flows (e.g., Pessar 1988;  Marmora 1988;  Koehn 1991; Shami  1993). Literature on repatriation often deals with decolonization where the origin country was not contiguous to the receiving country (e.g.,  Smith  1981) or w i t h a  situation  of  returning  exiles  (e.g.,  Pessar  1988). This  literature  lacks  relevance  to  the  Soviet and post-Soviet cases because few places in the FSU violently  overthrew  the  Soviet regime, sending Russians packing. Returning Russians are not  exiles-they left their  homelands voluntarily, in some cases several generations earlier, to  seek fortunes  in  contiguous territories of  the country.

The appearance of crises or major economic 'shocks' requires the modification of tradition theory. As described by Long (1981), the 1930s Great Depression in the United  States caused a  stagnating  of  the  streams of  rural-to-urban migration, as people stayed on the farms where at  least  they  could  eat.  Explanations  of  the 'clean break' of US. migration patterns in the 1970s (Vining and Strauss 1977) included consideration of the severe recession early in that decade that was brought on by the shock of the Arab oil embargo of  1973. The persistence of the  metropolitan-to-nonmetropolitan movement trends through the late 1970s suggested, however, that a variety of factors were operating  synchronously  (Long  and  DeAre  1980). Among  those  factors  was  the  demographic shock of  extraordinarily large baby boom  cohorts  flooding  regional  labor  markets  (Plane and Rogerson 199 1; Plane 1992).  Interestingly, an oil glut (and recession) shock has been identified  to  help  explain U.S.  migration  patterns in the 1980s  (Plane and  Rogerson 1989; McHugh and Gober 1992).

Plane (1984) provided a theory of migration system  change  involving  'steady-state''  and 'non-steady-state' movement  patterns that vary in relative proportions  as a nation  passes through periods of rapid structural change followed  by  longer  interregnums  during  which movement patterns exhibit equilibrating trends.  Of considerable current interest in regional science are the  economies of  unscheduled,  major  events,  as  attested  to  by  several special  theme  sessions  at  the 1994  North American  Meetings in  Houston. To  date, however,  we are  unaware  of any  of  these emerging  ideas  having  been  applied  to  the impact  of  a  major  social  and  economic  dis- location  on  interregional  population  movement patterns,

## Soviet and Russian Case

Questions  relevant to  the  changing  direction and composition of migration flows in the Soviet and Russian context during a shock period include: What  happens  to  the  direction  and composition  of  migration  flows  when  a  socially,  economically, and  politically integrated multinational state with distinct ethnic homelands breaks apart? What happens when strong government control over social and economic processes  begins  to  fade? When,  if  ever,  do major systemic changes occur?

The answers to these questions lie, in part, within  the  context of  the  previous migration system, one that was not well-studied by Western social scientists.  Many studies of migration in the FSU successfully predict the volume and direction  of migration  flows  using  standard economic models despite the contextual problems related  to the  noncapitalist setting (Rybakovskiy  1973; Zaytsev 1973; Lysenko  1977; Ball  and  Demko  1978;  Fuchs  and  Demko 1978; Grandstaff 1980;  Maksakova 1986; Mitchneck 1990, 1991).  These studies note the improvement of material welfare and quality of life  as  determining  factors in  the  decision  to migrate and destination choice. Standard economic  models  produced  highly accurate predictions  of  the  volume  and  direction  of  the flows  (Grandstaff  1980; Mitchneck  1990 and 1991). Ball  and  Demko  (1978) note  variable influences over  migration  flows  according  to level and type of regional  developmentagrarian, frontier, less industrial, and more industrial-supporting the  Brown  and  Sanders (198  1) thesis regarding the importance of contextual  influences over migration patterns.

Relatively little information is available about  gender, age, and  ethnic differentials of migration  flows  in  the  FSU.  Research  has shown generally balanced flows with respect to gender  (Lewis  and  Rowland  1979). Mobility appears to be highest among the youngest age groups in the labor force and among children (Lewis and  Rowland  1979). Also, substantial ethnic  differentials appear  to  exist,  with  the Slavs and several minority ethnic groups, such as  Jews,  Tatars,  and  Armenians,  having  the highest mobility rates (Lewis et al.  1976).

During  the  1970s  and 1980s  a  relatively small proportion of the total Soviet population moved interregionally each year. Topilin (1988) estimates  that about  5%  of  the  Soviet population  moved annually, with less than half of  those moves between  republics or economic regions.  T h e 5% figure places mobility in the FSU  well  below  that  of  developed  countries (Long 1991). Although Long's (1991) data are not  directly  comparable,  the  small  figure  is striking when  compared  to data  on changing place  of  residence circa 1981,  for  example, 17.5% in the United States and 9.6% in Great Britain.  T h e  majority  of the  moves  were  between  closely  located  oblasts  and  thus  were short-distance moves.  In  the  1970s between 40%  and 60% of moves were intraoblast (Rybakovskiy  1973). Evidence  of  a  trend  toward long distance moves, i.e., an increasing proportion of interrepublic  moves or interoblast moves, would indicate a change to the Russian migration system.

The direction and composition of migration flows in the  1970s and 1980s were largely stable,  but  we  see  the  first  evidence  of  social upheaval  with  the changing direction of some net migration interchanges in the  1980s. In a broad  regional perspective, the Soviet  (and Russian) population traditionally  redistributed from  central  Russia  eastward  towards  Siberia and  the  Far  East,  and  southward  towards Kazakhstan,  Central  Asia,  and  the  Transcaucams  until  the  1980s when  the  pattern  reversed  (Lewis  and  Rowland  1979; Mitchneck 1990).

The reversal  of this  long-term,  established pattern  of  migration  signals  social  and  economic  change.  Indeed,  cities  and  regions  in central  Russia  appear  to  have  attracted  migrants from farther rather  than  closer  origins in the mid-1980s.  Destination-specific  spatial interaction  models  of  intercity  migration  in 1985 for cities  in central  Russia  have  positive distance  coefficients,  indicating that  migrants were coming from distant rather  than nearby origins (Mitchneck  199  1).

Large-scale rural-to-urban migration  was also  an  important  feature  in  the  migration processes  of  Russia,  in  particular  in the postWorld War I and I1 periods (Lewis and Rowland 1979).  Although rural-to-urban  migration was a significant trend in the USSR, it became relatively  less  important  in  Russia  over  time.

Interurban  migration  became  predominant  in the  1970s and  1980s  in  Russia  and  for  the ethnic Russian population (Lewis and Rowland 1979).  A change to the migration system would be  indicated  by  the decreasing  importance  of interurban  moves.  This  did  occur  in  Russia after  the  1917 Revolution  when many urbanites left the cities of  northern  Russia  for rural places  in the south and east in  search of food and land  resources  (Lorimer 1946).

## Yaroslavl'  Case Study

The  Russian  and  Soviet  migration  systems have undergone shocks in the past due to major  violent  events  such  as  the  I917  Russian Revolution, civil  war, and  World  War  1 1 . Characteristics of the migration system persisted  despite  these  events-the north-to-south and west-to-east flows and rural-to-urban flows.

The essential  problem  here is to conceptualize  how  the  direction  and  composition of migration flows within the migration system(s) of  Russia  may  change  during the  post-Soviet period-a time  of  instability,  disintegration, and reintegration, not a wartime period. There are likely to be several overlapping yet distinct phases  of  migration.  The reality  of  the  situation suggests that although the phases may be distinct,  no one phase will be evident in isolation  in  any one place  or at any one point in time. Phase I, destabilization, describes the late 1970s and early 1980s  when the reversal of the north-to-south  net exchange occurred. Phase I foreshadows Phase 1 1 ,  disintegration,  when the chaotic patterns occasioned by the current destabilization and politicaVeconomic shocks become evident.  The initial  period  of  destabilization  ended  in  the  late  1980s just  as pereswoyka was ending. Phase I1 migration should be  evident  in  the  1990s, with  1989 being  a transition year  when both  Phase I  and  Phase I1 patterns co-existed.

## Yarosla  vl'

Migration  in and  out  of  Yaroslavl'  Oblast should  be  seen  as  representative of central Russia. Data on migration in the Central Economic  Region  (a  statistical  accounting region to which Yaroslavl' belongs)  for 1970 through 1989 indicates that Yaroslavl'  is not atypical for the region with respect to losses of  population

in  the  1970s due  to  migration,  gains  in  the 1980s, persistent inflows of  migrants to urban places from the  1970s through  1989, and consistent outflows of  migrants  from rural  places (Goskomstat  RSFSR 1990).  Although the Central Economic Region has received a large portion  of the forced migrants returning from the  former  Soviet republics, Yaroslavl' Oblast received  about  the  average  number  for  the region  (Vitkovskaya  1994). Despite  the  relatively  large  number  of  returning  Russians in Yaroslavl', the oblast was  not  designated as  a receiving location by  the  central  government (Schwartz 1993).

Other regional  issues also support  the  description of Yaroslavl' as typical for the region. The politics are not overwhelmingly  liberal or conservative, although the region can boast of early  'democratic' movements  (Hahn  199  I). Although the oblast capital is located within a five-hour train  ride,  Moscow does not  dominate  the  region;  the  oblast capital, Yaroslavl', is  itself  a  regional  center  due  to its  industrial importance and role as a transportation center. Industrial employment in the oblast is concentrated in petrochemicals,  machine-building, the  automobile  industry,  and  light  industry (textiles).  These industrial sectors provide the oblast economy  with the combination of growth possibilities and an obsolete, fixed capital  base.  The oblast  is  not  dominated  by  the military  industrial  complex,  although  some factories  did  produce  for  it.  Yaroslavl'  does differ  from  other  central  Russian  oblasts  in that it has a higher proportion of its population living  in  urban  areas  (about  80% urban  and 20%  rural  in  1989), but  like other  oblasts in the central region its population is mainly ethnic Russian (95% in  1989).

## Data and Methods

Migration  data  for  Phase  I 1   come  from  the annual  population  register  data  collected  in Yaroslavl' by  the oblast government. Register data  collected at the oblast level are probably of  higher  quality than  those  presented  at the national  level; by  the  time  the  national  level receives  the  data,  they  have  passed  through several  government  offices,  each  having  the potential  to introduce  error. Trained  sociologists calculated this dataset by hand  using the original registry forms. Although human error can occur in the absence of computerization in

Russia, the population accounting in this dataset is  the best available to date.

Several major drawbacks, however, exist due to the nature  of  the registry system. First, inmigration data are more accurate than outmigration data. Individuals must register as  they migrate into a  place  in order to receive social services,  including  housing, education,  and public assistance, but  no  such incentives exist to  register  outmigration.  Outmigration  data are  generally underestimated,  but  due  to  the absence of  place-to-place migration  data,  we cannot  estimate  the  level  of  undercounting. Within this particular dataset, however, we can measure 6% undercounting for intraoblast migration. Second, the urban accounting systems are  more  accurate than  the  rural  ones. Rural inmigration and outmigration are likely undercounted. Third, there are two separate counts of intraoblast migration. Differing levels of accuracy  between  urban  and  rural  accounting systems and  differing levels  of  self-reporting for  inmigration  and  outmigration  explain the latter  problem.

Accounting  and  data  quality  problems  are not  unique  to  Soviet  or  Russian  population data. These problems exist  in many contexts, particularly those with less technologically advanced data management systems. These data are,  however,  the  best  quality  and  most  detailed available on migration trends in Russia. Our approach is to analyze the time series with respect to trends without giving undue weight to  absolute figures. We  rely  most  heavily on the inmigration  data-rather than  the  outmigration  data-and the  data collected in urban places.

Because the goal of this work is to conceptualize the nature of a migration system undergoing shock and, in part, because of data limitations,  simple  descriptive  techniques  rather than causal modeling techniques were used  to describe and analyze the migration data. Other than  presenting  the  raw  data  themselves, we calculate simple ratios to describe the composition of the migration flows, such as a sex ratio and an age ratio of the 15-34  age group to the 35-59 age  group.  We  also  calculate  demographic  effectiveness ratios  to  measure  gains and  losses due to  the  exchange of  population at varying geographical levels. A high positive or  negative ratio  indicates a  large imbalance between the stream and counterstream. An in-

creasing ratio  over time  signifies regional net gains. The ratio is calculated by subtracting the counterstream  from  the  stream,  dividing  by the sum of migrants, and multiplying by  100.

## Evidence on Phase II Migration Pattern Hypotheses

The hypotheses associated with Phase I1 focus on an acceleration of trends noticeable toward the end of Phase I, such as returning migration flows  to  Russia  from  other  republics and  the concentration of  ethnic groups in their homelands.  We  expect  to  see  gradual  structural change becoming evident from  1989 through 1992.

## Hypothesis 1: Decreasing volume $jaws

The absolute volume  of  the migration  flows in and out of Yaroslavl' Oblast should decrease during the 1989-92  time period. We  should see the decreasing  volume  for  intraregional  flows  and gross interoblast  and interrepublic flows.

Decreasing flows  should  indicate the  presence of  economic shock. The decline of volume for total in- and  outmigration  would  be consistent with  the  United  States experience during  the  Great  Depression  and  the  experience  of  Russia  after  the  Civil  War  in  1917 (Lewis and Rowland  1979). We would  expect a  temporary  increase of  migration  associated with  cataclysmic  events,  such  as  the  commencement of  armed conflict in  the southern tier  or the perception of  revolutionary events. The volume should gradually decrease as  the migrant pool diminishes and as  people decide to wait out the economic downturn in place to reap  the  benefits  of  place-specific knowledge and social and  economic networks.

The time  period  under  investigation here, 1989-92,  does  in  fact show a  decline of  total in-  and outmigration, and net migration  (Table  I)  preceded  by  an  increase.  We  do  not consider the  decrease to be  a normal year-toyear  variation  of  migration  flows  because  of the  sharp decline for both  in- and oumiigration  between 1989  and 1992  (19,686  and 16,974, respectively).  The decline is especially noteworthy because from  1979 through  1988 Yaroslavl'  Oblast  experienced  an  average annual  net  increase  due  to  migration  of  about 2,900 persons  (Goskomstat  RSFSR 1990). Goskomstat RSFSR data show a steep increase of net  migration  between 1988  and 1989 followed by  a  gradual  decline  evident in  the current  dataset  as  well.  Intraoblast  migrants decline  as  do  the  interoblast  flows, while  the interrepublic  level  flows  fluctuate  (Table  1). The decline is a major change in the migration system,  while  fluctuating  interrepublic  flows also suggest changes to the migration system.

## Hypotbesis  2: Increasing proportion of long-distance mnves

The proportion of long-distance migrants should increase  over  the  period  as  interrepublic  flows increase in importance.

Interrepublic  (i.e., long-distance) flows consist of refugees  and return migrants.  We should be  seeing relatively more interrepublic moves relative to short-distance moves as part of  the effect of the shock. The breakup of the FSU should have precipitated an acceleration of south-to-north flows as Slavs return to Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus from the non-Slavic republics.

The data show that the proportion  of interrepublic  inmigration  and  thus  long-distance movers  does  increase over  the  period  (Table 2).  The growing proportion  of  long-distance movers in Yaroslavl' reflects the growing social unrest and economic instability outside Russia. The proportion  of  in-migrants  to  Yaroslavl' Oblast  from  republics  outside  of  Russia  increases from an estimated 12% in  1989 to an estimated 22% in 1992,  with the proportion of out-migrants going to other republics remaining fairly stable during the period. We also see a  fluctuation in the absolute number of in-mi-

Table 7 Volume of  Total Migrant  Nows for  Yaroslavl' Oblast,  1989-1992

| Migration      |      1989 |   1990 |      1991 |      1992 |
|----------------|-----------|--------|-----------|-----------|
| Inmigration    | 53785     | 51,108 | 40693     | 34099     |
| Outmigration   | 45583     | 42,941 | 37710     |    28.609 |
| Net migration  |     8.202 |  8,167 |  2983     |  5490     |
| Intraoblast"   |    20.006 | 17,872 | 15056     |    14.196 |
| Interoblast'   | 30493     | 27,914 |    22.387 | 19602     |
| Interrepublic' |    10.759 | 12,522 |     8.611 |    10.472 |

Table 2 Percentage  Estimates  of  Long-Distance  Miqration,  Yaroslavl' Oblast,  1989-1992

|                | 1989   | 1989   | 1990   | 1990   | 1991   | 1991   | 1992   | 1992   |
|----------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Migration Type | In     | out    | In     | out    | In     | out    | In     | out    |
| lntraoblast    | 37     | 41     | 35     | 42     | 37     | 40     | 42     | 50     |
| interoblast    | 31     | 30     | 30     | 30     | 30     | 29     | 30     | 32     |
| lnterrepublic  | 12     | 10     | 16     | 10     | 12     | 9      | 22     | 10     |
| International  | 1      | 1      | 1      | 2      | 1      | 2      | 1      | 2      |
| Unknown        | 19     | 18     | 18     | 16     | 20     | 20     | 5      | 6      |

grants  from  outside Russia  during  the  period (Table  3). Another  source of  data on net migration  in Yaroslavl' Oblast for  1989 through 1991  (Pavlova 1993)  cites  interrepublic  net gains  to  Yaroslavl'  Oblast  as  7,755-just 79 migrants more than our dataset suggests. This consistency  implies that the interrepublic flows in our dataset may not account for the largest proportion of the unknown category (Table 2). Prior to 1992, the unknown category included military-related moves. The international and interoblast categories were most likely undercounted.  The  Soviet and  now  Russian  army has remained a strong presence in the former republics with troop withdrawals occurring after  1992.

The data also show an increasing proportion of migrants  moving  within  the  oblast  at  the end  of  the  period  in  1992. This is  consistent with  the  conceptualization of  waiting out the shock in the home region. While the increases registered  here  may  be  artifacts  of  the  data (due to increasing knowledge of destinations), the trends are consistent with expectations and historical evidence.

Hypothesis 3: Women predominate  in  long-distance mow

The proportion of women relative to men should increase  in  long-distance  flows  as  part  of  the return migration motivated by social conflict and by  economic conflict.

If  the  return  migration  is  politically or socially motivated, then more women than men should  make  the  long-distance  moves  as  is characteristic  of  international refugee  flows.

The long-distance moves would  be motivated by social  unrest, perceived or real ethnic conflict, and  political  change  rather  than  job seeking. We expect women to precede men, as wives  and  children  move  first while  the  men stay  behind,  continue  working,  or  join  the military.

While the dataset is rich, it does not include a breakdown of the flows by origin and destination.  Using  data  on  the  ethnic  and  gender composition of the flows,  we extrapolated long-distance  movers  by  ethnicity, given  two considerations. First, non-Russian in-migrants will most likely be long-distance movers. NonRussian ethnic groups with  homelands in the FSU  were  concentrated  in  their  homelands. Second, Russians will predominate in the refugee  inflows  to  Yaroslavl'  as  they  leave  nonRussian regions due to real or perceived ethnic conflict and social unrest.

In support of the hypothesis, Russian women  do  surpass  men  for  inmigration  to Yaroslavl'  in  each  year  (Table  4).  Ukrainian and  Belorussian  women  do  not  outnumber men  but  increase  their  representation  in  the flows between 1989 and 1992. The category of 'other,'  comprised of ethnic groups with homelands within Russia (the  Mordovian, Dagestani, Osetian,  Chechen,  Ingush,  Bashkortostan, Udmurt, Komi, and Chuvash republics),  also increased its  proportion  of  women. These increases are consistent with  more traditional refugee flows. Many of  the non-Russian  ethnic  homelands  in  Russia  experienced both  armed  conflict and  social  unrest  during 1991 and  1992.

Table 3 Absolute lnterrepubhc  Migration Flows for  Yaroslavl' Oblast,  1989-1992

| Interrepublic Flows   | 1989   |    1990 |   1991 |   1992 |
|-----------------------|--------|---------|--------|--------|
| Inmigration           | 6,422  | 8326    |  5,036 |  7,594 |
| Outmigration          | 4,337  | 4196    |  3,575 |  2,878 |
| Net mioration         | 2 085  |    4.13 |  1,461 |  4,716 |

Table 4 Inmigration Sex Ratio iFernale/Male) for Yaroslavl' Oblast by Ethnic Group,  1989 and  7992

| Ethnic Group     |   1989 |   1992 |
|------------------|--------|--------|
| Russian          |    112 |    113 |
| Ukrainian        |     83 |     86 |
| Belorusian       |     71 |     87 |
| Uzbek            |     28 |     56 |
| Kazakh           |    141 |     68 |
| Georgian         |     57 |     54 |
| Azeri            |     37 |     52 |
| Lithuanian       |     50 |     33 |
| Moldovian        |     32 |     25 |
| Latvian          |     11 |     57 |
| K y rw           |     77 |     30 |
| Talik            |      5 |     37 |
| Armenian         |     55 |     73 |
| Turkmen          |     37 |    100 |
| Estonian         |    100 |     83 |
| Tatar            |     90 |    114 |
| Jew              |     85 |    108 |
| German           |     85 |     74 |
| Other            |     67 |     93 |
| Total population |    103 |    109 |

The data  do not  strongly  support  the  hypothesis  for  all  ethnic  groups.  Ethnic groups with homelands that experienced armed conflict  and  social  unrest  during  this  period, such as the  Armenian,  Azeri, Uzbek,  and Tadzhik, have flows in which men, not women, predominate. This  is  not  consistent with  the hypothesis  that the  flows  are  due  to  political and  ethnic  conflict.  T h e  dominance  of  male inflows is notable,  because it signifies a change from previous migration patterns when the sex ratio was relatively even. T h e  male dominance for the non-Russian  ethnic groups is consistent with economically motivated  flows, such as are evident in receiving countries in Europe. The predominance  of  Russian  women  and  nonRussian  men suggest  that during the disintegration  period  refugee  flows  were  economically and politically motivated  and were differentiated, in central Russia, by ethnic group.

## Hypothesis  4:  Changing ethnic composition

Ethnic composition of the migration flows should  change during  this period. The proportion  of  Slavs  to  non-Slavs  in-migrating  should increase  over  time,  as  should  the  proportion  of non-Slavs to Slavs out-migrating.

We expect changing ethnic composition to reflect a trend  toward further reconcentration of  Soviet national  groups within  their  homelands as a manifestation of social and economic changes  during Phase  1 1 .  Table 5  shows  support for this hypothesis.  Slavs do increase their proportion of total inflows from 89% in 1989 to  93%  in  1992  and  Russians  increase  from 84% to 89%. This indicates a trend toward the reconcentration  of  Russians and  Slavs in central Russia and a structural change in the composition  of migration flows.

The data  clearly  reflect  outmigration  from central Russia by non-Slavic  ethnic groups. In 1989, more non-Slavs migrated into Yaroslavl' Oblast than migrated out of the oblast  (Table 5).  Few non-Russian  ethnic groups had negative  net flows. But by  1992, the  situation had reversed with a negative net flow appearing for almost all  non-Slavic  ethnic  groups  and  with the  overall  non-Russian  proportion  of  inflow decreasing from 1  1 % to 8%. This supports the hypothesis that non-Slavic  groups were leaving central Russia. Although the data do not specify  the destinations of  out-migrants,  it is possible  that non-Slavs  leaving Yaroslavl' are  returning  to  their  ethnic homelands  or joining kin  in other places  in Russia.

Table  5  reveals  other  notable  features  of migration  patterns  by  ethnicity.  First,  Armenians continue to have relatively high positive inflows  to  Yaroslavl'  while  most  other  nonSlavic  ethnic  groups  have  net  outflows.  This most likely reflects the presence of a war refugee  population  due to  the  armed  conflict  between  Armenia  and  Azerbaydzhan. Second, the  category  of  'other,'  composed  of  nonRussian  ethnic groups with homelands within the  Russian  territory, increases  its  proportion

Table 5 Distribution of  Migrants in  Yaroslavl'  Oblast by Ethnic  Group,  1989 and  1992

|                  | 1 gas   | 1 gas   | 1 gas   |       |            |            |
|------------------|---------|---------|---------|-------|------------|------------|
|                  |         |         |         |       | Percentage | Percentage |
| Ethnic Group     | Net     | In      | out     | Net   | In         | out        |
| Slav             | 5,793   | a9      | 89      | 6,029 | 93         | 90         |
| Russian          | 5,339   | 84      | 85      | 5,954 | a9         | a6         |
| Ukrainian        | 425     | 4       | 4       | 38    | 3          | 4          |
| Belorusian       | 29      | 1       | 1       | 37    | 1          | 1          |
| Non Slav         | 824     | 11      | 11      | -61 5 | a          | 12         |
| Uzbek            | 60      | 1       | 1       | -26   | 0          | 0          |
| Kazakh           | -32     | 0       | 0       | -35   | 0          | 0          |
| Georgian         | -57     | 0       | 0       | -7    | 0          | 0          |
| Azeri            | 1 a6    | 2       | 1       | -32   | 1          | 1          |
| Lithuanian       | 0       | 0       | 0       | 0     | 0          | 0          |
| Moldavian        | 68      | 1       | 1       | -68   | 0          | 1          |
| Latvian          | 0       | 0       | 0       | 4     | 0          | 0          |
| Kyrgyz           | -15     | 0       | 0       | -33   | 0          | 0          |
| Talik            | -18     | 0       | 0       | -14   | 0          | 0          |
| Armenian         | 218     | 1       | 0       | 199   | 1          | 0          |
| Turkmen          | 7       | 0       | 0       | -23   | 0          | 0          |
| Estonian         | 3       | 0       | 0       | 6     | 0          | 0          |
| Tatar            | 62      | 1       | 1       | 62    | 1          | 1          |
| Jew              | 0       | 0       | 0       | -58   | 0          | 0          |
| German           | 17      | 0       | 0       | 4     | 0          | 0          |
| Other            | 325     | 5       | 5       | -458  | 3          | 5          |
| Total population | 6.617   | 100     | 100     | 5.500 | 100        | 100        |

of  out-migrants  and  changes from net inflow to net outflow by the end of  the period. The groups in this category are most likely returning to their homelands. Third, although some changes in the ethnic composition of the migration system are evident, the changes are not large. This  feature  suggests that the  patterns have remained relatively stable despite the economic  and  political  shocks  surrounding  the disintegration  of  the  FSU. There may also be a  lag response time  by  certain  ethnic groups. In  addition,  the  1989 ethnicity data were not recorded  for  about  1,600 persons.  Although the  majority  of  these  are  most  likely  Slavic, the  relative  magnitude  of the  trends  could change.

## j a w s Hypothesis I : Changing age cumposition of migration

The  labor  force  peak  of  the  age  schedules  of migrants should broaden and the volumes of migrants  for all age groups should decrease due to the  economic and political shocks. Over the period,  mobility  for  older  age  groups  within  the working-age  population  (including  mid-career) should increase relative  to the  younger age groups. We expect the changing age composition to  be  evident  for  men  and  women  in  the  total and urban  flows.

Due  to  economic  and  political  instability, migration should become a viable response of persons in  all age groups, not just of  persons in  the  younger  years of  labor force participation  with  children, as  was  the  case during the Soviet period  (Lewis and Rowland 1979). We expect two trends to become evident: (1) older age groups will increase their proportion of the total  flows  because  migration  becomes  a  response  of  the  entire  population,  and ( 2 ) the volume of flows for all age groups will  decline at the end of  the period because fewer people will be at risk of migrating, and those remaining will choose to wait out the crisis in place.

The  changing  ratios  of  younger  to  older labor  force  age  migrants  for  both  total  flows and for urban  places  strongly support the hypothesis concerning the changing age structure of  migrants (Table 6). The ratios decline over the period for gross migration flows, inmigration, and outmigration, signifying greater  balance of age-specific flows. The declining ratios hold  constant  for total,  male, and  female migrants, further highlighting the pervasive changes in  mobility. The largest  relative  declines are evident for the 15-34  age group, the group  with  the  previously  highest  mobility rates. These data provide strong evidence that the age structure  and  the  volume of  flows  by age  group  have  changed  dramatically during the  crisis  period.  This  trend  has  important implications for  the changing composition of the labor force in Yaroslavl' during the transition period.

Table 6 Age Structure of Migration  Flows for  Yaroslavl' Oblast, Ratios of  15-34 T o 35-59  Year-Olds, 1989- 1992

| Migration               | 1989   | 1990   | 1991   | 1992   |
|-------------------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Gross Flows Inmigration | 4 06   | 381    | 371    | 324    |
| Total                   | 3 71   | 3.38   | 3 40   | 2 80   |
| Male                    | 2 99   | 2.74   | 2 71   | 2 39   |
| Female                  | 4 82   | 4 32   | 4 37   | 332    |
| Outmigration            |        |        |        |        |
| Total                   | 4 54   | 4 40   | 4 08   | 3 90   |
| Male                    | 3 56   | 328    | 300    | 2 86   |
| Female                  | 6 08   | 6 31   | 5 95   | 5 37   |
| URBAN PLACES            |        |        |        |        |
| Gross Flows Inmigration | 4 78   | 4 42   | 4 21   | 360    |
| Total                   | 411    | 3 78   | 3 84   | 3 10   |
| Male                    | 3 38   | 3 15   | 3 12   | 2 71   |
| Female                  | 5 13   | 4 57   | 4 76   | 3 56   |
| Outmigration            |        |        |        |        |
| Total                   | 5 86   | 544    | 4 67   | 4 35   |
| Male                    | 4 46   | 3 83   | 3 33   | 327    |
| Female                  | 7 94   | 8 35   | 7 06   | 6 06   |

Hypothesis  6:  Changing  rural-to-urbnn migration flows

The volume  and  demographic effectiveness of urban-to-rural migration flows should increase as the  urban  crisis intensifies, reversing  the  longterm urbanization trend.

Recent  research  has  shown  that  in  Russia during the 1989-1992  period, urban places began  to  lose  population  while  the rural  places gained population due to migration (Zayonchkovskaya 1994). This trend should be particularly  evident  on  the  interrepublic  scale  since many  returning  migrants  and  refugees are forced  to  live  in  rural  places  due  to  governmental urban  residential  controls. The urban response  to shock at this point should include outmigration to rural locations. This response occurred in the United States during the Great Depression  of the  1930s and in  Russia imme- diately following the 191  7 revolution  (Lorimer 1946).

The information  for Yaroslavl'  Oblast suggests  a  concurrence  with  the  general  change for Russia. T h e  direction of flows changed and the  importance  of  rural-to-urban flows  declined  during the transition  period  (Table 7). The proportion  of  rural-to-urban  flows  also declines over time at the intraoblast level (from 41%  in  1989  to  30%  in  1992)  and  at  the interrepublic level (from 24% in 1989 to 10% in  1992). T h e  effectiveness  of  urban-to-rural flows increases  on the intraohlast,  interoblast, and  interrepublic  levels  (Table  8).  Urban-torural  flows increase  at the  intraohlast and  interrepublic levels (Table  7).  Information from the database also shows a trend toward declining urbanization over the 1989-92  period.  Because  of  the  problems  associated  with  rural

Table 7 Volume of Inmigration Flows for  Yaroslavl' Oblast, by  Total, Urban, Rural,  1989-1992

|                |     1989 |   1990 |    1991 |     1992 |
|----------------|----------|--------|---------|----------|
| Intraoblast"   |          |        |         |          |
| Rural to Urban |    7.042 |  5,856 | 4403    | 3919     |
| Urbanto Rural  | 3847     |  4,325 | 4127    | 4082     |
| Urbanto Urban  | 6376     |  5,745 | 5024    | 4916     |
| lnteroblast    |          |        |         |          |
| Rural to Urban | 2626     |  2,387 | 1765    |    1.57  |
| Urbanto Rural  | 2189     |  2,032 | 1845    | 1702     |
| Urbanto Urban  | 9633     |  8,688 | 7043    |    6.209 |
| Interrepublic  |          |        |         |          |
| Rural to Urban | 1300     |  1,214 |  624    |  705     |
| Urbanto Rural  | 1120     |  1,757 | 1125    |    1.72  |
| Urbanto Urban  | 2993     |  4,388 |    2.74 |    4.629 |

Table 8 Demographic Effectiveness of Migration Flows,  Yaroslavl' Oblast,  1989-1992

| Migration       |   1989 | 1990   |   1991 |   1992 |
|-----------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Urban to Rural' |        |        |        |        |
| Intraoblast     |    -29 | -1 5   |    -32 |      2 |
| interoblast     |     -2 | 1      |      5 |     13 |
| Interrepublic   |     25 | 48     |     30 |     54 |
| Urban to Urban  |        |        |        |        |
| lnteroblast     |      7 | 5      |      3 |      5 |
| Interrepublic   |     11 | 31     |     20 |     51 |

data  collection, three  separate accountings of urbanization  are  possible  from  the  dataset. Each  one,  however,  shows  a  clear  trend  of declining urbanization in Yaroslavl' Oblast.

Intraoblast effectiveness changes from negative  to  positive,  indicating  a  change  in  the trend of urbanization to one of net losses from urban  places  to  rural  places  with  Yaroslavl' Oblast. The structural change of direction for intraoblast  flows  occurs  in  1992.  Given  that 1992 was the year of the breakup of the Soviet Union,  the  structural  change may  be  an indicator of the deepening urban crisis and severe economic disarray that followed. We also see a  change  from  negative to  positive  effectiveness  for  interoblast  migration  (Table  8),  but the  change occurs earlier than  for  intraoblast migration. Urban-to-rural  effectiveness on the interrepublic  scale was  positive  and  increased during the period.

The redistribution  to rural places  at the interrepublic scale most likely reflects the urban residential  controls  in  place  at  the  time  that affected the long-distance return migrants. The  declining  importance  of  rural-to-urban migration  and  increased  importance  of  rural destinations  may  also  reflect  an  element  of choice on behalf of the migrants. Urban-to-rural migrants position themselves  in places where they have access to productive resources (land  and  livestock  for  food  production)  that are not available in the cities or for which they must pay substantial amounts. The early 1990s was  a time of  declining availability of  food in urban places and rising interest on the part of urban  dwellers in  obtaining  plots  of  land  to grow their  own food supply. A second reason that  migrants  may  choose  rural  places  over urban  ones is that land  reform,  including the allocation of land, structures, and farm equipment, was beginning in the experimental stage and seemed an inevitable event. People located in rural places prior to land reform physically position  themselves  in  places  where  they  are likely to reap benefits to which urban dwellers do not have access.

Hypothesis 7: Changing intmrban migration $ms The volume  and  demographic effectiveness of interurban  flows  should  decrease  as  alternative destinations compete  with  Yaroslavl'  for  migrants.

We expect the volume and effectiveness of interurban flows to decrease for Yaroslavl' Oblast on the interoblast scale due to the increasing  relative  importance  of  intraoblast  migration  (see Table  2).  The data reflect decreased volume of  interurban  flows  at  the  intraoblast and interoblast scales (Table 7 ) and decreased effectiveness of interurban  flows within Russia (Table  8).  The  data  also  show  the  striking increased migration to urban places in Yaroslavl' at  the  interrepublic  scale, with  the greatest  gains  occurring  in  1992, the  year  of the  breakup  (Table  8).  These trends  are  significant because they signal further disruptions to the previous system where interurban moves predominated at all scales.

## Conclusions

One  primary  conclusion  from  the  empirical analysis  of  migration  in  Yaroslavl'  Oblast  is that  despite  dramatic  political  and  economic disruption  in  the  FSU,  the  structure  of  the migration system is predictable using an analysis of historical trends and standard approaches.  Despite  dramatic contextual differences between capitalist and socialist economic systems, concepts derived from capitalist contexts  can  serve  as  a  guide  to  the  analysis of migration  flows in socialist contexts.  Contextual differences exist, however, and are important for the study of migration flows.  For example,  the  increasing  migrant  flows  to  rural places in Yaroslavl' are due, in part, to the lack

of a housing market and to government regulation.

The data  clearly show  a  migration  system undergoing  political  and  economic  shocks. A significant decline in the volume of  flows and a  relative increase in  the  importance  of  longdistance  (interrepublic)  moves  are  results  of social  and  economic  disruption.  This is particularly evident when  we  look  at the  demographic  composition  of  the  flows.  Increased relative mobility for those in the later years of the  working-age  population,  reflected  in  the declining age ratios, is one of the most important  changes evident in  the migration system. Also, a  significant change of  direction  of  migration  flows, in particular the increasing importance  of  urban-to-rural  flows,  was  found. Despite only minor changes to the  migration patterns  by  ethnic group,  the reconcentration of  ethnic  groups  into  their  respective  homelands within the FSU was evident. The process is  likely  to  accelerate  during  the  1990s and deserves  greater  attention  in  future  analysis. This change also suggests that whereas Yaroslavl' may be an ideal locale to study many aspects  of  current  changes  in  the  migration system, much of the migration by non-Russian ethnic groups is taking place elsewhere.

Some  continuity  with  the  past  migration system does exist. For example, Yaroslavl' Oblast had  had  a net  gain of population  through migration for a long time; however, during the crisis  period  the  gains  increased.  Interurban migration is still dominant, but less so relative to the increased importance of  urban-to-rural flows at the interrepublic and intraoblast scales.  Also,  for  the  total  population,  gender differentials in  mobility  are  slight;  however, when  disaggregated by  ethnicity, gender  differentials increase. These  examples highlight the  importance  of  disaggregating the  migration data in order to reveal the composition of broad changes in the migration system.

We expect that when the  crisis phase ends, the patterns established in Phase I1 will lay the foundation for a new migration system distinct from previous patterns. There are several possible scenarios,  however, about how the system will evolve. If the economic and political crises worsen, we can expect Phase I1 migration patterns to persist to the extent that at-risk pools remain. A postshock transition  phase may  be characterized by stepwise migration evident on a  system-wide  basis  as  migrants  respond  to changing individual and environmental conditions in places. An  example of  changing environmental  conditions would  be  the  lifting or institution  of  residential controls  in  different locations in  the  system. Another  phase could be  a  temporary  new  stability with  a  gradual return  to certain pre-crisis migration patterns such as interurban moves predominating. But the spatial configuration of the system will differ dramatically from the pre-crisis period. For example, during the 1970s and 1980s,  large net inflows  were  concentrated  in  relatively  few places  like  Siberian  boom  towns  and  capital cities of  republics. Provincial capitals were attractive destinations for their own hinterlands but  did  not  present  intervening obstacles for nonlocal migrants.  New  centers of  economic growth  and  cultural primacy  are  likely to emerge that will  change the  configuration of the system of  origins and destinations. We are likely  to see less primacy under  capitalism or some  economic  system  other  than central planning. This new migration system will ultimately depend on the success of economic reforms in particular places, including changing regional levels of economic prosperity.

The structure  and  composition of  the  migration flows and the resulting migration rates after the shock will not look entirely like those in the United States or any other country.  The historical social and  economic context of  the FSU  and  the  dynamic  nature  of  migration flows suggest that while there  may  be  a  convergence  of  economic  systems and  some  related similarities  of the migration systems, significant differences will persist. H

## Literature Cited

Ball, B.,  and G. J. Demko.  1978. Internal  migration in  the  Soviet  Union. Economic  Geography 54:95114.

Brown,  L. A., and  R.  L.  Sanders.  1981. Toward  a development paradigm of migration, with particular  reference  to Third World  settings. In Migration Decision Making, Multidisciplinary  Approaches to Microlevel  Snulies in Developed and Developing Countries, ed.  G.  DeJong  and  R.  W.  Gardner, 149-85. New York: Pergamon Press.

Dunlop, J. B.  1993. Will a large-scale migration of Russians to the Russian Republic take place over

- the current decade? International  Migratim2 Review 27:605-29.

Fuchs,  R. J., and  G. J. Demko.  1978. The postwar mobility transition in Eastern  Europe. Geographical Review 68:171-82.

Goskomstat  RSFSR. 1990. Chislennost',  Sostav i Dvizhenie Naseleniya v RSFSR. Moscow: Respublikanskiy Informatsionno-Izdatel'skiy Tsentr.

Grandstaff,  P. J. 1980. lnterregional Migration in  the U.S.S.  R.,  Economic  Aspects, 1959-1970. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Hahn,  J. W. 1991. Local politics and political power in  Russia:  The case  of  Yaroslavl'. Soviet  Economy 7:32241.

Koehn,  P.  H.  1991. Refugees from Revolution:  US. Policy  and  Third-  World Migration. Boulder,  CO: Westview Press.

Larrabee, F.  S. 1992. Down and out in Warsaw and Budapest, Eastern Europe and  East-West  migration. In America's Strategy in a Changing World, ed. S. M. Lynn-Jones and S. E. Miller, 238-66.  Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Lewis, R. A,, and  R.  H. Rowland.  1979. Population Redimilmtion  in  the U.S.S.R.:  Impact on Society, 1897-1977.  New York: Praeger Publishers.

Lewis, R. A,, R. H .  Rowland, and R. S. Clem. 1976. Nationality and  Population change  in Russia  and  the USSR An Evaluation  of Census Data, 1897-1970. New York: Praeger Publishers.

Long, J.  F.  1981. Population  Deconcentration in the United States. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.

Long,  L. 1991.  Residential mobility differences among developed countries. International  Regional Science Review 14:13347.

Long,  L.,  and  D.  DeAre.  1980. Migration  to Nonmetropolitan Areas: Apprabing the Trend and Reasons for Moving. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.

Lorimer, F.  1946. The Population of  the Soviet  Uaion: H i s t o r y and  Pro..rpects. Geneva: League of Nations.

- Lysenko, V.  L. 1977. Vozdeystvie sotsial'no-bytovoy infrastruktury  na  migratsiyu  naselenie. Izvestiya Sibir.skogo Otdeleniya Academii Nauk SSSR 11:13 136.

Maksakova, L.  1986. Migrat-siya Naseleniya  Uzbekistana. Tashkent: Uzbekistan.

Marmora, L.  1988. Social  integration and  employment  of  Central  American  refugees.  In Wben Borders  Don't  Divide: Labor  Migration and  Refirgee Movements in  the Americas, ed  P.  Pessar,  142-55. New York: Center for Migration Studies.

McHugh, K.  E.,  and  P.  Gober.  1992.  Short-term dynamics  of  the  US.  migration  system,  19801988. Growth and  Change 23:42845.

- Mitchneck, B. A.  1990. Geographical and Economic Determinants  of  Interregional  Migration  in  the

USSR, 196551986. Ph.D. diss., Columbia University, New York, Ny.

Mitchneck, B. A.  1991. Geographical  and economic determinants  of  interregional  migration  in  the USSR,  1968-1985. Soviet  Geography 33:168-89.

Pavlova,  I.  1993.  Strannopriinmyy dom  na  Rostovskom trakte. Vash Vybor 2:22-3.

Pessar, P.  R.  1988. Introduction: Migration  myths and  new  realities. In Wez  Borders Don't  Divide: Labor  Migration  and Refugee Movements  in  the Americas, ed. P. Pessar, 1-7.  New York: Center for Migration Studies.

Plane, D. A.  1992. Age-composition change and the geographical dynamics of interregional migration in  the  US. Annals o f the  Association  of  American Geographers 82  :64-85.

- Plane,  D.  A. 1984. A systemic  demographic  efficiency  analysis of  U.S.  interstate population  exchange,  193  5-1980. Economic  Geography 60:294312.
- Plane, D. A., and P. A.  Rogerson.  1989. US. migration pattern responses to the oil glut and recession of  the  early  1980s: An  application  of  shift-share and  causative  matrix  techniques.  In Advances i n Regional Demography, ed. P. Congdon and P .   Batey, 258-80.  London: Belhaven Press.

Plane, D. A., and P. A. Rogerson. 1991. Tracking the baby boom,  the baby bust,  and  the echo generations: How age composition regulates U.S. migration. The Profesn'onal Geographer 43:416-30.

- Rybakovskiy, L. L. 1973. Regiunal'nyy Analiz Migratsii. Moscow: Statistika.
- Schwartz, L.  1993. Refugee flows and capacities for their accommodation. Post-Soviet Geography 3  8:2  3  9 4 9 .
- Shami,  S.  1993. The social  implications  of  population  displacement  and  resettlement:  An  overview with  a  focus  on  the  Arab  Middle East. Intemational Migration Review 27:4-33.

Smith, T. E.  1981. Commonwealth Migration. London: The MacMillan Press.

Topilin, A.  1988. Osnovnye  napravleniya mezhrespublikanskoy  migratsii  naseleniya. Planovoe  Khozyaysmo: 86-9 1.

- Vining,  D.  R., Jr.,  and  A.  Strauss.  1977. A demonstration that the current deconcentration of  population  in the United  States is  a clean break with the past. Environment and  Planning A 9:751-58.
- Vitkovskaya, G. S. 1994. Russians in  the  non-Russian  former  republics  and  forced  migration to Russia. Paper presented at Geodemography of the Former Soviet  Union:  A  Workshop/Seminar. Radford University, Radford, VA.
- Zayonchkovskaya, Zh. 1994. Recent internal migration  flows in  Russia. Paper presented  at  Geodemography of the Former Soviet Union: A Workshop/Seminar.  Radford University, Radford, VA.

Zaytsev,  V .   D.  1973. Problemy modelirovaniy  migratsii naseleniya.  In Migratsiyu Naseleniyu RSFSR, ed. A.  Z. Maykov,  3-31. Moscow: Statistika.

BETH MITCHNECK is Assistant  Professor in the Department of  Geography  and  Regional  Development  at  the  University  of  Arizona,  Tucson,  AZ 85721. Her research has  fociised  on population mi- gration  and  economic  development  in  the  Soviet Union and Russia.

DAVID A.  PLANE is Professor in the Department of  Geography  and  Regional  Development  at  the University  of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721. His research  has  focused  on population  migration  in the United States.

## Issues of Spatial and Temporal Variability in Climate Impact Studies

## Gregory  J. Carbone

Uniuersig o f South Carolina

The accuracy of  impact estimates relating  climate change to regional-scale agricultural production  is  constrained by  the  temporal  and  spatial  resolution  of  climate  change  projections.  Several  techniques  have  been  used  to compensate for these limitations in order to provide reasonable estimates of the impact of climate change on crop yield.  One approach assumes that variability over time  can  substitute for spatial variability, thereby  reducing the need to estimate the impacts at a  spatially dense network of  stationsan assumption that  has  not been generally tested.  This  study  evaluates  this  assumption  using  methods  similar to  those  employed  in  the  climate  impact literature. The findings suggest that current practices are generally defensible if  the  goal is to provide a range of possible  crop responses to climate change. However, the results also show that  the assumption is highly sensitive to  specific  interactions  at  the  soil-plant-atmosphere  interface  and,  consequently,  does  not  hold  under  certain circumstances. Key Words: climate change, agricultural impacts, scale, temporal variability, spatial variability.

## Introduction

oncern about potential climate change has C led  to a  number of studies addressing the possible  impacts  on  agriculture  (e.g.,  Santer 1985; Hodges  et  al.  1987; Smit  et  al.  1989; Cooter  1990; Curry  et  al.  1990; Rosenzweig 1990).  Two themes emerge from these studies. First, global climate change could alter agricultural productivity, requiring adjustment of certain agricultural  practices. Second,  present strategies used  to estimate climate impacts on agriculture have several shortcomings. Perhaps the most critical shortcoming involves accurate representation  of  climate  change  at  a  spatial scale where agricultural impacts are felt. Clearly,  the  impact  of  climate  change  over broad  agricultural regions should result  from the aggregated effects at local levels. Yet projecting climate change down to the local scale remains difficult. Many climate impact studies rely on general circulation model (GCM) output to  provide  initial  estimates  of climate change. Even  though  GCM results presently represent the most reliable and comprehensive means of  estimating potential climate change, the spatial and temporal resolution of the output is  typically too coarse to use directly with crop  yield  models  at  a  local  scale (Riebsame 1990; Rosenzweig 1990).

Most  researchers  have  acknowledged  the uncertainty  associated with  regional and local scale climate change scenarios and have recognized the need to present a range of potential impacts that conform  to  such  uncertainty (Cooter 1990;  Riebsame 1990;  Rosenzweig