## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Geographies of Social Capital: Catastrophe Experience, Risk Perception, and the Transformation of Social Space in Postearthquake Resettlements in Sichuan, China

Alex Y. Lo &amp; Lewis T. O. Cheung

To cite this article: Alex Y. Lo &amp; Lewis T. O. Cheung (2016): Geographies of Social Capital: Catastrophe Experience, Risk Perception, and the Transformation of Social Space in Postearthquake Resettlements in Sichuan, China, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2016.1159502

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2016.1159502

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 18 Apr 2016.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 38

- [x] View related articles

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

## Geographies of Social Capital: Catastrophe Experience, Risk Perception, and the Transformation of Social Space in Postearthquake Resettlements in Sichuan, China

Alex Y. Lo* and Lewis T. O. Cheung y

*

Kadoorie Institute, University of Hong Kong y Department of Social Sciences, The Hong Kong Institute of Education

This article explores the relationships between catastrophe experience and risk perception, social interaction, and household response to future catastrophes. Our main argument recognizes the geographical context in which social capital is formed and reproduced. Social relationships and norms adjust to the social landscape, which can be transformed by the spatial consequences of natural catastrophes. We therefore argue that sources of household resilience could be derived from the spatial transformation of social practices and not necessarily from catastrophe experience and risk perception directly. A case study was conducted in two postearthquake rural communities in China. The inquiry is primarily based on a household survey of 371 local residents and is further supported by an analysis of additional in-depth interviews and a review of key changes in the neighborhoods under study. The findings challenge the assumption that catastrophe experience and risk perception are related to residents' intentions to prepare for future catastrophes. Nonetheless, the relationship might be mediated by social relationships and social norms. Catastrophe experience and risk perception can be construed as a geographical contextual factor. Further analysis provides one example of such a factor: The spatial features of postearthquake resettlements have increased the proximity between residents. This shift facilitates neighborly interaction and risk communication across a neighborhood. We discuss the nonlinear, dynamic relationships between the variables examined and the grounding of social capital in space. Key Words: catastrophe experience, China, earthquake, household behavior, social interaction.

本 文 探 讨 灾 难 经 验 和 风 险 认 知 、 社 会 互 动 以 及 家 户 对 于 未来 灾 害 的 回 应 之 间 的 关 联 性 。 我 们 的 主 要 主 张 在 于 指 认 社 会 资 本 形 成 和 再 生 产 的 地 理 脉 络 。 社 会 关 係 和 常 规 适 应 社 会 地 景 ༌ 并 可 被 自 然 灾 害 的 空 间 后 果 所 改 变 。 我 们 因 而 主 张 ༌ 家 户 恢 復 力 的 来 源 ༌ 可 能 衍 生 自 社 会 实 践 的 空 间 变 迁 ༌ 而 不一 定 直 接 从 灾 难 经 验 和 风 险 认 知 而 来 。 我 们 对 中 国 两 座 经 历 大 地 震 的 农 村 社 区 进 行 案 例 研 究 。 研 究 问 题 主 要 是 根 据 三 百 七 十 一 位 在地 居 民 的 家 户 调 查 ༌ 并 由 额 外 的 深 度 访 谈 分 析 和 回 顾 研 究 的 邻 里 中 的 关 键 改 变 进 一 步 支 持 之 。 研 究 发 现 ༌ 挑 战 了 灾 害 经 验 和 风 险 认 知 关 乎 居 民 为 未来 的 灾 害 做 准 备 的 意 图 之 预 设 ༌ 但 此 般 关 係 仍 然 可 被 社 会 关 係 和 社 会 常 规 所 中介 。 灾 害 经 验 和 风 险 认 知 可 解 释 为 地 理 的 脉 络 因 素 。 进 一 步 的 分 析 ༌ 对 此 般 因 素 提 供 了一个 实 例 ༚ 地 震 后 再 安 置 的 空 间 特 徵 ༌ 增 加 了 居 民 之 间 的 亲 近 性 。 此 般 改 变 促 进 了 邻 里 间 的 邻 居 互 动 和 风 险 沟 通 。 我 们 探 讨 所 检 视 的 变 项 和 社 会 资 本 的 空 间 基 础 之 间 非 线 性 的 动 态 关 係 。 关 键 词 ： 灾 难 经 验 ༌ 中 国 ༌ 地 震 ༌ 家 户 行 为 ༌ 社 会 互 动 。

En este art  ıculo se exploran las relaciones entre la experiencia en cat  astrofe y la percepci  on del riesgo, la interacci  on social y la respuesta del hogar frente a futuras cat  astrofes. Nuestro argumento principal reconoce el contexto geogr  afico dentro del cual se forma y reproduce el capital social. Las relaciones sociales y las normas se ajustan al paisaje social, que puede ser transformado por las consecuencias espaciales que generan las cat  astrofes naturales. Por eso arg € uimos que las fuentes de resiliencia del hogar podr  ıan derivarse de la transformaci  on espacial de las pr  acticas sociales y no necesariamente de la experiencia en cat  astrofe y percepci  on del riesgo en forma directa. Se condujo un estudio de caso posterior a un terremoto en dos comunidades rurales de China. La indagaci  on est  a basada primariamente en un estudio de hogares de 371 residentes locales, apoyado adem  as por un an  alisis de entrevistas a profundidad y una revisi  on de cambios claves en los vecindarios bajo estudio. Los hallazgos cuestionan el supuesto de que la experiencia en cat  astrofe y la percepci  on del riesgo est  an relacionadas con las intenciones de los residentes de prepararse para futuras cat  astrofes. No obstante, la relaci  on podr  ıa estar mediada por las relaciones sociales y la normatividad social. La experiencia en cat  astrofe y la percepci  on del riesgo pueden interpretarse como un factor geogr  afico contextual. Un mayor an  alisis genera un ejemplo de tal

factor: Los rasgos espaciales de los reasentamientos posteriores al terremoto han incrementado la proximidad entre los residentes. Este cambio facilita la interacci  on vecinal y la comunicaci  on relacionada con el riesgo a trav  es del vecindario. Discutimos las relaciones din  amicas no lineales entre las variables examinadas y el afincamiento del capital social en el espacio. Palabras clave: experiencia en cat  astrofe, China, terremoto, conducta hogare ~ na, interacci  on social.

C ommunity resilience to environmental change can be enhanced by social capital, which captures the idea that the integrative features of social organizations, such as trust norms and social networks, form the basis of sustainable communities. Social capital has proven to be important for accelerating recovery from large-scale natural catastrophes, including disruptive earthquakes in Kobe, Japan, in 1995 and the deadly tsunami in South Asia in 2004 (Shaw and Goda 2004; Aldrich 2011a, 2011b). This article offers further evidence of the complex implications of social norms and social relationships for household resilience to earthquakes.

Major earthquakes create enormous physical damage and disrupt the spatial organization of human settlements and the livelihoods of local residents. The massive damage and disruption often result in forced relocation, with far-reaching societal consequences. Possible changes in social practice include the reinforcement of norms and the formation of new social networks (Aldrich 2011a, 2011b; Lo 2013). Some of these norms and networks can increase the capacity of resource-dependent societies to cope with impending environmental change and reduce their vulnerability to its impacts (Adger 2000, 2003; Pelling and High 2005; Pelling 2011; Oulahen et al. 2015).

The ways in which these sources of social capital evolve in a social space that is shocked and transformed by natural disturbances are highly complex. The past two decades have witnessed a heightened interest in exploring these complexities (Osbahr et al. 2008; Goulden et al. 2013). What remains contested are the pathways by which social norms and social relationships are linked to household responses that contribute to resilience. One of the issues that requires particular attention is how these social elements fit into existing conceptual frameworks that put considerable emphasis on catastrophe experience and risk perception.

The conventional view is that household response is shaped by the perception of risk, which is subject to social influences and peer pressures. Grothmann and Patt (2005), for example, described social discourse as a determinant of individuals' risk perception, which then directly influences their response to environmental change. Recent studies, however, have provided limited evidence of the direct effects of risk perception on behavior (Bubeck, Botzen, and Aerts 2012). The relationship between these elements is found to be nonlinear and mediated by social factors (Wolf et al. 2010; Frank, Eakin, and L  opez-Carr 2011; Lo 2013). This evidence moves the debate beyond an individualistic focus on human cognition toward a focus on social practice.

We advance the social focus by putting those social elements in a geographical context that recognizes individuals' experiences with environmental change and the associated spatial consequences. Social interactions among members of a community and the informal institutions that govern these interactions are spatially organized and shaped by their encounters with environmental stressors. We contribute to the debate by suggesting that household responses that contribute to resilience are a function of spatially shaped social interactions and have only a weak linkage to catastrophe experience and risk perception. Our framework draws a closer link between social capital and community resilience.

Specifically, this research examines the complex relationships between earthquake experience and risk perception, perceptions of social norms and relationships, and intended behavioral responses. We report a case study of two rural communities in Sichuan Province, China, which recorded massive damage during a 7.9magnitude earthquake in 2008. Mixed-method research approaches that combine quantitative and qualitative analyses have proven to be useful for investigating household decisions in China (Tian et al. 2015). Our research is based on an extensive survey of indigenous residents and a quantitative analysis. It is supported by a qualitative analysis based on additional in-depth interviews and a review of key changes in the neighborhoods under study. The results of the survey demonstrate an alternative pathway by which risk perception and social capital affect a household's intention to prepare for future catastrophes, and the supporting materials help to identify one of the most important spatial driving forces that leads to changes in social practice. The findings draw attention to the mediating role of social practice in influencing the adoption of coping strategies and enhancing household resilience.

In the next section, we review the literature and further elaborate on the problem being addressed and the conceptual premises. The study area and research methods are then described. The ensuing section presents the results of the survey and a regression analysis based on structural equation modeling. These results are further discussed in conjunction with observations from face-to-face interviews and wider changes in the neighborhoods. We then discuss the nonlinear, dynamic relationships between the variables examined herein and the grounding of social capital in space.

## The Geographical Context of Social Capital

## Natural Catastrophe and the Changing Social Landscape

Social capital is generated and accumulated in the processes of social interaction and engagement with social networks and institutions, both formal and informal, yielding a wide range of economic and societal benefits. Putnam (1995) defined social capital as an enabler of collective action: 'features of social lifenetworks, norms and trust-that enable participants to act together more effectively to pursue shared objectives' (664-65). He suggested that these networks, norms, and relationships of trust can foster coordination and communication among members of a community.

By enabling individuals to act collectively and effectively, social capital plays a central role in the lived experience of coping with catastrophes. Adger (2003) described it as a 'glue' that brings together individuals in coping with unforeseen and periodic hazardous events. Social norms and networks act as informal institutions, influencing the ways in which individuals and communities respond to the shocks and stresses experienced by the social-ecological system (Adger 2003; Pelling and High 2005). These networked relationships enable the sharing of knowledge, risk, and information and can strengthen solidarity and allow claims for reciprocity in times of crisis. Because 'the quality of relationships between individuals is shaped by, and itself shapes the character of, the contexts in which they live' (Mohan and Mohan 2002, 193), social capital is grounded in a particular place and time. It is therefore a geographical concept (Adger 2003).

The grounding of social networks and norms in space and time means that their formation and reproduction can be driven or interrupted by changes in physical and spatial conditions. Research has found the aftermath of catastrophes to be an important driver of changes in social practice, with both intrinsic and extrinsic dimensions. The motivation of victims to seek help from, or offer help to, each other is intrinsic. Individuals' propensity to cooperate with each other increases because individual efforts are far from adequate for mitigating massive impacts on the entire system. Neighborly interaction is one form of social activity that is crucial for victims to counter deteriorating physical conditions. An openness to deeper social engagement is further reinforced by individuals' past experience with devastating catastrophic events (Yamamura 2010; Bihari and Ryan 2012). Thus, major earthquakes often lead to the formation of new social organizations and the enhancement of cooperation between governments and local communities (Shaw and Goda 2004; Solnit 2010). Crises open up new social spaces by increasing the demand for collective and coordinated responses that individuals alone fail to deliver.

Moreover, new social spaces might gain impetus from postdisaster reconstruction. The new urbanism literature has suggested that spatial proximity is an important extrinsic factor determining the quality of social capital in a community. As social ties between members of neighborhoods tend to form based on proximity, certain features of the built environment that bring houses and residents closer to each other are conducive to fostering social interaction (Cabrera and Najarian 2015). Sidewalk continuity, for example, can foster neighborly interactions (Wilkerson et al. 2012). Talen (1999) noted that patterns of social interaction in a neighborhood are shaped by the specific design elements of the residential space and the surrounding public space that encourage residents to leave their houses and go out into the public sphere. Porches, for example, can generate pedestrian traffic by projecting the human presence within a house to those passing by on the street. Neighborhoods with a clearly defined center and clear boundaries can engender a sense of community and neighborliness. Similarly, communal gathering places can serve as a counterpressure to community fragmentation and nurture a sense of place (Talen 1999).

Although spatial organization is not sufficient for building social capital, it is one key factor that warrants consideration in the study of community resilience to geophysical catastrophes, notably earthquakes. Earthquakes disrupt the spatial structure of neighborhoods. Postdisaster housing arrangements and

Figure 1. Schematic representations of conceptual frameworks. Source : (A) Authors; (B) partial representation of Grothmann and Patt's (2005, 204) conceptual framework.

<!-- image -->

the structure of new housing determine the ways in which victims, other residents, and local volunteers interact with each other. Temporary shelters and long-term housing that group together survivors from the same area are key to maintaining existing stocks of social capital (Aldrich 2011b). As we show later in this article, this effect can be achieved by building a new settlement for the entire village and placing occupants' units closer to one other. An appropriate degree of spatial proximity between victims can help build solidarity within the community.

Therefore, the demand as well as opportunities for social interaction might increase in the wake of a major earthquake. Resilient communities develop new norms and bring new features to the built environment to help victims cope with the dreadful consequences of earthquakes and prepare for future shocks. Catastrophes could result in the transformation of the social landscapes on which networks and norms are grounded. As such, individuals' experiences with catastrophes and the resulting spatial reorganization of a neighborhood have important implications for social practice, which is itself a determinant of the intention to adopt strategies for coping with environmental threats, as described in Figure 1A.

## The Contested Role of Social Interaction

The view that social practice is a dynamic mediating factor embedded into the geographical context, however, is not clearly reflected in other conceptual formulations. The social context in which interactions between individuals occur and social norms and relationships are formed is often construed as a background factor (Figure 1B). Knowledge about the ways in which the social context is shaped by the consequences of catastrophes remains incomplete. Underlying these formulations are two assumptions. First, it is assumed that social interaction influences individuals' perception of risk. Second, risk perception determines behavioral adjustments. These assumptions and their causal relationship were articulated by Renn (2011): 'Social interactions can heighten or attenuate perceptions of risk. By shaping perceptions of risk, they also influence risk behaviour' (156). This argument suggests that risk perceptions mediate between social interactions and behavioral changes, rather than social interactions themselves functioning as mediators. Other empirical reports that draw on the same conceptual framework adopted by Renn (2011) 1 also tend to focus on how societal processes affect risk perceptions (Pidgeon, Kasperson, and Slovic 2003).

Although nuanced differences exist as to how social discourse is understood and positioned in relation to catastrophe experience and risk perception, some scholars portray a linear relationship between these attributes. In a widely discussed paper, Grothmann and Patt (2005) proposed a model known as the model of private proactive adaptation to climate change (MPPACC). The MPPACC defines behavioral adaptation to environmental change as a function of risk perception (or threat appraisal), which is amenable to social discourse, among other factors. As Grothmann and Patt (2005) explained, 'We include the social discourse (or more specifically: the perception of the social discourse) as a determinant of people's risk perception and perceived adaptive capacity in our model' (205).

Like Renn (2011), Grothmann and Patt (2005) recognized that the social discourse is subject to what individuals hear and encounter in interacting with friends, neighbors, and society at large. What remains unspecified is how the perception of social discourse is constructed upon experience with-and perception of-environmental change.

Evidence of the effects of risk perception or threat appraisal on behavioral response poses challenges to these assumptions. In China, Wong and Zhao (2001) suggested that direct experience with flooding does not necessarily result in protective behavioral responses. Frank, Eakin, and L  opez-Carr's (2011) Mexican study shows that 'risk perception and experience with particular hazards alone remain insufficient to motivate adaptation [to climate change]' (75) and that social identity plays a mediating role. This finding is corroborated by a recent Australian study (Lo 2013). Bubeck, Botzen, and Aerts (2012) reviewed sixteen empirical studies about flood risk mitigation worldwide and concluded that risk perception is a weak predictor of mitigation behavior. This converging evidence from multiple sources calls for further investigation into the role of risk experience and perception as well as examination of the pathway by which social interactions or discourse influence behavioral response, as described by Renn (2011) and Grothmann and Patt (2005) earlier.

One element that has been missing from these other formulations is the geographical context. These studies do not explicitly recognize that social interactions, norms, and networks are sites for learning from grounded experience. Individuals' experiences with and expectations about environmental changeincluding that of the natural and built environments-can shape social discourse or, more accurately, the perception of social discourse (Grothmann and Patt 2005). These experiences and expectations can lead to changes in the organization of social practice. One possible change, for example, is the provision of more communal spaces in postearthquake reconstruction.

Based on the assumption that social relationships and norms are derived from grounded experience, we argue that these social elements are not merely a background factor but a mediating factor that links one variable with another. The perception of these social elements can shape and be shaped by the perception of, and experience with, changes in the natural and built environments. The reinforcement of perceptions provides an alternative pathway linking intended action with risk perception and catastrophe experience (Figure 1A), thus addressing the limitations of other conceptual accounts, such as Grothmann and Patt (2005).

Our primary research hypothesis is that catastrophe experience and risk perception are related to perceptions of social relationships and norms, but only the latter are associated with the intention to adopt coping strategies. This hypothesis can be used to demonstrate the mediating effects previously discussed by Frank, Eakin, and L  opez-Carr (2011) and Lo (2013). Moreover, we examine how the quality of social capital is affected by the spatial reorganization of a neighborhood after a catastrophic earthquake. Evidence was solicited from a case study in Sichuan Province, China.

## Case Study: Sichuan Wolong ( 四 川 卧 龙 )

## Location and Demographics

Sichuan is an inland province located in the southwestern part of China. The province recorded a gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of 32,617 Chinese yuan (approximately US$5,030) in 2013, which is lower than the national estimate of 43,320 Chinese yuan (approximately US$6,681) in the same year (National Bureau of Statistics of China 2015). Our study area is a Special Administrative Region located in Sichuan Province, known as Wolong National Nature Reserve (30  45 0 -31  25N,102  52 0 -103  24 0 E; hereafter, Wolong; see Figure 2). Wolong has a total area of 2,000 km 2 and is a national protected area best known for its large population of giant pandas. The region has been under the provincial government's direct control since it was established in 1983.

According to a recent report (Sichuan Academy of Forestry 2014), Wolong has a total population of 5,216 and a relatively large proportion of ethnic minorities, namely, Tibetan ( 藏 族 ), Qiang ( 羌 族 ), and Hui ( 回 族 ), who account for more than 85 percent of the total population. All of the local residents live in the two main towns, Wolong Town ( 卧 龙 镇 ) and Gengda Town ( 耿 达 镇 ), which are home to 2,292 and 2,924 residents, respectively. By the end of 2013, Wolong's GDP was estimated at 52.7 million Chinese yuan, or US$8.62 million, and the GDP per capita was 6,888 Chinese yuan, or US$1,127, which is far below the provincial and national estimates. A total of 4,750 residents, or 91 percent of the total population, work in agriculture. Agricultural incomes derived from crop production, forestry, and pastures account for 42.4 percent of the region's total income (Sichuan Academy of Forestry 2014).

Figure 2. Location of study areas. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

## Sichuan Earthquakes

Wolong falls within the geographic boundaries of Wenchuan County, which was the epicenter of the catastrophic 7.9-magnitude earthquake that struck the region on 12 May 2008.

According to the International Disaster Database (Guha-Sapir, Below, and Hoyois 2014), the Wenchuan earthquake was the most destructive natural catastrophe in China since 1976 and one of the most damaging earthquakes in human history in terms of socioeconomic losses. Damage costs amounted to US$85 billion (Guha-Sapir, Below, and Hoyois 2014). Swiss Re, a global reinsurance company, reported a larger number; total economic losses were estimated at US$137 billion, whereas insured losses were only US$0.4 billion (i.e., 0.3 percent insured; Swiss Re 2014). Therefore, the economic damage accounted for 1.9 percent to 3.1 percent of China's GDP in 2008: 30,067 billion Chinese yuan (National Bureau of Statistics of China 2009) or US$4,410 billion.

Massive casualties were the worst consequence; 87,449 people died in the earthquake event, 375,000 were injured, 15 million people were rendered homeless, 5 million houses were destroyed, and 18,500 schools collapsed (Swiss Re 2014). For comparison, Japan's 11 March 2011 earthquake and tsunami killed 18,520 individuals and injured 5,893; 0.4 million people lost their homes. Although the earthquake in Japan was the world's costliest seismic disaster in the past decade, approximately 16.7 percent of the total economic damage was insured (Swiss Re 2014). Thus, the Wenchuan earthquake was relatively more destructive in terms of the number of casualties and the relative size of economic losses.

Sichuan was hit by another major earthquake on 20 April 2013, commonly known as the Lushan or Ya'an earthquake. The Lushan earthquake was measured at a magnitude of 7.0, and the epicenter was located in Sichuan's Lushan County, which is approximately 85 km from southwestern Wenchuan County. According to Swiss Re (2014), the 2013 earthquake resulted in less damage than the 2008 event: 214 deaths and 13,484 injuries. Nearly US$7 billion in economic losses were recorded, but only 0.4 percent of these losses were insured.

Both the 2008 and 2013 earthquakes were considered economic disasters. The massive damage further impoverished the poverty-stricken agricultural communities in Sichuan. Sun et al. (2010) reported that the Wenchuan earthquake more than doubled the poverty rate of fortythree counties, and farmers' per capita net income in these areas decreased from 1,873 Chinese yuan (approximately US$305) at the end of 2007 to less than 1,000

Chinese yuan (approximately US$163) in the aftermath of the 2008 catastrophe. Both events suggest that China's southwestern population remains economically vulnerable to seismic hazards. Enhancing the community's economic resilience to unavoidable geophysical hazards, such as earthquakes, is imperative.

## Research Methods

## Field work

Our case study includes a household survey in Wolong and a quantitative analysis. During the spring and summer of 2014, we visited Wolong Town and Gengda Town, which each include three administrative villages. According to local residents and available records, until 2008, these six villages had not experienced a major earthquake of a magnitude of 6.5 or above during the past few decades. They experienced significant losses during the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake event, however, due to their close proximity (i.e., within 40 km) to the epicenter. The two towns recorded similar levels of damage as they are located within a relatively small geographic area.

Weinvited residents of these villages to participate in face-to-face interviews based on a structured questionnaire. Six college students were recruited as research assistants. These student research assistants were fluent in the local dialect and were trained in the procedure and etiquette of face-to-face interviews. Each assistant was assigned to one village and visited every household in that village accompanied by a local government officer from the Wolong Nature Reserve Administration, which granted permission for the interviews and offered logistical support. One member of each household age sixteen or older was invited to complete the questionnaire. The household surveys were conducted on weekdays and weekends. Each interview, on average, lasted fifteen minutes. All of the interviewees received a small gift as a token of appreciation after completing the survey.

As a follow-up survey, we returned to the study sites in November 2014 and conducted in-depth interviews with residents of the four largest villages in Wolong Town and Gengda Town. Each village has approximately 80 to 100 households, from which we randomly selected six to eight households and invited them to participate in the research. The sample consists of twenty-six individuals and mainly includes heads of household because some of the interview questions concerned household decisions, which in Chinese villages often fall under the domestic authority of the head of household. Each interview lasted approximately twenty minutes. Based on these individual interviews, we reviewed and observed the key structural changes in the study areas damaged by the 2008 earthquake.

## Survey Instrument

The primary survey instrument is a structured questionnaire that includes three sets of questions, described next, that was originally presented in the Chinese language.

Residents' Propensity to Make Arrangements for Coping with Future Earthquakes

Five closed-ended questions elicited respondents' propensity to make arrangements that could reduce potential economic losses from major earthquakes or help them to recover faster (Table 1). Each question

Table 1. Residents' propensity to make arrangements for coping with future earthquakes

|                           | Description                                                                                                                                                           | Range   |    M |   SD |
|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|------|------|
| Diversify incomes         | Would you try to explore alternative sources of income that are unlikely to be affected by strong earthquakes?                                                        | 1-5     | 3.81 | 1.12 |
| Take out insurance        | How likely would you take out insurance, if available to you, that covers part of your potential losses due to strong earthquakes?                                    | 1-5     | 3.68 | 1.18 |
| Seek remittance (family)  | Would you ask your family members living outside the town to send you money (remittance), if your livelihood is severely affected by the consequences of earthquakes? | 1-5     | 2.98 | 1.38 |
| Seek remittance (friends) | Would you ask your friends to send you money (remittance), if your livelihood is severely affected by the consequences of earthquakes?                                | 1-5     | 2.82 | 1.24 |
| Acquire liquid assets     | Would you try to acquire more liquid assets (to cope with catastrophes such as earthquakes)?                                                                          | 1-5     | 2.11 | 1.11 |

Note: N D 371. All responses measured on a five-point scale ranging from 1 ( definitely not ) to 5 ( definitely ).

Table 2. Perceptions of social norms and social relationship

|                     | Description                                                                                                  | Range   |    M |   SD |
|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|------|------|
| Social norms        | Do you think . . . would want you to prepare for strong earthquakes? (1 D absolutely not to 5 D absolutely ) |         |      |      |
|                     | Your family                                                                                                  | 1-5     | 3.89 | 0.92 |
|                     | Your friends                                                                                                 | 1-5     | 3.84 | 0.88 |
|                     | Other people in Wolong                                                                                       | 1-5     | 3.72 | 0.9  |
| Social relationship | How is your relationship . . . (1 D very bad to 5 D very good )                                              |         |      |      |
|                     | With other members of your family?                                                                           | 1-5     | 4.49 | 0.73 |
|                     | With your friends?                                                                                           | 1-5     | 4.19 | 0.77 |
|                     | With other people in Wolong?                                                                                 | 1-5     | 3.87 | 0.8  |

Note: N D 371.

presented a possible option or opportunity, namely, diversifying sources of income to spread risk, taking out insurance, seeking remittance to maintain livelihood, and acquiring liquid assets that can be sold for cash. In poor villages, regular welfare payments cannot be taken for granted, as the rural government and civil society are poorly resourced. Residents must rely on their own efforts in spreading risk and must make use of personal networks. The design of these questionnaires was informed by key research reports, notably Alinovi, Mane, and Romano (2009) and the World Bank (2010). All of these questions were read in the context of the earthquakes in Sichuan. Responses were recorded using a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1 ( definitely not ) to 5 ( definitely ). Higher scores denote stronger intention to adopt these strategies.

Residents' Perceptions of Social Norms and Social Relationships

Subjective perceptions of social norms and social relationships were prompted by six questions (Table 2).

These questions were equally divided into two groups, one concerning the social-normative effects on respondents' decisions to make arrangements for coping with earthquakes (e.g., 'Do you think your family would want you to prepare for strong earthquakes?') and the second on the quality of one's social relationships (e.g., 'How is your relationship with other people in Wolong?'). Responses were recorded using a five-point Likert scale. Higher scores mean that the individuals were more likely to be subject to social norms and to have closer relationships with the people they know. Although these items do not represent the full range of social capital attributes, they capture the key aspects of social interactions and social ties that are regarded as important factors influencing risk perception and behavior and they therefore can help us examine our research hypothesis.

Residents' Risk Perceptions and Experiences with Earthquakes

Another set of survey items recorded respondents' risk perceptions and actual experiences with

Table 3. Risk perception and actual damage due to major earthquake

|                                    | Description                                                                                                                | Range   |    M |   SD |
|------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|------|------|
| Earthquake risk perception         |                                                                                                                            |         |      |      |
| Perceived likelihood of earthquake | How likely is Wolong to experience a magnitude-7 earthquake in the next ten years? (1 D very unlikely to 5 D very likely ) | 1-5     | 2.28 | 0.83 |
| Perceived severity of damage       | How much personal damage would another magnitude-7 earthquake cause? (1 D no damage to 5 D extremely damaging )            | 1-5     | 4.11 | 0.98 |
| Earthquake experience              |                                                                                                                            |         |      |      |
| Earthquake victim                  | Did you or your family suffer any damage due to a major earthquake in the past ten years? (0 D no , 1 D yes )              | 0-1     | 0.94 | 0.23 |
| Severity of actual damage          | How damaging was the last major earthquake to you and your family? (1 D no damage to 5 D extremely damaging )              | 1-5     | 4.2  | 1.01 |

Note: N D 371.

earthquakes (Table 3). Two questions measured perceptions of the likelihood and severity of another major earthquake: 'How likely is Wolong to experience a magnitude 7 earthquake in the next ten years?' and 'How much personal damage would it cause?' Because causality cannot be determined by testing the statistical correlation between perceived risk and perceived social norms and relationships, we used a qualitative measure of actual experience with major earthquakes to support the interpretation. Whether one had been affected by earthquakes is unlikely to be affected by perceived social norms and relationships. Additionally, whether one had been affected by earthquakes is closely related to how people perceive future risks. Therefore, this measurement allows a logical inference and can be used to indirectly examine the conjecture that risk perception influences the perception of social norms and relationships. Because nearly all of the Wolong residents had experienced a major earthquake, we formulated the questions about actual experience in terms of incurred damage instead of whether they had earthquake experience to provide adequate variation for statistical analysis. A binary (yes-no) item was used to ascertain whether the respondents had incurred any damage from a major earthquake in the past ten years. This item was followed by an inquiry into the extent of the actual damage: 'How damaging was the last major earthquake to you and your family?'

The responses to these questions form three sets of statistical variables. Our working hypothesis is that perception of social norms and social relationships (A) and earthquake risk perception and experience (B) are correlated with one another, but only the former is associated with the propensity to make arrangements for coping with future earthquakes (C). We analyzed the structural relationships among these three sets of variables.

## Results

A total of 425 Wolong residents from six villages were invited to participate in the household survey; 380 agreed to be interviewed. Only 371 individuals completed the interviews, yielding an effective response rate of 89 percent. The sample therefore consists of 371 observations. Before presenting the results of our analysis, we briefly describe the socioeconomic characteristics of the respondents and discuss the test variables. Due to space limitations, we dispense with detailed breakdowns and focus on the associations between the variables.

## Descriptive Statistics

The average respondent was forty-one years old and had lived in Wolong for thirty-six years, thus suggesting that the majority of the respondents were native. The average and median monthly incomes were 1,578 Chinese yuan (approximately US$255) and 1,000 Chinese yuan (approximately US$161), respectively, which are well below the provincial average of 2,718 Chinese yuan (approximately US$419; National Bureau of Statistics of China 2015). More than half of the respondents were female (54.5 percent). Many had received only elementary education (43.1 percent), and some had attended middle school (32.5 percent), whereas less than 10 percent had received postsecondary education. The sample includes 252 (67.9 percent) ethnic Tibetans and only 97 (26.1 percent) individuals of Han origin. As many as 70.6 percent of the respondents engaged in agricultural activities, and only 38.8 percent received all or part of their income from nonagricultural sources.

The statistics for the three sets of variables are displayed in Tables 1 through 3. The mean scores of the five items related to the propensity to make arrangements for catastrophes ranged from 2.11 to 3.81. According to these scores (Table 1), the respondents had a greater intention to prepare for catastrophes by diversifying their income and assets and taking out insurance. The tendencies for seeking remittance from family and friends are not clear. Acquiring liquid assets was a relatively less common strategy.

The three items related to perceived social norms yielded consistent results, with mean scores ranging from 3.72 to 3.89 (Table 2). This outcome suggests that the respondents generally felt that they were subject to expectations from family, friends, and other individuals in Wolong to prepare for a major earthquake. The scores of the other three items related to perceived social relationships ranged from 3.87 to 4.49. In general, the respondents indicated good relationships with all of these three groups-particularly with their families.

The mean scores for risk perception (Table 3) suggest that the likelihood of another magnitude-7 earthquake was perceived to be low (2.28); however, the respondents indicated that should another major earthquake occur, they expected it to be highly damaging (4.11). The overwhelming majority (0.94, or 94 percent) of the respondents had recorded losses during a major earthquake in the past ten years. Actual damage to the household was significant (4.20).

<!-- image -->

Allcoefficients are standardised.RMSEA=0.05,CFI=0.91,IFI=0.92,x²/df=2.04

Figure 3. Path analysis for propensity to act, perceptions of social relationship and social norms, and risk perception. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

***, ** and * denote significance at .001, .01 and.05levels respectively.n.s.: notsignificant at .05level

Allcoefficients are standardised.RMSEA=0.05,CFI=0.92,IFI=0.92,x²/df=1.98

Figure 4. Path analysis for propensity to act, perceptions of social relationship and social norms, and earthquake experience. (Color figure available online.)

## Structural Relationships between Key Variables

A path analysis examined the structural relationships between the variables based on structural equation modeling. Each of the conceptual components described earlier is defined as an unobserved, latent variable in the model that is predicted through the observed variables measured by the questionnaire. Each latent variable is assigned a label, such as earthquake risk perception and propensity. The relationships between the latent variables are assessed in terms of standardized coefficients and significance levels, which indicate the strength of association between variables.

Figure 3 presents the path analysis for risk perception (earthquake risk perception), perceived social norms (social norms), social relationships (social relationship), and the propensity to make arrangements for coping with future earthquakes (propensity). The latent variable earthquake risk perception, which is predicted through the perceived likelihood and severity of future earthquakes, was not a significant predictor of propensity. This variable is significantly related to social relationship, however. Conversely, there is a strong association between social relationship and social norms, and both predicted propensity. The model variables explained 16 percent of the variation in propensity.

To check for model fitness, we computed the following estimates: root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), comparative fit index (CFI), incremental fit index (IFI), and chi-square relative to degrees of freedom ( x 2 / df ). As a rule of thumb, the RMSEA should be lower than or at least close to 0.05, with the CFI exceeding 0.93, IFI exceeding 0.90, and x 2 / df below 2.00. Our model achieved an RMSEA value of 0.05, CFI D 0.91, IFI D 0.92, and x 2 / df D 2.04, thus suggesting that it came very close to the usual benchmark.

Figure 5. Observed relationships between model variables.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4 shows the second model, which was created by replacing earthquake risk perception with earthquake experience. Consistent with the first model, earthquake experience was not associated with propensity but had some impact on social relationship and social norms. Propensity was a function of social norms but not social relationship. These variables explained 19 percent of the variation in the dependent variable. The second model achieved an RMSEA value of 0.05, CFI D 0.92, IFI D 0.92, and x 2 / df D 1.98.

A schematic summary of these results is presented in Figure 5. Both models indicate that the propensity to make arrangements is a function of perceived social norms and, to a lesser extent, social relationships. Risk perception and damage experience do not predict propensity and perception of social norms. Nonetheless, both are related to social relationships. Note that experience with actual damage should be viewed as a cause rather than an effect, as it is a past event and therefore unlikely to be affected by the perception of present social relationships, whereas earthquake risk perception tends to be subjective and therefore causality cannot be determined for this variable. These results imply that although catastrophe experience and perception do not produce significant effects on intended behavior, they might create indirect impacts by shaping perceptions of social norms and social relationships, which play a mediating role.

These results beg the question of how the consequences of a major earthquake might intervene in local residents' social interactions. A structural change in the built environment caused by the catastrophic event in 2008 offers one possible explanation.

## Spatial Proximity in the Postearthquake Resettlements

The aftermath of the Wenchuan earthquake resulted in the creation of denser neighborhoods, bringing positive changes to the social landscape. Before the 2008 earthquake, most Wolong villagers, particularly low-income earners and farmers, lived in poorly maintained cottages. Figure 6 shows an aerial photo of some of these cottages, which are now used for nonresidential purposes (e.g., storage) or have even been abandoned since the emergency evacuation during the earthquake event or the managed relocation afterward. Although these detached cottages were situated at a short, walkable distance from one other and there might be more than one household in adjacent houses, their scattered distribution did not provide

Figure 6. Old cottages in Wolong Town, China. Source : 2015 DigitalGlobe, CNES/Astrium; Map data Ó 2015 Google. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

good conditions for frequent visits and social interactions among multiple households. Considering the mountainous terrain of Sichuan and the poor infrastructure in some of its remote areas, large group meetings and daily encounters were particularly difficult for those living farther away from each other.

Many rural residents lost their homes during the Wenchuan earthquakes or found them to be no longer habitable. With a generous supply of external financial support amounting to 2.2 billion Chinese yuan, or US$0.35 billion (Sichuan Academy of Forestry 2014), the Wolong government was able to rebuild the infrastructure and resettle affected residents by constructing a number of new villages. Larger resettlement sites accommodate fifty to eighty households each; an example is presented in Figure 7. Houses on these sites are more closely packed than were their predecessors. Many have multiple (two or three) stories and a total area of approximately

Figure 7. A resettlement site in Gengda Town, Sichuan, China. Source : 2015 DigitalGlobe, CNES/Astrium; Map data Ó 2015 Google. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 8. New houses in two resettlement sites in Wolong Town, Sichuan, China. Location: Hejiadadi ( 何 家 大 地 ) (left) and Guanlaojie ( 关 老 街 ) (right). Source : Authors. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

200 to 500 m 2 per household (i.e., house allocation depends on household size). Figure 8 provides a closer look at these houses, which are typically semidetached or terraced. As of the middle of 2014, at least 757 houses have been built (Sichuan Academy of Forestry 2014).

Importantly, these resettlements provide a spatially bounded community with denser neighborhoods and more clearly defined communal spaces. One of the key planning principles was to rehouse affected residents who were originally from the same culture, community, or village in the same resettlement or in nearby sites whenever possible. Thus, efforts were made to avoid neighborhood fragmentation and mass migration. A long-term effect is that individual residents who used to live at a distance from each other now live in closer proximity to their neighbors.

## Spatially Enhanced Social Interactions

Our in-depth interviews with twenty-six residents from these new villages reveal that resettlement has contributed to a subtle change in the social landscape. Respondents were asked, among other openended questions, how the major earthquake affected the social relationships among neighbors. We found that, in general, there is a moderately strong level of trust among villagers, and they know most of their neighbors within the community. Neighborly activities are frequent. Most of the respondents (fifteen out of twenty-six) indicated that social relationships had improved since the 2008 earthquake, and closer proximity was the primary reason.

Whereas there is more interior space within the respondents' new houses, the distance between houses and neighbors has been reduced. A farmer from Wolong Town (female, age thirty-eight) responded that people moved to the resettlement after the earthquake and 'live together,' making everyday contact more frequent and the community livelier. As shown in the preceding figures, these new villages are essentially gated communities with small pockets of built communal spaces where neighbors can visit with each other every day, whereas their former homes put them in disparate locations. Another resident of Wolong (male, age sixty-seven) said that they 'live and eat' closer to each other and meet their neighbors on the street more often than before. Due to the closer proximity, there are more opportunities for chu  anm  en ( 串 门 ), or casual visits to a neighbor's home, and more neighborly interactions. Many other respondents mentioned that they have better social relationships because they now live closer to each other and see each other more often than before.

These spatially enhanced neighborly activities, such as chu  anm  en , are important for enhancing communication among members of the community and strengthening mutual support. In the wake of the major earthquake, Wolong residents became more aware of hazard risks (including those of earthquakes as well as landslides), and the new social space within resettlements is one of the main channels through which risk information is communicated. The respondents were asked whether they observed any change in the frequency of exchange and communication related to hazard risks after the 2008 event; most responded affirmatively. Apart from chu  anm  en , residents indicated that they often participate in l  ongm  enzh  en ( 龙 门 阵 ; literally dragon squad), which refers to an informal or semiformal discussion or debate about a variety of community affairs among a group of people, usually men. As the higher neighborhood densities reduce the efforts required for getting together, there are more opportunities for residents to participate in

l  ongm  enzh  en . According to a local driver (male, age twenty-six), these gatherings function as a primary means by which residents access risk information, exchange opinions, and make recommendations to village leaders. The new spatial setting is conducive to informing residents of potential threats to their community and livelihoods.

Although these casual visits and regular meetings do not always cover issues related to natural hazards, as indicated by another respondent (female, age fortyone), they are crucial for spreading useful information about a wide variety of community topics. By promoting access to this information hub and speaking to informed individuals, residents know where to seek help should the need arise and become messengers themselves. Therefore, the in situ resettlement has led to the reorganization of space by creating new sites for social interactions. By increasing the spatial proximity of residents, resettlement has strengthened the existing social networks and facilitated social interactions within communities.

## Discussion

Catastrophic earthquakes are rare, but the povertystricken rural communities in Sichuan must address a wide range of risks, including not only future earthquakes but also landslides and climate change impacts on agricultural production. Household preparation for unforeseen changes in livelihood might be driven by actual experience with, and perceptions of, an impending threat. These experiences and perceptions can be enhanced or attenuated by social interactions and the sociocultural context (Kasperson et al., 1988; Renn et al., 1992). Nonetheless, there are multiple interpretations for the relationships between these elements, and they remain a contested issue in scholarly debates.

The conceptual understanding that we seek to advance is consistent with a context-dependent perspective about these social elements. Numerous studies have been conducted to ascertain how social systems are transformed in response to environmental change and its local consequences (Pelling 2011). A key concept advanced by these studies is the notion of social capital, the formation and reproduction of which is regarded as largely dependent on the geographical context (Adger 2003; Pelling and High 2005; Goulden et al. 2013; Lo et al. 2015). Following Mohan and Mohan (2002), we argue that even as aspects of social capital such as social interactions, networks, and norms can create various impacts on humans' subjective experiences with natural catastrophes, they are simultaneously a product of such experiences; that is, the process is dynamic. Social networks and norms are grounded in space; thus, their formation and reproduction can be driven or interrupted by changes in physical and spatial conditions.

We began by recalling two standard assumptions. The conventional view is that catastrophe experience and perception first determine behavioral responses (Kunreuther 2006; Kunreuther, Meyer, and Michel-Kerjan 2009) and, second, that catastrophe experience and perception are themselves determined by social interactions (Renn 2011) or the perception of social discourse (Grothmann and Patt 2005). Our household survey offers little evidence of the first assumption; that is, neither actual experience with a major earthquake nor a perception of earthquake risks is associated with a propensity to make economic arrangements to cope with future earthquakes. This finding corroborates similar observations reported by Frank, Eakin, and L  opez-Carr (2011), Bubeck, Botzen, and Aerts (2012), and Lo (2013). As the surveyed villages in Wolong were located within a small area and the residents have similar experiences with earthquakes, there is limited statistical variance in the earthquake victim variable, which might have contributed to the insignificant relationship between earthquake experience and propensity to adopt coping strategies. The second assumption is partially supported; that is, perceptions of social relationships correlate with catastrophe experience and perception. Earthquake experience is likely to be a cause rather than an effect, however. Although causality cannot be determined for risk perception, it is plausible to suggest that these social perceptions are influenced by earthquake experience.

In Wolong, past experience with environmental change, driven by earthquakes, is part of the geographical context in which social interactions among villagers occur and social relationships develop. New neighborhoods were formed in the wake of the 2008 earthquake and, consequently, spaces for social interactions were reorganized. Changes in social relationships run parallel to social expectations, which nonetheless do not correlate with catastrophe experience and perception. In our case study, therefore, past experience with environmental change does not directly influence the propensity to act or perceptions of social norms; rather, experience has an indirect effect by shaping social relationships (see Figure 5).

Our further analysis provides one example of changes in the built environment that have shaped the social

space. The 2008 Wenchuan earthquake disrupted the social life of neighborhoods. One of the long-term consequences, however, can be described as an unexpected spatial propinquity effect, which is a term borrowed from Cabrera and Najarian (2015). According to the new urbanists such as Talen (1999) and Cabrera and Najarian (2015), social capital is a function of spatial proximity between social contacts, such as neighbors. The Wenchuan earthquake directly contributed to the construction of permanent resettlements. By increasing neighborhood densities, these resettlements created a new social space that is conducive to neighborly interaction. Resettlements strengthened the spatial norms and the neighborhoods' physical conditions that promote everyday contact between residents who formerly lived in disparate locations prior to the major earthquake. As part of the geographical context, spatial reorganization proves to have significant implications for patterns of social interactions and the quality of social capital.

As such, the major earthquake in Sichuan led to a subtle change in the social landscape on which social networks and norms are grounded. In the more interactive social environment, individuals might feel greater social pressures to prepare for environmental change, as individuals' concerns are more widely spread and information flows faster. Material damage to households created by past earthquakes could reinforce this feeling. Although a catastrophe might not be an immediate driver of behavioral responses to impending threats, it could have an impact in shaping the social context that determines the ways in which information about risks and coping arrangements are disseminated and conveyed.

These findings recognize the social system as a critical site for learning from a grounded experience with the natural and built environments. The collapse of old neighborhoods due to earthquakes does not necessarily have immediate effects on residents' intentions to prepare for future earthquakes-in fact, it should not, as the local residents are well informed of the rarity of a magnitude-7 earthquake occurring in the same place. The main effects of neighborhood collapse are thus systemic, changing the larger context in which individuals interact and social practices operate. These changes might be incremental, for example, with residents merely living closer to each other, yet they contribute to social dynamics and might collectively lead to the formation of new villagers' cooperatives or social orders over time. Natural catastrophes are likely to result in sharp changes in victims' adaptive or preventive actions, but their primary effects on the individual are not limited to psychological responses and do not directly originate with environmental stressors and shocks. Catastrophic events can create systemic effects, such as the reorganization of social spaces in which every day neighborly activities take place, as we have shown in Wolong.

## Conclusions

This article has examined how catastrophe experience and risk perception are associated with social norms and relationships and how these risk and social factors contribute to individuals' intentions to make economic preparations for natural catastrophes. We reported a case study of two rural communities in China's Wolong region that suffered massive damage during a 7.9-magnitude earthquake in 2008.

The findings challenge the assumption that the intention to prepare for future catastrophes is a function of catastrophic experience and perception. We understand catastrophe experience and perception as part of the geographic context shaping social interactions. Consistent with this view, the findings of this study suggest that social relationships and social norms mediate between the geographic context and a household's behavioral response to earthquakes. Thus, this study calls for more serious engagement with the dynamic role of social capital.

The concept of social capital requires an analytical focus on social life. Another contribution of this study is its demonstration of how Wolong residents' social life has been affected by the reorganization of space in the neighborhood. As a consequence of the major earthquake in 2008, the resettlement of victims in new residential sites is manifested as a spatial force, thus creating conditions for more frequent interactions between residents and new social practices. Although the spatial transformation of social practice is merely one example of the multiple consequences of earthquakes linked with the formation and reproduction of social capital, it is important to recognize that both social practice and household response are situated within the natural system and built environment that are subject to disturbances and shocks. The grounding of social and individual responses in space therefore warrants consideration by both risk managers and spatial planners.

Policies and interventions should account for the social process that determines household resilience to environmental change. Strategies and measures that contribute to household resilience can be promoted by creating a favorable social environment that can help

to disseminate useful information about risks and emergency arrangements and spread positive messages that promote desirable behavioral responses, such as insuring against risks and prearranging contingency funds. This endeavor could benefit from a social learning process in which expectations and encouragement from family, peers, and the wider community are articulated and circulated among individuals and families at risk from natural catastrophes. To enhance community resilience, spatial planners should take into account the additional benefits of providing more communal spaces for neighborly interaction and enhancing spatial proximity of residents. This approach is particularly important for resource-dependent societies where economic capital is relatively scarce and the main source of resilience is social capital.

A limitation of this study is that our qualitative findings do not directly demonstrate the hypothesized association between the enhanced social interactions and relationships and the propensity to adopt coping strategies. Further evidence is needed, and one way of soliciting such evidence is to include a control group in the interviews (i.e., residents who were not resettled after the earthquake) and compare their responses with those from resettled households. Although such a comparative approach is not possible in our case study-because all of the residents of the two towns had moved to the resettlements and the geographic context of their social lives was likely to be similar-it would be instrumental in demonstrating the role of geographic context in altering social practices and consequently driving hazard adjustments.

## Acknowledgment

The authors wish to acknowledge the support offered by the Wolong Special Administration Region for the data collection in Wolong, Sichuan.

## Funding

This work was supported by funding from the Trust Fund in Support of Reconstruction in the Sichuan Earthquake Stricken Areas of the Development Bureau of Hong Kong SAR Government.

## Note

1. Renn (2011) adopted the social amplification of risk framework (Kasperson et al. 1988; Renn et al. 1992).

This framework is proposed as an interpretative framework for understanding experiences of risk and their behavioral and broader societal implications. It is based on the assumption that individuals process risk information either by amplifying signals that appear to be frightening or by attenuating those that are less threatening. This process is driven by or highly sensitive to social parameters, such as social norms, which are creatively described as a social amplifier of risk. The functioning and transmission powers of such amplifiers crucially influence the formation of risk perceptions. They operate through multiple feedback mechanisms and complicate the ways in which risk perceptions affect human actions. By placing social cognitive factors at the center, the framework could offer explanations as to why riskrelated behaviors appear to be insensitive to risk perceptions in some cases.

## References

- Adger, W. N. 2000. Social and ecological resilience: Are they related? Progress in Human Geography 24 (3): 347-64.
- ---. 2003. Social capital, collective action, and adaptation to climate change. Economic Geography 79 (4): 387-404.
- Aldrich, D. P. 2011a. The externalities of strong social capital: Post-tsunami recovery in Southeast India. Journal of Civil Society 7 (1): 81-99.
- ---.2011b. The power of people: Social capital's role in recovery from the 1995 Kobe earthquake. Natural Hazards 56 (3): 595-611.
- Alinovi, L., E. Mane, and D. Romano. 2009. Measuring household resilience to food insecurity: Application to Palestinian households. Working paper, EC-FAO Food Security Programme, Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome.
- Bihari, M., and R. Ryan. 2012. Influence of social capital on community preparedness for wildfires. Landscape and Urban Planning 106 (3): 253-61.
- Bubeck, P., W. J. W. Botzen, and J. C. J. H. Aerts. 2012. A review of risk perceptions and other factors that influence flood mitigation behavior. Risk Analysis 32 (9): 1481-95.
- Cabrera, J. F., and J. C. Najarian. 2015. How the built environment shapes spatial bridging ties and social capital. Environment and Behavior 47 (3): 239-67.
- Frank, E., H. Eakin, and D. L  opez-Carr. 2011. Social identity, perception and motivation in adaptation to climate risk in the coffee sector of Chiapas, Mexico. Global Environmental Change 21 (1): 66-76.
- Goulden, M. C., W. N. Adger, E. H. Allison, and D. Conway. 2013. Limits to resilience from livelihood diversification and social capital in lake social-ecological systems. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 103 (4): 906-24.
- Grothmann, T., and A. Patt. 2005. Adaptive capacity and human cognition: The process of individual adaptation to climate change. Global Environmental Change 15:199-213.
- Guha-Sapir, D., R. Below, and P. Hoyois. 2014. EMDAT: The OFDA/CRED International disaster database . Brussels, Belgium: Universit  e Catholique de

- Louvain. www.emdat.be/database (last accessed 17 February 2015).
- Kasperson, R. E., O. Renn, P. Slovic, H. S. Brown, J. Emel, R. Goble, J. X. Kasperson, and S. Ratick. 1988. The social amplification of risk: A conceptual framework. Risk Analysis 8 (2): 177-87.
- Kunreuther, H. 2006. Disaster mitigation and insurance: Learning from Katrina. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 604:208-27.
- Kunreuther, H., R. Meyer, and E. Michel-Kerjan. 2009. Overcoming decision biases to reduce losses from natural catastrophes. In The behavioral foundations of public policy , ed. E. Shafir, 398-413. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Lo, A. Y. 2013. The role of social norms in climate adaptation: Mediating risk perception and flood insurance purchase. Global Environmental Change 23 (5): 1249-57.
- Lo, A. Y., B. Xu, F. K. S. Chan, and R. Su. 2015. Social capital and community preparation for urban flooding in China. Applied Geography 64:1-11.
- Mohan, G., and J. Mohan. 2002. Placing social capital. Progress in Human Geography 26 (2): 191-210.
- National Bureau of Statistics of China. 2009. China statistics yearbook . Beijing: National Bureau of Statistics of China.
- ---.2015. National database . Bejing: National Bureau of Statistics of China.
- Osbahr, H., C. Twyman, W. N. Adger, and D. S. G. Thomas. 2008. Effective livelihood adaptation to climate change disturbance: Scale dimensions of practice in Mozambique. Geoforum 39 (6): 1951-64.
- Oulahen, G., L. Mortsch, K. Tang, and D. Harford. 2015. Unequal vulnerability to flood hazards: 'Ground truthing' a social vulnerability index of five municipalities in metro Vancouver, Canada. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 105 (3): 473-95.
- Pelling, M. 2011. Adaptation to climate change: From resilience to transformation . London and New York: Routledge.
- Pelling, M., and C. High. 2005. Understanding adaptation: What can social capital offer assessments of adaptive capacity? Global Environmental Change 15:308-19.
- Pidgeon, N., R. E. Kasperson, and P. Slovic. 2003. Introduction. In The social amplification of risk , ed. N. Pidgeon, R. E. Kasperson, and P. Slovic, 7-12. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Putnam, R. D. 1995. Tuning in, tuning out: The strange disappearance of social capital in America. PS: Political Science and Politics 28 (4): 664-83.
- Renn, O. 2011. The social amplification/attenuation of risk framework: Application to climate change. Climate Change 2:154-69.
- Renn, O., W. J. Burns, J. X. Kasperson, R. E. Kasperson, and P. Slovic. 1992. The social amplification of risk: Theoretical foundations and empirical applications. Journal of Social Issues 48 (4): 137-60.
- Shaw, R., and K. Goda. 2004. From disaster to sustainable civil society: The Kobe experience. Disasters 28 (1): 16-40.
- Sichuan Academy of Forestry. 2014. Wolong national nature reserve: An overarching plan (2015-2025) . Chengdu, China: Sichuan Academy of Forestry.
- Solnit, R. 2010. A paradise built in hell: The extraordinary communities that arise in disaster . New York: Penguin.
- Sun, M., B. Chen, J. Ren, and T. Chang. 2010. Natural disaster's impact evaluation of rural households' vulnerability: The case of Wenchuan earthquake. Agriculture and Agricultural Science Procedia 1:52-61.
- Swiss Re. 2014. Sigma explorer. http://www.sigma-explorer. com/ (last accessed 13 September 2014).
- Talen, E. 1999. Sense of community and neighbourhood form: An assessment of the social doctrine of new urbanism. Urban Studies 36 (8): 1361-79.
- Tian, Q., D. G. Brown, L. Zheng, S. Qi, Y. Liu, and L. Jiang. 2015. The role of cross-scale social and environmental contexts in household-level land-use decisions, Poyang Lake Region, China. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 105 (6): 1240-59.
- Wilkerson, A., N. E. Carlson, I. H. Yen, and Y. L. Michael. 2012. Neighborhood physical features and relationships with neighbors: Does positive physical environment increase neighborliness? Environment and Behavior 44 (5): 595-615.
- Wolf, J., W. N. Adger, I. Lorenzoni, V. Abrahamson, and R. Raine. 2010. Social capital, individual responses to heat waves and climate change adaptation: An empirical study of two UK cities. Global Environmental Change 20 (1): 44-52.
- Wong, K.-K., and X. Zhao. 2001. Living with floods: Victims' perceptions in Beijiang, Guangdong, China. Area 33 (2): 190-201.
- World Bank. 2010. Natural hazards, unnatural disasters: The economics of effective prevention . Washington, DC: World Bank.
- Yamamura, E. 2010. Effects of interactions among social capital, income and learning from experiences of natural disasters: A case study from Japan. Regional Studies 44 (8): 1019-32.

ALEX Y. LO is an Assistant Professor at the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. E-mail: alexloyh@hku.hk. His research interests include political economy, public perception of environmental change, public engagement in environmental planning, and management.

LEWIS T. O. CHEUNG is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Social Sciences of the Hong Kong Institute of Education, Tai Po, New Territories, Hong Kong. E-mail: ltocheung@ied.edu.hk. His research interests focus on sustainable tourism with particular emphasis on nature-based tourism in protected areas, environmental education, and environmental conservation.