## Cottagers in an Urban Field

## Greg Halseth

University of Northern British Columbia

## Mark W.  Rosenberg

Queen's University

The use  of  rural  areas  by  the  urban  population is  an  important  organizing  principle  in  the  study  of  the  rural hinterland  of  urban  centers.  One of  the  important  land  uses identified  within  the  urban  field  is  recreation.  This paper focuses on cottage property ownership in one part of the urban field, the rural-recreational  countryside.  Using three case studies from Canada, it was found that cottage properties account for a large proportion of local residential property.  Although  most cottage  properties are  owned  by  urban  residents,  up  to one-quarter  are owned  by  local residents.  Using  a questionnaire survey, it was also  found that cottage owners are more likely to he older,  better educated, and have higher incomes than rural residents. Key Words: urban field, rural-recreational countryside, cottagers.

## Introduction

e rural hinterland surrounding cities is a T complex geographic landscape where local land  use  changes are  differentially combined with  development pressures generated by  the processes of  urbanization  (Bryant et al.  1982; Osborne  1988). The  pattern  of  recreational land uses of the urban-based population is one of  the organizing constructs of  the urban field or city's countryside models of the rural hinterland surrounding cities (Friedmann and Miller 1965; Bryant et al.  1982). This paper is  interested in one of the important and longstanding forms of recreational land use in the rural hinterlands  of  cities,  that  of  cottage  or  secondhome property ownership. The goal is to fill a gap in what is currently a paucity of data identifying  the  cottage  property-owning  population.  For  a  variety  of  reasons, there  has been renewed interest  in  rural  and  small-town research  in  recent  years  (Leckie  1989,  1993; Davies and Yeates 1991;  Flora and Christenson 1991;  Mackenzie 1992; Gober et al.  1993),  and in  the  particular  phenomenon  of  cottage  or second-home ownership (Coppock 1977;  Jaakson  1986; Wilkinson  and  Murray  1991; Gill and  Clark  1992; Halseth  1992). At  present, however,  the  published  research  has  not offered a  conceptual or statistical profile  of  the cottage owner population, nor has it offered a comparative examination of the profiles of cottage owners and rural residents.

To address this gap in current research, this paper  undertakes  a  fourfold  examination  of cottage property owners and ownership using information from three case studies in Canada. The first issue to be examined involves a comparison of  the  distribution  of  cottage properties as a proportion of all within  the  study  areas. The  purpose  of  this comparison is  to establish the relative importance of  cottage properties as a component of the  local residential property  stock. The second  issue concerns identification of  the place of  permanent  residence  for  cottage  property owners.  This  analysis  explores  the  extent  to which cottage property ownership in the urban field is controlled by urban  residents. Third, a family structure and socioeconomic  status profile of seasonal-use cottage property owners is developed from a questionnaire survey conducted in each study area. Finally,  the profile of cottage property owners is compared to that of residents living year-round in the surrounding rural countryside.

These issues are important because much of the existing research on cottage or recreational pressures  within  the  urban  field  rests  upon anecdotal  information  or  untested  assumptions. For example, there are assumptions  as to the extent of  cottaging activity within particular portions of the urban field and assumptions that most cottagers are urban residents fleeing to weekend retreats in the countryside. There are  also  assumptions  made  about  important differences between  cottagers  and  local  rural residents. This paper provides an opportunity to test and interpret some of these assumptions in  light  of  case  study  evidence.  Of  specific interest is the research question: How different are cottagers from rural residents? The ration-

ale for seeking an answer to this question is the growing importance of this secondary housing market  and  the  ways  in  which  cottagers  are changing the rural landscape into, on the one hand,  an  idealized version of  the 'rural' (i.e., beautiful scenery but with all the conveniences of  urban  life), and  on  the  other, the ways  in which  each  additional  cottager  makes  a  rural place even more urban.

## Background

The summer cottage at the lake is an immediately recognizable element of the recreational countryside.  Indeed,  cottages  are  a  relatively common element within Western  society. Examples from France (Clout  1977), Great Britain (Coppock 1977; Rogers 1977), Czechoslovakia (Gardavsky 1977), Sweden (Geipel1992), and Australia (Robertson  1977) stand as  testament  that  the  phenomenon  is  widespread. However,  academic research  has  made  only tentative attempts at tying together the importance of cottaging in the rural countryside and the  role  of  cottage  communities  within  the local rural community (Ragatz 1970; Coppock 1977; Jordan  1980;  Wilkinson  and  Murray 1991; Halseth  1993a).

If  cottages  and  cottage  properties  are  relatively common within Western society, access to  cottage  ownership  is  certainly not  ubiquitous. The costs of cottage property ownership are  considerable,  and  access  to  ownership  is limited  by  socioeconomic  status.  Economic costs are  not, however, a  new  framework for explaining the pattern of higher socioeconomic status  among cottage  owners as  compared  to rural residents. As Wolfe (1965, 6) argued, the cottage may be a burden in many ways, but the burden on the pocketbook is the heaviest of  all. There are  the  costs  of  maintaining  a  separate home,  including  the  original  cost  of  land  and dwelling, taxes, electricity, furnishings. There are the  extra  costs  of  pleasurable  possessions  and activities,  such  as  boats  and golf  equipment. There is  the  expense of  travelling  to and  from the cottage.

Halseth  (1993a) has recently  argued  in  a  Canadian context that changes to property assessment, property  taxation, and  personal  capital gains  tax  regulations  are  increasing not  only the costs of obtaining cottage property but also the  costs  of  maintaining  the  property. While the  relationship  between  household  income and the  ability to own  a  cottage property  can be greatly complicated by factors such as property inheritance,  there  is  clearly an  econoinic cost to cottage property ownership that acts as a very real barrier to people who might otherwise wish to purchase 'their own  piece of  the good life.'

A second pervasive explanation for socioeconomic  differences  between  cottage  property owners and rural residents involves the socially constructed image of the cottage. This has far less  to  do with  simple economic costs and  is more intimately bound up with the idea of the cottage  as  a  symbol  of  status  within  society. Wolfe (1965, 7) has argued that cottage ownership confers upon  the owner the status and markings of being 'among the elect.' Cottage property  assumes  the  identity  not  only  of  a separate place, but  also of  a  place  defined by the type of social nuances often associated with the country club.

In Canada, the cottage and the act of cottaging have deep historical roots. This legacy has made  the  socially  constructed  image  of the cottage  as  a  status symbol a  part  of  Canadian folklore  and  culture.  Cross's  (1992)  popular review of the summer house offers an insightful historical discussion of  its origins as a wilderness  escape  for  the  elite  of  society.  She argues that  these elites, ranging  from  Roman senators to American presidents to the wealthiest  entrepreneurs  of  the  Gilded  Age, have  all  made use of  the summer house, both as a retreat from the pressures of urban life and as a symbol of the station they had achieved in society. Wyckoff ( 1990, 3  3 5 ) offers  a  critical historical  interpretation  of  wilderness  resorts and  retreats  as  part  of  an  influential melange of landscapes of private power and wealth. For Wyckoff, these landscapes of power are part of a  longstanding  process  whereby  the  affluent within  society  work  toward  the  creation  of landscapes marked by social and spatial exclusivity. The small cottage in  the  mountains  or by  the  lake  or seashore represents in a rather more democratized form the desire to capture and be part of the panache, style, and status of the early resorts.

Along the Rideau Lakes, the 'historic pattern of recreational land use and cottage development mirrors that of other central Canadian resort areas in that it was initially developed as

a resort hotel destination in the 'northern'  wilderness catering to an elite able to afford such distractions'  (Halseth  and  Rosenberg  1990, 104).  During  these  early  years,  the  cottage provided  upper-class  families  with  a  way  to spend their summers in the countryside while the wage earner commuted to the city during the  business week  (Kennedy  1984). The role of  the cottage as a symbol of social status continues to be an important explanation of socioeconomic  differences between  cottage  property owners and rural residents. While accessibility to the image of  status through  cottage ownership  may  have  become  democratized during  the  1960-1980  period,  the  increasing costs of purchasing and maintaining these occasional-use properties  may  be  reinforcing  its earlier exclusivity.

A recasting of  the economic and  the  social status  explanations  for  differences  between cottage property owners and rural residents is emerging within the rural restructuring  literature.  Cloke  and  Goodwin  have  recently  offered a summation of the pressures of change in rural areas. Building upon an integration  of economic  and  social  forces,  they  argue  that 'the commodification of rural  idylls  and rural lifestyles [has generated] a new theatre of consumption . . .' (Cloke  and  Goodwin  1992, 328). Citing immigration based  on recreation, leisure,  and tourism, Cloke  and  Goodwin (1992, 331) suggest that  'this can  lead  to the occurrence of  'two nations' in  the  same rural place .  .  . [with] a contesting of  local political power .  .  . [and] local cultural images.' Phillips (1993) has elaborated upon parts of  this argument in a careful discussion of rural gentrification  in  Britain. Of  importance  to this discussion  is  Phillips's (1993) argument  for  greater attention to diversity both within and between rural localities in evaluating explanations  of the pressures, processes, and outcomes of residential  change.  This  paper  uses  case  study  research  findings  to  examine  cottage  property ownership  and  to  develop  a  socioeconomic profile of  cottagers for  comparison with  local rural residents.

## Study Areas

The three case studies examined in this paper are the Rideau Lakes area of Ontario, the Cultus  Lake  area  of  British  Columbia,  and  the

Beaubassin  coastline  of  New  Brunswick.  In each case, the study areas are located near the outer bounds of the urban  field and contain a mix of rural, small-town,  and  recreational property  areas.  Each  study  area  also  features established  cottage  property areas  together with  a  rural  community whose livelihood remains grounded  in  agriculture. In  seeking to develop a socioeconomic profile of  cottagers, we  selected these study areas to explore possible  regional  variations in  cottage  landscapes. This is  an  important issue as  there  has been, and  continues  to be,  tremendous  variation in the  strength of  regional Canadian economies. To present information for only one study area runs  the  risk  of  making  general  statements based  on  findings that  may  in  fact  represent unique  or idiosyncratic aspects of  that  region or  area.  Given  that  there  is  little  additional research with which to compare our findings, it  was  decided  that  a  multiple  case  study approach was more appropriate.

Within each study area the small-lot, intensively  developed  cottaging  properties  are  set within  a  surrounding,  less  densely  developed rural countryside. These distinct cottage property landscapes are readily distinguishable within each study area and are identified in this paper  as  part  of  the rural-recreational c v z mwside. It is  important to note  at the  outset that the rural-recreational  countryside is  only one component of the larger urban field.

The Rideau Lakes study area comprises six rural  townships  located  in  eastern  Ontario along the central portion of the Rideau Canal waterway (Fig.  1). Situated within  an  area  o f dairying or more marginal agricultural activity, cottage properties form a distinctly linear pattern along the margins of the recreational lakes and waterways. The Rideau Lakes area is also one of the oldest cottaging landscapes in Canada. In most cases, the depth of  cottage development rarely exceeds a single row of properties.  The  towns  of  Perth  and  Smiths  Falls (1991 populations of  5,574 and 9,396, respectively)  are  immediately adjacent to  the  study area. The cities of  Ottawa  and  Kingston  are located approximately  30  miles,  north and south respectively, from the Rideau Lakes.

The Cultus  Lake  area  is  located  about  60 miles  from  metropolitan  Vancouver  in  the Lower-Fraser  Valley  of  southwestern  British Columbia (Fig.  1). Two intensively developed

Figure 1 : Study areas.

<!-- image -->

cottaging areas,  Lindell  Beach and Cultus Lake Park,  are  located at each end  of Cultus Lake; a rural  and agricultural area is found in the Columbia Valley. Bounded on the south by the international border with the United States and  on  the  other  sides  by  steep  mountain slopes,  the  Cultus  Lake  area  is  a  well-contained  valley within  which  the  very  different landscapes of  cottage and rural property areas are  juxtaposed. Adjacent  to  the  Cultus  Lake area is the regional service center of Chilliwack (1991 population  of 49,531).

The New Brunswick study area includes all of  the  Beaubassin  Planning  Commission  region (Fig. 1). Located along the Northumberland Strait of the Gulf of St. Lawrence on New Brunswick's southeast coast, the study area features a mix of clustered (as at Cultus Lake) and

RIDEAU LAKES

dispersed (as along the  Rideau  Lakes)  cottage properties.  The  towns  of  ShCdiac  and  CapPel6 (1991 populations  of 4,343 and 2,181, respectively) are located within the study area. The city of Moncton is approximately 25 miles west  of  the  Beaubassin beaches. In  a  striking illustration  of  the  close  connection  between urban residents and rural amenity areas, one of the only sections of four-lane divided highway through  this  part  of  Maritime  Canada  goes directly from downtown Moncton to the beach at ShCdiac.

## Data

There has been a longstanding gap in the geographic  literature concerning  definitions  of cottaging  activity  and  related  issues  of  data

quality. Definitions of cottaging and cottagers, as a type of land use and as a class of residential occupancy respectively, have  proved  too malleable to operationalize in a consistent manner (Coppock  1977;  Hart 1984; Jaakson 1986; Hinch 1990). Clearly, the residential landscape within cottaging areas is complex. In all three study areas described  above, there  are  examples of permanent  residents living year-round at  cottage property  along the lake and examples  of  farm  property  used  only  as  summer retreats. Micro-level analysis  of  individual behavior suggests that there are also examples of property use  that  fall  between these  extremes (Geipel 1992;  Halseth  1993b).  In this sense, we must  recognize that  cottage  property  can  be distinguished by  patterns  of location and patterns of use or occupancy. In each of our study areas, the small-lot cottage properties could be easily distinguished from surrounding agricultural  or  rural  residential  properties.  In  addition, property use in terms of seasonal or permanent occupancy could be readily ascertained from  local  government  records.  In  order  to address the specific  research question of differences  between  cottagers  and  rural  residents, this  paper  draws  on  survey  data  from  both owners of  seasonal-use cottage  property  and owners of rural or agricultural property.

Data  used  in  this  analysis  derive from  two sources. Data from local government property assessment  and  taxation  records  are  used  to explore questions of property distribution and ownership in areas featuring extensive cottaging activity. These records provide information on property use and location together with the mailing  address  of  the  property  owner.  For studies of cottaging activity in  the urban field, data of  this type are important both  for identifymg seasonal-use cottage properties and for providing confirmation of whether the owners of  such cottage properties  are urban  residents (Halseth 1992).  In order to develop a socioeconomic profile  of  cottage owners and compare it with a profile of  rural residents, a questionnaire survey of  local property  owners was  administered in each study area (Rosenberg and Halseth  1993). The survey, conducted  in  the summer of  1991, was  used  to  obtain  directly comparable  household  level  information. A random sample of seasonal-use cottage owners and  rural  residents  was  drawn  in  each  study area. The sample size in each area was deter- mined  by  a  larger  research project examining the  conversion  of  cottages  into  year-round homes; the number of questionnaires  mailed to rural residents and to seasonal cottagers coincides  with  the  number  of  converted  cottage properties identified during the preceding 10year period.

The analysis  is  organized  around  the  two Resident Groups from the questionnaire survey. Seasonal residents are defined as those who own property  within  the  small-lot  cottaging  areas and who are  distinguished by  the  seasonal or periodic  pattern of occupancy  and  by  the maintenance  of  a  permanent  residence  elsewhere. Rural residents are defined as  the  local population not living within the cottaging areas.  Their residential landscape consists of permanent-use  housing  stock occupied  by  yearround  residents. This distinction of  property owners by settlement type and occupancy pattern  is  a  significant departure  from  the  standard  fardnonfarm  treatment  of  rural  area populations (Brunet 1980; Russwurm and Bryant  1984; Joseph  and  Smit  1985) and  is  one that seeks to introduce more of the complexity that is the rural landscape.

The sample sizes and response rates for the survey  are  listed  in  Table 1. The  response rates compare  favorably to those  summarized in Feitelson's (1991) review of survey research methods. There is no information  to suggest that  nonresponses  are  systematically  organized.

## Results

Property Distribution

In the rural-recreational  countryside, cottages and  other  recreational properties  are an  integral part  of  the  landscape. In the  three study areas  examined in this paper,  cottage properties  account  for  a  significant  share  of local residential property  (Table 2). In  fact, in  two cases cottage properties represent the majority of  local residences. Given these distributions, cottage  properties,  and  the  people  who  use them,  can  have  an  important  impact  on  the local area. For example, cottage property ownership  confers the  right  to vote  in  municipal elections. The issue as  to which constituency, rural  residents  or  cottage  owners,  holds  the balance of local political power in debate over community change is a contentious one within

Table  7 Sample Sizes and Response Rates

| Study Areas and Resident Groups   |   Questionnaires Maileda |   Number of Resoonses | Resoonse Rate I%)   |
|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|
| Rideau Lakes                      |                          |                       |                     |
| Rural                             |                      294 |                   124 | 42%                 |
| Seasonal                          |                      295 |                   112 | 38%                 |
| Cultus Lake:                      |                          |                       |                     |
| Rural                             |                      104 |                    39 | 38%                 |
| Seasonal                          |                      120 |                    40 | 33%                 |
| Beaubassin.                       |                          |                       |                     |
| Rural                             |                      152 |                    51 | 34%                 |
| Seasonal                          |                      150 |                    60 | 40%                 |
| TOTAL                             |                     1115 |                   426 | 38%                 |

Source: Rosenberg and Halseth (1  993).

"The  sampling fi-ame was determined ly the requirements o f a research project examining the conversion o f cottage properties fiom seasonal to year-round occupancy. For each study area,  the number o f questionnaires mailed out t o  seasonal residents and to rural residents covesponds to the number o f convened cottage  properties identified in those areas over the preceding 10-year period.

these  rural areas.  Despite  the  likelihood  of these  kinds of  important  and  highly localized impacts, there  continues  to be  relatively little geographic research directed at understanding the interactions and implications of this juxtaposition of two very different types of residential  landscapes (Jordan  1980;  Wilkinson  and Murray  1991). Popular  literature  has, by  contrast, been keenIy interested in the social consequences of this juxtaposition (Gordon  1989; Cross  1992; Lampi  1992).

## Cottage Property Ownership

The urban field and city countryside models of the  rural  hinterland  of  cities  are  very  much urban-centric  in orientation, that is, rural area changes fundamentally originate  from the urban center (see Simmons 1981 and Troughton 1981). In the case of cottagingin the rural-recreational countryside,  this  conceptualization has been translated into an implied assumption that cottage  properties  are owned entirely  by urban residents. Indeed, a large proportion  of

Table 2 Residential Property Distribution

|              |                                         | Cottage Area Propertiesb   | Cottage Area Propertiesb              |
|--------------|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| Study Area   | Total Number of Residential Properties' | Number                     | As Yo of total residential properties |
| Rideau Lakes | 13,559                                  | 5.516                      | 407%                                  |
| Cultus Lake  | 816                                     | 61 6                       | 75 5%                                 |
| Beaubassin   | 3 480'                                  | 1.839'                     | 52 8%                                 |

the sample of cottage property owners are residents of nearby urban  centers (Table 3). This finding supports other research suggesting that urban  and metropolitan  area residents exert a considerable influence upon  cottage  property ownership  in  the  rural-recreational  countryside  (Wolfe  1951; Hallman  1990; Wilkinson and  Murray  1991). However,  in  the  Rideau Lakes  and  Cultus  Lake  areas,  between  onefifth  and one-quarter  of  all cottage properties are owned by residents living within the study area itself or in an immediately adjacent small town.  This  result  challenges the  assumption that cottage owners are universally urban  residents. Reasons for the large number of cottage property owners from within the local area are varied.  Along  the  Rideau  Lakes, several residents remarked that since private cottage ownership  has  effectively cut  off  public access to the lakes, they purchased a cottage lot in order to  ensure  access  for  their  family.  At  Cultus Lake the cottaging areas began as recreational retreats for local residents, and it has only been

Table 3 Distribution of Cottage Ownershipa

|                                                  | Percentage of Cottage Properties   | Percentage of Cottage Properties   | Percentage of Cottage Properties   |
|--------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Location of Permanent Residence of Cottage Owner | Rideau Lakes                       | Cultus Lake                        | Beaubassin                         |
| Internalb                                        | 6 2                                | 1 9                                | 2 0                                |
| Adjacent TownsC                                  | 21 6                               | 18 1                               | 2 7                                |
| Adjacent Rural/SmallTownd                        | 6 9                                | 4 8                                | 8 0                                |
| Adjacent Metropolitan Arease                     | 43 3                               | 71 2                               | 73.3                               |
| Other Canada                                     | 13 1                               | 2.9                                | 113                                |
| United States                                    | 8 9                                | 1 1                                | 2.7                                |
| Sample Size                                      | 295                                | 375                                | 150                                |

Source: Questionnaire nrruey.

aThe Cultus Lake sample includes all .seusonal-use  cottage properties within the study area. The Rideau Lakes and Beaubassin area samples are based on propey-owner address information collected for the random sample of seasonal-use cottage propern'es  ident$ed or the questionnaire ruruey. The sample size corresponds to the total number of questionnaires mailed to seasonal residents. 'Wthin  the respective stdy area boundaries.

'Rideau Lakes = Penh, Smiths Falls,  Westporr. Culm  Lake = Chilliwack. Beaubassin = Shidiac, Cap-Pel[.

dCovers the region between each study area and tbe adjacent metropolitan  area($.

'Rideau Lakes = Ottawa, Kingston. Cultus Lake = Vancouver. Beaubassin = Moncton.

over  time  that  non-local  residents  have  been able to supplant local residents' ownership of property within the cottage market.

## Cottage Owners

Measures of  family  structure  for  seasonal-use cottage property  owners are presented in Table  4.  There  is  remarkable  similarity across these  family  structure  measures  among  seasonal residents in the  three study areas. Over half of all respondents in each area are 55 years of age or older; over three-quarters of seasonal residents in each study area are married. Perhaps because  of  the  slightly older age  profile, a  higher  proportion  of  Cultus  Lake  respondents are widowed. Less than half  of  the seasonal  residents  have any  children  living  at home. Not surprisingly, the Cultus Lake area has the lowest proportion  of children living at home.

As with the family structure measures, there is  considerable similarity in  the  responses of seasonal residents in  terms  of  socioeconomic status across the  three  study areas  (Table 5). More  than  half  of  seasonal  residents  have  a university education. In the Rideau Lakes area this  proportion  reaches nearly three-quarters. More than two-thirds of seasonal residents report  an  income  of over  $50,000  per  year. When  retired  households  are  dropped  from the  analysis, the  proportion  of  seasonal  residents  reporting  annual  incomes  of  less  than $20,000  falls  to  zero  in  each  area. A large proportion  of  seasonal residents  in  the  three study areas report that they are retired. This is an  expected outcome in light of the age structure.  Of  those  who  are not  retired,  the  clear majority are employed in professional occupations.

There are relatively few  studies of  the cottage property owner population with which to compare the  profile  developed in  this  paper. Hodge  (1970) undertook a probe of cottagers living in the Toronto urban field. In that early cursory  study,  Hodge  argued  that  cottagers tend to involve families, particularly those with young  children,  and tend to  be clustered within the higher income categories. The predominance of  higher  incomes, and  associated higher  levels  of  education  and  occupational status, compares favorably with  the  profile  of cottage  propeny  owners developed from  our questionnaire survey. In terms of family structure,  however,  our  profile  differs  markedly from that suggested by Hodge in that we note a pattern of older households without children living at home. A more recent  study  by  Gill and  Clark  (1992)  has  developed  a  socioeconomic profile for second-home owners in the mountain  resort  of  Whistler,  British  Columbia. As with our study, they find that  secondhome  owners tend  to  have  high  income and education levels and that they tend to be  employed  in  professional occupations. The  age distribution  of  second-home  owners surveyed by  Gill  and  Clark  is,  however,  concentrated between  ages 35 and  54,  and  not  the  retirement years found in our survey. This may be an indication of important differences  between the  types of  cottagehesort  areas in  the ruralrecreational countryside and the types of households  drawn  to different recreational landscapes. These  differences may  have  significant implications not only for determining

Table 4 Profries  of  the Farn/ly Structure of  Rural  Resident and Seasonal Resident Respondents

|                       | Rideau Lakes   | Rideau Lakes   | Cultus Lake   | Cultus Lake   | Beaubassin   | Beaubassin    |
|-----------------------|----------------|----------------|---------------|---------------|--------------|---------------|
|                       | Rural (%)      | Seasonal 1%)   | Rural (%)     | Seasonal (Yo) | Rural I%)    | Seasonal (Yo) |
| Age Structure (years) |                |                |               |               |              |               |
| 2534                  | 10 5           | 3 0            | 103           | 2 6           | 23 5         | 5 4           |
| 35-44                 | 23 4           | 190            | 23 1          | 10 5          | 29 4         | 12 5          |
| 45-54                 | 22 6           | 23 0           | 20 5          | 21 1          | 13 7         | 30 4          |
| 55-64                 | 194            | 23 0           | 26 2          | 26 3          | 9 8          | 35 7          |
| 65-74                 | 169            | 21 0           | 128           | 316           | 15 7         | 12 5          |
| 75+                   | 7 3            | 11 0           | 5 1           | 7 9           | 7 8          | 3 6           |
| n=                    | 124            | 100            | 39            | 38            | 51           | 56            |
| Marital Status        |                |                |               |               |              |               |
| Single                | 2 4            | 3 9            | 103           | 0             | 4 1          | 1 6           |
| Married               | 81 5           | 80 6           | 82 1          | 76 9          | 73 5         | 76 8          |
| Widowed               | 9 7            | 107            | 0             | 20 5          | 143          | 12 5          |
| DivlSep               | 6 4            | 4 8            | 77            | 2 6           | 8 2          | 8 9           |
| n=                    | 124            | 103            | 39            | 39            | 49           | 56            |
| Children at Home      |                |                |               |               |              |               |
| Yes                   | 53 7           | 41 2           | 45 9          | 28 9          | 52 1         | 44 4          |
| n=                    | 121            | 102            | 37            | 38            | 48           | 54            |

Source: Questionnaire suruey.

who purchases property but also for the future costs  of  services  provision  to  very  different populations.

## Contrasts with Rural  Residents

There are notable differences in the age distribution of seasonal residents and rural residents (Table  4).  While  most  respondents  in  both groups  report  being  married,  rural  residents are  younger.  This  is  a  somewhat  surprising result given the greying of the rural population suggested in published research (Hodge  1987; Bekkering  1990; Hodge  and  Gutman  1991). Related to the differences in age profiles is the greater proportion of rural residents who have children  living in the home, although  there is less difference in the Beaubassin area between seasonal residents  and  rural  residents  on  this variable.

The most marked differences between seasonal  residents and  rural residents  involve measures  of  socioeconomic  status  (Table  5). More than  half  of the rural  residents in  each area have only a high school education or less. By  contrast,  a  majority  of  seasonal  residents have some education  beyond the high  school level. Sharp differences also exist between the two  groups in terms  of  annual household income  levels  and  occupational  status  of  the household  head.  While  approximately  twothirds of seasonal residents reported an annual household income of more than $50,000, more than half of the rural residents reported annual household  incomes  of  less  than  $40,000. A

smaller  proportion  of  rural  residents  are  retired.  Among  those  still  in the  workforce, more rural residents are in service and secondary industry activities compared to the strong concentration  of  seasonal residents in  professional occupations.

The differences in proportions  of those falling into a particular demographic or socioeconomic  category  depending  on  whether  they are a  rural  resident or a  seasonal resident  can be tested using Chi-square analysis.  The analysis confirms the observations noted above (Table  6).  Most  of  the  observed differences between rural and seasonal residents are statistically significant (p &lt; .05) or nearly so (p &lt; .lo). Only  for  marital  status  in  Rideau  Lakes  and Beaubassin and for children at home in Cultus Lake  are  the  differences not  statistically significant or nearly so.

The strongest  and  most  consistent  differences occur with household income. There is an  assumption within  much  research  on  cottage  or  second-home  ownership  that  these owners  must  have  higher  incomes,  and  presumably other associated measures  of  higher socioeconomic status,  in  order  to  afford  the additional costs of  these  occasional-use properties.  The  comparison  of  seasonal  resident and rural resident profiles does lend support to this  view.  In  all  three  study  areas,  seasonal residents  reported  higher  levels of  education and annual household incomes, and for those who  are  not  retired,  a  higher  proportion  of professional  occupations  than  do  rural  resi-

Table 5 Socio-economic Status Profiles of Rural Resident and Seasonal Resident Respondents

|                             | Rideau Lakes   | Rideau Lakes   | Cultus Lake   | Cultus Lake   | Beauhassin   | Beauhassin    |
|-----------------------------|----------------|----------------|---------------|---------------|--------------|---------------|
|                             | Rural (%I      | Seasonal (Yo)  | Rural 1%)     | Seasonal (%I  | Rural (%I    | Seasonal (Yo) |
| Education                   |                |                |               |               |              |               |
| <High School                | 89             | 2 9            | 77            | 2 6           | 20 0         | 5 4           |
| High School                 | 46 3           | 23 8           | 53 9          | 35 9          | 46 0         | 30 4          |
| University                  | 40 7           | 71 3           | 35 9          | 56 4          | 34 0         | 62 5          |
| Other                       | 41             | 2 0            | 2 6           | 5 1           | 0 0          | 1 8           |
| n=                          | 123            | 101            | 39            | 39            | 50           | 56            |
| Household Income i$ '000's) |                |                |               |               |              |               |
| <20                         | 20.5           | 4 2            | 26 3          | 12 1          | 8.5          | 3.6           |
| 20-29                       | 134            | 7.4            | 158           | 3.0           | 38.3         | 3 6           |
| 3&39                        | 143            | 116            | 18 4          | 9 1           | 23 4         | 12 7          |
| 4&49                        | 12 5           | 11 6           | 18 4          | 9 1           | 8 5          | 12 7          |
| 50+                         | 39 3           | 65 2           | 21 1          | 66 7          | 21 3         | 67 4          |
| n=                          | 112            | 95             | 38            | 33            | 47           | 55            |
| Occupation                  |                |                |               |               |              |               |
| Professional                | 193            | 32 7           | 21 6          | 26 3          | 17 1         | 34 5          |
| Service                     | 20 2           | 12 2           | 24 4          | 132           | 25 5         | 164           |
| Primary                     | 109            | 1 0            | 8 1           | 2 6           | 2 1          | 0             |
| Secondary                   | 109            | 3 1            | 108           | 53            | 24 7         | 73            |
| Other                       | 8 4            | 8 2            | 8 1           | 105           | 6 4          | 7 3           |
| Retired                     | 30 3           | 42 8           | 27 0          | 42 1          | 234          | 34 5          |
| n=                          | 119            | 98             | 37            | 38            | 47           | 55            |

Source: Quenionnaire mruey.

dents. These findings were consistent among study areas, even though there was wide variability in  the  strength  of  the  regional economies in  the three examples.

## Discussion and Conclusions

There is growing academic interest in cottages and cottaging in the rural hinterlands of cities. At  present,  however,  there  is  little  published research  that  addresses  the  question  of  who these cottagers are, where they come from, and how they might be different from the rural and small-town populations in  cottage areas. This paper  has  presented  the  results  of  a  study of cottage property owners in three rural-recreational countryside areas of Canada.  The findings from this research address several important  questions concerning cottagers in the

Table 6 Summary Results  Chi-square Analysis

|                  |   Degrees of Freedom | Chi-square Results   | Chi-square Results   | Chi-square Results   |
|------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| Variable         |                      | Rideau Lakes         | Cultus Lake          | Beaubassin           |
| Age Structure    |                    6 | 12494"               | 17 196""             | 47 728**             |
| Marital Status   |                    3 | 0 935                | 13.063""'            | 0.597                |
| Children at Home |                    1 | 3 464'               | 2.317                | 10.209'"             |
| Education        |                    3 | 40 003' *            | 6.814"'              | 17.823'"'            |
| Household Income |                    4 | 19 285"              | 15 599"'             | 18.769**'            |
| Occupation       |                    5 | 40 870"'             | 9 985"'              | 19478"'              |

urban  field,  the  answers  to  which  had  previ~usly been based on assumptions or anecdotal evidence. It is clear from our examples that cottage properties do make up a large proportion  of  the  residential  property  stock in  particular  parts  of  the  rural  countryside.  Our findings suggest that while most cottage property  owners as  expected  do come from  large urban or metropolitan areas, up to one-quarter of cottage properties are in fact owned by local rural  and  small-town residents. Seasonal residents  tend  to  be  married  with  no  children living at home,  have  an  educational level  beyond  high  schooI,  have relatively  high incomes, and  are  either  employed in  a  professional occupation or retired.  Compared to local  rural  and  small-town  residents,  seasonal residents  are  more  likely  to  be  older,  better educated, and have higher incomes.

The degree  to which  the  case  study  areas described in this paper  may  be  representative of  the  broader  phenomena  of  cottaging  and cottage property ownership  cannot  yet be evaluated. This is  due in part to a scarcity of comparable case  study research-, but  it is  also due  to  a  general  lack of  detailed information on this important economic and social activity available  from  standard  sources  such  as  the census. Within the limitations of  the research described in this paper, however, these findings lend support to the premise that the rural-recreational  countryside  is  a  socially  and  geographically divided landscape. The fundamental  division  revolves around  the separation of cottage  properties  from  the  rural  and  smalltown  milieu within which they  are set,  based on  an  economic  differentiation,  such  as  the ability to afford  cottage property,  and the socially constructed  image of  a  cottage community as  something separate from the rural milieu.  Recognition  and  incorporation  of  both these explanations will be necessary if research is to move forward in considering the broader implications  of  cottage  ownership  within  the rural  landscape.

Theoretical  explanations for  differences in socioeconomic  status  between  cottagers  and rural  area residents include the  economic criteria of being able to maintain a second set of residential  costs, the  social status  legacy of a historic association between resorts in the wilderness and the lifestyles of  an affluent population,  and  the  implications of  economic  resmcturing in commodifylng rural property for those w i t h the time  and money to afford this form of leisure activity.  A better understanding of  this  activity takes  on  an urgency, however, given  the  economic, social, and  demographic changes occurring across the contemporary rural landscape. Questions should be asked about the implications of  the cottager  profile  developed in  this paper for rural  communities. For example,  how  will  increasing  environmental sensitivity affect  the  development  of  new,  or the redevelopment of existing, cottage properties  given  the  continuing  demand  for  these recreational retreats? What are the local political ramifications as seasonal-use cottage property owners become more active in rural land use  planning,  property taxation, and servicing debates?  As  cottage  property  values  increase relative to rural properties, will there be a widening  of  the  socioeconomic  distinctions  be- tween these  groups occupying the  same rural landscape? What will  be  the implications for rural  communities if  large numbers o f   retired cottagers  move  'to the  lake' for  their  retirement years? While this paper  has focused on developing a  profile  of  the  seasonal-use cottage-owner population, it is also a call for more research on the complex and widespread phenomenon of cottaging. Economic, community, health, and social service changes are all possible impacts resulting from cottaging activity in the  rural-recreational  countryside. An  understanding  of  these  pressures  and  the  related processes is needed if we  are to better understand the complex nature of  the rural countryside.

## Note

'Some  of  the  data  presented  were  originally  collected  for Remeatimal Home  Conversion in  Canada (Rosenberg and Halseth 1993),  which was supported through the External Research Program of the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation.

## Literature Cited

Bekkering, M. 1990. Patterns of change in the spatial distribution of Canada's elderly, 1966 to 1986.

Master's thesis, Department of Geography, Queen's University, Kingston, Canada.

Brunet, Y. 1980. L'exode urbain, essai de classification  de  la  population  exurbaine  des  Cantons de 1'Est. Canadian Geographer 24:385-405.

Bryant, C. R., L. H. Russwurm, and A. G. McLellan. 1982. The  City's  Counsntryside-Land and  Its  Management  in  the  Rural-Urban Fringe. London  and New York: Longman Group Limited.

Cloke, P.,  and M. Goodwin. 1992. Conceptualizing countryside change:  From  post-Fordism  to rural structured coherence. Transactions o f the Institute of British Geographers 17:32  1-36.

Clout, H.  D. 1977.  Residences Secondaires in France. In Second Homes: Curse or Blessing, ed. J. T. Coppock, 47-62.  Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Coppock, J.  T.,  ed.  1977. Second  Homes:  Curse  or Blessing. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Cross, A. W.  1992. The Summer House-A Tradition of  Leisure. Toronto: Harper Collins.

Davies, S.,  and  M. Yeates.  1991. Exurbanization  as a component of migration: A case study in Oxford County, Ontario. Canadian Geographer 35:177-86.

Feitelson,  E. 1991. The potential of mail surveys in geography:  Some  empirical  evidence. Profissional Geographer 43 : 190-205.

Flora, C. B.,  and J. A. Christenson, eds. 1991. Rural Policiesfor the 1990s. Boulder: Westview Press.

- Friedmann, J., and J. Miller. 1965. The urban field. 30umal of the American Institute of Planners 3 1  :3  1220.
- Gardavsky, V.  1977. Second homes in Czechoslovakia.  In Second  Homes:  Curse or Blessing, ed. J.  T. Coppock, 63-74.  Oxford: Pergamon Press.
- Geipel, R.  1992. Territoriality at the microscale. In Person,  Place  and  Thing: interpretive and  Empirical Essays in  Cultural Geography. ed. S. T. Wong, 7997. Baton Rouge, Louisiana: Department  of  Geography and Anthropology, Louisiana State University.
- Gill, A., and P.  Clark.  1992. Second-home development in the resort municipality of Whistler, British  Columbia.  In British  Columbia:  Geographical h q s in  Honour  of  A.  MarPherson, ed.  P.  M. Koroscil, 281-94. Burnaby, B.C.:  Department  of Geography, Simon Fraser University.
- Gober,  P.,  K.  E. McHugh,  and  D.  Leclerc.  1993. Job-rich but  housing-poor:  The  dilemma  of  a western amenity town. Professional Geographer 45:12-20.
- Gordon,  C.  1989. At the  Cottage: A  Fearless Look at Canada?  Summer Obsession. Toronto:  McLelland and Stewart.
- Hallman,  B.  R.  1990. Migration,  commuting  and economic development in Toronto's outer urban field: The Southern  Georgian  Bay  region.  Master's thesis, Department of Geography, University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada.
- Halseth, G. 1992. Cottage property  ownership: Interpreting spatial patterns  in  an  Eastern  Ontario case study. Ontario Geography 38:3242.
- . 1993a. Communities  within  communities: Local residential change and conflict in the ruralrecreational countryside. Ph.D. diss., Department of Geography, Queen's University,  Kingston, Canada.
- . 1993b. Communities  within  communities: Changing  'residential'  areas  at  Cultus  Lake, British Columbia. Journal Of'Rural Stzldies 9:  17587.
- Halseth, G., and M. W.  Rosenberg.  1990. Conversion of recreational residences: A case study of its measurement and management. Canadian 3oumai o f Regional  Science 13  :99-115.
- Hart, J.  F.  1984. Population  change  in  the  Upper Lake  States. Annals o f the Association  of American Geographers 74:22143.
- Hinch, T. D.  1990. A spatial analysis of  tourist  accommodation in Ontario:  1974  to 1988.Joumal o f Applied Recreation  Research 15:239-64.
- Hodge, G. 1970. Cottaging in the Toroato Urban Field: A  Probe  of  Structure and  Behaviour. Toronto: University of Toronto, Centre for Urban  and  Community Studies Research Paper No. 29.
- . 1987. Seniors in Canada? Small Towns: Recent Trads and  Their Implications. Vancouver: Centre
- for Human Settlements, University of British Columbia.
- Hodge, G., and G. Gutman. 1991. Maintaining Seniors Independence  in Rural Areas-A Guide to Pianningjir Housing and Support Seruices. Ottawa: Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation.
- Jaakson,  R.  1986. Second-home  domestic tourism. Annals o f Tourim Research 13:367-91.
- Jordan, J.  W.  1980. The  summer  people  and  the natives:  Some  effects  of  tourism  in  a  Vermont vacation village. Annals  of  Tourism Research 7:3455.
- Joseph, A.,  and B.  Smit.  1985. Rural residential development and municipal service provision. A Canadian  case study. 30umal o f Rural  Studies 1:32137.
- Kennedy, J.  R.  1984. South  Elmsley  in  the  Making 1781-1983. Lombardy,  Ontario:  Township  of South Elmsley.
- Lampi,  K.  1992. Cottage  country  from  the  other side of  the  fence. Globe and  Mail 16 September, A26.
- Leckie,  G. J.  1989. Continuity  and  change  in  the farm  community:  Brooke  Township, Ontario, 1965-86. Canadian Geographer 33:32-46.
- . 1993.  Female  farmers  in  Canada,  19711986. Profissional Geographer 45:180-93.
- Mackenzie, F.  1992. 'The worse it got, the more we laughed':  A discourse of resistance among farmers of  eastern  Ontario. Environment and  Planning  D: Society and Space 10:691-713.
- Osborne, B.  S. 1988. The Hinterland. In Neu Directions fir the  Study  of  Ontario's Past-Papers of  the Bicentennial  Conference  on the  History  of  Ontario, eds. D. Gagan and R.  Gagan, 267-83.  Hamilton, Ontario: McMaster University.
- Phillips, M.  1993.  Rural gentrification and the processes of class colonisation. Journal o f Rural Studies 9:123-40.
- Ragatz, R.  L.  1970. Vacation homes in  the  northeastern  United  States:  Seasonality in  population distribution. Annals  of  the  Association  of  American Geographers 60:447-5 5.
- Robertson,  R.  W. 1977.  Second-home  decisions: The Australian context. In Second Homes: Curse or Blessing, ed. J. T .  Coppock,  119-38.  Oxford: Pergamon Press.
- Rogers, A. W.  1977. Second homes in England and Wales. In Second Humes: Curse or Blessing, ed.  J. T. Coppock, 85-102.  Oxford: Pergamon Press.
- Rosenberg, M. W., and  G. Halseth.  1993. Recreational Home Conversion in Canada. Ottawa: Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation.
- Russwurm, L. H., and C. R. Bryant. 1984.  Changing population  distribution  and  rural-urban  relationships in Canadian urban fields, 1941-1976.  In The Pressures  of  Change  in  Rural  Canada, ed.  M.  F . Bunce  and  M. J.  Troughton,  113-37.  Toronto:

- Atkinson College, York University, Geographical Monograph No. 14.
- Simmons, T. 1981. The challenge of rural  perspectives on the  rural-urban  fringe. In The Rural-Urban Fringe: Canadian Perrpectives, ed. K. B.  Beesley and  L. H. Russwurm, 71-86.  Toronto: Atkinson College,  York  University,  Geographical  Monograph No.  10.
- Troughton, M. J.  1981. The rural-urban  fringe: A challenge to resource management. In The RuralUrban  Fringe: Canadian  Perspectives, ed.  K. B. Beesley and  L.  H. Russwurm, 21843. Toronto: Atkinson College, York University, Geographical Monograph No.  10.
- Wilkinson,  P.  F.,  and A. L.  Murray.  1991. Centre and periphery: The impacts of the leisure industry on  a  small  town  (Collingwood,  Ontario). Society and Leimre 14:235-60.
- Wolfe,  R.  I.  1951.  Summer  cottages  in  Ontario. Economic Geography 27:lO-32.
- . 1965. About  cottages  and  cottagers. Landscape 15:6-8.

Wyckoff, W.  K.  1990. Landscapes of private power and wealth. In The Making o f the American Landscape, ed. M. P. Conzen, 335-54.  London: Harper Collins Academic.

GREG  HALSETH  (Ph.D.,  Queen's  University, Kingston, Ontario) is Assistant Professor in the Geography Program, Faculty of Natural Resources and Environmental Studies, University of Northern British  Columbia,  Prince  George,  B.C.,  Canada V2N 429. His research  interests  include  issues  of community change, specifically public participation and debate, in rural and suburban settings.

MARK ROSENBERG  (Ph.D.,  London  School  of Economics  and  Political Science) is Associate Professor  in  the  Department  of  Geography,  Queen's University,  Kngston,  Ontario,  Canada  K7L  3N6. His current interests  are population  aging, medical geography,  housing,  and  transportation,  and  their implications for public policy.

## Forest -La  n  d  sca  pe Structure a  Ion  g an U  r  ba  n  -To-  R  u  ra  I Gradient *

Kimberly E. Medley Miami University

## Steward T .  A.  Pickett

Institute o f EcoTstem Studies

Human activities and forest-landscape structure are examined along a belt transect that extends 140 km  from New York City  to  northwestern  Connecticut. The  study  quantifies urban  structures (population density,  land  use, transportation)  and processes (population  growth,  urban land development)  in the transect,  and tests for relationships with the distribution,  sizes, and shapes of forests. Our results identify distinct characteristics  of urban and suburban environments based  on the  landscape structure of  native  forest vegetation. These  findings are  applicable to  the management of  natural  areas  along  a  gradient  of  urbanization. Key  Words:  conservation,  forest  ecology, landscape analyses, New York City, urbanization.

e altered environments of cities, coupled that  occur  when  urban areas  expand,  profoundly influence the native vegetative cover of a  landscape. Within most urbanized areas, human activities have resulted in a landscape that Th with  the  dynamic changes in  land  cover is  characterized  by  a  highly  developed urban pogenic  influences at the  periphery.  It  is  evident that urban effects extend beyond city political boundaries or built-up areas of high human  population  density  (Berry  1991). While core  and  a  trend  toward  diminishing anthro-

'Research  support was provided to K. Medley through an AAG  Research Grant and a postdoctoral appointment at the Institute of Ecosystem  Studies. We thank T. Klak, E. McCann, R. V. Pouyat, C. Young, D.  Lord, D. Hodge, and two anonymous renewers for comments on earlier drafts T h i s paper IS a contribution  to the program for the Institute of Ecosystem Studies.

Mark J. McDonnell University o f Connecticut