This article was downloaded by: [University of Windsor]

On: 16 November 2014, At: 16:39

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,

37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## The Role of Domestic Food Production in Everyday Life in Post-Soviet Ukraine

John Round b , Colin Williams b &amp; Peter Rodgers b

a School of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences , University of Birmingham , United Kingdom

b Management School , University of Sheffield , United Kingdom Published online: 29 Oct 2010.

To cite this article: John Round , Colin Williams &amp; Peter Rodgers (2010) The Role of Domestic Food Production in Everyday Life in Post-Soviet Ukraine, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 100:5, 1197-1211, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2010.520214

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2010.520214

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## The Role of Domestic Food Production in Everyday Life in Post-Soviet Ukraine

John Round, ∗ Colin Williams, † and Peter Rodgers †

∗ School of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Birmingham, United Kingdom † Management School, University of Sheffield, United Kingdom

The Soviet Union's collapse brought economic uncertainty to many Ukrainians. Approximately 20 percent of the population, 10 million people, currently survive on incomes below the state-set subsistence minimum figure. Given the unrealistic nature of this state-produced definition, 'poverty' levels are in reality much higher. A distinctive feature of this marginalization is its longevity, as seventeen years since the dismantling of the command economy relatively few feel the benefits of marketization. As Burawoy (2001) noted, the very fact that few people have starved to death during this period indicates that other economic practices must be in operation to ensure households survive. Therefore, there is a need to explore how people (re)structure their everyday lives in response to economic marginalization. Revealing such practices demonstrates the multiplicity of forms that economic marginalization can take, the relationships between formal and informal economies, the exploitation of marginalized groups, new spaces of resistance, and the potential impact of state reforms. Although there is an emerging literature qualitatively exploring the coping tactics developed as in response to economic marginalization, there has been little qualitative examination of the role that domestically produced food plays within this broad spectrum of practices. This article begins to fill this lacuna by exploring the various roles that the dacha, a plot of rural land given to households during the Soviet period, plays in everyday life. Key Words: coping tactics, domestic food production, economic marginalization, informal economies, Ukraine.

苏联解体给许多乌克兰人带来了经济不确定性。目前有1000万人口，大约占人口总数的百分之二十，收入低于国家设定 的维持生计的最低数额。对"贫困"一词的国家定义是不切实际的，有鉴于此，现实中的"贫困"水平要高得多。这种 边缘化的一个显著特点是它的持久性，自指令性经济模式被摧毁之后的十七年以来，只有较少的人口感受到了市场化的 籍此得以确保家庭的生存。因此，有必要探讨人们是如何（重新）构建日常生活来应付经济边缘化。揭示这些其他形式 的经济活动展示了经济边缘化可能产生的多种不同形式，正规和非正规经济之间的关系，对边缘群体的剥削，新的阻力 空间，以及国企改革的潜在影响。虽然有关定性地研究应对经济边缘化的发展策略的文献日益增多，在广泛的其他形式 的经济活动中粮食自产所扮演的角色的定性检查尚不多见。别墅制度是前苏联时代将农村土地分配给家庭的一项国家规 划，别墅在日常生活中起着不同作用，通过对此进行分析研究，本文填补了这方面的空白。关键词：应对策略，粮食自 产，经济边缘化，非正规经济，乌克兰。

El colapso de la Uni´ on Sovi´ etica llen´ o de incertidumbre econ´ omica a muchos ucranianos. Aproximadamente el 20 por ciento de la poblaci´ on, es decir, 10 millones de personas, sobreviven actualmente con ingresos por debajo del guarismo m´ ınimo de subsistencia definido por el Estado. Dada la irreal naturaleza de la definici´ on estatal, los niveles de 'pobreza' en realidad son m´ as altos. Un rasgo distintivo de esta marginalizaci´ on es su longevidad, en cuanto que despu´ es de diecisiete a˜ nos del desmantelamiento de la econom´ ıa controlada relativamente muy pocos sienten los beneficios de la mercadizaci´ on. Como nota Burawoy (2001), el propio hecho de que nadie haya perecido de hambre durante este per´ ıodo indica que otras pr´ acticas econ´ omicas deben estar operando para permitir que los hogares sobrevivan. Es necesario, en consecuencia, explorar c´ omo la gente (re)estructura sus vidas cotidianas en respuesta a la marginalizaci´ on econ´ omica. Al revelar tales pr´ acticas se demuestra la multiplicidad de formas que puede adoptar la marginalizaci´ on, las relaciones entre la econom´ ıa formal y la informal, la explotaci´ on de grupos marginados, nuevos espacios de resistencia y el impacto potencial de las reformas estatales. Aunque existe una literatura emergente que explora cualitativamente las t´ acticas desarrolladas para responder a la marginalizaci´ on econ´ omica, poco ha sido el examen cualitativo sobre el papel que juegan los alimentos producidos dom´ esticamente dentro de este amplio espectro de pr´ acticas. Este art´ ıculo empieza a llenar

este vac´ ıo explorando los diferentes papeles que juega en la vida cotidiana la dacha, un lote de tierra rural que se entreg´ o a los hogares durante el per´ ıodo sovi´ etico. Palabras clave: t´ acticas de respuesta, producci´ on dom´ estica de alimentos, marginalizaci´ on econ´ omica, econom´ ıas informales, Ucrania.

T he Ukrainian federal government believes that those receiving an income below the state-set subsistence minimum figure (SSSM) can be considered to be living in poverty. In 2008 this group included approximately 20 percent of the population. Given that this state-produced definition does not reflect the true cost of living in Ukraine, however, it is clear that the true levels of economic marginalization are much higher. To combat poverty, individuals and households have turned to a wide spectrum of practices to secure an income that provides for an adequate standard of living. Such practices include informal work, the use of social networks, gift-giving, mutual exchange, and the domestic production of food. It is this latter practice that this article explores through the use of the dacha, a plot of land typically with some living accommodation on it away from the owner's main residence, in everyday life. Although dacha food production has received plenty of academic attention, this has mainly explored the economic rationale of the domestic production of food through a quantitative lens (cf. Clarke 2002; O'Brien, Patsiorkovski, and Wegren 2004; Wegren 2004; Southworth 2006). Within this body of work opinions vary over the importance of this practice; however, although of course such work is extremely important, quantitative analyses often struggle to reveal the practices and spatialities that surround such production. It is in these spaces that this article's main aims lie.

By looking beyond traditional readings of the economic rationales behind dacha production, that is, the value of the outputs should outweigh inputs, it will be shown that land is important to many households (even those that do not grow food) in a multitude of ways. The work of de Certeau and Lefebvre is used here to demonstrate how economically marginalized households have developed spaces of resistance and coping tactics in response to economic marginalization. A critical reading of social capital theory is also employed to frame the complex networks that have arisen around the domestic production of food. Relevant to these arguments is the growing body of research within rural geography exploring alternative food networks (AFNs). Although much of this research is undertaken in Western European contexts, the processes discussed in this article have relevance as they share definitions of AFN produc- tion, namely, short supply chains, higher perceptions of quality, and environmentally sympathetic production methods (for discussion on the definitions, see Renting, Marsden, and Banks 2003). While acknowledging the differing contexts, our arguments suggest that such research can see such practices in a rather romantic light.

The article is structured as follows: After outlining the research methodologies, the forms of economic marginalization experienced in Ukraine, and the theoretical approaches employed to conceptualize the ways in which people have responded to them are detailed. The importance of dacha production is then discussed, in turn examining the role it plays in household consumption, the networks and sites of resistance that have continued and developed around it, and the informal selling of produce. The latter, although ostensibly straightforward, reveals complex social processes that disclose much about everyday life in post-Soviet regions.

We draw on research conducted between 2005 and 2006 in three Ukrainian cities: Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Uzhhorod. The research was conducted in two main stages: The first stage was a quantitative survey of 600 households and the second consisted of eighty qualitative follow-up interviews to explore key issues in greater depth. Repeat interviews took place with approximately half the interviewees. These interviews were contextualized by interviews with national, regional, and local political 'elites' and academics. Combined, the authors spent over twelve months in Ukraine, and ethnographic observations and numerous 'kitchen table' conversations also contextualize the research. In Kyiv, research was undertaken in the regions of Pechersk (150 surveys) and Vynohradar' (150 surveys), 'affluent' and 'marginalized' areas, respectively, and the outlying area of Vasil'kiv (150 surveys). One hundred additional surveys were completed in Kharkiv and 150 in Uzhhorod. In each locality, a spatially stratified sampling methodology was employed to select 150 households for interviews. In randomly selected streets within these regions the researcher called at every twentieth household. If there was no response or the interview was refused, then the twenty-first household was visited, then the nineteenth, twenty-second, eighteenth, and so on. A maximum of five interviews would be conducted on

each street. Although obviously not fully representative of the country as a whole, the sample was balanced between age, gender, and income groups.

In each study area around fifteen qualitative interviews were conducted with people who had answered the household survey, providing a sample with an approximately equal gender and age balance. Of this group 61 percent identified themselves as economically marginalized, having an income of less than US$400 per month. It was agreed that interviewees would be referred to only by their location. The following discussions concentrate on Ukraine as a whole as the differences in dacha use between the regions are minimal and interviewees in each area initiated discussion on similar issues. This is not to suggest that space and place are not important, because the locations around the dacha, the transportation of goods, the power relations within places, and the development of networks and sites of resistance are central to the role of the dacha in everyday life.

## Economic Marginalization and Everyday Life in the Post-Soviet Era

Although there were many negatives in the late Soviet era, there was a sense of stability. Basic foodstuffs were sometimes difficult to access, but prices and wages remained stable, allowing households to plan their economic futures. Retirees received a pension and subsidies, which, interviewees recounted, allowed an acceptable standard of living. Economic marginalization, however, came quickly to many Ukrainians following the Soviet Union's collapse. By 1993 inflation reached almost 10,000 percent per annum ( ˚ Aslund 2002), wiping out savings and drastically reducing the real worth of wages. The economic crisis engulfing the country during this period is epitomized by the fact that it was not until 1996 that the first post-Soviet bank notes could be introduced (Wilson 2005). Unsurprisingly, such turmoil saw many endure economic marginalization and by the decade's end it was estimated that 30 percent of the population had incomes below a subsistence level (World Bank 2005). Relative economic recovery saw annual gross domestic product (GDP) growth of almost 9 percent between 2001 and 2004, yet there are still high levels of economic marginalization. In late 2004, the Orange Revolution saw a change of government in Ukraine, signifying a break from the previous, allegedly corrupt, regime and a shift in political and societal outlook away from Russia toward the European

Union (Wilson 2005); however, as Larrabee (2007, 46) noted, the expected outcomes from the revolution were 'clearly overoptimistic' and did not bring an immediate increase in overall living standards. Political stability has remained elusive to date and although GDP has increased, high inflation rates have generally negated any rises in incomes. Furthermore, populist economic policies have had a negative impact on the marginalized. For example, during the course of the research Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko increased pensions and state wages; this process, however, further fueled inflation. Senior citizen interviewees all discussed how the cost of basic goods went up much more than their income had. 1 Several discussed how they could no longer afford the sugar needed to preserve their dacha production for the winter. This situation reveals the complexities of Ukraine's post-Soviet economy and the fact that everyday life for the economically marginalized is concerned with far more than the formal economy.

In comparison to Russia and some of the central Asian republics, Ukraine's scope for economic development is constrained by its relative lack of natural resources. This has a double impact as it means that, unlike Russia, the country does not benefit from the current high oil and gas prices, and the cost of importing its energy needs is constantly increasing. High energy costs further fuel inflation and deny the state tax revenues needed for social development projects. In 2006 the government suggested that approximately 20 percent of the population, or 10 million people, had incomes below the subsistence minimum. This figure, however, does not reveal the true levels of marginalization in the country. As Simonov (2004) notes, post-Soviet subsistence minimum figures do not account for the need to purchase clothes, medicines, or major household purchases and repairs. For example, the figure assumes that senior citizens receive free medicines, but the reality is markedly different: 82 percent of surveyed households with a member entitled to free medicines stated that it is difficult to obtain them. Many instead have to purchase medicines at prices similar to those in Western countries, which the subsistence minimum figure does not allow for. Purchasing medicines can take up a substantial proportion of senior citizens' household budgets. Households were asked if they believed it possible to live a 'normal life' on an income around the subsistence minimum figure. Only 8.5 percent suggested that this was possible. Therefore, it is fair to assume that far more than 20 percent of Ukrainians endure economic marginalization.

As Lefebvre (1992, 2006, 16) noted, to study the everyday solely at its microlevel at a given point in time 'bypasses the concept [of everyday life].' Similarly, marginalization in Ukraine is concerned with far more than low incomes. Many interviewees, especially senior citizens, are extremely disillusioned with the state for allowing corruption to flourish and for erecting such an inscrutable bureaucracy around everyday life. 2 As Lefebvre (2003) argued, the state constantly reproduces its nation's social spaces through laws, conventions, values, and everyday symbols and interactions. The 'winners' of the collapse of the Soviet Union, those who have made money and gained power, construct postSoviet social spaces as ones of opportunity and success: Atheme repeatedly running through 'elite' interviews was 'If we can succeed why cannot you?' Yet, as Lefebvre noted, individuals mediate these spaces very differently from the state's wishes, and antagonism exists between the state-led, metalevel production of the everyday and the realities interpreted at the microscale. State constructions of everyday life are obviously mediated by individuals in differing ways, but for many, such mediation emerges as a pride in their ability to cope in the face of perceived government indifference. In other words, when people believe that they cannot rely on the state for survival, they develop other coping practices, allowing seemingly marginal places and practices to be of crucial importance to those that live their everyday through them. For example, a small plot of land used for subsistence production might be seen as 'backwards' by the state, a brake on the development of the 'market,' but it can be of crucial importance to those who use it, not just for the food it produces but for the space it provides for resistance to externally introduced marginalization.

To understand these interpretations, de Certeau's (1984, 365) discussions on the distinctions between strategies and tactics as modes of everyday practice are extremely useful. He argued that a strategy is the 'calculation of power relationships' through which those that employ them can mould the spaces within which they operate. Those with power, such as the state or enterprises, can develop strategies to reproduce the spaces and practices they operate within, for example, by paying wages at around the subsistence minimum level to maximize profits, or by doctors demanding bribes to prescribe 'free' medicines. Conversely, tactics are a negotiation of the spaces enveloped by the strategies of the powerful: '[t]he space of the tactic is the space of the other' (de Certeau 1984, 37). As he posited, '[s]trategies are able to produce, tabu- late, and impose these spaces, when those operations take place, whereas tactics can only use, manipulate, and divert these spaces' (30). An apposite example of such strategies and tactics in Ukraine is provided by selling domestically produced food around formal market places. As will be expanded on later, those without permits to sell in these spaces develop tactics to negotiate the strategies of those, such as the police, who 'impose' these spatial restrictions. These tactics rely on the informal exchange of knowledge that is shared through close-knit social networks that exist around such practices. They are interesting examples of the use of social capital as a tool in negotiating economic marginalization. Putnam (1993) argued that levels of social capital in a region can be assessed by quantifying linkages with formal and semiformal organizations, voter turnout, newspaper readership, and other 'civic' engagements (see Fine [2003] for a critique). Drawing on such definitions, it is assumed by many that post-Soviet spaces are social capital 'deficient' due to a lack of civic engagement (see Marsh 2000; Hjøllund, Paldam, and Tinggaard 2001; Petro 2001); however, the tactics and networks analyzed here suggest a more prosaic, culturally nuanced, reading. Our findings draw on Bourdieu's (1986, 1993) conceptualizations of social capital as arising from the 'connections' made between individuals and the 'sites where it is accumulated, transmitted and reproduced.' As Lefebvre (2006, 99) argued, social trust 'is close to daily life.'

## A Return to the Land as a Coping Tactic?

The use of tactics to negotiate everyday life is not unique to the post-Soviet period. Shortage economies in the Soviet era meant that many developed networks to access scarce products and services (Lovell, Ledeneva, and Rogachevskii 2001). The domestic growing of food was also undertaken. In response to overcrowding in urban areas, the state provided families with plots of land on which they could escape from the city and grow food if they wished (Lovell 2003). The majority of the food grown would be consumed within the family network or used as a barter currency for other goods and services and constituted a large proportion of overall agricultural production (Southworth 2006). Therefore many post-Soviet tactics have deep historical antecedents. For many, what has changed is the reason for undertaking them. Many interviewees stated that in the Soviet period they had money to buy goods but there were no goods to buy. Now there are plenty

of goods to buy but they have no money to do so. Although both rationales are concerned with scarcity, the post-Soviet period has seen a dramatic increase in uncertainty. For example, workers with low incomes know they will have to continue working, either formally or informally, past their retirement age, as pensions are so low. Of course, as noted earlier, those with incomes below the SSSM have had to develop or rework tactics to ensure the survival of their households. In post-Soviet regions a broad spectrum of practices can be observed, including informal work (see Busse 2001; Humphrey 2002; Pavlovskaya 2004; Round 2005), turning to nonstate actors for assistance (Caldwell 2004), or informal exchange (Seabright 2000; Bor´ en 2003).

Domestic food production has also received plenty of academic attention, mainly exploring the economic rationale of the domestic production of food through a quantitative lens (cf. Clarke 2002; O'Brien, Patsiorkovski, and Wegren 2004; Wegren 2004; Southworth 2006). Opinions vary over the importance of this practice, with Clarke (2002) particularly dismissive and arguing that although it is richer households that can afford the inputs needed to grow food, they mainly use the dacha as a site of relaxation (see also Seeth et al. 1998). Southworth (2006) refuted this claim by noting that the number of Russian households with a dacha on which food is grown rose from approximately 12 percent in 1992 to just less than 25 percent in 1994, suggesting that production rose along with economic uncertainty. We argue, however, that such econometric approaches struggle to reveal the intrinsic processes that surround such production and the ephemeral moments of everyday life (Burawoy 2001). For example, the qualitative work of Pallot and Moran (2000), Pickup and White (2003), and Round (2006) on the role of domestically produced food in Russian households demonstrates the multitude of 'roles' that the food can play, ranging from consumption to a means of sustaining social networks. Such practices are also used to illustrate the relationships among societal change, the state, and everyday coping tactics. This relationship is important because, as Smith (2002, 229) discussed in his work conducted in Slovakia, 'Many household economic practices take place outside the commodified and market relations of an emergent capitalist economy, in a kind of decommodified space of noncapitalist/nonmarket relations . . . this is not a culturalist explanation but one recognising the plurality and historicity of economic practices.'

Therefore, there is a need to explore the dacha's 'decommodified' spaces, beyond the economic rationales of domestic food production, to examine the plurality of practices in operation within and around them. This approach resonates with de Certeau's arguments that as tactics can subvert the spaces of formal economies, it is therefore necessary to look beyond the economic when exploring everyday life. Thus the discussions that follow consider not only domestically grown food but also the importance of nonproductive dachas, the social networks that surround both types, and the tactics involved in selling surplus produce.

Relevant to these arguments is the growing body of research within rural and food geographies on what are labeled as AFNs (for further details see, for example, Whatmore, Stassart, and Renting 2003; Watts, Ilbery, and Maye 2005; Holloway et al. 2006). Although much of this research focuses on Western European contexts, the processes discussed in this article have relevance as they share definitions of AFN production, namely, short supply chains, higher perceptions of quality, and environmentally sympathetic production methods (for discussion on the definitions see Sonnino and Marsden 2006). Furthermore, Watts, Ilbery, and Maye (2005) discussed whether AFNs can be seen as alternatives to neoliberal economic development. They believed that networks and trust, cornerstones of our arguments, are central to their alternative nature. Trust in this context, however, is often presented as a reworking of relationships between producer and consumer, rather than an examination of linkages among producers, suppliers, and sellers. Some see AFNs as drivers of regional development in marginalized rural areas (e.g., Ploeg and Renting 2000; Marsden and Smith 2005); however, as Sonnino and Marsden (2006) noted, there is little discussion on their political contexts. Furthermore, there is scant consideration given to examples outside Western Europe or north America; this is problematic, as in post-Soviet contexts many millions have developed alternatives to commercial food production and distribution as a means of securing their household.

Within the AFN literature not much attention is given to the role of domestically produced food, and its sale, in response to economic marginalization. Indeed, as Goodman (2004) pointed out, the emphasis on quality, and thus higher priced goods, will lead to the exclusion of marginalized groups from 'alternative' networks. Despite such words of caution, negative aspects of AFNs are rarely touched on within the literature. This is not surprising, because as Samers (2005) discussed, there is a tendency when exploring alternative economic spaces to accentuate their positive aspects to the detriment of exploring the unequal power relations

and exploitation that exist within them. Trauger (2007, 18), for example, argued that the AFN she researches uses 'labor structures that marginalize women and exploit 'rural others,' such as migrant labor,' but it can still be argued that the AFN literature often tends to romanticize domestic or small-scale food production as a 'return to the land,' as a resistance to the market economy or multinational corporations, or because of their environmentally sympathetic nature. As the discussions that follow show, in Ukraine, although there are many positives to such practices, they are borne out of economic marginalization rather than a wish to disengage with formal structures (for example, senior citizens would much rather receive a living wage pension than have to undertake arduous work) and they have many negative aspects. Furthermore, they cannot be considered a true alternative, as in many cases they do not offer long-term security to the household. As income generated from the land often only covers the immediate winter period, it is not possible to save for the time when ill health means that such practices can no longer be undertaken. Therefore, although they are examples of the tactics employed by households, they do not provide a total escape from political frameworks characterized by low wages, pensions, and welfare provision.

## The Role of the Dacha in Everyday Life

## 'The Air Is So Good Here': The Role of Nonfarmed Dachas in Everyday Life

Of the households surveyed, 26 percent stated that they have access to land where they grow food for their household, with very little variation between the research locations. A similar percentage have access to land where no food is grown; in other words, land that could be considered 'just' a site of relaxation. As the quote from Smith (2002) suggests, however, there is a need to look at such spaces outside the narrow definitions of a 'commodified economy.' Drawing on de Certeau's (1998) notion that spaces outside of the household play important roles in its renewal, it is clear that there is still a close relationship between those who have nonfarmed land and the availability of food that is grown in the region. Interviewees who do not grow food often acquire many of the products they need from the area where their land is, bought from street markets, exchanged with neighboring land owners (perhaps, for example, in return for driving them to their dacha from the city), or given freely by other family members who do grow food. In other words, using a dacha is an inherently spatial practice even if no food is grown there. People whoacquire foodstuffs near their dacha state that they do so not only because it is cheaper, or free if the goods are exchanged, but because they are convinced that the goods are of a higher quality than store-bought produce. Although many dacha owners use fertilizers, there is still the feeling that these goods are of a much higher quality than formally purchased goods. As one interviewee from Kyiv said,

We get our meat from the village. Everyone has relatives in the village who can get products. You cannot trust the meat that is sold in shops so we get it from relatives who work on the farms as it is 'home grown' [and] therefore of good quality.

Furthermore, among interviewees who do not grow food, many acquired produce from 'nature.' This might be berries grown from bushes on their land, which require little attention (therefore they stated that they did not grow food), or products picked from nearby common land, such as mushrooms. Such products are often pickled, taken back to the city, and added to household diets over the winter when the cost of such goods becomes prohibitively expensive. 3

Entwined with such beliefs and practices is the attachment that many interviewees feel toward 'the land.' Many feel that living in the city is 'unnatural' and spend as much time in the countryside as is possible (see Lovell 2003). The spatialities of post-Soviet urban life exacerbate such feelings. The vast majority of people live in Soviet apartment blocks in cramped conditions. Urban infrastructures, built when few people had cars, struggle to cope with increased traffic, and public transport is similarly overstretched. Since the Soviet Union's collapse, crime and pollution have risen dramatically and many communal spaces, such as the entrances to apartment blocks, are in decay. It is therefore unsurprising that many interviewees discuss how 'urban' everyday life is stressful in comparison to spending time in rural areas. Interviewees described how spending time on their land allows them to regain their health after the winter and to prepare psychologically for the next one. In the Soviet period it was possible to travel within the Union to coastal resorts and sanatoriums at greatly subsidized prices. This is no longer possible, so for those who cannot afford to pay market prices the dacha is the only possible escape from the city. As one interviewee from Kharkiv discussed,

I would die without my dacha. I am too old to grow food there as the soil is of a poor quality and requires a lot of

work which I now cannot do. So I spend my time just relaxing. Growing flowers and talking to my friends who also spend the summer there is how I spend my days. The air is so good here I feel healthier the moment I arrive. It allows me to regain my health and when I leave in September I feel prepared for the coming winter months.

As de Certeau (1984, 18) noted, there is 'a pleasure in getting around the rules of constraining places,' in this case the negative aspects of urban life; thus it is clear that dachas, and the spaces that surround them, are still extremely important for everyday life even if no food is grown there.

## The Importance of Domestically Grown Food

In addition to the preceding benefits, domestically grown food plays an important role in everyday life. Of the household survey respondents with land, 74 percent stated that the produce they grow is either 'very important' or 'important' to their daily diet. Among those who grow food, only 20 percent grow food they would otherwise be unable to buy. Thus, for the majority, the food grown is important to the household more in terms of substitution or exchange. Although they could afford to buy the goods they grow, by producing them domestically their money can be spent elsewhere. As one interviewee, a construction worker from Kharkiv, said,

We don't buy fruits and vegetables as we have all this in our vegetable garden. Nor meat as we have chickens there. We grow things all year round and in the summer we preserve what we grow to help us through the winter. Our garden is very important in our life and family budget as we have children so there is always something we need to buy for them. If we had to spend all our money on food we would really struggle.

This practice does vary with age; many senior citizens stated that their diets would be extremely limited if they were unable to grow their own food. Furthermore, the food plays an important role throughout the year. All types of produce are taken back to the apartment and are stored or preserved for consumption in the winter period (see also Tchernina and Tchernin 2002) to provide for the household when the extreme cold makes it very difficult to search around urban areas for the cheapest food. During these periods the spatialities of the household shrink, although as Round (2006) noted, the social networks built up around the dacha during the summer months still provide support.

The in-depth interviews further reveal the tactical nature of domestic production. Many grow produce that is easy to grow yet expensive to buy. A common example is berries, which require little physical effort, are easy to store for the winter, and provide plenty of vitamins. One of the most popular vegetables to grow is broccoli, considered easy to grow and nutritious. Both of these goods would be too expensive for people on incomes around the subsistence minimum to buy at the market. Contrary to Clarke's (2002) findings, we observed that the importance of dacha production was linked to low incomes. Survey respondents were asked to indicate their overall household income (both formal and informal) 4 and what they felt was a realistic subsistence minimum level. The average suggested subsistence figure was an income over US$400 per month and respondents were then placed into two groups, above or below this figure. Of the respondents who grow produce on their land with an income below this subsistence figure, 82 percent stated that their domestically produced food is either extremely important or important to their daily diet. For those who have higher incomes the figure is 50 percent. Clearly, therefore, domestically produced food is a practice employed by the economically marginalized. It is especially evident among senior citizens whose pensions are their sole form of monetary income.

Although the gender aspects of the domestic production of food, and its selling and sharing around networks, was not a central theme of the research, there were relatively clear divisions of labor. The majority of people who sold the food were women, with male family members involved with driving to and from the point of sale and helping out for shorter periods. This was not just because selling the produce was seen as 'women's work' but because often men were involved in other informal work networks that took up most of their time. Furthermore, access to a car meant that the men could spend time driving other sellers to their pitches in return for a small payment, some produce, or a favor in the future. Health issues also affect the division of labor. As discussed later, selling produce often involves long hours in difficult weather conditions. Among senior citizens, ill health often affects men at a much earlier age than women and they are often physically unable to spend long periods on their feet selling the produce. Interviewees discussed how in growing and harvesting of produce the division of labor is normally much more equal, with the time spent on the land dependent on other commitments. Labor is also provided by other family members who spend less time on the dacha. As discussed earlier, helping out on the land is seen by many as an escape from the city and a way of strengthening family ties.

Can food-growing practices be seen as coping tactics employed by economically marginalized households in the sense suggested by de Certeau? The fact that they result from a conscious decision to respond to the economic marginalization people find themselves in as a result of the restructuring of the Soviet command economies suggests that they can be. For numerous reasons it is a strategy of the Ukrainian state to pay pensions and wages at a level that is extremely difficult to live on, and similarly wage levels are often very low in the private sector. It is therefore a tactic to grow one's own food, year after year, as a way of 'getting through the winter,' both materially and psychologically. Such tactics also display a plurality of rationales and actions that transcend far beyond traditional notions of the economic. In a spatial sense, the dacha might represent the actual land on which food is grown, a site of relaxation, a base from which to harvest food on common land or purchase locally grown produce, or just as an escape from the city. All of the sites provide the building blocks on which tactics to negotiate economic marginalization are developed. The goal, the survival of the household, is dependent on far more than monetary income; however, as the following sections discuss, the consumption of domestically grown food is only one of the practices that can be observed in the spaces of dacha production.

## Networks and Sites of Resistance

Informal, mutually assistive social networks are extremely important in post-Soviet societies (see Burawoy [1996, 2001]; Burawoy, Krotov, and Lykina [2000]; Humphrey [2002]; Pavlovskaya [2004]; Vitebsky [2005]; Round [2006] for examples in differing contexts). This is, however, not a solely post-Soviet phenomenon, as they were also important for everyday life in the Soviet era, when such networks were used to negotiate the shortage economy (Ledeneva 1998). Across both eras the phrase 'it is better to have a hundred friends than a hundred rubles' encapsulates people's attitudes toward their informal networks. Such networks are a revealing example of the creation, use, and maintenance of informal social capital as they are based on the individual's ability to enter personal networks and to have the will, and often the ingenuity, to maintain relationships based on future obligations (i.e., if I help you now you have to help me in the future). The Russian term for this non-cash-based system of favors is blat (for further details, see Ledeneva 2006). When interviewees were asked if they requested pay- ment when they helped an acquaintance or provided a service, many said they would rather undertake it po blaty; that is, it is done free in the expectation that when the time arises the recipient will reciprocate. Across interviewees it can be seen to operate in times of need, as a worker in Kyiv notes:

Some of my friends have a little more money than we do, and they help us. Sometimes with products, sometimes with money, sometimes even with the clothes. When my daughter was ill they helped as I had to buy a lot of medicines and they are very expensive.

In other instances networks can be used to find opportunities for informal work or to alert people to cheap goods or opportunities; for example, a doctor who does not seek bribes to dispense free medicines. People who receive help would not be expected to repay the gifts, or pay a commission on the work found, but they must be willing to help the giver. For example, the woman quoted previously later helped with the planting at the lender's dacha and babysat for her children. Thus it is no surprise that strong social networks can be observed around the sites of domestic food production. Households who grow food on their land were asked if they share labor or socialize with dacha owners in the neighboring areas; 48 percent of respondents said they do. Interviewees discussed how sharing labor made the work on the land seem less arduous and it was especially welcome if the land owner was suffering from ill health. Asenior citizen from Kharkiv, who is suffering from ill health, discussed how this process works:

My neighbors are very friendly. If you need anything they will come and help you. They help me take care of the plants as it is very difficult for me to do so. Do you do anything in return? My son, who is too busy to help most of the time, drives out here on a Sunday to see me-if my neighbors need to go back to the city or want to take produce back there then he will give them a lift. Also I grow a lot of berries on my land so I give some of them to my neighbors as well.

The socialization of these spaces increases their role as an escape from the city and as sites of relaxation. The final sentence of the preceding quote introduces another extremely important practice operating within these spaces: the sharing of domestically produced food, as 81 percent of respondents indicated that they share the produce with family and friends. This distribution can take many forms and roles. One of the most important is the role it plays in social transfers between families; for example, in ensuring that older generations

have enough food to eat. A senior citizen interviewee in Uzhhorod echoed the practices visible in many families:

Myoldest son bought a house in a village with a vegetable garden. I don't go there very often as it is a long way for me to go with my arthritis but my son lives there for the whole summer and autumn. He grows a lot of food, which makes my life so much easier as he brings me potatoes, onions, and cabbages. I don't know if I would be able to afford them on my pension. It makes my life so much less stressful.

Furthermore, interviewees discussed how they would swap their surplus produce for a friend's surplus of a different crop. Another practice is the swapping of goods for assistance that the household otherwise would find difficult to access, such as the use of a car to return produce to the city, the acquisition of fertilizers, or repairs around the dacha. Again, such processes are examples of informal social capital, and given the long-term obligations they entail, such networks are further confirmation of the existence of tactics. All of the processes just detailed are relatively minor-the lending of a small amount of money or the sharing of food, for examplebut they are crucial to the tactics of individual households. In short, to return to Lefebvre, they are 'close to everyday life.'

De Certeau (1998) wrote at length, in an urban context, about how such networks, and use of space, extend the 'living room' of the household into the everyday spaces that surround them. Within this framework it is clear that the spaces around the dacha become as important for many as the actual land that they own. As well as providing food, friendship, relaxation, and support networks, the dacha provides a site of political resistance. Households know that in times of crisis, whether within the family or society, they can draw on their land and the networks around it. During a period of uncertainty, such as ill health, people know that they have friends to turn to who will help without question. Given the uncertainties of everyday life, such support is vital in coping with the stresses of economic marginalization. Moreover, many interviewees discussed how they feel alienated from the state and that their ability to survive on such low wages or pensions provides them with great feelings of pride and satisfaction. Therefore, many dachas can be considered as sites of resistance, not just from economic marginalization but also from the detachment that many feel from the new social processes, whether political, cultural, or economic, that have sprung up in post-Soviet societies. For example, they provide a space that is relatively free from bureaucracy and corruption and interviewees discussed how the outputs reflected their inputs. For senior citizens this is especially important, as such interviewees feel that their pensions do not reflect the work they undertook in the Soviet period. Therefore, a space where their efforts are 'rewarded' provides a great deal of satisfaction. On a more macroeconomic scale, the importance of domestically produced food does, as the preceding discussions demonstrate, provide resistance to economic marginalization, especially for senior citizens. It could be considered fortunate for the state that people turn to the dacha, rather than taking to the streets in protest, in response to low pensions and wage rates. As Lefebvre (2006, 171) argued, '[d]aily life has served as a refuge from the tragic, and still does: above all else, people seek, and find, security there.' Furthermore, as de Certeau (1988, 108) said, in relation to how individuals use their neighborhood and the networks within it, ''I feel good here': the well-being under-expressed in the language it appears in like a fleeting glimmer is a spatial practice.' Such sentiments clearly exist in the spaces that surround the dacha and to paraphrase him, many people further believe that 'I can survive here.'

## The Informal Selling of Produce

One of the most overtly spatial practices connected to dacha production is the sale of the goods grown there. In the majority of post-Soviet cities, people, mainly senior citizens, can be seen selling produce at the entrances to metro or train stations or close to bus stops. This sight often contrasts starkly with the new spaces of consumption, such as high-end retail outlets, that have developed since the collapse of the Soviet Union. Groupsofpeopleselling produce outside a modern shopping mall, in temperatures well below freezing, provide a glimpse into the lives of those excluded from the benefits of the new market economies. Not all of the produce is domestically produced. Some sellers travel early in the morning to the wholesale markets on the edge of the city, where prices are cheaper, and sell their purchases at a premium to commuters who do not have the time to make such journeys. Profit margins are low and the hours are long, but an income to supplement pensions can be made.

Selling domestically produced food can take two forms. First, surplus production is sold after enough is stored for the winter and shared among family or friends. The second practice is growing vegetables or flowers specifically for sale. Often the produce is either sold

locally, at entrances to formal markets (a permit would be required to sell within the formal market space), or, as with the resellers just discussed, at transport thoroughfares. For higher priced goods, especially flowers, the growers might make the journey into the nearest large urban center to sell at a premium. Often the produce is laid out on a blanket, or on a makeshift table madeofupturned cardboard boxes, alongside other such sellers. All of the interviewees involved in this tactic stated how important it is for their household budgets. As one women in Kyiv discussed:

Myhusband is disabled and I cannot work as I need to look after him. Our only formal income is his benefit payment, therefore the income we can get from selling what we grow on our land is of vital importance to our lives. We try and save as much as we can over the summer as it is impossible to stand on the streets to sell things when it reaches minus thirty in the winter!

As the final sentence suggests, the need to save money for the winter months is paramount in the interviewees' tactics. The money that can be earned from a day's selling when related to pension sizes, for example, can be considerable, as the following interviewee (who sells produce outside a market in Uzhhorod) recounts:

I work twelve hours per day from late April to late September to earn enough to survive the winter. I start working on my land before the snow melts; something like in April. Then I dig and plant radish, dill, and onion. Usually they are the first things I sell on the market. In a good month I can earn more than my pension. I have no idea how I will live when I am not able to dig or to carry my goods to the market.

All such income is informal as no tax is paid on it, although many interviewees discussed having to make paymentstoeither the police or market owners to be 'allowed' to sell the produce where they do. This can take the form of a cash payment or some of the goods. Such practices reveal the unequal relationships within society that have (re)formed since the collapse of the Soviet Union. Drawing on de Certeau's conceptualizations of the 'strategies' of those who are able to 'produce, tabulate, and impose' spaces it is clear that those who control these spaces, such as the police or those who oversee formal retail sites, are able to postulate their poweroverthem.Fromabystander'sperspective, selling dacha produce is a seemingly straightforward process. The goods are grown, taken to a suitable location, and sold, and the money is then saved for the winter. In reality they are extremely complex social practices, as the sellers have to develop tactics to negotiate the power within these spaces. Throughout this article it has been shown that such tactics are often not just the work of the individual but are underpinned by networks that operate across spaces. To explore such networks further, we consider two examples briefly. The first, selling surplus produce outside a market, demonstrates how informal spaces are regulated and how this is bypassed. The second, flower selling in the city, highlights the importance of social networks in selling goods.

To explore the processes behind selling dacha production close to formal markets, their geographies must first be examined. At the center of the market are the formal sites where sellers have a license to trade. At the market's entrance there are semiformal sellers, people who are perhaps waiting for a license or who have good relations with the market owners and the security that regulates the site. Farther away, on the approaches to the market, are the informal sites where domestically grown produce is sold. It would be impossible for these sellers to get a license due to the payments needed and the lengthy bureaucracy involved. Furthermore, holding a license would mean that tax returns would have to be submitted. Despite their different geographies, all three spaces are still regulated. The first obstacle to selling produce informally in this, or indeed any other, area is to be allowed to do so by the people who sell there on a regular basis. It is at this point that the distinction between strategies and tactics and their relationships to space become blurred. The informal sellers have developed tactics to subvert the formal spaces, but simultaneously they are operating their own strategies to limit the ability of others to develop their own practices. Giventhenumbersofpeople who need to sell produce it is no surprise that prime selling locations were claimed many years ago. It is understandable that existing sellers do not want new entrants increasing competition. Interviewees discussed how they would approach friends or acquaintances whom they knew sold in a particular spot and enquire whether they would be allowed to work there as well. They might be 'allocated' a pitch on the outskirts of the space or be given a time slot during which they could sell their goods. Such rotas operate in many informal spaces. In more affluent regions there are rotas for scavenging through rubbish bins or for asking formal market store owners for rotting fruit and vegetables.

Even when one has a space from which to sell, further tactics are still needed to negotiate the militia and mafia groups that oversee it. Interviewees discussed how the militia often ask for payment, in cash or goods, to allow the informal selling to continue. Interviewees say

there are militia who understand that they are selling the produce because they are short of money, not in an attempt to 'cheat the state.' Therefore, one needs to be able to develop relationships with these 'overseers' to facilitate the process. Returning to Lefebvre's discussions on state-space relations, these are ostensibly formal spaces mapped out by the state, regulated by permits and restrictions, but constructed very differently by the people who use them. Those who regulate the space, the militia, should act formally but because of their low pay, weak state structures, and the formalization of corruption in post-Soviet states, they enable the informal use of these spaces through their actions. The knowledge needed for the sellers to enter and remain in these informal spaces is another example of the social capital required to undertake the practice of selling produce. The street selling of flowers requires similar uses of social capital to find a suitable place to pitch; however, its use is also visible throughout the whole process. In the town of Vasil'kiv we observed a closeknit informal community of flower sellers. Within this group knowledge is shared about what variety is easiest to grow, where the best prices can be found, and what times and places are easily accessible to sell them without too much trouble. Sellers get the cheapest bus to Kyiv (which doubles transport time) at around six in the morning so they can catch the morning commuter trade in the city center. They work until they have sold all of their produce, which can often take until late in the evening.

This is obviously an extremely time- and energyconsuming process that, given that many of the sellers are senior citizens, can affect their health negatively. If one seller is too ill to travel to the city a friend will take his or her flowers into the city and sell them on a reciprocal basis with no 'commission' charged, but the favor will be expected to be returned. On other occasions, perhaps toward the end of the season when energy levels are low, one person will take the flowers to a formal market on the edge of the city where they are sold wholesale and the money shared among the growers. All of these processes are facilitated by the deep trust that exists between members of the groups. Viewed through a Putnam-style lens, this group would be considered to be social capital deficient. Very few members of this group are members of an organization; they do not buy a newspaper, as they cannot justify the cost, and not all of them would vote, as they blame politicians en masse for the need to work so hard past retirement age. Yet close to their daily lives they would argue that informal and nonmonetary relations are what allow them to ensure the survival of their households. These are spatial practices as they are bound in the knowledge that members of this group have developed of several locations, the growing and selling areas, and their ability to 'read' these places.

## Overview

The coping tactics we have discussed, developed by households in response to economic marginalization, are deeply entwined within the communities and locations through which they operate and are facilitated by high levels of social capital. Contrary to Putnam's (1993) assumptions about how they are created or employed, this does not involve the membership of organizations or other civic engagements, newspaper readership, or trust in the state; rather, they are informal and rely on high levels of trust between people in similar economic situations. To return to Lefebvre, 'in short it is close to daily life,' and it is anticipated that our findings will resonate with qualitative research undertaken on informal work, everyday practices, and the development of tactics to negate economic marginalization in other locations and contexts. As Samers (2005) noted, research on informal economies often fails to consider their negative aspects. Therefore, it is important to reiterate here that the preceding arguments are not an attempt to overromanticize these coping tactics as alternatives or resistance to formal market relations or to cast them as a nostalgic 'return to the land.' Often the work is arduous, extremely time consuming, and does not allow people to save for a time when they cannot physically undertake such work. Therefore, there is a constant fear of what the long-term future will hold. The thoughts of a senior citizen from Kharkiv echoed the views of many interviewees:

I start work at six in the morning in the summer before it gets too hot. I water the plants and get rid of the weedsthis takes about three hours as carrying the water makes my back hurt. Selling the goods is also tiring. The bus is hot and overcrowded and I have heavy bags. You have to stand there for a long time. It is difficult to go to the toilet or get something to eat as you have to leave your pitch. It is hot in the summer and cold in the autumn to stay for hours in one place. It is a hard job especially when you are 76.

Although many of the practices under discussion have resonance with the AFN literature, such practices cannot be viewed solely as an alternative to large-scale capitalist agricultural production. Although very proud

of their ability to cope in the face of adversity, the majority of interviewees would rather use the dacha as a site of relaxation than as a place of resistance to economic marginalization. Although much of the AFN literature is situated in differing contexts, the negative aspects of such production should not be overlooked. Moreover, the pride that interviewees derive from their ability to cope in extremely trying conditions should not enable the state to absolve itself of its social welfare responsibilities. As Round and Kosterina (2005) discussed, many political elites argue that the 'poor are not really poor' as they operate the informal practices discussed earlier. As this article demonstrates, such practices are, unless you include informal subsidies to the militia, indeed conducted without recompense to the state. Yet such tactics are not created to cheat the state but because of long-term economic marginalization, and very few pull their income above a more realistic subsistence minimum.

Our discussion highlights both the continuities and discontinuities of the dacha's role between the Soviet and post-Soviet periods. On the one hand many similarities in the dacha's role can be seen within these very different economic systems. For example, across the eras dachas have offered a site of relaxation and escape from the city, formed the loci of social relations and networks, and provided food that was difficult to access. The dacha is also often a site of political resistance: in the Soviet era to an oppressive regime and in contemporary Ukraine against low wages, pensions, and perceived political indifference. Across these periods the belief that domestically grown food is healthier than mass-produced food remains very strong. There are, however, fundamental differences in the importance and roles of the dacha between the Soviet and post-Soviet times and these also reveal broader societal changes. The main change is why people turn to dacha production as a means of obtaining food. In the Soviet period basic foodstuffs were often scarce because of inefficiencies in the command economy system: There was a lack of choice and often goods were of a poor quality. Full employment and pension levels that allowed an adequate standard of living meant that households had the money to buy the food that was available, but in response to the shortages they turned to growing their own produce. In short, people did not worry about having enough food to ensure their household survival. In the post-Soviet period low real wages, unemployment, and subsistence-level pensions mean that for many people ensuring they have enough food is a constant worry. Furthermore, the social guarantees of the Soviet period are no longer available; therefore everyday life has become more precarious for many households, reflected by the fact that 67 percent of the household survey respondents feel that everyday life is now more stressful than in the Soviet period and 61 percent say that it is difficult for them to plan their household's economic future. Therefore, it can be stated that because of increased social marginalization, the removal of state safety nets, corruption making access to benefits difficult, and growing insecurity, the outputs, networks, and spaces of dacha production are more vital to everyday life than they were during the Soviet period.

The increase in social marginalization has also altered how individuals use urban apartments and dachas. Some interviewees now spend much longer at their dachas than they previously did to save on utility bills. There are also instances where people have moved out of the city permanently. Some have leased their city apartments to provide an extra income, and others have sold them to provide money to pay medical bills or to help family members. As the price of purchasing or renting property increases, it is harder for young families to find accommodation. In response, some interviewees live full time at the dacha to allow their children to use their apartment. Another stark difference is that as post-Soviet societies become increasingly unequal, dacha locations have become much more mixed use. In the Soviet period elites were rewarded with large dachas in exclusive locations that were closed to outsiders. These spaces still exist, although money can now be used to purchase dachas, but they are limited in number. Therefore, rich Ukrainians are often forced to purchase land where it is available to build a dacha, leading to the situation where very expensive dachas, used exclusively as sites of relaxation, can sit next to dachas that are used to grow food for sale or for domestic consumption. 5 This juxtaposition leads to tensions, as interviewees discussed how 'the rich' do not want their view spoiled by untidy plots of land and rundown buildings. Some interviewees, however, did say that their richer neighbors would drive them and their produce back to the city at the end of the growing season or 'keep an eye' on older family members when they are alone at their dacha.

These continuities and discontinuities reveal much about post-Soviet life in general, not just for those with access to a dacha. The changing rationale for dacha production highlights the increasing inequalities evident in post-Soviet societies and the extreme economic marginalization and uncertainties that many people face. In response to economic conditions,

the development of informal tactics, such as selling produce, demonstrates the importance of informal economies, and the failure of formal social structures and institutions, in everyday life. Obviously, as already noted, access to a dacha is by no means universal, but common to all of the interviewees on which this research was based is the importance of informal tactics, which might include a factory worker stealing goods from the workplace to sell or an engineer using company time and materials to undertake extra work on an undeclared basis (see Williams and Round [2007] for further discussion). Therefore, utilizing the dacha is just one of a wide portfolio of informal tactics employed by Ukrainians in response to economic marginalization. Our findings add to Smith's (2002, 229) argument that in post-Soviet spaces many economic practices take place outside the commodified and market relations of an emergent capitalist economy.

The importance of informal economies to everyday life cannot, however, fully compensate for low formal incomes and inadequate state structures. As few can save money beyond the forthcoming winter, many interviewees, both middle-aged and senior citizens, are extremely fearful of the time when they can no longer employ their chosen tactics. Without outside support it is extremely difficult for those whose pensions are their only income to survive. An eighty-three-year-old interviewee living in Kyiv, who used to sell produce that she had grown, discussed her situation:

I do not know how I live. A day passes and all I can afford to eat is a bowl of cereal or just some bread. It is a wonder that I am still alive. I am afraid of the winter.

AsdeCerteauargued, the 'other' can develop tactics to negotiate the spaces created by the strategies of the powerful; however, in the instances discussed here such tactics do not enable the other to completely overcome these strategies on a long-term basis. Without reconsideration by the Ukrainian state about what it means to be economically marginalized, seventeen years after the collapse of the Soviet Union it is difficult to envisage how this situation will change. For many, for far many more than these states care to admit, the everyday will remain extremely uncertain.

## Acknowledgments

The authors wish to acknowledge the UK's Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC; Ref: RES000220985), which funded this research. Our thanks are also due to Angus Cameron, Alun Jones,

Emilia Kosterina, Audrey Kobayashi, the section editor, and the anonymous referees who commented most helpfully on earlier drafts of the article.

## Notes

1. In 2008, if anything, this problem was getting worse. Although pensions rose by 13 percent in July, inflation was running at over 20 percent.
2. Informal payments are required in many areas of everyday life to secure what should be readily accessible. A Transparency International (2006) survey found that 82 percent of respondents in Ukraine had recently paid a bribe to access services or goods they were entitled to: the highest figure in the world. There is not enough space here to delve fully into the forms of bureaucracy that have developed in post-Soviet regions. Suffice to say even seemingly simple tasks take inordinate amounts of time. To provide an example, one interviewee told how she had to get six stamps on a piece of paper (all from different locations) to get a free walking stick. As she said, 'One has to be healthy to get benefits.'
3. It should be noted here that at the time of the research (March 2005-March 2006) the cost of fresh fruit and vegetables in supermarkets in Kyiv was very similar to prices found in supermarkets in the United Kingdom.
4. Formal income is taken here to mean income on which tax is paid. Informal income can arise from work undertaken 'cash in hand,' the selling, or reselling, of goods at informal markets or income from formal work that employers pay 'in an envelope' so they themselves can avoid paying payroll tax.
5. Given that the dachas belonging to rich Ukrainians are always gated and often have security guards, it was impossible to formally interview their owners. Informally several were met with over the course of the research and often in conversation about their dacha they expressed anger that their 'tranquility' is spoiled by views of unkempt vegetable plots and gardens. Given that the dachas belonging to rich Ukrainians are multistory, have double-glazed windows, and are much more akin to permanent residences, the distinction between these properties and the dachas of the economically marginalized is clear.

## References

- ˚ Aslund, A. 2002. Building capitalism: The transformation of the former Soviet bloc. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Bor´ en, T. 2003. What are friends for? Rationales of informal exchange in Russian everyday life. In Everyday economy in Russia, Poland and Latvia, ed. K. Arnsberg and T. Bor´ en, 19-34. Stockholm, Sweden: S¨ odert¨ orn Academic Studies.
- Bourdieu, P. 1986. The forms of capital. In Handbook of theory and research for the sociology of education, ed. J. Richardson, 241-58. New York: Greenwood.
- ---.1993. Sociology in question. London: Sage.

- Burawoy, M. 1996. The state and economic evolution: Russia through a China lens. World Development 24 (6): 110517.
- ---. 2001. Transition without transformation: Russia's involuntary road to capitalism. East European Politics and Societies 15 (2): 269-90.
- Burawoy, M., P. Krotov, and T. Lykina. 2000. Involution and destitution in capitalist Russia. Ethnography 1 (1): 43-65.
- Busse, S. 2001. Strategies of daily life: Social capital and the informal economy in Russia. Sociological Information 38 (2-3): 166-88.
- Caldwell, M. 2004. Not by bread alone: Social support in the new Russia. Berkley: University of California Press.
- Clarke, S. 2002. Sources of subsistence and the survival strategies of urban Russian households. In Work, employment and transition: Restructuring livelihoods in postcommunism, ed. A. Rainnie, A. Smith, and A. Swain, 193-212. London and New York: Routledge.
- de Certeau, M. 1984. The practice of everyday life. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- ---.1998. The practice of everyday life: Living and cooking. Vol. 2. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Fine, B. 2003. Social capital: The World Bank's fungible friend. Journal of Agrarian Change 3 (4): 586-603.
- Goodman, D. 2004. Rural Europe redux? Reflections on alternative agro-food networks and paradigm change. Sociologica Ruralis 44 (11): 3-16.
- Hjøllund, L., M. Paldam, and G. Tinggaard. 2001. Social capital in Russia and Denmark: A comparative study. Aarhus School of Business Working Papers No. 01-13, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.
- Holloway, L., R. Cox, L. Venn, M. Kneafsey, E. Dowler, and H. Tuomainen. 2006. Managing sustainable farmed landscape through 'alternative food networks': A case study from Italy. Geographical Journal 172 (3): 219-29.
- Humphrey, C. 2002. The unmaking of Soviet life. Everyday economies after socialism. New York: Cornell University Press.
- Larrabee, F. 2007. Ukraine at the crossroads. The Washington Quarterly 30 (4): 45-61.
- Ledeneva, A. 1998. Russia's economy of favours: Blat, networking, and informal exchange. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- ---.2006. How Russia really works: The informal practices that shaped the post-Soviet politics and business. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Lefebvre, H. 1992. Critique of everyday life. London: Verso. ---. 2003. Space and the state. In State/space: A reader,
- ed. N. Brenner, B. Jessop, M. Jones, and G. MacLeod, 84-100. London: Blackwell.
- ---. 2006. The critique of Everyday life: From modernity to modernism (Towards a metaphilosophy of daily life). Vol. 3. London: Verso.
- Lovell, S. 2003. Summerfolk: A history of the dacha, 17102000. New York: Cornell University Press.
- Lovell, S., A. Ledeneva, and A. Rogachevskii. 2001. Bribery and blat in Russia: Negotiating reciprocity from the Middle Ages to the 1990s. London: Macmillan.
- Marsden, T., and E. Smith. 2005. Ecological entrepreneurship: Sustainable development in local communities through quality food production and local branding. Geoforum 36 (4): 440-51.
- Marsh, C. 2000. Social capital and democracy in Russia. Communist and Post-Communist Studies 30 (2): 183-99.
- O'Brien, D., V. Patsiorkovski, and S. Wegren. 2004. Household responses, regional diversity and contemporary agrarian reform in Russia. The Journal of Peasant Studies 31 (3-4): 457-88.
- Pallot, J., and D. Moran. 2000. Surviving the margins in post-Soviet Russia: Forestry villages in Northern Perm' Oblast. Post-Soviet Geography and Economics 41 (5):34164.
- Pavlovskaya, M. 2004. Other transitions: Multiple economies of Moscow households in the 1990s. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 (2): 329-51.
- Petro, N. 2001. Creating social capital in Russia: The Novgorod model. World Development 29 (2): 22944.
- Pickup, F., and A. White. 2003. Livelihoods in postcommunist Russia: Urban/rural comparisons. Work, Employment and Society 17 (3): 419-34.
- Ploeg, J. D., and H. Renting. 2000. Impact and potential: A comparative review of European development practices. Sociologia Ruralis 40 (4): 529-43.
- Putnam, R. 1993. Making democracy work. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Renting, H., T. Marsden, and J. Banks. 2003. Understanding alternative food networks: Exploring the role of food supply chains in rural development. Environment and Planning A 35 (3): 393-411.
- Round, J. 2005. Rescaling Russia's geography: The challenges of depopulating the northern periphery. EuropeAsia Studies 57 (5): 705-27.
- ---.2006.Marginalisedforalifetime.Theeverydayexperiences of gulag survivors in post-Soviet Magadan. Geografiska Annaler: B 87 (1): 15-34.
- Round, J., and E. Kosterina. 2005. The construction of 'poverty' in post-Soviet Russia. Perspectives on European Politics and Society 6 (3): 403-34.
- Samers, M. 2005. The myopia of 'diverse economies,' or a critique of the 'informal economy.' Antipode 37 (5): 875-86.
- Seabright, P., ed. 2000. The vanishing rouble: Barter networks and non-monetary transactions in post-Soviet societies. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Seeth, H., S. Chachnova, A. Surinova, and J. Von Braun. 1998. Russian poverty: Muddling through economic transition with garden plots. World Development 26 (9): 1611-24.
- Simonov,V.2004.Russkieustali on dobrodeteli byt' bednymi (Russians tired of the virtue of poverty). RIA Novosti 27 (April): 3.
- Smith, A. 2002. Rethinking 'survival' in austerity: Economic practices and household economies in Slovakia. In Work, employment and transition:Restructuring livelihoods in post-Communism, ed. A. Rainnie, A. Smith, and A. Swain, 227-45. London and New York: Routledge.
- Sonnino, R., and T. Marsden. 2006. Beyond the divide: Rethinking relationships between alternative and conventional food networks in Europe. Journal of Economic Geography 6 (2): 181-99.
- Southworth, C. 2006. The dacha debate: Household agriculture and labor markets in post- socialist Russia. Rural Sociology 71 (3): 451-78.

- Tchernina, N., and E. Tchernin. 2002. Older people in Russia's transitional society: Multiple deprivation and coping responses. Aging and Society 22 (5): 543-62.
- Transparency International. 2006. Global corruption barometer 2006. http://www.transparency.org/ policy research/survey indices/gcb/2006 (last accessed 3 September 2006).
- Trauger, A. 2007. Un/re-constructing the agrarian dream: Going back-to-the-land with an organic marketing cooperative in South-Central Pennsylvania, USA. Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 98 (1): 9-20.
- Vitebsky, P. 2005. Reindeer people: Living with animals and spirits in Siberia. London: HarperPerennial.
- Watts, D., B. Ilbery, and D. Maye. 2005. Making reconnections in agro-food geography: Alternative systems
- of food provision. Progress in Human Geography 29 (1): 1-19.
- Wegren, S. 2004. Russian peasant farms and household plots in 2003: A research note. Eurasian Geography and Economics 45 (3): 230-39.
- Whatmore, S., P. Stassart, and H. Renting. 2003. What's alternative about alternative food networks? Environment and Planning A 35 (3): 389-91.
- Williams, C., and J. Round. 2007. Re-thinking the nature of the informal economy: Some lessons from Ukraine. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 31 (2): 425-41.
- Wilson, A. 2005. Ukraine's orange revolution. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- World Bank. 2005. Ukraine poverty assessment: Poverty and inequality in a growing economy. Kyiv, Ukraine: World Bank.

Correspondence: School of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK, e-mail: j.round@bham.ac.uk (Round); Management School, University of Sheffield, 9 Mappin Street, Sheffield, S1 4DT, UK, e-mail: c.c.williams@shef.ac.uk (Williams); Peter.Rodgers@sheffield.ac.uk (Rodgers).