## Success and Failure of Crossbred Cows in India: A Place-Based Approach to Rural Development

## Pratyusha Basu

Department of Geography, University of South Florida

Although India's cooperative dairying program is lauded as a model of successful rural development, lack of uniformity in replication of the program across rural India has raised questions about the meanings of success. Differences between dairy cooperatives become especially apparent when crossbred cows are considered, so that the promotion of crossbreds by dairy development agencies has not always resulted in their actual adoption by farmers. This article seeks to explain the mixed reception accorded to crossbred cows by focusing on the link between development and place. By discussing both official discourses and local perspectives, the article enables two kinds of understanding of dairy development. First, the rise and fall of support for crossbred cows within India's national plans suggest that contrasts between official policies and local practices of dairying need to be attentive to the dynamics of both discourses and places. Second, the comparison between two villages-one utilizing crossbred cows and the other water buffaloes as principal dairy animals-shows that evaluations of success or failure cannot be made simply on the basis of adoption or rejection of crossbred cows but requires engagement with place-specific agricultural economies and social relations. Given the liberalization of India's dairy sector, official discourses and material experiences of cooperative dairying become significant for ascertaining future possibilities for small-scale farming and equitable economic growth in rural India. Key Words: agriculture, dairy animals, India, place, rural development.

虽然印度的合作化乳酪项目被称赞为一种成功的农村发展模式，但该项目在印度农村缺少能够复制的统一性，使得 其成功的含义受到置疑。如果考虑到杂交品种牛的因素，乳制品合作社之间的差别就变得特别明显，所以，奶业发 展机构对杂交品种牛的推广并不总是被农民接受。本文的重点放在发展程度与地区之间的联系，以此试图解释对待 杂交品种牛的不同接受程度。通过对官方言论和地方观点的讨论，本文对奶业发展的两种不同理解进行了分析说明。 首先，印度国家规划里对杂交牛加以支持，但是实际结果的成败则表明，我们需要对官方政策和地方实践的矛盾加 以关注，对于乳酪农业的需要，要从动态的理论论述和地区差异两方面加以分析。其次，对比两个村庄个例，一个 利用杂交品种牛，另一个利用水牛作为主要的奶制品动物，结果表明，评价成败的标准不能简单地定义为对杂交品 种牛的接受和拒绝，还应该考虑到与地区相关的特定农业经济和社会关系因素。在印度农村地区实行小规模耕作和 公平的经济增长，为了确定该模式的未来发展可能性，鉴于印度奶制品行业的自由化，官方话语和乳酪农业合作社 的实质经验对此具有重要意义。关键词：农业，乳制品动物，印度，地方，农村发展。

Pese a los elogios que se prodigan al programa cooperativo de lecher´ ıa de la India, como modelo de desarrollo rural exitoso, la falta de su r´ eplica uniforme en todo el ´ ambito rural de aquel pa´ ıs genera interrogantes sobre c´ omo debiera entenderse el ´ exito. Las diferencias entre las cooperativas lecheras se hacen especialmente notorias cuando se trata de vacas mestizas, porque la promoci´ on de esta clase de animales por las agencias de desarrollo del sector lechero no siempre produce adopciones reales por parte de los granjeros. En el art´ ıculo se pretende explicar la acogida mixta dispensada a las vacas cruzadas, con la atenci´ on centrada en el v´ ınculo que hay entre desarrollo y lugar. Al discutir los discuros oficiales, lo mismo que las perspectivas locales, el art´ ıculo habilita dos maneras de pensar el desarrollo lechero. En primer t´ ermino, el auge y ca´ ıda de la preferencia por las vacas mestizas en los planes nacionales de la India, sugiere que los contrastes entre las pol´ ıticas oficiales y las pr´ acticas lecheras locales necesitan poner atenci´ on a las din´ amicas tanto de los discursos como de los lugares. Y segundo, la comparaci´ on entre dos aldeas-una que utiliza vacas mestizas y la otra b´ ufalos como sus principales animales lecheros-muestra que las evaluaciones del ´ exito o fracaso no pueden simplemente hacerse con base en la adopci´ on o rechazo de vacas cruzadas, sino que requiere considerar las econom´ ıas agr´ ıcolas y relaciones sociales espec´ ıficas del lugar. Dada la liberalizaci´ on del sector lechero de la India, los discursos oficiales y las propias experiencias de lecher´ ıa cooperativa adquieren significaci´ on cuando se trata de entrever las posibilidades de la agricultura de peque˜ na escala y el crecimiento econ´ omico justo en los campos de la India. Palabras clave : agricultura, animales de lecher´ ıa, India, lugar, desarrollo rural .

I ndia's national dairy development program is widely regarded as an exemplary instance of rural development due to its focus on organizing farmers' cooperatives for the collection and marketing of milk (Kurien 1997a). As part of strategies to improve productivity, the program has also promoted the adoption of crossbred cows, using indigenous Zebu varieties and European dairy breeds (mainly Jersey and Holstein-Friesian). The official promotion of crossbred cows, however, has not always resulted in their actual adoption in local contexts, so that variations in the replication of dairy development become especially visible when crossbred cows are considered (Candler and Kumar 1998).

This article focuses on the mixed reception accorded to crossbred cows in India to understand the role of place-based characteristics in shaping the outcomes of development programs. It contrasts two village dairy cooperatives, one representing the success of dairy development where crossbred cows have been adopted and the other located in an area where cooperative dairying has been less successful and where water buffaloes are the principal dairy animals. The aim is to show that development policies are neither simply appropriated nor wholly rejected by local communities. Instead, local communities engage with and transform development programs to fit them into specific local circumstances. This transformation occurs in the case of both appropriations and refusals of the directives of development programs. The contextual unfolding of cooperative dairying is thus crucial for understanding what has actually been achieved by the dairy development program.

A study of cooperative dairying in India illuminates a widely feted instance of development but is also more broadly significant because it contributes to two key research areas within contemporary geographic studies, producing critical understandings of development and providing diverse understandings of rural places. In development studies, geographic perspectives have clarified contests over development through comparisons between official discourses and community-level experiences. Schroeder (1999), for example, considers development strategies in the Gambia to show how the shift in emphasis from market gardening done by women to agroforestry done by men weakened women's positions in the household even as it increased women's work due to the spatial proximity of women's gardens and men's trees. In western India, Robbins (1998, 2003) has considered how discourses of deforestation have led to the privileging of officially defined forest landscapes over the pastoral landscapes valuable to herders, thus highlighting the inconsistencies between expert and everyday meanings of landscapes. In both cases, official discourses emerge as incomplete portrayals of the unfolding of development, and the juxtaposition of development discourses with place-based social identities highlights the material consequences of development.

The focus of the most recent World Development Report on agriculture (World Bank 2007) exemplifies the extent to which rural places are exercising the imaginations of global institutions. This visibility of the rural is likely to have been partly fueled by the value of the agricultural sector for neoliberal strategies of accumulation (e.g., Patnaik 1999) and partly prompted by the resistance posed by rural places to the inequalities unleashed by neoliberal policies (e.g., Perreault 2005; Aiyer 2007). India's dairy development program provides a different perspective because it has not opposed the liberalization of the dairy sector as much as sought to become competitive within the global economy (Raju 2007). This is reflected in current programmatic statements that seek to '[set] realistic goals for strengthening cooperative business, production enhancement, assuring quality, and creating a national information network' (National Dairy Development Board [NDDB] 2008). Yet the full impacts of neoliberalization on cooperative dairying have yet to be felt (V. Sharma and Gulati 2003), so that a contemporary analysis of the program is likely to provide a basis for understanding the extent to which the withdrawal of state support will affect rural economies.

A focus on cooperative dairying in India also responds to the call by Woods (2007) for greater attentiveness to rural places in the context of globalization. He contends that the emphasis on 'global cities' needs to be tempered by an engagement with the 'global countryside,' and this is especially pertinent in the context of South Asia, where countries like India remain predominantly rural and agricultural. Woods argues that 'globalization remakes rural places not through a politics of domination and subordination, but through a micropolitics of negotiation and hybridization' (502). I seek to illuminate similar forms of local engagement with national policies related to crossbred cows and thus draw dairy cooperatives into wider discussions of the remaking of rural places.

The next section outlines the broader context of dairy development through an overview of the political economy of rural India and the cultural and economic meanings of cattle in India. This is followed by a focus

on the links between national and international dairy development institutions to trace the rise and fall of crossbred cows within official discourses. The two case study villages are then introduced, followed by an analysis of household-level data to establish principal differences in local dairying between the two villages, and an analysis of ethnographic evidence to explain the processes through which such differences in dairying have been constructed. The article thus provides a series of vantage points from which to view forms and processes of dairy development, and the conclusion reflects on how this range of perspectives enables a more complex understanding of the ways in which development is inflected by place.

## Politics of Development and Cultures of Cattle 1 in India

In studies of the political economy of India, there has been much debate regarding the extent to which agrarian class interests are expressed through the Indian state (Rudolph and Rudolph 1987; Varshney 1995; Bardhan 2003; Frankel 2005). In the 1960s, the period when rural cooperative dairying was officially established as the national program of dairy development in India, economic policies were geared not just toward productivity but also toward self-sufficiency and redistribution. Contradictions between the aims of productivity and redistribution, however, were apparent right from the beginning and became especially prominent in the context of the Green Revolution in agriculture. The focus on technology-intensive agriculture, dependent on high-yielding hybrid seeds, chemical fertilizers and pesticides, large-scale irrigation projects, and mechanization, has been viewed as a key to India becoming self-sufficient in food grains (Lipton and Longhurst 1989; Hazell and Ramasamy 1991), but it has also been criticized for producing and entrenching inequalities in rural land ownership (Byres 1981; Harriss 1982). Given that initial attempts at land reform have often faced a lack of political will for continued implementation, it has been argued that structures of rural inequality have not just remained undisturbed but have also been intensified by state policy (Radhakrishnan 1990; Besley and Burgess 2000). Meanwhile, new farmers' movements in India have been quick to grasp at Lipton's (1977) allegation of 'urban bias' in the Indian polity to shift the discussion from within-rural inequalities to urban-rural inequalities (Brass 1995; Gupta 1998).

Dairy development, also known as the White Revolution, can be counted as part of the emphasis on technology-dependent productivity. The crossbred cow is one of the principal manifestations of this dependence, but the technocentrism of dairying can also be seen in the context of state-of-the-art dairy processing plants and milk marketing based on long-distance transport routes and associated refrigeration technologies. The program is also a striking example of rural bias that actively discourages urban and private dairies to promote rural cooperative dairying as the primary model for dairy development in India (George 1985; Candler and Kumar 1998). In many accounts, cooperative dairying is also depicted as possessing broad-based support in rural India due to its value for all segments of rural society, across gender and class divisions (NDDB 1987; Candler and Kumar 1998; Hemme, Garcia, and Saha 2003). In contrast, critics have argued that the biases of dairy development resemble those of the Green Revolution, so that existing social inequalities are reflected in the membership of cooperatives (Alvares 1985; Baviskar 1988).

The consequences of the shift to market-led development for urban-rural inequalities have also become the subject of much analysis and disagreement since the 1990s liberalization of the Indian economy (Vyas 2002; Kalirajan 2004; Deaton and Kozel 2005). There is some evidence to show that the deregulation of the agricultural sector has led to increasing uncertainty in agricultural returns, as well as actual loss of ability to depend on agricultural livelihoods (Patnaik 1999; Das 2007). The already existing gaps between urban and rural levels of development are thus likely to be exacerbated by neoliberal policies (Kurian 2007). The political implications of this situation were reflected in the results of the 2004 general elections, when the then ruling alliance led by the right-wing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) was defeated. Given that the campaign of the BJP was organized around the slogan 'India Shining,' this defeat was viewed as a major setback to the celebratory narrative of neoliberalization and mainly attributed to the lack of coincidence between urban and rural experiences of the new economy (Oza 2004). Thus, whereas urban experiences of neoliberalization could be depicted as the increasing availability of foreign consumer goods and the opportunity to participate in the global information technology (IT) economy (Oza 2006), stories emanating from rural areas usually focused on suicides by indebted farmers (Vakulabharanam 2005; Radhakrishnan2006). The rural backlash against neoliberalization, however, cannot be considered uniform. As Patnaik

(1999) has stated, the shift toward an export-oriented agricultural economy has been welcomed by some farmers who seek to gain access to the higher prices provided by global commodity markets. Yet, to the extent that these farmers do not pay their laborers globally competitive minimum wages, class divisions are likely to be intensified in this shift toward synchronizing local agricultural practices to global demands.

How the liberalization of the dairy sector, officially promulgated in 1992, will change the meanings of cooperative dairying is still an open question (Rajaram 1996; Katakam 2002). According to Patnaik (1999), globalization of agricultural production and consumption has entailed the transformation of Third World agriculture to serve the needs of First World consumers, with deleterious consequences for food security in the Third World. In this context, she discusses both the changes in Latin American cropping patterns to serve needs for fresh fruits and vegetables as well as fodder in the United States and also briefly mentions recent attempts by India's dairy development program to focus on overseas markets. Patnaik's analysis of the inequalities embedded in 'free trade' mirrors concerns raised by critics of dairy development over the ways in which milk from rural areas has been directed toward urban consumers under the stated aim of providing assured markets for rural milk producers (George 1985). Dairy officials have argued, however, that providing milk to the cooperative does not decrease milk consumption in rural areas (NDDB 1987). As mentioned earlier, in terms of the future of dairying in the neoliberal context, the official position is that rural cooperatives can withstand global competition (Raju 2007; NDDB 2008). Poised between the old and new economies, cooperative dairying emerges as a key site from which to launch an examination of the possible meanings of neoliberalization and globalization for rural India.

This is only part of the narrative of dairy development, however; the political economy of agriculture has to be connected to meanings of cattle to understand the ways in which dairy development is constructed in local contexts. In the case of India, cattle are of course especially charged sites through which national cultural and religious identities are produced 2 (Yang 1980; Pandey 1983). Cows are represented in Hindu-origin myths as one of the sources from which the world was created and an acceptance of the sacred nature of cattle is part of popularly held religious beliefs across India (Korom 2000). Proscriptions on beef eating, and in fact on consumption of meat in general, are thus the unofficial and increasingly official norm as part of the wider hegemony of Hindu beliefs. The extent to which Hindu religious texts actually oppose the killing and eating of cows has become a matter of controversy in recent times, but the use of cow protection as part of political agendas and the centering of religious conflict on alleged desecration of cattle makes cows a key emblem for right-wing organizing in India (Jha 2002).

Concurrently, cattle have been a crucial component of rural livelihoods in India and their role in agriculture continues into the present, so that the religious meanings of cattle are linked to their significance for agricultural economies (Freed and Freed 1981; Harris 1992). Within discourses of dairy development, the religious meanings of cattle have not received attention, even as such meanings are implicit to the extent that discussions of dairying do not flow into discussions of the uses of cattle as meat (Nair 1987; Sriram 2004). Thus, questions during my fieldwork did not refer to the death of cattle, and the methods for disposal of old or unproductive cattle were not part of my surveys or interviews. Although this silence can be traced to the religious beliefs of the people interviewed, it was also implicitly assumed that the utilization of cattle as meat was not within the framework of my research on dairying.

Robbins (1999) follows the meat commodity chain in India to show that the slaughter of cows remains hidden, usually because it is illegal, although the slaughter of buffaloes, goats, and sheep does take place in urban slaughterhouses. Thus, rural places partly remain separate from meat production by transferring animal slaughter to urban sites. Yet, as Robbins also shows, meat eating does exist in rural places, present among non-Hindu, lower caste, and landless groups, especially through the keeping of goats. The ways in which dairy development separates itself from wider considerations of livestock ownership thus is also part of its acceptance of existing cultural hegemonies.

Although the separation between a celebrated dairying and hidden meat economy has not received attention, criticisms of dairy development dwell on the Western nature of crossbred cows (Alvares 1985; George 1985), which fits into larger concerns over the role of development in the destruction of indigenous knowledge (e.g., Shiva 1988). Such destruction is a global concern, and recent reports have emerged from Uganda regarding the loss of native Ankole cattle due to the introduction of profitable European species (Rice 2008). Loss of indigenous breeds is also becoming a concern in Western contexts where the emphasis on milk and meat productivity is promoting

dairying monocultures and hurting the diversity of cattle species (Yarwood and Evans 2003). Similar concerns have also recently begun to be voiced within India's national plans, as it is being noted that local varieties of Zebu breeds, produced through indigenous breeding efforts, are likely to be lost where crossbred cows become widely adopted. Yet this was not always the case, and the next section considers how notions of the productivity of crossbreds became part of official dairy development discourses.

## Crossbred Cows and National Discourses of Dairy Development

National dairy development in India is based on replication of cooperative dairying bodies established by farmers in the state of Gujarat (NDDB 1987; Kurien 1997a). In 1946, villages around Anand, a small town in central Gujarat, became the site of a struggle against the monopoly on milk procurement and marketing granted to Polson, a private dairy company. This struggle compelled the British colonial authorities to rescind the monopoly, and the farmers of Anand organized themselves into the Kheda District Cooperative Milk Producers' Union (KDCMPU), 3 currently more popularly known as Amul, the brand name of its products. As the KDCMPU grew in the villages surrounding Anand, farmers began resisting the hold of small-scale private traders in milk. Thus, cooperative dairying sought to reform existing structures of marketing to return profits to dairy farmers as opposed to milk traders and dairy companies.

In 1965, rural cooperative dairying was proclaimed the national model of dairy development in India and the NDDB was established at Anand (NDDB 1987). 4 The raison d'ˆ etre of the NDDB was replication of the Anand model, and one of its principal tasks was to obtain funding for this. 5 At that time, dairy products were being provided as food aid by the European Economic Community (EEC; Talbot 1979; Doornbos et al. 1990), and the NDDB decided that money obtained from selling EEC dairy products in urban markets would be utilized to replicate rural cooperative dairying. For dairy development officials, this was an innovative use of food aid, as it would serve to strengthen local dairy production instead of increasing competition between national and international dairy products (NDDB 1987). Dairy officials also viewed their role as one of connecting farmers to the best of engineering and marketing expertise, by setting up high-tech dairy plants and launching a high-profile advertising campaign for

Amul 6 (Fulton and Bhargava 1994). The crossbred cow soon became central to the provision of better technologies of dairying, and this brings us to the role of the World Bank in shaping the replication of dairy development.

## National Planning and International Funding: Coincidences of Power

The future lies with the hybrid cow-in the beginning a first cross of European milk breed (mainly Jersey) on the native cow [Zebu] which in one generation will double production and about halve costs of production. It's the most exciting cattle development prospect in the world at the present time . . . . In my view, the prospect is the animal equivalent of the rice and wheat story with the possibility of even greater initial gains and impact upon costs of production which, with the buffalo, can only remain high. (internal memo of the World Bank 1969, cited in Candler and Kumar 1998, 2)

The first loan from the World Bank for replication of cooperative dairying was obtained in 1974 and specifically directed to the states of Karnataka, Rajasthan, and Madhya Pradesh. As the preceding quote shows, crossbred cows had begun to be discussed in glowing terms within the World Bank before official initiation of funding. The discussion of crossbred cows in India's Five Year Plans began at roughly the same time, with the earliest mentions appearing in the Third Five Year Plan, 1961-1965 (Planning Commission 2008). In contrast, the First Five Year Plan, 1951-1956 (Planning Commission 2008), views the breeding of high-yielding dairy cattle as a matter of improving indigenous breeds. In the words of this document:

Among the well-defined breeds in India there are three broad divisions, viz., milch [dairy], draft and dual purpose breeds. Recent investigations have indicated that some of the draft breeds are potentially capable of yielding more milk and this capacity can be developed by proper methods of breeding and management. There is thus a possibility of most of the breeds of Indian cattle being developed eventually into dual purpose animals and this is the prime objective of the breeding policy of the Government of India. (Chapter 19, Section 7)

By the Third Five Year Plan period, indigenous breeds were also sought to be developed through crossbreeding with exotic species (mainly Jersey), exotic breeds being designated as especially suitable for 'regions of high altitude which have heavy rainfall' (Chapter 21, Section 6). By the Fourth Five Year Plan, 19691974 (Planning Commission 2008), crossbreeding was

designated as the 'main emphasis of the new cattle breeding policy' (Chapter 8, Section 10). Yet, a note of caution was also struck with these observations:

While introduction of 50 per cent of exotic blood has proved to be satisfactory, the introduction of 75 per cent of exotic blood has generally tended to reduce body weight, viability and milk yield. In regard to cross-breeding with Jersey bulls, it has been considered advisable to fix the exotic inheritance at 5/8 level and inter-breed from stock having this exotic blood. (Chapter 8, Section 10)

Whether the coincidence between international and national discourses of improving cattle breeds signified the dominance of international agencies over Indian dairying, or drew strength from the support of Indian managers and engineers seeking to increase the efficiency of milk production and processing, remains a matter of debate. This specific controversy within dairy development resembles the larger argument raised by critics of international development regarding the unequal terms of the encounter between existing indigenous practices and new technologies of development.

## Indigenous Dairying Versus Western Dairying: Loss of Local Control

Whilst other tropical countries import Indian cattle to breed their animals stronger and hardier, India herself is frantically importing European breeds to make her zebus more delicate and demanding. (George 1990a, 124)

Critics of dairy development point out that the promotion of crossbred cattle through national dairy development did not conform to the original structure of cooperative dairying in Anand. S. Patel (1990, 46) argues that the KDCMPU had introduced dairy development based on the Jersey cow to the farmers of Kheda only in the 1960s. Prior to that time, dairying in Kheda had used buffaloes. The subsequent promotion of crossbreeding with exotic species as an ingredient of the Anand model was thus to ignore the role of buffaloes in the actual production of successful dairying in Anand (George 1988).

Promotion of the crossbred cow was linked by critics to the increasing power of international funding agencies, such as the EEC and the World Bank, which in turn increased the strength of dairy officials over local dairy farmers (Baviskar and George 1988; Baviskar and Terhal 1990). The relative power of experts has become a topic of wide concern within studies of international development and the World Bank has been at the center of such concerns. For example,

Goldman (2007) has shown how the privatization of water has become the central policy of water reform across the Third World through both actual conditionalities and a carefully coordinated campaign waged by the World Bank and networks of research and dissemination linked to it. In a similar vein, Broad (2006) considers how the Bank sponsors studies specifically to produce evidence regarding the benefit of neoliberal policies, and hence counter criticisms regarding the rise of inequalities within regimes of structural adjustment.

In the case of dairy development in India, the promotion of crossbred cows by dairy development officials has been criticized by George (1990a) as detrimental both to indigenous cattle breeds as well as to existing practices of agriculture. For George (1985, 8), the crossbred cow was an attempt to 'restructur[e] . . . India's dairy economy on the lines of what are usually called 'advanced dairying countries'' so that dairy policy was 'tear[ing] down indigenous structures [and replacing them with] imports of dubious relevance' (xii). Thus, although dual-purpose cattle breeds were preferred in India, crossbred cows could only be used for dairying purposes and not as draft cattle, rendering them less useful to Indian farmers (George 1990a).

The gender dimensions of local dairying knowledge are also stressed in such criticisms. George (1985), in the specific context of cooperative dairying, and Shiva (1988), in the wider context of rural development, have argued that development programs are better viewed as the devaluation and loss of local control, often with deleterious consequences for women's environmental and agricultural knowledge. Due to dairy development, women's roles in milk processing and their control over milk sold from home is lost to dairy plants and the dairy cooperative, respectively.

The extent to which such debates over the traditional uses of cattle and the inequalities inherent in new dairying technologies remain overarching scholarly pronouncements, or also resonate at the grassroots level within village dairy cooperatives, will be followed through the case studies discussed in this article. This issue becomes especially important because, whether in official documents or in critical analyses, the perspective of farmers does not emerge with any clarity. Given that one of the initial acts of the newly formed KDCMPUwas to hire Verghese Kurien, a U.S.-trained engineer, as its manager, it is not clear that dairy farmers are against new technologies (Kurien 1997b). Moreover, given variability in agricultural practices and women's work across rural India (U. Sharma 1980;

Jackson and Chattopadhyay 2000), it is clear that contextual factors need to be part of narratives of dairy development. With this in mind, let us next consider the ways in which dairy development is connected to agriculture and take a step toward adding place-based understandings to the analysis of dairy development.

## Replication of the Anand Model in Madhya Pradesh: Cropping Patterns and Private Traders

As mentioned earlier, Madhya Pradesh was one of the states in which cooperative dairying was replicated on the basis of funding provided by the World Bank, and dairy development in this context was viewed as having failed to match the success of the original model. In evaluations commissioned by the Bank, the 'failure' of dairy development in Madhya Pradesh was associated with two meanings: The first was the closing down of dairy cooperatives in many villages, and the second was the unwillingness of villagers to adopt crossbred cows for dairying. In Mergos and Slade's (1987) discussion, based on a survey conducted in 1983, the second meaning is privileged. One of their main conclusions is that the strengthening of veterinary services will increase the adoption of crossbred cows, and they emphasize the adoption of crossbred cows even as they also state that milk yields have shown an increase in Madhya Pradesh despite lackluster response to crossbred cows. Their discussion thus privileges the economic meanings of crossbred cows and cooperatives, and does not consider the fit between crossbreds and the agrarian context to explain the extent of adoption.

Hiremath, Singh, and Mergos (1997) analyze how existing practices of agriculture and dairying have served to reduce acceptance of cooperative dairying in Madhya Pradesh. Their findings are based on a longitudinal study of villages affiliated with three cooperative unions, including the Indore Milk Union, first surveyed in 1983 (these are also the data that were used by Mergos and Slade) and resurveyed in 1997. According to them, the relative lack of success of cooperative dairying in Madhya Pradesh can be linked to changes in cropping patterns, especially the shift toward soybean cultivation. Between the 1970s and the 1990s, the cultivation of soybeans increased from being negligible to becoming one of the leading crops in Madhya Pradesh. The problem with soybean cultivation is that it is not utilized as cattle feed; instead, cotton and groundnut shells are used. Thus, decline in the cultivation of cotton and groundnuts, consequent to increase in the acreage allotted to soybeans, meant that farmers had to depend on purchasing cattle feed, which was not feasible for all farmers.

Hiremath, Singh, and Mergos (1997) also point out that the link with private traders had not been broken in Madhya Pradesh. The city of Indore, for example, continued to be the site of competition between the cooperative union and private milk companies. Private dairy traders were preferred because they seemingly offer higher prices by paying on the basis of quantity and not fat content, unlike the dairy cooperative. Moreover, private traders could provide dairy farmers with personal loans, which are not available from the cooperative. This response to private traders is an important difference between dairy cooperatives in Gujarat, which specifically organized to oppose private milk traders, and Madhya Pradesh, where cooperatives were introduced as a development program rather than a people's movement. The political meanings of dairy cooperatives thus differ markedly at the sites of replication.

## Rethinking Crossbred Cows

By the early 1990s, celebratory discourses regarding the adoption of crossbred cows were overshadowed by a gradual loss of support for cooperative dairying. In 1996, the World Bank did not renew funding for the cooperative dairying program. Candler and Kumar (1998, 12) quote a 1995 internal Bank memorandum that asserts that the 'key argument' for withdrawing support lay in the fact that 'the project design is not consistent with the present GOI (Government of India) and Bank strategy of leveling the playing field for agroindustrial development between cooperative and private entrepreneurs, thus putting the project at odds with the recommendations of our macroeconomic work as well as the recent livestock sector review.' By 1996, therefore, the Bank believed that 'the private sector might be more efficient than the cooperative sector' (12) and that Operation Flood was too costly to support. Economic liberalization of India's dairy sector, put into effect in 1992, had made its appearance in the discourses of international development.

India's Tenth Five Year Plan, 2002-2007 (Planning Commission 2008), supports the complete deregulation of the dairy sector and briefly mentions crossbreeding, espousing a stance at odds with the Fourth Five Year Plan. In the words of the Tenth Plan,

Crossbreeding, which was to be taken up in a restricted manner and in areas of low producing cattle, has now spread indiscriminately all over the country. Continuous emphasis on cross breeding with exotic breeds even in the

tracts of indigenous breeds led to the near extinction of some of the known breeds. (569)

Thus, the Plan supports the breeding of indigenous varieties of cattle, so that even as the dairy sector is being opened up and liberalized, local cultures of dairying need to be protected.

In this uneven history of support for crossbred cows, dairy development discourses emerge as multivalent, borrowed from both international development agendas and local agrarian politics. Grassroots development practices thus do not merely emulate official desires but seem to converge with or diverge from them at various points, depending on the changing nature of pronouncements by development agencies. The remaining sections of this article follow the adoption and refusal of crossbred cows at the level of the village in the light of these official positions on dairy development.

## Case Studies

Local perspectives on dairy development were gathered through ethnographic fieldwork conducted in 2000 and 2001 in the village of Mahdol in the state of Gujarat and the village of Saundara in the state of Madhya Pradesh. 7 Fieldwork consisted of data collection using surveys administered to every household and interviews conducted with a cross section of village residents. Both surveys and interviews were undertaken with a research assistant who was a resident of the village. Because these data were collected while I resided in the village, interpretations have also been supplemented through participant observation. Mahdol and Saundara were chosen as field sites because they reflect the variations in outcomes of dairy development that this research seeks to explicate. Crossbred cows are the principal dairy animals in Mahdol, whereas water buffaloes play this role in Saundara, so that the two villages provide an important basis for understanding how different development histories and regional economies affect the adoption of new technologies.

Recent geographic understandings of place have moved from humanistic notions of place as attachment, to materialistic understandings of place as a specific node in the wider production of space (Duncan 2000). The meaning of place utilized in this article is best articulated through Massey's (1994, 156) 'global sense of place' where differences between places are viewed as a product of the globalization of social relations, instead of merely marking a deviation from processes of globalization. In Massey's words, what gives a place its specificity is not some long internalized history but the fact that it is constructed out of a particular constellation of social relations, meeting and weaving together at a particular locus . . . . Instead then, of thinking of places as areas with boundaries around, they can be imagined as articulated moments in [multiscale] networks of social relations and understandings. (154)

Meanwhile, sociological approaches have questioned the idea of the village as an isolated and internally harmonious community and represented the village as an entity influenced both by internal conflicts and wider historical transformations (B´ eteille 1965; Breman 1988). These interconnected and internally differentiated meanings of villages and places structured both the questions I asked in the field and my analysis of data obtained from fieldwork.

The village of Mahdol is located in Anand district in the state of Gujarat (Figure 1) and its dairy cooperative is affiliated with the KDCMPU. Established in 1961, the Mahdol cooperative was not part of the struggle that first established Anand's cooperatives in 1946. The Kheda region is made up of many successful cooperatives, so the Mahdol cooperative does not mark an exception in the local landscape. In fact, there are at least four other dairy cooperatives within walking distance of the village. The village is a useful case study, however, because it is showcased by the NDDB and is the village to which dairy officials send many local and international visitors. My choice of Mahdol as field site for this study was also directed by an official from the NDDB.

The village of Saundara is located in the West Nimar (or Khargone) district in the state of Madhya Pradesh. The village dairy cooperative was established in 1986 and is affiliated with the Indore Milk Union. This milk unionwasestablished in 1977 and, as mentioned earlier, was part of the national program to replicate Anand pattern dairying throughout rural India funded by the World Bank. Saundara's dairy cooperative stands out in the Nimar region because many villages around it do not have dairy cooperatives, and those that do exist are often closed or on the verge of closing.

The state of Gujarat is more developed in terms of economic and social indicators than the state of Madhya Pradesh (Planning Commission 2001), and the success of Mahdol and relative failure of Saundara to adopt crossbred cows could be viewed as a reflection of wider regional differences in development. Yet, there are also similarities between the two villages. Mahdol is located in the agriculturally prosperous region of central

Figure 1. Location of fieldwork sites.

<!-- image -->

Gujarat and is part of the area irrigated by the Mahi river canals. State support is apparent in the flow of water toward the village. Mahdol also contains a village-level irrigation cooperative, which continues to operate despite the presence of the canal. The village of Saundara has access to irrigation due to its proximity to the NarmadaRiver, and irrigation pipelines are privately owned by large landowners. In both villages, therefore, dairying is not constrained by environmental factors, especially in terms of access to water. This similarity increases the value of explaining differences in extent of adoption of crossbred cows, and the next two sections seek to establish and explain differences in dairying practices across the two villages.

## Comparing Cows and Buffaloes

This section is based on surveys of every household in the two villages. In the case of Mahdol, surveys also included houses in agricultural fields that are classified as part of Mahdol. Table 1 provides an overall comparison of the two villages and indicates that the village of Mahdol differs substantially from the village of Saundara in terms of number of households and total amount of agricultural land. The more important difference, however, is in terms of how land is distributed between households: 62 percent of households own some land in Mahdol but only 35 percent of households own land in Saundara. About 69 percent of total house- holds are cooperative members in Mahdol and the average daily milk production is 2,000 liters, whereas only 12 percent have membership in Saundara, with an average milk collection of 400 liters. These quantitative

Table 1. Characteristics of the two villages, 2001

|                                                      |   Mahdol |   Saundara |
|------------------------------------------------------|----------|------------|
| Population                                           |          |            |
| Number of households                                 |    277   |      469   |
| Population                                           |   1499   |     2662   |
| Agriculture                                          |          |            |
| Total agricultural land in acres                     |    473   |     1407   |
| Total commonly owned land in acres                   |      0   |       15   |
| Number of households that own land                   |    171   |      162   |
| Percentage of households that own land               |     61.7 |       34.5 |
| Dairying                                             |          |            |
| Year dairy cooperative was established               |   1961   |     1986   |
| Number of households with cooperative membership     |    190   |       57   |
| Percentage of households with cooperative membership |     69   |       12.2 |
| Number of registered members                         |    441   |       70   |
| Daily milk collection (approximately) in liters      |   2000   |      400   |
| Total number of cows a                               |    374   |      127   |
| Total number of buffaloes                            |    148   |      341   |
| Total number of bullocks b                           |     18   |      266   |
| Total number of goats                                |      9   |      771   |

differences provide some indication of why dairy development is considered relatively unsuccessful in the village of Saundara.

Table 1 also depicts the stark differences that exist in terms of kinds and numbers of animals between the two villages. Thus, there are 374 crossbred cows in Mahdol village and none in Saundara. 8 In contrast, there are very few Zebu cows in Mahdol, whereas the 127 cows in Saundara listed in Table 1 are indigenous Zebu varieties, and there are only 18 Zebu bullocks in Mahdol compared to 266 in Saundara. The number of bullocks in Saundara reflects the use of cattle for draft purposes. Water buffaloes also show a difference in numbers between the two villages: There are 148 in Mahdol compared to 341 in Saundara. Thus, in Mahdol, the relatively high ownership rate of crossbreds has not entirely eliminated access to buffalo milk within the village. Almost absent in Mahdol, goats constitute the majority of livestock in Saundara, mostly owned by landless households.

The most prominent difference between crossbred cows and water buffaloes is in quantity and seasonality of milk production. Crossbreds in Mahdol on average produce twelve liters of milk per day (milking is undertaken twice a day), and maximum production in the village approaches a high of thirty-five liters. Buffaloes in Saundara produce four liters a day, with the highest production going up to only eight liters. An equally significant difference is that the milk yields of crossbred cows do not vary by season, whereas water buffaloes in Saundara give higher yields during the rainy season. In fact, crossbred cows were introduced by the dairy program in large part to offset the variability in buffalo milk production and to ensure that dairy processing plants would be able to work at full capacity throughout the year. Buffalo milk, however, has a higher fat content, and because the cooperative pays for milk on the basis of fat content, the milk productivity difference between crossbreds and buffaloes is slightly reduced in terms of milk payments.

Crossbred cows are more prone to diseases, which increases the need for veterinary services for crossbreds, whereas the health of buffaloes in Saundara can be managed by dairy farmers themselves. Where cattle health services are not available from the dairy program, it thus becomes more difficult to maintain crossbred cattle (Mergos and Slade 1987). Another difference in the care and upkeep of cattle is that crossbred cows are dependent on stall feeding if their productivity has to be maintained. Buffaloes, in contrast, are taken out to graze, reducing the need to carry fodder from fields or to spend money on cattle feed. The ways in which these differences between crossbred cows and buffaloes affect the adoption of crossbreds are discussed in more detail in the next section.

Table 2 compares households with and without dairy animals in the two villages. Of households in Mahdol, 45 percent do not own crossbred cows, whereas 71 percent of households in Saundara do not own buffaloes. The ownership of dairy animals is thus relatively more widespread in Mahdol. In terms of land ownership, as the number of dairy animals owned increases, the proportion of households owning land and mean acres of land owned per household also increase in both villages. Thus, in the case of crossbred cows in Mahdol, 90 percent of households owning more than two crossbred cows are land owners, whereas land ownership for the village as a whole is 62 percent. This pattern is repeated in the case of water buffaloes in Saundara, where 96 percent of households owning more than two buffaloes also own land, even though land ownership is only 35 percent in the village as a whole. Households owning more than two crossbred cows in Mahdol own an average of 3.7 acres of land, compared to a mean of 1.7 acres for the village as a whole. The corresponding figure for buffaloes in Saundara is 16.7 acres, compared to 3.1 acres for the entire village. Yet, it should also be noted that the mean land ownership for households owning crossbred cows varies between 1.4 and 3.7 acres in Mahdol, with an average of 1.7 acres of land for the village as a whole. Land ownership figures for households owning buffaloes in Saundara range between a mean of 4.9 and 16.7 acres, which is much higher than the overall village mean of 3.1 acres. Crossbred cows in Mahdol are thus being maintained on relatively smaller land holdings when compared to buffaloes in Saundara.

The performance of dairying work is depicted in Table 2 through the percentage of households hiring agricultural laborers and the mean number of women in households owning dairy animals. In Mahdol, where the work of dairying is primarily the responsibility of women, an increase in the number of crossbred cows is matched by a corresponding increase in mean number of female members in households within the two categories of animal ownership. In Saundara, women are not primarily responsible for working with dairy cattle, so that the emergence of a similar link between number of female members and dairy animal ownership as Mahdol is striking. The difference between Mahdol and Saundara in the number of households hiring agricultural laborers on an annual basis is also due to the fact

Table 2. Characteristics of households (HHs) by dairy animal ownership

|                       | Mahdol (crossbred cows)   | Mahdol (crossbred cows)   | Mahdol (crossbred cows)   | Mahdol (crossbred cows)   | Saundara (water buffaloes)   | Saundara (water buffaloes)   | Saundara (water buffaloes)   | Saundara (water buffaloes)   |
|-----------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|
|                       | HHs with 0                | HHs with 1-2              | HHs with > 2              | All HHs                   | HHs with 0                   | HHs with 1-2                 | HHs with > 2                 | All HHs                      |
| Households ( N )      | 126                       | 99                        | 52                        | 277                       | 335                          | 87                           | 47                           | 469                          |
| Percentages           |                           |                           |                           |                           |                              |                              |                              |                              |
| Dairy members         | 41 . 3                    | 88 . 9                    | 98 . 1                    | 69 . 0                    | 0 . 9                        | 27 . 6                       | 63 . 8                       | 12 . 2                       |
| Landowners            | 43 . 7                    | 69 . 7                    | 90 . 3                    | 61 . 7                    | 14 . 9                       | 77 . 0                       | 95 . 7                       | 34 . 5                       |
| Laborers annual       | 0 . 8                     | 3 . 0                     | 7 . 7                     | 2 . 9                     | 0 . 3                        | 13 . 8                       | 63 . 8                       | 9 . 2                        |
| Caste: Patel          | 48 . 4                    | 65 . 7                    | 94 . 2                    | 63 . 2                    | -                            | -                            | -                            | -                            |
| Caste: Patidar/Rajput | -                         | -                         | -                         | -                         | 4 . 5                        | 43 . 7                       | 83 . 0                       | 19 . 6                       |
| Means                 |                           |                           |                           |                           |                              |                              |                              |                              |
| Land in acres         | 1 . 1                     | 1 . 4                     | 3 . 7                     | 1 . 7                     | 0 . 8                        | 4 . 9                        | 16 . 7                       | 3 . 1                        |
| HHsize                | 4 . 8                     | 5 . 3                     | 7 . 4                     | 5 . 5                     | 5 . 1                        | 6 . 1                        | 8 . 9                        | 5 . 7                        |
| Female HHmembers      | 1 . 9                     | 2 . 1                     | 3 . 2                     | 2 . 2                     | 1 . 7                        | 2 . 3                        | 3 . 5                        | 2 . 0                        |

that the contracts available to agricultural laborers differ between the two villages. In Mahdol, cultivation is informally contracted out to landless laborers, with the landowning farmer paying for inputs in return for a share of the harvest but not providing any labor. Moreover, as mentioned before, the work of dairying in Mahdol is mostly the work of women and hence does not depend on hired agricultural labor. In Saundara, agricultural laborers are hired full-time on the basis of a negotiated annual wage. These laborers are then also devoted to dairying work in some households.

Caste identity also plays a role in dairy animal ownership and hence cooperative membership. The Patel caste includes 63 percent of all households in Mahdol, 94 percent of the households that own more than two crossbred cows, and 74 percent of households with cooperative membership. Patel is also the majority caste in the districts of Kheda and Anand. In the case of Saundara, the Patidar and Rajput castes are the higher castes in the village. Including only 12 percent of the village, these two caste groups include 83 percent of households owning more than two buffaloes and 68 percent of households with cooperative membership. Caste thus functions as an identity associated with cooperative dairying in both villages, and this has been noted in other studies of dairy development (Baviskar 1988; A. S. Patel 1988).

Overall, household-level data show that dairy cattle, irrespective of whether they are crossbred cows or buffaloes, are related to land ownership, household composition, and caste identity in the two villages. Yet, why are 98 percent of the households that own more than two crossbred cows also members of the dairy cooperative in Mahdol, whereas only 64 percent of households owning two or more buffaloes have cooperative membership in Saundara? How does this fit into the larger issue of adoption or refusal of crossbred cows? Although numerical data are useful to display broad similarities and differences between the two villages, explanations can be fruitfully sought through more intensive engagement with village-level experiences.

## Place-Based Meanings of Dairy Development: Politics, Economies, Identities

This section traces the ways in which dairy cooperatives and their success or failure are discussed within the two villages. The focus here shifts to the ways in which crossbred cows have to fit into existing and changing political and agricultural systems. Farmers rarely refer to the dairy development program as produced from the outside and arriving fully formed in the village. Instead, their words suggest that dairy development has been produced within the village, and the ways in which development is also local work can thus be approached in place-based analyses of development.

The discussion that follows draws on ethnographic experiences, as well as on interviews conducted within the two villages. 9 It is divided into three parts. The first, focusing on political connections, draws on people who are strongly connected to the dairy cooperative, especially dairy board members in Mahdol and principal dairy farmers in Saundara. The second part focuses on the relationship between dairy development and agriculture and draws on the perspectives of both women and men who are involved with the work of dairying in the village. The third part considers landless agricultural laborers to show how the dairy economy also

depends on class and caste-based inequalities in the two villages.

Cooperative Infrastructures and Political Connections. Passing by Mahdol's dairy cooperative on the day of elections to the cooperative board, I found a large crowd massed outside, keenly watching the casting of ballots. My interviews in the days leading up to the elections had been punctuated by visits from hopeful candidates, usually seeking votes for their group rather than for themselves as individuals. This made me reflect on the contrast with Saundara, where I had been told that farmers had to be persuaded to become members of the dairy board, and no formal elections were actually held. Why do political meanings of the dairy cooperative vary so widely between the two villages?

In Mahdol, the chairman of the village dairy cooperative board has links with Amul (the district cooperative union), formed initially by working in milk producer unions in other districts of Gujarat and more recently by holding an elected position in the administrative board of Amul. The chairman explains his allegiance to the cooperative thus:

I have risen from clerk [low-level employee in the village cooperative] to manager due to the [cooperative] movement. That is why I have a deep interest in sharing my good fortune, in providing my expertise [to the village dairy cooperative].

His prominent role in the cooperative was also mentioned in other interviews, although many of those who mentioned him were also part of his extended family. Because marital alliances are formed within the village in Mahdol (the village comprises unrelated families), the extended family of the dairy cooperative chairman encompasses a number of households in the village.

As mentioned before, a large portion of the members of the dairy cooperative, including the chairman and a majority of the board members and employees, belong to the Patel caste. Scholarly opinions on the role of the Patel caste in cooperative dairying are divided. Some scholars argue that the Patel caste installed engineering and managerial experts in the cooperative program to provide a cover for their continued domination in cooperatives, given that political control over the region and in the wider state of Gujarat was shifting away from the Patel caste (Kothari and Maru 1970; S. Patel 1990). Other scholars have argued instead that dairy development officials rose to power over Patel farmers through access to international funding, so that cooperatives are no longer driven by the interests of farmers but have become linked to the interests of international development agencies (Baviskar and George 1988; George 1990b). Although this article cannot resolve this debate, the identification of Mahdol as a Patel village is likely to be part of its ability to enter into cooperative dairying networks in Kheda and Anand districts. Moreover, given that Mahdol is a small village in size, its prominence within the local area is linked in part to its flourishing dairy cooperative, so that dairy development has become a means to make the village matter in political terms.

The chairman of Mahdol's cooperative also brought up the issue of marital alliances and the ways in which dairying livelihoods can improve a family's status and enable favorable marriages. Mahdol's gol (marriage circle), the group of villages within which Mahdol's Patel families can form marital relationships, comprises two neighborhoods of the town of Petlad. Participation in cooperative dairying is one way to enhance the status of the village and possibly enlarge its marriage circle. The congruence between dairy development policies and local village practices is thus not surprising in Mahdol, given the political and social value of participation in cooperative dairying.

One of the visible signs of the village's close links to the district cooperative union is the presence of a veterinary doctor in the village, 10 a substantial advantage because crossbred cows require relatively frequent medical care, and knowledge related to healing crossbred cows is not possessed within the village. Similarly, artificial insemination services are available from the cooperative, and the Mahdol cooperative is in fact a site for training dairy employees in artificial insemination practices. The cooperative also provides access to loans and cattle feed. Because the maintenance of crossbred cows is to a large extent dependent on services provided by the dairy development program (Patil and Udo 1997), the availability of these services reinforces the power of the cooperative in the village.

When directly questioned about the ways in which cooperative officials have determined the adoption of crossbred cows, the chairman of Mahdol's cooperative, however, insisted that the decision to shift to crossbred cows had been made by villagers.

Author: So Amul [the district cooperative union] has now shifted from buffaloes to cows?

Chairman of Mahdol dairy cooperative: Amul has not shifted, people have shifted, because there is more money and profit in cows; it is not Amul that has shifted.

The link between official policies and local practices of dairying is thus viewed as produced within the village, and not a mere reflection of official power. I interpret this as underlining the extent to which local discourses of dairying refuse to relinquish power to official dairy development discourses, even as the technological equipment residing in the village dairy cooperative continues to point toward the village's access to resources provided by the official development program.

The technological nature of the Mahdol dairy cooperative is especially visible during daily collection times. The cooperative has a generator to guard the bulk cooler against power outages and a computerized milk weighing and payment system, which enables it to cope with the long line of members waiting to deposit milk. To manage accounting systems, it employs five men on a full-time basis. In contrast, the cooperative in Saundara has very basic equipment for measuring milk-at the time of fieldwork in 2000 and 2001, milk was being collected and payment disbursed by the one man employed by the cooperative. The differences between the two dairy cooperatives are also visible in their location within the village. The Mahdol cooperative is housed in a two-story concrete building located at the entrance to the village, whereas in Saundara, the dairy cooperative operates out of a rented room.

In contrast to the state of Gujarat, dairy development does not play a significant role in political power struggles in the state of Madhya Pradesh, and this is also true of the village of Saundara. Thus, questions related to the development of the village were often answered in terms of the paved road that connects Saundara to the nearby highway and not in terms of the dairy cooperative. Among prominent farmers in the village, the road was viewed as jointly constructed through the efforts of two leaders of the village. Their friendship was described as exemplary not only because they belonged to different castes (Patidar and Rajput) but also because they had different political affiliations (Congress I and Bharatiya Janata Party). Thus, in this case, the interests of the village were privileged over individual and caste interests. Ironically, the insignificance of the cooperative in local and regional politics is what enables it to be a site dominated by upper, landowning castes, as political struggles are not played out within Saundara's dairy cooperative. 11

Saundara's cooperative therefore depends on already existing development (the paved road) and the cooperative itself is not replete with technologies (computers or veterinarians). Unlike Gujarat, or at least unlike Anand district, good quality roads are relatively rare in rural Madhya Pradesh. Saundara's paved road is thus an extraordinary achievement for the village, enabling the dairy transport van to actually arrive at the village; other villages sometimes have to drive their milk to the van's route. As the secretary of Saundara's dairy cooperative put it, part of the prestige of belonging to the cooperative was in the fact that ' apne yahan itni bari gaari aa gayi [such a big vehicle was making the journey to our village].' The secretary is the sole full-time employee of the cooperative and measures fat content of milk and doles out payments without recourse to digital technologies (although since my fieldwork the measuring of fat content and the calculation of milk payments have been automated). Further, water buffaloes in Saundara are not dependent on the purchase of feed or health care from the cooperative, and the lack of services from the cooperative union also partly underpins the unwillingness to adopt crossbred cows in Saundara. Some dairy farmers singled out the lack of a veterinarian in the village as a major disadvantage.

The value of Saundara's cooperative emerges not in terms of improving the technological basis of dairying as much as gaining access to assured markets. Alongside, the trust vested in the dairy cooperative derives from the notion that it is owned by the government. The value ascribed to government ownership becomes especially clarified when we consider that farmers have continued to deposit milk at the Saundara cooperative despite payments for milk being delayed, in one case for almost a year. As the secretary of Saundara's cooperative put it,

[The members] said, it is owned by the government, it is a cooperative; if not today, then payment will be made tomorrow; our money will not be lost. This is why they continued providing milk to the cooperative. They also wanted the cooperative to continue in the village; it should not close down. So the village would have a name; people from other villages would say, in Saundara there is a cooperative of the milk union.

The ability to continue depositing milk without regular payments in Saundara shows that it is the relatively well-off farmers who patronize Saundara's dairy cooperative, the ones who can afford to wait for eventual payment. As opposed to this situation, payment for milk in Mahdol is regularly provided once in ten days. In the preceding quote, it is also noteworthy that the cooperative is called a government cooperative, not a farmers' cooperative, and this 'mistake' would not be made in Gujarat.

From these discussions and experiences within Mahdol and Saundara, it becomes clear that for rural places development is also a local political accomplishment. In the case of Mahdol, the dairy cooperative is central to political power, and through its links with the district union, it has been equipped with the services required to maintain crossbred cows. In the case of Saundara, the road is the most visible symbol of political clout, and the dairy cooperative merely follows the road. Yet, it is not just political meanings that justify dairy cooperatives, and the next section moves to a consideration of the link between agricultural and cooperative dairying economies.

(Dis)Connecting Cattle and Agricultural Livelihoods. Zebu cattle are closely connected to agriculture in both Mahdol and Saundara. Zebu bullocks are used as draft animals, for plowing, sowing, weeding, and transportation. Buffaloes, in contrast, are utilized mainly as dairy animals and not in agricultural work. Crossbred cows have to enter into this already existing division of work between Zebu bullocks and water buffaloes. The principal difference between crossbred cows and Zebu cows is that the progeny of crossbred cows are not used as draft cattle (George 1990a; Nair 1990). This feature of crossbred cows is an important part of explaining their rejection by farmers in Saundara, and the availability of nonagricultural livelihoods is a key aspect of local attitudes toward crossbred cattle in Mahdol. These relationships between the wider economy and crossbred cows are elaborated in this section.

The role of dairying livelihoods in Mahdol cannot be understood without appreciating the location of the village. The village of Mahdol is poised on the edge of a small town. This location is not accidental but the outcome of a deliberate move by the village toward the town. The progressive shift in location of the village was detailed to me in answer to questions related to the history of the village. Mahdol's location has meant access to jobs in local textile mills and to business opportunities. The state of Gujarat has also traditionally been connected to international migration, so that men from Mahdol have traveled further afield (the Gulf countries, East Africa, and Southeast Asian countries) in search of employment. Although my interview questions were mostly focused on dairy development, many interviewees, both men who had experiences of migration and women whose husbands were away, were keener to discuss stories of migration. The dairy cooperative within the village is one part of this larger access to livelihoods, so that the importance of cooper- ative dairying income varies depending on the growth and decline of economic opportunities outside the village.

Gender differences also play a role in enabling household dairying. A strong discursive ideal connecting women and dairying is present in Mahdol, as well as in Gujarat more generally, and the dairy development program also highlights the ways in which women are central to dairying work. In Mahdol, women do not leave the village for employment, and because their labor is no longer devoted to agriculture, women become available for dairying work. The main elements of women's dairying work are cutting fodder, stall feeding and milking cows, and carrying milk to and collecting payments from the cooperative. Given that crossbred cows are bred through artificial insemination services provided by the cooperative, and that crossbred cows have to be stall fed, the availability of women's labor allows crossbred cows to be incorporated into household routines (Basu 2006).

The shift away from agriculture has also been propelled by the subdivision of agricultural land holdings. As subsequent generations have inherited smaller and smaller parcels, capital-intensive chemical agriculture has become unprofitable, even as expansion of agricultural land is rendered impossible by proximity to the town. As indicated in Table 2, the average size of land holdings in Mahdol is 1.7 acres for the village as a whole. Further perusal of village-level data shows that 49.4 percent of households in the village own at most 3 acres of land. When only landowning households are considered, the average size of land holdings in Mahdol is 2.8 acres, whereas the corresponding figure for Saundara is 8.7 acres.

The small land holdings of Mahdol are utilized instead for the production of fodder. The value of fodder from one's own fields in subsidizing the costs of dairying was mentioned on several occasions and was most emphatically stated in an interview with a Patel family that owned land but did not participate in dairying, being primarily dependent for income on jobs in nearby towns. In the words of a senior male family member, 'Those who do not own land cannot do the business of dairy farming. What will the cow eat? [Do you know] how much Amuldaan [packaged cattle feed sold by the cooperative] costs? Will the person feed himself or his cow?'

Dairying based on crossbred cows also requires a shift away from the use of bullocks in agriculture. Bullocks are owned by thirteen households in Mahdol who rent them out to the rest of the villagers. The eleven tractors

present in the village can also be hired at relatively low costs, given the size of land holdings. Because bullocks no longer need to be maintained by every household, cows in Mahdol can be devoted solely to dairying.

At the time of fieldwork (2000-2001) and continuing into the present, however, jobs outside the village are becoming scarce in Mahdol, mainly because textile mills in the nearby town remain closed and the possibilities of continuing to work for the few mills that remain open become bleaker. Although immigration continues to be another source of employment, its returns are uncertain, especially at a time when controls on immigration are being strengthened, and the time required to search and arrange for migration requires an alternative means for the family to survive. The dairy cooperative becomes valuable as this alternative source of income for the household, at least at the subsistence level. Thus, men are increasingly, and more openly, sharing the work of dairying with women. As one young Patel woman whose brother has begun working with dairy cattle put it,

You know how the young boys . . . would refuse to consider the possibility of earning income on the basis of cattle. It used to be like that. Now this view is less prevalent. They have to earn money [if they do not have a job], so they do the work of dairying. There is no shame associated with it.

Moving to Saundara, the available mix of livelihoods is very different here. Agriculture is the principal means of livelihood, and very few residents migrate outside the village in search of jobs. The notion that dairying was subsidiary to agriculture as an activity was strongly implied in the ways in which dairy development was disowned as a means of livelihood in many interviews with farmers, and prominent farmers in the village were not members of the dairy cooperative. In the village survey, only 33.3 percent of the landowning households in the village are shown as members of Saundara's dairy cooperative. This number is 75.0 percent for Mahdol.

The use of cattle as draft animals puts cows and bullocks under the purview of men's work in Saundara. It is worth noting that there are only thirteen tractors in Saundara as a whole, compared to eleven tractors in the much smaller village of Mahdol. The dependence on Zebu bullocks for agricultural work in Saundara further reduces the value of cattle species that are useful only for dairying. Additionally, women in Saundara count agriculture as their principal work, so that their time cannot be devoted to caring for cattle (Basu 2005). Women's participation in dairying thus emerges as another key difference between the two villages and underlines the role played by the gender division of dairying labor in enabling crossbred cows to be adopted.

The difference between the two villages in terms of relative emphasis on grazing and stall feeding further highlights differences in the nature of crossbred cows. In Mahdol, women cut and carry fodder from fields to cattle sheds to feed crossbred cows. In Saundara, buffaloes are sent out to graze, and this work is usually undertaken by male members of the household or by laborers. Although pregnant and lactating cows and buffaloes are not sent out to graze even in Saundara, the continuation of stall feeding when the animal is not producing milk is viewed as a major disadvantage.

There are also issues associated with the buying and selling of cattle. As one prominent Patidar member of the Saundara dairy cooperative attested,

The animals here, you milk them for a year, and then they do not produce milk for a year. When it dries up we take it to the nearby market and sell it and buy a lactating animal. But the foreign breeds will not sell in the market here. So you have to wait for them to produce milk again. It should not be like that; it should be sell the dry animal and get a lactating one.

In another interview, when asked why crossbred cows were not preferred, a leading contributor to Saundara's dairy cooperative took (mildly expressed) umbrage at the fact that his methods of cattle care were being questioned. In his words, his inability to keep crossbred cows was not because of how I maintained it. No one looks after animals like I do within Khargone [West Nimar] district, not even the Patidars [the well-off caste group within Saundara, the speaker himself belongs to the Rajput caste]. It was not the heat either. Inside the shed, animals do not feel the heat, and I had made arrangements for cooling. But at the cooperative, cow's milk sells for less. That is why the cows failed.

This statement is also a reference to the cost of crossbred cows. Outside the context of the interview, I was told that this farmer had taken on a large amount of debt to buy crossbred cows and had to default on his loans whenthecrossbreds did not prove profitable, making his financial situation precarious. Official discourses in the local area nonetheless remain supportive of crossbred cows, 12 and the manger of the local milk chilling plant insisted in an interview that the profitability of crossbred cows could not be doubted. The gulf between local

experiences and official positions on crossbred cows became strikingly clarified in that moment.

Overall, the ability of households to accept crossbred cows is linked to their ability to separate dairying from agriculture. Put simply, where farmers have turned away from exclusive dependence on agricultural income, they have turned toward dairy breeds, and hence toward crossbred cows. Conversely, where agriculture continues to be the main source of livelihood and cattle are utilized as draft animals, households cannot devote themselves to dairy cattle. Thus, in Mahdol, the separation of dairying from agriculture occurs mainly in terms of the ability to separate cows from the production of draft cattle and hence accept crossbred cows that are exclusively suited for dairying. Meanwhile, the loss of nonfarm economic opportunities makes dairying income valuable in providing a basic standard of living for the household. In Saundara, where agriculture remains the principal means of livelihood, cows continue to be devoted to producing draft cattle, and buffaloes are the preferred dairy animals. Yet another aspect of the separation between dairying and agriculture is demonstrated through women's work. In Mahdol, women's willingness to devote their labor to dairying becomes significant to maintaining crossbred cows. In Saundara, however, women's role in agriculture and refusal of dairying responsibilities reduces the availability of labor for dairying and has worked against the adoption of crossbred cows. 13

## Animals and Identity Beyond Dairy Development.

This section focuses on landless households that mostly support themselves through working as agricultural labor. The role of livestock ownership in augmenting livelihoods of landless households in India is increasingly being highlighted by international development agencies (Rangnekar 2006; Turner 2004). In Mahdol and Saundara, the ability of landless laborers to own livestock is related to economic ties with, as well as the religious inclinations of, landowning farmers.

In Mahdol, some agricultural laborers do own crossbred cows, but for most others, crossbred cows are obtained as part of the process of providing labor to landowning farmers. It should be noted that although landowning households entrust the cultivation of fields to landless households, data on such contracts could not be officially obtained, as they are informal and probably illegal. In the process of visiting landless households, however, it became clear that many of them were not just cultivating land on behalf of farmers but also look- ing after unproductive cows for them. These cows would be taken back by farmers when they began producing milk, although often they were also sold to the laborer. While keeping the cow, the landless household had access to the little milk that the cow continued to produce, but it is likely that these cows were mainly accepted to maintain good relations with the farmer. Thus, by taking over some of the responsibilities for unproductive cows, landless households contribute to Mahdol's crossbred cow economy.

In contrast, in Saundara, agricultural laborers are usually hired under annual labor contracts. The laborer is responsible not just for agricultural but also for dairying work. As previously indicated in Table 2, a larger percentage of buffalo-owning than non-buffalo-owning households also hire agricultural laborers. Agricultural labor and dairying are thus linked, so that in the absence of access to women's labor within the household, hired labor becomes crucial to maintaining dairy animals.

Keeping goats also separates landless households from the cattle economy in Saundara. Goats enable access to milk and meat but not to membership in the dairy cooperative. As shown in Table 1, a large number of goats are included in the livestock of Saundara, and these are maintained by landless households through grazing on uncultivated wasteland. Why are goats almost absent among landless households in Mahdol? To keep goats is akin to owning up to meat eating, and the stricter rules against this practice in Mahdol prevent landless households from keeping goats. The Patel caste is vegetarian and although such prohibitions often cannot be maintained during international migration, they are maintained within the village. This is not to say that I observed any open conflicts around meat eating in Mahdol. When asked why they did not keep goats, however, landless households nearly always responded by saying that they did not eat them. In Saundara, on the other hand, because Rajputs also make up the upper caste in the village and sometimes do not abjure the eating of meat, the stigma attached to goats is likely to be lessened. Yet, the Patidar caste of Saundara more openly expressed its opposition to meat eating, and vegetarianism was viewed as key to the superiority of the Patidar caste over other castes in the village. Overall, it is worth noting that vegetarianism in India works against the livelihoods and nutrition of landless households.

The inability to maintain cattle is also connected to the absence of common land. In Mahdol, where uncultivated, commonly owned land is almost nonexistent

(Table 1), keeping cattle is beyond the reach of landless households. In one interview, it was mentioned that even building houses by landless laborers was dependent on favors from farmers, so keeping cattle was out of the question. Similar issues of lack of space arise in Saundara, where large farmers possess large houses, and the smaller houses of landless laborers leave no space for cattle. Moreover, in Saundara, part of the uncultivated wasteland was used to build governmentsponsored housing for landless families, which has further reduced the availability of common grazing areas. Landless households also mentioned problems related to obtaining fodder. In the words of an agricultural laborer in Saundara, 'It is not possible for us to maintain cattle. If we get fodder from someone else's fields, then one day he might refuse to provide us with fodder.' The extent to which access to land resources is dependent on the relationship between farmers and laborers was thus mentioned by landless households in both villages.

Through such discussions, cooperative dairying emerges as an exclusive enterprise that has not become the basis for widespread participation in development. Although the goat-based economy in Saundara does provide some access to livestock ownership, the inability of the landless to maintain crossbred cows or water buffaloes is an indication of the limits of dairy development in both villages. Overall, although official discourses of dairy development are replete with notions of the productivity of crossbred cows, it is not just productivity that shapes the adoption of crossbred cows. Instead, crossbred cows enter rural landscapes as unfamiliar entities and become included within local economies on the basis of a number of place-based properties of agriculture, dairying, and development. These include services provided by cooperatives, the political value of participating in cooperatives, the extent of dependence on agricultural production, the availability of nonagricultural, waged employment, and the extent to which divisions of work based on class and gender can be incorporated to support dairy development. It is the contingent mixing of such political, economic, and social characteristics that produces the adoption of crossbreds, and the precise nature of the mixing is also a consequence of local work. This means that irrespective of the discursive meanings of success and failure that attach to cooperative dairying, material processes of dairying always reflect the success (and power) of local endeavors to fit development to place.

## Conclusion: Development and Place-Based Differences

This article has sought to explicate the role of placebased characteristics in shaping development outcomes by considering the program of dairy development from a range of perspectives. Funding from the World Bank has been an important part of replicating cooperative dairying in rural India, and this article noted the ways in which funding from the World Bank was contemporaneous with increased support for the crossbred cow within India's Five Year Plans. The implication that national dairy development has actually been synchronized with international development, rather than with farmers' needs and practices, has been a major aspect of the criticisms leveled against dairy development. In this article, the more interesting point that emerges from a perusal of the official history of dairy development is that, traced over a sufficient period, development turns on itself. In the process, not only is the 1960s promotion of crossbred cows repudiated by the 1990s, but the World Bank eventually reached the decision that the very success of cooperative dairying, because it provides unfair competition to private dairies, rendered further support for the program problematic.

Official promotions of crossbred cows also connect and disconnect from local experiences in contingent ways. Although the World Bank withdrew from cooperative dairying in 1996 and the Tenth Five Year Plan, 2002-2007 (Planning Commission 2008), sought to return attention to indigenous species, dairy officials continue to promote crossbred cows. Official discourses, therefore, do make an appearance within local contexts, but this appearance does not coincide with the changing pronouncements of national and international dairy development. Meanwhile, criticisms of the dairy development program have focused on the difference between Western dairy science and indigenous practices of dairying. Such differences also do not emerge in local contexts. Instead, farmers in Mahdol and Saundara accept or modify cooperative dairying because it does or does not fit with existing agriculture-based economies, and the adoption or refusal of crossbred cows cannot be explained exclusively in terms of attachment to traditional cattle breeds nor as culturally predetermined attitude toward foreign cows.

Dairy development thus has to be situated in the wider economic and political context. In Mahdol, because the agricultural and wider wage economy cannot

provide sufficient or certain incomes, the village has turned toward commercial dairying based on crossbred cows. It is also likely, though, that participation in cooperative dairying represents a turn away from agriculture (Rutten 1995), rather than wholly being a turn toward cooperative dairying. In Saundara, the value of cooperative dairying is linked to its ability to provide access to markets for milk, not to its ability to connect the village to the latest technologies and services for dairying. Agriculture remains central, so dairying can only be pursued as a subsidiary occupation, which works against the adoption of the crossbred cow. This situation can change as agricultural profits continue to decline due to withdrawal of support for small-scale agriculture by the neoliberalizing state, so that Saundara could turn to crossbred cows in the future.

The dairy cooperative also conforms to existing economic and social inequalities, as shown by the role of class and gender differences in dairying work. Thus, the marginalization of landless and goat-owning households continues, even as within dairying economies their responsibilities for providing agricultural labor are crucial. Moreover, gender differences in responsibilities for agricultural work become valuable to making labor available for dairy development.

The current regime of neoliberalization will introduce new economic and political struggles into these varied landscapes of dairying. Through crossbred cows, the meanings of dairy development have already been shifted toward productivity and profits. By instituting new technologies of dairying without reference to contextual needs, however, the cooperative dairy program is likely to dilute the political value of cooperatives as farmer-led organizations. During fieldwork in the summer of 2007, there was already talk of new private players in the dairy sector, including Indian companies like Reliance that are seeking to expand into rural markets and national dairy economies like that of New Zealand seeking to deal with their own crises of overproduction. Small farmers, however, remain entrenched within dairying due to the support provided by cooperative structures. The complete liberalization of the dairying sector, and of agriculture in general, is not possible without the removal of these small farmers. Steps being taken in that direction are partly reflected in the removal of Verghese Kurien, the dairy engineering expert who first managed cooperative dairying in Amul on the behalf of farmers (Katakam 2006). It is also possible, however, that farmers associated with cooperative dairying will soon become more vocal in questioning and struggling against neoliberal policies.

This article has shown that the replication of cooperative dairying in India has not produced uniform versions of the Anand model, highlighting the role of place in the unfolding of development. Villages do not adopt or refuse crossbred cows in accordance with the pronouncements of development officials or those of alternative development activists and scholars. Instead, place-based social relations and economic dependencies combine with the characteristics of crossbred cows to produce acceptance or rejection, so that local constructions of development provide more compelling reasons for the adoption or refusal of new technologies of dairying in Mahdol and Saundara. The ability of place-based actors to transform development programs becomes apparent in the process.

## Acknowledgments

Fieldwork for this research was partly supported by an International Dissertation Research Fellowship from the Social Science Research Council (with funds from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation) and a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant from the National Science Foundation (BCS-0000280). I am grateful to Urmila Patidar, Hetal Patel, and Sandip Patel for their valuable assistance with fieldwork in India. An earlier version of this article was presented at the 2007 Annual Meeting of the Southeastern Division of the Association of American Geographers and Rekha Mathur kindly provided comments as discussant. Thanks are also due to Audrey Kobayashi and the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. All remaining errors are entirely my responsibility.

## Notes

1. In this article, cattle refers to indigenous Zebu and crossbred cows and bulls, and buffalo refers to the domestic water buffalo. Zebu bulls used as draft animals are referred to as bullocks.
2. It is likely that the religious connotations of indigenous Zebu cows vary from those of crossbred cows, and this aspect of cattle cultures in India remains to be studied.
3. Kheda district was divided into Kheda and Anand districts in 1997, but villages in both Kheda and Anand districts continue to be affiliated with the KDCMPU.
4. The struggle by farmers in Anand was supported by leading members of the Indian National Congress, a political organization that spearheaded the independence movement, and formed India's government after

- independence. This partly explains the patronage provided to Anand's cooperative dairies and their eventual elevation to national model of dairy development in postcolonial India.
5. The program for replication of Anand pattern dairying was called Operation Flood and was implemented in three phases: 1970-1980, 1981-1985, and 1985-1996. Initially dependent on the EEC, funding for this program was primarily provided by the World Bank from 1974 to 1996.
6. Examples of Amul's advertising campaign can be found at http://www.amul.com/hits.html (last accessed 23 July 2008).
7. Mahdol and Saundara are pseudonyms for the actual villages in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh, respectively, where fieldwork was conducted.
8. There were no crossbred cows in Saundara at the time of the initial fieldwork (2000-2001). Based on discussions during a visit in Summer 2007, however, it is likely that crossbred cows will be adopted in the future as profits from agriculture continue to decline.
9. As part of the 2000 and 2001 fieldwork, 192 interviews were conducted, 95 in Mahdol and 97 in Saundara. In Mahdol, interviews were conducted with fifty-nine men and thirty-six women, and sixty-three of the ninetyseven interviews were conducted with members of the Patel caste. In Saundara, forty-eight men and forty-nine women were interviewed. Thirty-seven of these interviews were conducted with members of the Patidar caste and fourteen were conducted with members of the Rajput caste.
10. During a visit in Summer 2007, I found that the veterinary doctor no longer lived in Mahdol. The relationship between the chairman of the Mahdol dairy cooperative and Amul has recently been strained.
11. Other cooperative bodies in the village of Saundara, like the sand quarrying and agricultural services cooperatives, are sites of conflict between various class and caste groups.
12. This is based on interviews conducted in 2000 and 2001 with dairy officials in Khargone and Indore, Madhya Pradesh.
13. In the 1980s, feminist scholars had stated that women would be crucial to the adoption of crossbred cows (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific 1981). The experiences of Mahdol and Saundara are consistent with this statement.

## References

- Aiyer, A. 2007. The allure of the transnational: Notes on some aspects of the political economy of water in India. Cultural Anthropology 22 (4): 640-46.
- Alvares, C., Ed. 1985. Another revolution fails: An investigation into how and why India's Operation Flood project, touted as the world's largest dairy development program, funded by EEC, went off the rails. Delhi: Ajanta Publications.
- Bardhan, P. 2003. Poverty, agrarian structure, and political economy in India. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Basu, P. 2005. Separating women's empowerment from dairy development in Madhya Pradesh, India. Papers of the Applied Geography Conferences 28:1-10.
- ---. 2006. The gender of successful development: Women's words and dairying work in Gujarat, India. International Journal of Interdisciplinary Social Sciences 1 (1): 61-68.
- Baviskar, B. S. 1988. Dairy co-operatives and rural development in Gujarat. In Who shares? Co-operatives and rural development, ed. D. Attwood and B. S. Baviskar, 345-61. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Baviskar, B. S., and S. George. 1988. Development and controversy: National Dairy Development Board. Economic and Political Weekly 26 March:A35-A43.
- Baviskar, B. S., and P. Terhal. 1990. Internal constraints and external dependence: The EEC and Operation Flood. In Resources, institutions and strategies: Operation Flood and Indian dairying, ed. M. Doornbos and K. N. Nair, 339-55. Delhi: Sage.
- Besley, T., and R. Burgess. 2000. Land reform, poverty reduction and growth: Evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (2): 389-430.
- B´ eteille, A. 1965. Caste, class, and power: Changing patterns of stratification in a Tanjore village. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Brass, T. 1995. New farmers' movements in India. London: Frank Cass.
- Breman, J. 1988. The shattered image: Construction and deconstruction of the village in colonial Asia. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Foris.
- Broad, R. 2006. Research, knowledge, and the art of 'paradigm maintenance': The World Bank's Development Economics Vice-Presidency (DEC). Review of International Political Economy 13 (3): 387-419.
- Byres, T. 1981. The new technology, class formation and class action in the Indian countryside. Journal of Peasant Studies 8 (4): 405-54.
- Candler, W., and N. Kumar. 1998. India: The dairy revolution: The impact of dairy development in India and the World Bank's contribution. Washington, DC: World Bank.
- Das, R. 2007. Looking, but not seeing: The state and/as class in rural India. Journal of Peasant Studies 34 (3-4): 40840.
- Deaton, A., and V. Kozel. 2005. Data and dogma: The great Indian poverty debate. World Bank Research Observer 20 (2): 177-99.
- Doornbos, M., F. van Dorsten, M. Mitra, and P. Terhal. 1990. Dairy aid and development: India's Operation Flood. Delhi: Sage.
- Duncan, J. 2000. Place. In The dictionary of human geography, ed. R. J. Johnston, D. Gregory, G. Pratt, and M. Watts, 582-85. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
- Frankel, F. 2005. India's political economy: The gradual revolution, 1947-2004. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Freed, S., and R. Freed. 1981. Sacred cows and water buffalo in India: The uses of ethnography. Current Anthropology 22 (5): 483-502.
- Fulton, J., and M. Bhargava. 1994. The results of a marketing intervention: Dairy cooperatives in India. Journal of International Food and Agribusiness Marketing 6 (1): 33-58.
- George, S. 1985. Operation Flood: An appraisal of current Indian dairy policy. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- ---. 1988. Co-operatives and Indian dairy policy: More Anand than pattern. In Who shares? Co-operatives and rural development, ed. D. Attwood and B. S. Baviskar, 394-426. Delhi: Oxford University Press.

- ---.1990a. Agropastoral equations in India: Intensification and change of mixed farming systems. In Theworld of pastoralism: Herding systems in comparative perspective, ed. J. Galaty and D. Johnson, 119-43. New York: Guilford.
- ---.1990b. Operation Flood and centralized dairy development in India. In Resources, institutions and strategies: Operation Flood and Indian dairying, ed. M. Doornbos and K. N. Nair, 77-93. Delhi: Sage.
- Goldman, M. 2007. How 'water for all!' policy became hegemonic: The power of the World Bank and its transnational policy networks. Geoforum 38 (5): 786-800.
- Gupta, A. 1998. Postcolonial developments: Agriculture in the making of modern India. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Harris, M. 1992. The cultural ecology of India's sacred cattle. Current Anthropology 33 (1): 261-76.
- Harriss, J. 1982. Capitalism and peasant farming: Agrarian structure and ideology in northern Tamil Nadu. Mumbai: Oxford University Press.
- Hazell, P., and C. Ramasamy. 1991. The Green Revolution reconsidered: The impact of high-yielding rice varieties in South India. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.
- Hemme, T., O. Garcia, and A. Saha. 2003. A review of milk production in India with particular emphasis on smallscale producers. Pro-Poor Livestock Policy Initiative Working Paper 2, Food and Agriculture Organization. http://www.fao.org/AG/AGAinfo/projects/en/pplpi/ docarc/wp2.pdf (last accessed 23 July 2008).
- Hiremath, B. N., K. Singh, and G. Mergos. 1997. Impact of Operation Flood in Madhya Pradesh: A resurvey. Anand, India: Institute of Rural Management.
- Jackson, C., and M. Chattopadhyay. 2000. Identities and livelihoods: Gender, ethnicity, and nature in a South Bihar village. In Agrarian environments: Resources, representations, and rule in India, ed. A. Agrawal and K. Sivaramakrishnan, 147-69. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Jha, D. N. 2002. The myth of the holy cow. New York: Verso. Kalirajan, K. P. 2004. An analysis of India's reform dynamics. Oxford Development Studies 32 (1): 119-34.
- Katakam, A. 2002. The free market menace. Frontline 19 (7). http://www.frontlineonnet.com/fl1907/19070890.htm (last accessed 23 July 2008).
- ---. 2006. Milkman's exit. Frontline 23 (6). http://www. flonnet.com/fl2306/stories/20060407003802400.htm (last accessed 23 July 2008).
- Korom, F. 2000. Holy cow! The apotheosis of Zebu, or why the cow is sacred in Hinduism. Asian Folklore Studies 59 (2): 181-203.
- Kothari, R., and R. Maru. 1970. Federating for political interests: The Kshatriyas of Gujarat. In Caste in Indian politics, ed. R. Kothari, 66-95. Hyderabad, India: Orient Longman.
- Kurian, N. J. 2007. Widening economic and social disparities: Implications for India. Indian Journal of Medical Research 126 (4): 374-80.
- Kurien, V. 1997a. The AMUL dairy cooperatives: Putting the means of development into the hands of small producers in India. In Reasons for hope: Instructive experiments in rural development, ed. A. Krishna, N. Uphoff, and M. Esman, 105-19. West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press.
- ---. 1997b. An unfinished dream. Delhi: Tata McGrawHill.
- Lipton, M. 1977. Why poor people stay poor: Urban bias in world development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Lipton, M., and R. Longhurst. 1989. New seeds and poor people. London: Unwin Hyman
- Massey, D. 1994. Space, place, and gender. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Mergos, G., and R. Slade. 1987. Dairy development and milk cooperatives: The effects of a dairy project in India. World Bank Discussion Paper 15, World Bank, Washington, DC.
- Nair, K. N. 1987. Animal protein consumption and sacred cow complex in India. In Food and evolution: Towards a theory of human food habits, ed. M. Harris and E. B. Ross, 445-54. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
- ---. 1990. Cattle breeding technology and draught power availability in Indian agriculture: An unresolved contradiction in livestock economy of India. Bombay: Oxford.
- National Dairy Development Board (NDDB). 1987. From a drop to a flood. Anand, India: NDDB.
- ---. 2008. Perspective 2010. http://www.nddb.org/ perspective/perspective-more.html#goal (last accessed 23 July 2008).
- Oza, R. 2004. Indian elections: Mandate against religious nationalism and neoliberal reform. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 22 (5): 633-38.
- ---. 2006. The making of neoliberal India: Nationalism, gender, and the paradoxes of globalization. London and New York: Routledge.
- Pandey, G. 1983. Rallying round the cow: Sectarian strife in the Bhojpuri region, c.1888-1917. In Subaltern studies II: Writings on South Asian history and society, ed. R. Guha, 60-129. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Patel, A. S. 1988. Cooperative dairying and rural development: A case study of AMUL. In Who shares? Cooperatives and rural development, ed. D. Attwood and B. S. Baviskar, 362-77. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Patel, S. 1990. The Anand pattern: A socio-historical analysis of its origin and growth. In Resources, institutions and strategies: Operation Flood and Indian dairying, ed. M. Doornbos and K. N. Nair, 27-56. Delhi: Sage.
- Patil, B. R., and H. M. Udo. 1997. The impact of crossbred cows in mixed farming systems in Gujarat, India: Milk production and feeding practices. Asian-Australasian Journal of Animal Science 10:253-59.
- Patnaik, U. 1999. The long transition: Essays on political economy. Delhi: Tulika.
- Perreault, T. 2005. State restructuring and the scale politics of rural water in Bolivia. Environment and Planning A 37 (2): 263-84.
- Planning Commission. 2001. National human development report. Government of India. http://planningcommission. nic.in/reports/genrep/nhdrep/nhdreportf.htm (last accessed 23 July 2008).
- ---. 2008. 5 Year Plans. Government of India. http:// planningcommission.nic.in/plans/planrel/fiveyr/welcome. html (last accessed 23 July 2008).
- Radhakrishnan, P. 1990. Land reforms: Rhetoric and reality. Economic and Political Weekly 25 (47): 2617-21.

- ---. 2006. Farmers' suicides in India: Some sociological reflections. South Asian Journal 11. http:// www.southasianmedia.net/magazine/Journal/11 farmers suicides.htm (last accessed 23 July 2008).
- Rajaram, N. 1996. The impact of liberalization on village milk cooperatives: A sociological study of Kheda district. In Rediscovering cooperation. Vol. 3, Cooperatives in the emerging context, ed. R. Rajagopalan, 158-75. Anand, India: Institute of Rural Management.
- Raju, S. S. 2007. A note on Indian livestock products and their global competitiveness. Outlook on Agriculture 36 (4): 273-76.
- Rangnekar, D. V. 2006. Livestock in the livelihoods of the underprivileged communities of India: A review. Nairobi, Kenya: International Livestock Research Institute.
- Rice, A. 2008. A dying breed. New York Times 27 January. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/27/magazine/27cowt.html? r = 1&amp;ref = world&amp;oref = slogin (last accessed 23 July 2008).
- Robbins, P. 1998. Paper forests: Imagining and deploying exogenous ecologies in arid India. Geoforum 29 (1): 6989.
- ---.1999.Meatmatters: Cultural politics along the commodity chain in India. Ecumene 6 (4): 399-423.
- ---. 2003. Beyond ground truth: GIS and the environmental knowledge of herders, professional foresters, and other traditional communities. Human Ecology 31 (1): 233-53.
- Rudolph, L., and S. Rudolph. 1987. In pursuit of Lakshmi: The political economy of the Indian state. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Rutten, M. 1995. Farms and factories: Social profile of large farmers and rural industrialists in West India. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Schroeder, R. 1999. Shady practices: Agroforestry and gender politics in the Gambia. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Sharma, U. 1980. Women, work, and property in north-west India. London: Tavistock.
- Sharma, V., and A. Gulati. 2003. Trade liberalization, market reforms and competitiveness of Indian dairy sector. Discussion Paper No. 61, Markets, Trade and Institutions Division, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.
- Shiva, V. 1988. Staying alive: Women, ecology and development in India. Delhi: Kali for Women.
- Sriram, S. 2004. Locking horns over culture and business. http:// www.indiatogether.org/agriculture/cattle/notforsale.htm (last accessed 23 July 2008).
- Talbot, R. 1979. The European Community's food aid programme:Anintegrationofideology, strategy, technology and surpluses. Food Policy 4 (4): 269-84.
- Turner, R. 2004. Livestock production and the rural poor in Andhra Pradesh and Orissa States, India. Pro-Poor Livestock Policy Initiative Working Paper No. 9, Food and Agriculture Organization. http://www.fao.org/AG/ AGAinfo/projects/en/pplpi/docarc/wp9.pdf (last accessed 23 July 2008).
- United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UN ESCAP). 1981. Participation of women in dairy development in South Asia. ST/ESCAP/171. Bangkok, Thailand: UN ESCAP.
- Vakulabharanam, V. 2005. Growth and distress in a South Indian peasant economy during the era of economic liberalization. Journal of Development Studies 41(6): 971-77.
- Varshney, A. 1995. Democracy, development, and the countryside: Urban-rural struggles in India. London: Cambridge University Press.
- Vyas, V. S. 2002. Changing contours of Indian agriculture. In Facets of the Indian economy, ed. R. Mohan, 185-214. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Woods, M. 2007. Engaging the global countryside: Globalization, hybridity and the reconstitution of rural place. Progress in Human Geography 31 (4): 485507.
- WorldBank. 2007. World development report 2008: Agriculture for development. Washington, DC: World Bank. http:// siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDR2008/Resources/ 2795087-1192112387976/WDR08 00 FM.pdf (last accessed 23 July 2008).
- Yang, A. 1980. Sacred symbol and sacred space in rural India: Community mobilization in the 'anti-cow killing' riot of 1893. Comparative Studies in Society and History 22 (4): 576-96.
- Yarwood, R., and N. Evans. 2003. Livestock, locality and landscape: EU regulations and the new geography of Welsh farm animals. Applied Geography 23 (2-3): 13757.

Correspondence: Department of Geography, University of South Florida, 4202 E. Fowler Ave., NES 107, Tampa, FL 33620, e-mail: pbasu@cas.usf.edu.

Copyright of Annals of the Association of American Geographers is the property of Taylor &amp; Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.