## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Race, Space, and Electric Power: Jim Crow and the 1934 North Carolina Rural Electrification Survey

## Conor Harrison

To cite this article: Conor Harrison (2016): Race, Space, and Electric Power: Jim Crow and the 1934 North Carolina Rural Electrification Survey, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2016.1151335

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2016.1151335

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 08 Apr 2016.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 42

View related articles

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

## Race, Space, and Electric Power: Jim Crow and the 1934 North Carolina Rural Electrification Survey

## Conor Harrison

Department of Geography, Environment and Sustainability Program, University of South Carolina

Some scholars have recently put forward the concept of energopower-the harnessing of electricity and fuelas a way to rethink the energetic basis of biopower. In this article, I refine this idea by tracing the use of race in rural electrification planning in North Carolina during the New Deal 1930s. Drawing on archival fieldwork that examines and reconstructs the 1934 North Carolina Rural Electrification Survey, I chart the ways in which race was used to readjust and reshape projections of electricity consumption and the planning of electricity distribution line construction. This is particularly clear in the use of a metric called the correction factor that allowed electricity planners to negotiate the contradictions between the materiality of networked electricity service, based on connections, and the prevailing attitudes toward race, which were built around disconnection. Although the overall influence of the 1934 Survey on the location of electricity distribution in North Carolina remains an open question, this work highlights the ways an energopolitical project-rural electrificationintersects with a key biopolitical technology-state racism, thus providing a better understanding of the relationship between energy and social power. Key Words: American south, biopower, energopower, infrastructure, race.

晚 近 有 若 干 学 者 提 出 能 源 权 力 的 概 念 --亦 即 控 制 电 力 和 燃煤 --作 为 再 思 考 生 命 权 力 的 能 源 基 础 之 方 式 。 我 们于 本 文 中 , 透 过追 溯 1930 年 代 新政时 期 , 北卡 罗 来 纳 州 农 村 电 气 化 计 画 中 的 种 族 之 使 用 , 精 鍊 能 源 权 力 的 概 念 。 我 运 用 检 视 并 再 结 构 1934 年 北卡 罗 来 纳 农 村 电 气 化 调 查 的 档案 田 野 工 作 , 绘 製 种 族 用 来 再 调 整 与 再 形 塑 电 力 消 费 推 估 和 电 力分 配 网 的 建 构 规 划 之 方 式 。 此 一 现 象 , 在 一个 名 为 矫 正 係 数 的 指 标 使 用 中 特 别 明显 , 该 矫 正 係 数 让 电 力 规 划 师 得 以 协 商 在 根 据 连 结 的 网 络 化 电 力 服 务 之 实 现 , 以 及 建 立 在 分 离 之上 的盛 行 种 族 态 度 之 间 的 矛 盾 。 儘 管 1934 年 的 调 查 对 北卡 罗 来 纳 的 电 力分 佈 区 位 之 影 响 仍 是 个 开 放 的 问 题 , 但 此 一 研 究 凸 显 出 能 源 权 力 计 画 --农 村 电 气 化 --与 关 键 的 生 命 政 治 技 术 「 国 家 种 族 主义 」 相 互交 织 的 方 式 , 因 而 对 能 源 和 社 会 权 力 的 关 係 提 供 了 更 佳 的 理 解 。 关 键 词 ： 美 国 南 方 , 生 命 权 力 , 能 源 权 力 , 基 础 建 设 , 种 族 。

Recientemente algunos eruditos han lanzado el concepto de energ  ıa-poder [ energopower ]-la utilizaci  on de la electricidad y el combustible-como un modo de repensar las bases energ  eticas del biopoder. En este art  ıculo refino esta idea trazando el uso de raza en la planificaci  on rural de la electricidad en Carolina del Norte durante el New Deal [Nuevo Trato] de los a ~ nos 1930. Con base en investigaci  on de archivos para examinar y reconstruir el Estudio de la Electrificaci  on Rural en Carolina del Norte de 1934, compilo las maneras como se us  o la raza para reajustar y reconfigurar las proyecciones de consumo de electricidad y la planificaci  on para construir las l  ıneas de distribuci  on de electricidad. Esto es particularmente claro en el uso de una medida denominada factor de correcci  on que facilitaba a los planificadores de la electricidad salvar la contradicci  on entre la materialidad del servicio de electricidad en redes, con base en conexiones, y las actitudes prevalentes en t  erminos de raza, que estaban edificadas alrededor de la desconexi  on. Aunque la influencia general del Estudio de 1934 sobre localizaci  on de la distribuci  on de electricidad en Carolina del Norte se mantiene como una cuesti  on abierta, este trabajo destaca las maneras como un proyecto de energ  ıa-poder-la electrificaci  on rural-se intersecta con una tecnolog  ıa biopol  ıtica clave-racismo estatal-proveyendo as  ı una mejor comprensi  on de la relaci  on entre energ  ıa y poder social. Palabras clave: el sur norteamericano, biopoder, energ  ıapoder, infraestructura, raza.

- [ ] O n6June 1936, A. Y. Taylor, a field agent for the newly formed Rural Electrification Admin- istration (REA), wrote a memo to the Chief

Engineer of the REA. Taylor had spent several days assessing the rural electrification situation in Edge- combe County, a majority African American county in

Figure 1. Edgecombe County cities and towns.

<!-- image -->

the antebellum plantation belt of eastern North Carolina (see Figure 1). Writing at the height of the Great Depression, Taylor was clearly not impressed. 'This county has only two crops,' he described. 'Tobacco accounts for most of the wealth and is the only cash crop on about 75 percent of farms visited. . . . While this section is not subject to crop failure, the soil is gray and sandy and did not appear to be as rich as that in surrounding counties.' Taylor warily noted that nearly all of the farming in Edgecombe County was carried out by tenants. 'However,' he stated, 'in spite of the fact that there are many negroes working as 'share croppers' many of the tenants are white and of English and Welsh extraction. This latter group impressed me favorably.' Even better, in Taylor's view, was his discovery that many of the white tenants had been signed up as prospective customers of the new electric utility. Despite his reservations about the high proportion of African Americans in Edgecombe County, Taylor urged the approval of federal loans to a recently formed cooperative group seeking to build electricity distribution lines (Taylor 1936). These distribution lines were completed in 1937, making them the first REA-funded distribution lines built in North Carolina.

In the years prior to Taylor's memo, stakeholders from across the United States began clamoring for widespread rural electrification. Experiments on poor Southern farms had shown the promise of electricity for improving rural life, and Franklin D. Roosevelt's experiences with rural electrification as governor of New York spurred him to adopt rural electrification as part of his New Deal platform. Sympathetic politicians and agricultural organizations claimed that rural electrification would modernize farms, increase profitability, and raise the quality of rural life. Additionally, many rural advocates believed that these improvements would in turn help to stem rural to urban migration (Brown 1980).

In North Carolina, agricultural leaders managed to get rural electrification on the platform of both political parties in the 1932 gubernatorial elections. In 1934, three years before the first rural distribution line would be completed in the state, a rural electrification committee was appointed by the governor and a rural electrification survey was authorized. That summer, seventy-seven counties in North Carolina were extensively surveyed and mapped in an effort to better plan and guide what appeared to be imminent rural electrification. The 1934 Rural Electrification Survey captured an enormous amount of data and represents a remarkable snapshot of rural life across the state. Surveyors interviewed 25,508 individual households and collected twenty-six separate data points at each home. They used the data to estimate each household's electricity consumption and then grouped the households along a series of proposed lines. Linking projected revenue with cost data, the survey team ranked the lines in terms of projected profitability. The assumption of the survey directors was that the state rural electrification committee would then have the authority to guide line construction based on their rankings.

In their final report on the project, the survey directors were remarkably forthright in their admission of flaws and limits to the survey. They discussed the difficulty in estimating household electricity consumption and questioned the aptitude of many of the field surveyors. Yet absent from any of the final reporting, unexplained in the instructions to the field surveyors, and largely taken as self-evident throughout the survey process, was the use of one variable to negatively adjust the projected electricity consumption of certain households at a rate much higher than any other variable-race. Despite the massive amount of data that the surveys produced and the careful projections of revenues and costs, the projected electricity consumption was altered based on the race of the householder using a figure called the correction factor.

In this article, I examine the 1934 Rural Electrification Survey and the correction factor as a way of understanding the among between biopower, state racism, and energy in the New Deal South. Biopower emerges from the work of Foucault (2003) as a form of governing populations and producing particular subjectivities. Although Foucault's concept of biopower, and its related technologies such as state racism, has been extraordinarily useful to understanding the governance of modern life, recent scholarship has considered the energetic basis of biopower, also engaging with the more-than-human origins of social power. In deploying the concept of energopower, these scholars (Boyer 2011, 2014; Alexander and Reno 2014; Howe 2014; Rogers 2014) offer energopower not as a replacement for biopower but rather a concept that considers how technologies of biopolitics interact and are shaped by sources and flows of energy.

In stating the case for energopower, Boyer (2014, 327) pointed out that 'biopower has always plugged in.' This article analyzes the ways an energopolitical project-rural electrification-intersects with a key biopolitical technology-state racism. To understand this relationship requires attention to the materiality of electricity systems as well as the evolving forms of racial governance being deployed in the mid-1930s U.S. South. In bringing together energopower and biopower, I respond to recent calls from geographers of energy (Huber 2015; Calvert 2016), and social theorists more broadly (Chakrabarty 2009; Mitchell 2009; Urry 2014), to interrogate the energetic basis of our social theories. If, as Boyer (2011, 5) argued, energy is constitutive of 'modern power over life and population,' how has race been part of this?

The article proceeds in five parts. I first examine the relationship between biopower and energopower, highlighting the intertwining of the two concepts. I then explore the context in which the North Carolina Rural Electrification Committee designed and administered the 1934 survey in North Carolina. This section brings to the fore the uneven landscape of tenant farming and the embedded racial antipathy that shaped rural electrification planning in North Carolina. In the section that follows, I outline the workings of the 1934 survey. I then turn to a closer analysis of the correction factor and its application in Edgecombe County, a majority African American county emblematic of the uneven and highly racialized landscape of

rural life in North Carolina and the U.S. South more generally. The focus on Edgecombe County also draws out how energoand biopolitical projects do not always adequately mesh. In the Conclusion, I show that the concepts of energopower and biopower highlight the role of race, space, and energy in the marginalization of African American farm communities.

This work is based on archival research at the State Archives of North Carolina, through which I examined thousands of original documents related to the 1934 survey. This set of documents includes original hand-completed survey instruments and maps, instructions to surveyors, correspondence between survey designers and administrators, and official survey reports. I analyzed these documents for their content, focusing on passages that described and justified the design and administration of the survey. In addition, I digitized and converted to a spreadsheet the original survey documents for Edgecombe County, thus reproducing the original spatial database containing 10,712 household-level data points used to make the original Edgecombe County survey reports. Using ArcGIS 10.1 (Esri, Redlands, CA, USA), I joined these householdlevel data to a set of georeferenced original survey maps showing the locations of proposed electricity lines and surveyed households. This geodatabase was used to produce the maps and tables in this article. To provide context on rural African American life and the extent of racism present in local and state government, I also draw on historic census data, a collection of essays depicting rural African American life from the New Deal-funded Federal Writers Program, and interview transcripts from an unpublished 1933 study of the racial attitudes of North Carolina government officials.

Information preserved in archives from the 1934 survey reveals a story of power-the power to control how networked infrastructure will be spread, to create new forms of spatial governance, and to assign, calculate, and rationalize the differential value assigned at the level of the population. Yet archives are always incomplete, and the choice of what to preserve can discipline, erase, and otherwise minimize the agency of those whose artifacts are not preserved (Cresswell 2012). Numerous scholars have argued that archives can be read 'against the grain' to recover the micropolitics of resistance (Scott 1987; Kelley 1993). Although the voices of African Americans are largely absent from this article, I read the documents in the official archives 'with the grain' to understand how the powerful make their claims to truth appear normal

(Cresswell 2012). I focus on one particular method of producing 'truths,' the 'objective' quantitative survey that works to construct social realities to control, manipulate, and study populations (Barnes and Hannah 2001, 379). Such a focus highlights the spatial, economic, and racial calculus designed to guide the bio- and energopolitical intervention that is rural electrification.

## Biopolitics and Energopolitics

Scholars have recently argued that energy has not been adequately factored into social theory. Urry (2014, 3), for example, pointed out that energy's 'varied forms structure the social, temporal and spatial organization of societies and of 'life' itself,' yet he also asserted that studies of the extent to which energy has powered society are underexamined. In a review of contemporary energy geography research, Huber (2015) called for energy to be viewed as more than an empirical object of inquiry and instead an underlying concept in our social and material infrastructures.

One area in which social theories are becoming energized is in and around Marx's investigations into the operations of capitalism. Although acknowledging the immense explanatory power Marx's work has had, recent scholarship critiques Marx for treating energy simply as any other input into a capitalist system (Labban 2008; Huber 2009, 2013a, 2013b; Szeman 2014). The treatment of energy as a raw material consumed in production processes ignores that the development of modern capitalism was deeply dependent on the exploitation of fossil fuels. Researchers are beginning to push beyond this superficial account to analyze the role of fossilized energy in producing capitalism's distinct spatialities. Huber's (2009, 2013b) work on oil and neoliberalism, for example, considers how oil's biophysical properties have combined with social and political relations to fuel many of the 'freedoms' associated with contemporary U.S. life. Beyond the realm of Marxist geography, other scholars are interrogating the energetic roots of modern capitalism and democracy (Altvater 2007; Chakrabarty 2009; Mitchell 2009). This view positions energy not only as an object of geopolitical concern but also as a material basis of capitalism and the forms of production and consumption that order daily life.

Entangled with contemporary capitalism is the concept of biopower, the management of life and health at the level of the population (Rabinow and Rose

2006). Such management takes on a number of forms, including control over the physical environments in which humans reside, apparatuses of knowledge, and disciplinary practices that promote the health and productivity of populations (Foucault 2003). Biopower is not just an affirmative power, however. Whereas portions of the population are exposed to beneficial aspects of biopower, others are excluded. One method of exclusion is through the 'technology' of racism. For Foucault (2003, 61), racism can be thought of as one racial group defending itself as the 'true' race, 'the race that holds power and is entitled to define the norm, and against those who deviate from that norm.' As Rasmussen (2011, 40) explained, Foucault views racism as a flexible technology, a form of governance that operates between sovereign power and biopower, thus 'articulat[ing] a caseurea between worthy and unworthy life.' Racism, as a form of sovereign power, can directly confront and harm the individual. As a form of biopower, racism can manage populations on a larger scale by fragmenting 'on the continuum of the individual' (Crampton 2007, 225), enriching the lives of one race at the expense of others through the processes of inclusion and exclusion. Gilmore (2002, 16) described biopolitical racism best as 'a limiting force' that through the 'practice of abstraction' organizes relations and creates hierarchies that place disproportionate costs on one group versus another.

As in the case of Marxist political economy, biopower has largely taken the presence of energy for granted (Thrift 2007; Boyer 2011). The technologies of biopower deployed by states-surveillance, public health, slum clearance, and indeed racism-all require expenditures of and control over energy to be accomplished. Historically, this energy might have come in the form of human or animal muscle power, but by the nineteenth century control over fossilized or biological sources of energy became essential to fueling rapid industrial and population growth (Smil 1994). By the mid-twentieth century, fossilized energy had become thoroughly embedded in the routines of comfort and cleanliness associated with modern life (Shove 2003).

How best to consider the relationship between energy and biopower? Some insights can come from geographic scholarship on water. Water infrastructure is central to biopolitical interventions, both through control over populations and in producing 'the cultural aesthetics of health and hygiene' (Bakker 2012, 619). Selective investment in water infrastructures can work to separate and divide populations, as cases from racialized colonial and contemporary water regimes make clear (Bakker 2003; Kooy and Bakker 2008). Water's materiality-its flow and ability to carry pollution and pathogens-forges connections between individual bodies and the population as a whole (Bakker 2012). Water, then, is essential to human health and productivity, and although its material properties can bring about a shift in scale from the individual to the population, it also has the potential to divide and exclude.

Like water, energy is central to many biopolitical interventions (not least pumping and heating water itself). For example, the twentieth-century Keynesian welfare state, a macroeconomic biopolitical intervention, was premised on the potential for unlimited economic growth fueled by unlimited energy resources (Mitchell 2009; Boyer 2014). On a more mundane level, biopolitical technologies such as schools, hospitals, and prisons depend on reliable energy sources and are constructed from materials emerging from highenergy regimes. In certain forms, energy mimics water in its ability to shift individuals into populations. This is evident in the case of networked electricity, which distributes power from a centralized source along a web of distribution wires. In Boyer's (2011) terms, 'power over energy has been the companion and collaborator of modern power over life and population from the beginning' (5).

Quite clearly there is a strong biopolitical dimension to energy, and scholars have recently attempted to better understand this relationship. Key among them is Boyer (2014), who has put forward the concept of energopower as a separate but complementary form of biopower. Energopower calls attention to the need to consider nonhuman objects, particularly electricity and fuel, when analyzing the workings of political power and transformations of our social world. The material properties of energy, as Mitchell (2009) detailed, affect the types of technologies of control and management that emerge. Indeed, transitions in energy systems, both in material and geographical terms, are intricately related to changes in social systems (Bridge et al. 2013). As energy sources and infrastructure emerge and transform, the methods of authority over, knowledge of, and interventions into daily life will change as well. In the same vein, technological systems-including rural electrification-bear the imprint of the social systems that guide their development (Hughes 1983).

Given the distinct challenges posed by climate change, Boyer and colleagues assert that biopolitics is in need of reworking. This contemporary moment of

ecological crisis-with its roots firmly found in fossil fuel capitalism-highlights the central role of energy and fuel to modern freedoms (Chakrabarty 2009). As such, a greater focus on the role of energy is necessary, particularly one that incorporates closer consideration of energy's materiality in the workings of biopower. As Boyer (2014) proposed, 'Energopower and energopolitics are . . . ways of putting into words the increasing recognition that conditions of life today are . . . intertwined with particular infrastructures, magnitudes, and habits of using electricity and fuel' (323). Although Boyer and colleagues make a convincing case that energy has been central to the workings of biopower, they deliberately do less work fleshing out the precise relationship between biopower and energopower. Anticipating the argument that energopower is a simply a 'modality of biopower,' Boyer argued that the relationship between energopower and biopower is not one of either-or but rather both-and (Boyer 2014, 326). Indeed, the question is not where biopower ends and energopower begins but rather the nature of their entanglement.

In this article, I follow Boyer (2014, 310) in defining energopower as 'the harnessing of electricity and fuel' and consider rural electrification as an energoand biopolitical project. I aim to refine the work of Boyer and colleagues in two primary ways. First, whereas Boyer points to the contemporary crisis of capital and climate as the push for rethinking biopower, I turn to an earlier period of crisis-the Great Depression and the need to expand electricity networks into the rural United States. The response to the Depression-a crisis of capital-was the New Deal, a program designed to boost effective demand, although in practice it did so in decidedly uneven ways (Phillips 2007). Rather than being entangled with a crisis of climate, however, the energopolitical project of rural electrification confronted a different challenge-the so-called Negro problem. This brings to the fore my second contribution. Whereas Boyer and colleagues predominantly portray energy's centrality to the life-affirming qualities of biopower (the hospital or the school), I use the 1934 survey to show how an energopolitical project interacts with those portions of the population outside of biopower's investments. In the section that follows, I outline the racialized landscape confronting rural electrification, thus setting the stage for investigating how the 1934 survey was shaped by the pervasive racism of New Deal-era Edgecombe County and North Carolina.

## Race, Space, and Governance in 1930s Edgecombe County, North Carolina

The racial political economy of 1930s Edgecombe County was indicative of many counties in eastern North Carolina, home to some of the largest antebellum cotton plantations in the state. The legacy of slavery left Edgecombe as one of ten counties (out of 100 in North Carolina) with a majority African American population despite the significant outmigration of African Americans after the Civil War. Around two thirds of Edgecombe County's population of 47,894 in 1930 were classified as rural, with a vast majority of those (88 percent) employed in the agricultural sector (Table 1). Like North Carolina as a whole, the majority of farms operating in Edgecombe County were of modest size-between twenty and forty-nine acres 1 due to the prevalence of tenant farming. Tenants oversaw most farms (84 percent), acreage (73 percent), and farm value (70 percent) in Edgecombe County (U.S. Census 1930). Similar to antebellum plantations, major rural landowners in Edgecombe County performed little labor, instead acting as a rentier class that skimmed or swindled the profits derived from often African American tenant labor (Billings 1979; Woods 1998). The 1930 Census reported that Edgecombe County's majority African American population (57 percent) operated the majority of farms (57

Table 1. 1930 North Carolina and Edgecombe county population data

|                       |   North Carolina |   %of class |   Edgecombe County |   %of class |
|-----------------------|------------------|-------------|--------------------|-------------|
| Total population      |        3,170,276 |             |             47,894 |             |
| Urban population      |          809,847 |        25.5 |             16,401 |        34.2 |
| Rural population      |        2,360,429 |        74.5 |             31,493 |        65.8 |
| Rural farm population |        1,597,220 |        67.7 |             27,616 |        87.7 |
| Black population      |          918,647 |        29   |             27,259 |        56.9 |
| White population      |        2,234,948 |        70.5 |             20,628 |        43.1 |

Source : U. S. Census (1930).

Table 2. Farm characteristics by race

|                                  | North Carolina   | North Carolina   | Edgecombe   | Edgecombe   |
|----------------------------------|------------------|------------------|-------------|-------------|
|                                  | Black            | White            | Black       | White       |
| Acres of land                    | 3,392,535        | 14,662,568       | 108,768     | 128,645     |
| Farms in operation               | 76,873           | 202,835          | 2,282       | 1,718       |
| %of total farms in operation     | 27.5             | 72.5             | 57.1        | 43.0        |
| Value of lands and buildings ($) | 159,285,251      | 684,837,000      | 5,541,853   | 7,456,861   |
| Acres per capita                 | 44.1             | 52.4             | 47.7        | 63.3        |
| Average farm value ($)           | 2,072            | 3,376            | 2,429       | 4,340       |

Source : U. S. Census (1930).

percent; Table 2). The 1930 Census does not indicate the racial makeup of tenant farmers but does report that African American-operated farms tended to be smaller and less valuable. Based on these data, it is likely that a majority of African Americans were tenant farmers. Such a combination of race and occupation produces a particularly vexing set of intersectional challenges for many African American tenant farmers.

To electrify rural areas in North Carolina, project developers would be required to weave electricity distribution lines into a racialized tenant farming landscape that thrived on and reproduced uneven economic development (Billings 1979). The case of Jim Parker, an African American tenant living near Seaboard, North Carolina, is indicative of the uneven relations between landlord and tenant. At the time of his interview by the Federal Writers Project in 1939, Parker was in his twenty-second year of sharecropping. 2 He returned to work with the landowner because, in his words, 'I owed him some money on last year's account, and I don't want to leave a man owin' him' (Harris 1939, 1). 3 The volatile nature of cash crops such as tobacco and cotton meant that Parker faced years of boom and bust. In his best year, he made $1,000, and the worst left him $190 in debt. Reflecting on his current situation, Parker felt depressed about his options: 'It ain't my landlord I'm complainin' about, for they been as good as any I reckon, maybe better'n most. It's sharecroppin' that wrong' (Harris 1939, 8).

Tenants were especially vulnerable to the great flux in agriculture that occurred during the 1930s. The Great Depression wreaked havoc on tobacco and cotton prices in the late 1920s and early 1930s, resulting in farm foreclosures, bank closures, and unemployment. By the winter of 1932, 25 percent of North Carolinians were on the relief rolls (Badger 1981). New

Deal policies did little to alleviate the situation in rural areas, in part because the power of Southern Democratic congressmen meant that federal policies could be reinterpreted to fit local conditions and benefit large, politically connected planters (Woods 1998; Reid 2003). Although policies like the Agricultural Adjustment Act sought to boost prices by setting production limits, such controls were a regressive policy that caused hardship for small growers. Many tenants were evicted because of acreage reduction agreements, and those who remained were often systematically cheated out of profits by their landlords (Badger 1981).

New Deal policies marked a significant expansion of the state into agricultural lives. These policies were not color blind. Instead, they were morphed and layered onto a racist state governance apparatus already working to formally and informally oppose any possibility of African American empowerment. In many cases, racist county officials shaped New Deal programs locally to maintain 'a society structured in the interests of all whites' (Omi and Winnant 2015, 55). The specific views of these local officials, many of whom likely influenced rural electrification efforts in their counties and towns, were exposed by the work of Wiley B. Sanders, a professor of sociology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. In 1933, Sanders was researching for a planned book on the state of the child welfare of African Americans in North Carolina. 4 Part of the book was to focus on the racial attitudes of county officials across the state. Sanders deployed members of the staff of the North Carolina State Board of Charities and Public Welfare to perform guided interviews in the form of seemingly informal conversations with county officials to assess their racial attitudes. 5 The results reveal the deepseated racial antipathy of most county officials.

Among the officials surveyed, there was total agreement that African Americans were inferior but

no consensus as to why. Some cited Biblical reasons, others a lack of opportunity (although they agreed African Americans could never equal whites), simple laziness, and, in keeping with the 'scientific' thinking of the time, biology and climate. The overarching belief among officials was that social equality should be opposed at every opportunity due to the need to 'keep the negro in his place.' Doing so took on multiple forms. Only 25 percent of those surveyed thought African Americans should have equal opportunities for education, and most felt that mandatory school attendance laws should be suspended for black children during harvest. A majority felt that African Americans should only be allowed to own land in segregated areas, and 75 percent opposed any black voting (Sanders 1933).

The attitudes of county officials make clear the outright hostility and the fear of black rule that was pervasive during Jim Crow. 6 These same views were common among the agricultural extension and home demonstration agents surveyed. One farm agent argued that 'the outstanding and best negro is the best cotton hand. After God created the world, he saw that there was no one to till the soil so he created the negro. He made him to do this type of work and he should stay in the place intended for him' (Sanders 1933). Many home demonstration agents, who focused on rural home life, felt that African Americans should not be educated. As an inferior race, one argued, they would always be cooks and maids. Further, 'they should be taught cooking . . . not so much for their own sakes as for the protection of whites.' Although they did not physically conduct the door-to-door surveys for the 1934 survey, correspondence between field surveyors and the survey directors indicates that local extension agents were influential in guiding surveys to the 'best' and most influential farms in an area. Their views on race, which Sanders's (1933) work highlights, thus likely shaped the administration of the 1934 survey locally. 7

It is also likely that faculty in the University of North Carolina system designing policy interventions into rural life influenced the racial views of local officials. University of North Carolina rural sociologist Howard Odum, for example, was head of the Institute for Research in the Social Sciences when appointed to the governor's Rural Electrification Committee in 1934. Although moving beyond his early work that explicitly positioned African Americans as an inferior race, in the 1930s Odum continued to view the South as plagued by a 'Negro problem' and recommended a physical redistribution of African Americans (Woods 1998). This line of thinking was undoubtedly prevalent among the vast majority of North Carolina academics and administrators, a group influential to the construction and maintenance of racial segregation as well as the pending rural electrification programs in the state.

The arrival of rural electrification would bring about a change in the energy landscape of rural North Carolina. Politicians, rural advocates, and many others promised electricity would result in improvements to rural livelihoods. Given the existing conditions into which rural electrification emerged, however, this energopolitical project would likely be shaped by Jim Crow segregation, the ongoing biopolitical project of the racist state. Examining the 1934 survey shows just how this was done.

## The 1934 North Carolina Rural Electrification Survey

In 1932, only 3.2 percent of North Carolina farms had electricity. Rural leaders in North Carolina viewed this as a problem. By the early 1930s federal figures such as Morris Cooke (who would later head the federal REA), national and state agricultural leaders, and electrical equipment manufacturers such as General Electric (Brown 1980; Field 1990) were agitating for a federal rural electrification program, although these efforts were met with opposition from local private power interests (Manganiello 2015). For its chief boosters, rural electrification meant a restoration of a country life on par with those in cities (Phillips 2007). Clamoring for rural electrification would culminate in the formation of the federal REA in 1935, which began loaning money to build rural distribution lines in 1936. North Carolina's program actually began earlier, when in May 1934 North Carolina's governor formed a Rural Electrification Committee to coordinate the electrification efforts of existing privately and municipally owned electric utilities. The Committee's first order of business was to conduct a statewide survey to assess where rural electrification was most feasible (Brown 1982).

Few figures were more important to the 1934 survey and subsequent rural electrification efforts than David S. Weaver, professor of agricultural engineering at North Carolina State University. Weaver's academic career was largely devoted to increasing farm mechanization and he would serve as a consulting engineer for

both federal and state rural electrification organizations. Weaver's initial involvement in rural electrification came in early 1934 via a rushed three-county rural electrification survey funded by the Federal Rural Housing Survey and administered by North Carolina State University. When the state committee was formed that May and the survey authorized, Weaver was the logical choice to lead it (Meeting of Governor's Commission on Rural Electrification 1934).

At the time of the 1934 survey, the committee and survey administrators felt that the role of the Rural Electrification Committee would be to fund, guide, and coordinate subsequent rural electrification by municipal and private electric utilities based on the survey results. The survey designed and administered by Weaver and several assistants was impressive in its scope. Administrators hired fifty-eight (white) surveyors from the relief rolls and trained them for two days. The surveyors then visited 25,508 homes collecting data about households, farms, and the potential use of electric appliances. Surveyors filed weekly reports, and administrators sent follow-up letters of instruction to clarify issues with the survey and survey instructions. In their correspondence with the survey administrators, several surveyors included long narratives on their thoughts of the relative merits of certain proposed lines and the people that live along them, describing them as 'hard working people and good farmers' who lived close enough together that the costs of line extensions would be low (Wagner n.d.). Not all surveyors were diligent, however, and in a May 1935 report on the survey, one assistant engineer revealed that 'one or two of them were absolutely incompetent' (Burton 1935, 1).

Despite the great detail some surveyors paid to describing local conditions, the work focused on the careful collection of quantitative data from which proposed distribution lines could be compared. Surveyors went door-to-door along the routes of proposed electricity lines, which typically ran alongside major rural roads. The survey was meant to include both homeowners and tenant farmers, who were asked to provide answers to fifty-five different questions (Figure 2). Surveyors collected housing data including the distance to each house along the road from the point of origin (a metric critical to calculating the cost of the line); the location, race, and tenure (owner or tenant) of each proposed user; and the size and number of occupants of each home and surrounding buildings. Surveyors then asked homeowners whether they would use several common appliances. Finally, they collected data on attributes of the farm, including the number of various livestock, acreage under cultivation, and whether the farm already had a home lighting plant, 8 as several did, or planned to use electric motors.

The field surveyors aggregated these data to produce an electricity profile that showed how much electricity each house would consume in a given month. In combination with electricity cost data obtained from the nearest electric utility, the household's monthly and annual bills could be determined. Once each house along a proposed line had a projected annual electricity consumption and bill attributed to it, administrators could determine an aggregate consumption for each proposed line. Survey engineers created several key metrics they used to compare lines: interested prospects per mile; annual revenue per mile; annual revenue per prospect; and, most important, the estimated cost of the line compared to the estimated annual revenue along that line (Meeting of Governor's Commission on Rural Electrification 1934). In survey director Weaver's reporting, private utility companies had claimed that a particular line was not profitable unless the ratio was three to one or better-that is, the cost of the line should not be more than three times the expected annual gross revenue (Weaver 1934). With this ratio calculated for each line, the proposed lines were ranked in terms of their feasibility across the county and the state as a whole. This ranking would then guide decisions on which lines would be funded.

This careful consideration of cost was due to the material properties of networked electricity systems. Because electricity (still) cannot be stored in large quantities, there is a need to temporally match electricity production and consumption. Although individual households might use different amounts of electricity at different times, in general households share a similar temporal rhythm of electricity consumption that cycles through peaks and troughs (Walker 2014). Electricity infrastructure, including power plants, transformers, substations, and distribution lines, must be of sufficient size to meet the peak demand. Because of the cost of this equipment, investments in electricity infrastructure tend to require long-term outlooks because of longer payback periods.

In the aftermath of the 1934 survey, Weaver reported that, if passed, a bill before the North Carolina General Assembly would give the Rural Electrification Committee the authority to issue bonds up to $10 million to fund line construction. Despite lobbying by a number of communities for priority in line

Figure 2. Original survey documents from 1934 Rural Electrification Survey.

<!-- image -->

construction, Weaver was convinced of the utility of the survey in prioritizing line construction. Noting the high cost of electricity infrastructure, Weaver insisted that 'Lines will be constructed where the revenue will justify them' and that the revenue must be 'sufficient to retire the bonds' (Weaver 1934, 7). Because shorter distances between customers kept construction costs lower, densely populated areas with large electricity users were the most attractive to power companies. Indeed, a single heavy electricity user could make the construction of a particular line feasible. The density of customers was also essential to the viability of a particular line. Crucially, this also meant that all potential customers along a particular line-black and white, tenant and landlord-needed to be surveyed and included in estimates for each proposed line. Yet complicating the need for inclusion was the fact that equality and inclusion were decidedly not the preferred methods of social interaction under Jim Crow; hence the need for the correction factor.

## The Correction Factor

Twenty-four of the twenty-six household-level variables collected in the 1934 survey were based on relatively straightforward criteria (see Table 3 for an overview of surveyed households). For instance, surveyors could easily assess the number of rooms in a house, and the surveyed households could answer frankly about their desire for an iron or electric oven. Two variables stand out, however, as particularly subjective, as the survey required surveyors to make two judgments about each household.

First, surveyors were instructed to make an assessment of the condition of the house. As guidance, the instructions to surveyors stated:

By the use of the letters A, B, C, and D give a rating for the premises with the idea in mind-is the person interviewed sincere in his statements as to what he or she intends to do and do appearances point to the fact that he or she is financially able to live up to his or her

Table 3. Characteristics of Edgecombe county farms surveyed in 1934 survey

|                           |                    |   Count |   % total |   Avg. no. rooms |   Avg. no. occupants |   Avg. no. hens |   Avg. no. hogs |   Avg. acres of cotton |   Avg. acres of tobacco |   Avg. acres of general crop |   Avg. no. total acres |
|---------------------------|--------------------|---------|-----------|------------------|----------------------|-----------------|-----------------|------------------------|-------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------|
| All surveyed residences   | Owner occupied     |     169 |      44.4 |             6.22 |                 4.59 |           43.5  |           16    |                  15.4  |                   10.23 |                         39.4 |                   67.2 |
| All surveyed residences   | Tenant occupied    |     212 |      55.6 |             5.19 |                 6.08 |           25.1  |            7.99 |                  10.1  |                    5.35 |                         22   |                   38.5 |
| All surveyed residences   | White              |     302 |      79.3 |             5.95 |                 5.15 |           39    |           13.8  |                  14.8  |                    8.7  |                         35.6 |                   61   |
| All surveyed residences   | Black              |      75 |      19.7 |             4.48 |                 6.46 |           11.72 |            3.03 |                   3.45 |                    2.9  |                          7.2 |                   14.1 |
| All surveyed residences   | Race not specified |       4 |       1   |                  |                      |                 |                 |                        |                         |                              |                        |
| All surveyed residences   | Total              |     381 |           |                  |                      |                 |                 |                        |                         |                              |                        |
| Owner occupied residences | White              |     154 |      91.1 |             6.4  |                 4.7  |           44.6  |           16.8  |                  16.3  |                   10.8  |                         42   |                   71.4 |
| Owner occupied residences | Black              |      15 |       8.9 |             4.9  |                 3.9  |           32.1  |            7.1  |                   5.9  |                    4.3  |                         12.4 |                   24.1 |
| Owner occupied residences | Race not specified |       0 |       0   |                  |                      |                 |                 |                        |                         |                              |                        |
| Owner occupied residences | Total              |     169 |           |                  |                      |                 |                 |                        |                         |                              |                        |
| Tenant residences         | White              |     148 |      69.8 |             5.5  |                 5.7  |           33.3  |           10.6  |                  13.2  |                    6.6  |                         29   |                   50.2 |
|                           | Black              |      60 |      28.3 |             4.4  |                 7.2  |            6.6  |            2    |                   2.8  |                    2.6  |                          5.9 |                   11.6 |
|                           | Race not specified |       4 |       1.9 |                  |                      |                 |                 |                        |                         |                              |                        |
|                           | Total              |     212 |           |                  |                      |                 |                 |                        |                         |                              |                        |

promises. A-Excellent B-Good C-Doubtful DPoor. (Instructions for County Field Men to Follow in Securing Data on the Rural Electrification Survey, circa 1934, 4)

Second, surveyors were directed to make a further judgment on the quality of the interview:

By the use of the same 4 letters give a Grade to the rating or authoritativeness of the interview-that is if you interviewed the home owner, his wife or both and they were sincere, intelligent appearing people rate the interview A. If the parties interviewed are people of a low grade of intelligence give the rating B or C. If the interview is with a servant or a member of the family other than the heads give the interview a rating of B, C, or D. (Instructions for County Field Men to Follow in Securing Data on the Rural Electrification Survey, circa 1934, 4)

In combination with the race and tenure status of the householder, these two ratings produced a figure called the correction factor. The correction factor represented Weaver's and the survey creators' attempt to account for an overestimation of how much electricity would be consumed by a particular house. Rather than overestimating the potential success of a particular line, Weaver and colleagues preferred to underestimate the usage so that those areas first developed would be more likely to be profitable and therefore successful (Burton 1934). Although this conservative calculation was meant to ensure the success of the project, embedded in the correction factor calculation was another adjustment based on beliefs of the racial inferiority of African Americans.

As Table 4 shows, Weaver and colleagues created a matrix to determine the correction factor for each household based on the grades given by the surveyor of the condition of the premises and the rating of the interview weighted by the race and tenure of the occupant. For example, a household might receive both an A for the condition of the premises and an A for the rating of the interview. As the matrix shows, if the

Table 4. Matrix to determine the correction factor

| Condition of premises   | A     | A     | A     | A     | B     | B     | B     | B     | C     | C     | C     | C     | D     | D     | D     | D     |
|-------------------------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
| Rating of interview     | A     | B     | C     | D     | A     | B     | C     | D     | A     | B     | C     | D     | A     | B     | C     | D     |
| White owner             | 1.000 | 0.950 | 0.900 | 0.850 | 0.900 | 0.855 | 0.810 | 0.765 | 0.800 | 0.760 | 0.720 | 0.680 | 0.700 | 0.665 | 0.630 | 0.595 |
| White tennant           | 0.900 | 0.855 | 0.810 | 0.765 | 0.810 | 0.770 | 0.729 | 0.609 | 0.720 | 0.684 | 0.648 | 0.612 | 0.630 | 0.599 | 0.567 | 0.536 |
| Negro owner             | 0.850 | 0.800 | 0.765 | 0.723 | 0.765 | 0.727 | 0.689 | 0.650 | 0.680 | 0.646 | 0.612 | 0.578 | 0.595 | 0.565 | 0.536 | 0.506 |
| Negro tennant           | 0.800 | 0.760 | 0.720 | 0.680 | 0.720 | 0.684 | 0.640 | 0.612 | 0.640 | 0.608 | 0.576 | 0.544 | 0.560 | 0.532 | 0.504 | 0.476 |

Note : Data from Instructions for County Field Men to follow in Securing Data on the Rural Electrification Survey (1934).

Table 5. Calculation and effect of the correction factor from 1934 survey

|                      |   Condition of the home |   Rating of the interview |   Correction factor |   Avg. annual kWh consumed |   Avg. annual bill ($) |   Uncorrected annual kWh consumed |   Avg. cost/kWh ($) |
|----------------------|-------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------|----------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------|
| All white households |                    3.27 |                      3.54 |                0.81 |                      800.8 |                  56.92 |                             988.6 |               0.071 |
| All black households |                    2.8  |                      3.38 |                0.66 |                      245.2 |                  24.02 |                             371.5 |               0.098 |
| Owner occupied       |                    3.39 |                      3.58 |                0.88 |                     1067.6 |                  71.7  |                            1213.2 |               0.067 |
| White                |                    3.44 |                      3.62 |                0.89 |                     1144.9 |                  76.12 |                            1286.4 |               0.066 |
| Black                |                    2.75 |                      3.08 |                0.73 |                      274.3 |                  26.82 |                             375.8 |               0.098 |
| Tenant occupied      |                    3.01 |                      3.45 |                0.69 |                      376.8 |                  32.57 |                             546.1 |               0.086 |
| White                |                    3.07 |                      3.45 |                0.71 |                      442.8 |                  37    |                             623.7 |               0.084 |
| Black                |                    2.81 |                      3.47 |                0.65 |                      237.9 |                  23.32 |                             366   |               0.098 |

Note : The grades A, B, C, D have been converted to a numerical range of 4, 3, 2, 1.

respondent were a white homeowner, the correction factor would be 1.000. This means that if the respondent were projected to use 100 kWh of electricity a month, that amount would be multiplied by 1.000, and the electricity use attributed to that particular house would remain the same. If the respondent were a white tenant with the same housing and interview grades, the correction factor would be 0.900, thus decreasing the electricity assigned to the home to 90 kWh. For an African American homeowner with two A grades, the correction factor was 0.850, and for an African American tenant the correction factor was 0.800. This means that race directly affected projections of electricity use not only at the household level but also more broadly, as such projections were used to determine those areas in the county that would be electrified and those that would not. African American householders, just by virtue of their race, received at least a 15 or 20 percent 'markdown' in their projected electricity use. Although the instructions to field surveyors contain vast explanations for nearly every category of data collected, the instructions have no written justification for the correction factor. Further, nowhere in the reporting to state officials on the project was this hierarchy mentioned or justified.

Given the social and economic conditions in place during the 1934 survey, it is reasonable to believe that tenants would have less control over the electrification of their homes than homeowners. Yet the survey and supporting documents provide no logic for why African American tenants would have less autonomy or credibility regarding the inner workings of their home than white tenants. Despite this, the survey quantified white tenants as superior to their African American counterparts. The effect of the correction factor on survey results could be significant. For example, in Edgecombe County, the correction factor and the likely underlying racial biases of the surveyors considerably altered the projected amount of electricity that individual households and proposed electricity lines would use. One way to assess the bias of surveyors is to convert the letter grades A, B, C, and D to a scale of 4, 3, 2, and 1. 9 As Table 5 shows, in Edgecombe County, owner-occupied houses were graded higher on the condition of the home and rating of the interview than tenants. All whites scored higher than all African Americans, and white owners scored higher than African American owners. Although the condition of white tenant homes was deemed higher than that of African American tenant homes, somewhat surprisingly African American tenants were judged slightly higher on the quality of the interview. This slight edge in the perceived quality of the interview for African American tenants over white tenants emphasizes the effect of the correction factor. Because of the racial bias built into the correction factor, even when white tenants received lower grades than black tenants, they could still be assigned a smaller adjustment.

In Edgecombe County, white homeowners received the smallest average adjustment to their estimated electricity consumption (11 percent), followed by white tenants (29 percent) and African American tenants (35 percent). This means that even when surveyors perceived housing and interview quality to be equivalent, abstract racial hierarchies were redeployed via the correction factor to 'correct' for any resulting racial equality that might have slipped through. After all calculations and corrections, the projected average annual electricity usage among individual households ranged from a high among white homeowners at 1,144.9 kWh to a low among African American tenants at 237.9 kWh. This translated to an annual electricity cost of $76.12 ($1,348.21 in 2015 dollars) for white owners and a low of $23.32 ($413.04 in

Figure 3. Proposed and existing electricity distribution lines in Edgecombe County. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

2015 dollars) for African American tenants (see Table 5).

How did household-level attributes scale up to the sixteen proposed lines surveyed in Edgecombe County (see Figure 3)? As previously described, when evaluating the potential for electrification, survey administrators ranked each line based on the ratio of the estimated cost of the line divided by the line's estimated annual revenue. Based on this metric,

Edgecombe County had several highly ranked lines, with five of the proposed sixteen lines ranking in the top thirty statewide. Although a density of customers and numerous large power users was crucial to higher line ranking, the projected revenue was also tied to the tenure and race of the householder via the correction factor. Thus, the most desirable line in the eyes of the survey directors would be one densely settled exclusively by white homeowners.

Figure 4. Location of surveyed household by race. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 4 shows that this was a vision far from reality in rural Edgecombe County, where white landlords and African American tenants often resided in close proximity. Despite this racial mixing, the most highly ranked proposed lines tended to be more densely populated by white homeowners. The most highly ranked line in the county was Line 24 (see Figure 5, Table 6). It was short but dense (2.1 miles) and served twentyone mostly white prospects. The line with the highest proportion of African Americans was Line 28. Even though the line was more densely populated than most, the large population of African Americans meant that it had the second highest average correction factor. After adjustment, 19 percent of projected electricity consumption was scaled back from the initial calculation, leaving the line ranked fifth in the county. Without the correction factor, its ranking would have been fourth.

O

was also home to the highest potential electricity consumer surveyed in the county, Will Mayo. Mayo had a large farm, with 269 total acres under cultivation, as well as a substantial amount of livestock. Although he had a large house and indicated a desire to use multiple appliances in his home, his largest electricity consumption would come from two electric motors he planned to employ (Figure 6, Table 7). Further, most of the African Americans living along the line were

Figure 5. Proposed Line 24 detail. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

In many cases, however, a single large potential power consumer could override other factors, including readjustments from the correction factor. As Sanders's (1933) study shows, it is probable that racist officials who were influential in shaping the survey locally would have directed field surveyors to the wealthiest-and whitest-portions of the county. For example, Line 28 might have had the highest proportion of African Americans living along it, but the line

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 12:52 12 April 2016

Table 6. Statistics of proposed distribution lines in Edgecombe County

Line number County ranking State ranking Length (miles) No. interested prospects No. black prospects No. white prospects No. owners No. tenants Avg. correction factor Prospects per mile Cost of line ($) Annual Consumption (kWh) Annual revenue ($) Line cost/ annual revenue

## Harrison

| 2.80 3.02    |     3.63 |     3.67 |     4.08 | 4.71        | 5.08          | 5.84      |     7.86 |     9.87 |    10.47 |    11.08 |   13.60 |    13.95 |   14.12 17.37 |
|--------------|----------|----------|----------|-------------|---------------|-----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|---------|----------|---------------|
| 1,161 565    |  2263    |  3123    |  1102    | 1,052       | 1,525         | 1,874 414 |   906    |  1628    |   895    |  1693    |  689    |   894    |        174    |
| 14,028 6,132 | 36384    | 37992    | 13380    | 13,326      | 21,252 29,484 | 4,716     | 12324    | 17784    | 10440    | 33648    | 6636    | 17952    |       1860    |
| 3,255 1,705  |  8215    | 11470    |  4495    | 4,960 7,750 | 10,943        | 3,255     |  8944    | 17050    |  9920    | 23018    | 9610    | 12623    |       3023    |
| 10.00 5.45   |     6.04 |     5.95 |     7.59 | 9.69        | 3.40 5.10     | 2.86      |     4.51 |     2.82 |     2.66 |     2.58 |    2.74 |     2.61 |          1.54 |
| 0.85 0.96    |     0.83 |     0.94 |     0.81 | 0.87        | 0.85 0.88     | 0.91      |     0.79 |     0.85 |     0.86 |     0.87 |    0.78 |     0.88 |          0.9  |
| 10 2         |    18    |    20    |    14    | 14          | 8 12          | 3         |    20    |    24    |    13    |    11    |    4    |     6    |          1    |
| 11 4         |    12    |    24    |     7    | 19          | 8 22          | 3         |     6    |     6    |     4    |    22    |   11    |    13    |          2    |
| 19 6         |    16    |    38    |    10    | 21          | 15 32         | 5         |    18    |    23    |    16    |    34    |   12    |    20    |          3    |
| 2 0          |    14    |     6    |    12    | 6           | 2 4           | 1         |     8    |     7    |     1    |     2    |    4    |     0    |          0    |
| 21 6         |    32    |    44    |    22    | 31          | 17 36         | 6         |    26    |    31    |    17    |    36    |   17    |    20    |          3    |
| 2.1 1.1      |     5.3  |     7.4  |     2.9  | 3.2         | 5.0 7.1       | 2.1       |     5.8  |    11    |     6.4  |    14    |    6.2  |     7.7  |          2    |
| 11 14        |    27    |    28    |    42    | 62          | 73 98         | 16        |   271    |   287    |   318    |   408    |  417    |   422    |        493    |
| 1 2          |     3    |     4    |     5    | 6           | 7 8           | 9         |    10    |    11    |    12    |    13    |   14    |    15    |         16    |
| 24 13        |    15    |    18    |    28    | 23          | 17 20         | 14        |    25    |    19    |    16    |    22    |   26    |    21    |         27    |

Figure 6. Proposed Line 28 detail. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Mayo's tenants. In effect, Mayo's presence as a large landowner with numerous tenants served to override the correction factor.

Beyond the inclusion of heavy potential power users such as Mayo, the lack of change in line ranking due to the correction factor is primarily a reflection of the dearth of African Americans included in the survey to begin with. The 1934 survey portrays a whiter and more owner-operated farm life in Edgecombe

County than actually existed. In terms of tenure status, only 56 percent of the farms included in the survey were operated by tenants, compared to 84 percent of farms in Edgecombe County as a whole. Further, the surveyed farms were overwhelmingly white: 79 percent, in comparison with 43 percent of farms in Edgecombe County as a whole (U.S. Census 1930). Significant discrepancies exist in the size of the homes, the number of occupants, and the

Table 7. Potential changes in county ranks if correction factor is removed

| County rank                                             | 1 2 3 5 4 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 14 13 15 16                                                                      |
|---------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Line cost/ annual revenue                               | 2.38 2.90 3.01 3.45 3.30 4.10 4.32 5.14 7.15 7.80 8.90 9.53 11.83 10.88 12.42 15.63                         |
| Uncorrected Annual revenue ($)                          | 1,366 589 2,727 3,322 1,360 1,209 1,794 2,130 455 1,147 1,915 1,041 1,946 883 1,016 193                     |
| Annual consumption (kWh)                                | 16,504 6,388 43,836 40,417 16,519 15,317 25,002 33,505 5,182 15,600 20,922 12,140 38,676 8,508 20,400 2,067 |
| Corrected revenue Line cost/ annual revenue County rank | 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                                                                      |
|                                                         | 2.80 3.02 3.63 3.67 4.08 4.71 5.08 5.84 7.86 9.87 10.47 11.08 13.60 13.95 14.12 17.37                       |
| Annual                                                  | $1,161 $565 $2,263 $3,123 $1,102 $1,052 $1,525 $1,874 $414 $906 $1,628 $895 $1,693 $689 $894 $174           |
| Annual consumption (kWh)                                | 14,028 6,132 36,384 37,992 13,380 13,326 21,252 29,484 4,716 12,324 17,784 10,440 33,648 6,636 17,952 1,860 |
| Cost of line ($)                                        | 3,255 1,705 8,215 11,470 4,495 4,960 7,750 10,943 3,255 8,944 17,050 9,920 23,018 9,610 12,623 3,023        |
| Avg. correction factor                                  | 0.85 0.96 0.83 0.94 0.81 0.87 0.85 0.88 0.91 0.79 0.85 0.86 0.87 0.78 0.88 0.90                             |
| Line number                                             | 24 13 15 18 28 23 17 20 14 25 19 16 22 26 21 27                                                             |

Note : Lines that would change in rank are noted in bold.

characteristics of the farms included in the survey. Owner-occupied homes were more likely to be owned by whites, and the homes of whites tended to be larger, have fewer occupants, have more livestock, and have more acreage under cultivation. Even the tenant farmers included in the 1934 survey were more likely to be white (71 percent) and have larger houses and farms than both African American tenants and homeowners (Table 3).

One reason for the overrepresentation of white farm owner-operators in the 1934 survey is that many proposed lines were surveyed as a result of direct requests made to the Committee in Raleigh by key local stakeholders, and local officials also guided the process. These stakeholders were unlikely to have positive opinions of African Americans in the region as demonstrated in the Sanders (1933) study, nor would they likely be willing to include them in the biopolitical benefits of health and wealth that would come from receiving electricity. Although rural electrification was presented as a project of progress and modernity, many were also actively working to ensure that those benefits were reaped most by whites.

## Discussion

In the summer of 1935, state leaders formally began to utilize the data produced by the 1934 survey with the creation of the North Carolina Rural Electrification Authority (NCREA), a state agency designed to coordinate and promote rural electrification. Despite the lobbying efforts of NCREA members, the North Carolina General Assembly did not ultimately grant the NCREA the ability to fund line construction. The federal REA, on the other hand, did possess the ability to fund lines, and the NCREA and REA almost immediately clashed. Without the ability to dole out funds, the NCREA sought to coordinate and guide electrification by already existing private and municipal electric utilities. It also sought to serve as a gatekeeper for utilities wishing to access federal REA funds. 10 This steering work, the NCREA asserted, would be done based on the findings of the 1934 survey (Weaver c. 1934). The REA had other ideas, and preferred to work directly with newly organized rural electric cooperatives rather than through state agencies or private utilities (Brown 1980). Between 1935 and 1940, rural electrification in North Carolina was marked by a tense relationship between the NCREA and REA, with the REA accusing NCREA directors of being beholden to private power interests and the NCREA viewing the REA as a sluggish and possibly socialist bureaucracy (Harrison 2014).

In Edgecombe County, the NCREA tried to steer funds to a private company planning to build lines highly ranked by the 1934 survey in the southern part of the county. The REA, on the other hand, preferred to work with a cooperative group that formed to electrify the northern and eastern parts of the county, as well as neighboring Martin County. Ultimately the REA won out, and the Edgecombe-Martin Electric Membership Cooperative was the first to receive federal rural electrification funds and to build lines in North Carolina. After several years of line building, wartime restrictions brought rural electrification to a halt. Postwar leadership changes in the NCREA and the rapid increase in available federal funding meant that the rest of the Edgecombe County, and most of North Carolina as a whole, was electrified in quick succession (Harrison 2014).

Exactly how influential the 1934 survey was in guiding the line-by-line rural electrification in the other seventy-seven surveyed counties in North Carolina is an open question that is beyond the scope of this article. Questions also remain as to whether Weaver's survey methodology and the correction factor were deployed in other states during his short-lived appointment with the federal REA. Although the question of the extent to which the 1934 survey shaped distribution line construction is an important one, it is crucial to note that the racially skewed and state-sanctioned 1934 survey was conducted specifically with the purpose of directing future rural electrification efforts.

Planning for rural electrification in the South highlights the confrontation between the biopolitical and the energopolitical. The success of rural electrification depended on the ability of the survey to show lines that would be profitable based on the metrics employed. Profitability depended on finding heavy power users and areas of high density to produce distribution lines that had low costs per customer. Yet rural electrification was, in part, a biopolitical project, an attempt to control human beings and 'the milieu in which they live' (Foucault 2003, 245). As a biopolitical project, rural electrification and the 1934 survey sought the development of knowledge of the resources and populations that live in a particular location (Hannah 2009) to transform the populations via electrification. The desire to 'coordinate, manage, and reproduce large-scale, long-term productive capacities

within a particular territorial arena' (Brenner and Elden 2009, 369) through networked systems of electricity interacted with the prevailing attitudes toward race and the political economic necessity to keep a racialized labor force disciplined and cheap (Woods 1998; Gilmore 2002). The case of the 1934 survey shows not only how energopower interacts with the affirmative aspects of biopower but also how energopower can be molded through modes of calculation that facilitate racism through processes of (dis)connection and differentiation.

To meet the twin goals of (dis)connection and differentiation, survey directors attempted to differentiate and prioritize the population according to race. In a move that echoes the Three Fifths Compromise of 1787, 11 African Americans were in some ways included, but their overall presence in the survey was devalued through the use of supposedly objective quantitative measures. The 1934 survey, although starting at the level of the individual household, considered rural North Carolina as a population, a set of averages and abstractions designed to guide the reorientation and modernization of rural life. As designed by the racial state, however, the survey needed to mesh with the guiding planning ideology: racial separation and exclusion. The correction factor, then, represents something of a compromise between the two, a 'racialized politics of number' (Goldberg 1997, 50), designed to rank, to order, and to diminish the power of a supposedly subordinate group and ultimately to deny them the biopolitical benefits of electrification.

## Conclusion

New energy systems do not emerge into places devoid of social order. Rather, and as the concept of energopower shows, energy systems deployed in already uneven and racialized landscapes tend to perpetuate marginalization. 12 The 1934 survey is one of many surveys during the New Deal era that sought to produce and deploy quantitative measures of racial inequality. 13 These surveys, similar to the 1934 version discussed here, aim to produce 'calculative territory' in which counting is guided by a particular rationality (Crampton 2006; Crampton and Elden 2006). In their spatial form, these data have been, and continue to be, put to work by states, corporations, and other entities as 'calculative rationalities . . . to refashion the world in their own image' (Rose-Redwood 2012, 300; Rose and Miller 1992; Crampton 2006; Norman 2013).

Despite their efforts, however, the 1934 survey planners and the NCREA were not able to fully refashion the rural landscape of Edgecombe County to the vision presented in the maps and rankings they produced.

In the minds of the survey directors, however, the data collected by the 1934 survey told a story: Rural electrification could be successful and profitable in certain areas and rural farms could be modernized. In a speech to the annual Extension Workers Conference in 1938, Weaver already considered rural electrification a success:

The whole tone of the community has been raised by the coming of rural electrification. Houses are more frequently painted, yards and fences more often kept in good appearance . . . making life on the farm more desirable and attractive. (Weaver 1938)

Yet Weaver's claims of success surely must be viewed selectively in light of the reality for rural African Americans over the next fifty years. Given the attempts to undermine African American value in the 1934 survey, as well as the clear racial animus of state and local officials described by Sanders (1933), it should come as no surprise that African American farmers left and were forced out of the profession at a rate far higher than whites during the twentieth century (Reid 2003; Daniel 2013). Whereas African Americans operated 57 percent of farms in Edgecombe County in 1930, by 1940 African Americans would operate only 43 percent of farms. North Carolina as a whole experienced a similar decline during the same period, dropping from 27 percent African American operated to 22 percent in 1940 (U.S. Census 1940). Without access to electricity and other important federal programs, African American farmers were more likely to fold in the face of an increasingly competitive agricultural landscape.

Recent influential calls for reparations have been rooted in centuries of exploitation of African American labor and racist housing policy (Coates 2014). The racist state has greatly shaped the biopolitical milieu of daily life-housing conditions, labor markets, and much more. This article shows that the spread of electricity, an energopolitical project and one of the most influential technologies in the twentieth century, was also shaped by race. Although the correction factor might not have significantly influenced electrification in one county, the selective sampling in Edgecombe County essentially had already slanted the outcome in favor of whites. The 1934 survey shows quite clearly, though, that rather than

assume that the slower pace of electrification in some places was a result of purely economic factors, it is essential to reconsider the statistics and calculations that guided the electrification efforts. Doing so highlights how the material and social can intermingle with metrics of profitability to continue producing decidedly uneven geographies of power.

## Acknowledgments

Thanks to Scott Kirsch, Jeff Popke, Gaby Valdivia, John Pickles, David Kneas, and Jessica Barnes, who read earlier drafts of this article. I am especially thankful to the reviewers for their close reading and helpful criticism, and Richard Wright for his editorial support and guidance. Any errors are solely my responsibility.

## Notes

1. The 1930 U.S. Census identifies farms based on a variety of operator types-tenant, owner operated, or operated by a manager, for example. When providing statistics on farms, I identify the operator type. If none is provided, it is an aggregation of all operator types.
2. Although acknowledging the difference between sharecropping and tenant farming, I use the terms interchangeably in this section.
3. Most authors of the Federal Writers Project were attempting to capture local language and dialectics. As a result, many of the quotes are transcribed phonetically. I have left these quotes as they appear in the original documents.
4. What follows is derived from an unpublished and unpaginated manuscript donated by Sanders to the North Carolina Collection at the University of North Carolina. Citation information is found at Sanders (1933).
5. Although the survey was originally intended to be included in the book, Sanders stated in a 11 June 1963 letter donating the materials that the findings were left out because the study directors felt they would cause 'misunderstanding and controversy.'
6. Jim Crow, a name derived from a popular entertainment show involving a white actor performing in blackface, was the term used to describe the laws, codes, and norms that formally and informally governed the social interactions, housing, and movement of African Americans and whites in Southern cities.
7. Reid (2003) examined the role of agricultural policy, including extension services, in exacerbating racial discrimination of African American farmers in Texas.
8. The most common of these was the Delco Light Plant, essentially a small internal combustion generator connected to a battery. These were popular on farms not connected to grid electricity and were used for lighting and mechanical power.
9. The correction factor matrix did not convert A, B, C, and D to a 4, 3, 2, and 1 score. I do this to quantitatively compare the grades given to the various groups involved in the survey.
10. The clash between federal and private power interests occurred across the South and the United States more broadly (cf. Manganiello [2015] on private-public clashes in the South).
11. Thanks to Richard Wright for pointing out this similarity.
12. Thanks to one of the anonymous reviews for making this point.
13. Compare work on housing and redlining (Freund 2007; Pietila 2010) and labor (Sugrue 1996; Roediger 2006).

## References

- Alexander, C., and J. O. Reno. 2014. From biopower to energopolitics in England's modern waste technology. Anthropological Quarterly 87 (2): 335-58.
- Altvater, E. 2007. The social and natural environment of fossil capitalism. Socialist Register 43:39-59.
- Badger, A. J. 1981. North Carolina and the New Deal . Raleigh: North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources, Division of Archives and History.
- Bakker, K. J. 2003. An uncooperative commodity: Privatizing water in England and Wales . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- ---.2012. Water: Political, biopolitical, material. Social Studies of Science 42 (4): 616-23.
- Barnes, T., and M. Hannah. 2001. The place of numbers: Histories, geographies, and theories of quantification. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 19 (4): 379-83.
- Billings, D. 1979. Planters and the making of a 'New South': Class, politics, and development in North Carolina , 18651900. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
- Boyer, D. 2011. Energopolitics and the anthropology of energy. Anthropology News 52 (5): 5-7.
- ---.2014. Energopower: An introduction. Anthropological Quarterly 87 (2): 309-33.
- Brenner, N., and S. Elden. 2009. Henri Lefebvre on state, space, territory. International Political Sociology 3 (4): 353-77.
- Bridge, G., S. Bouzarovski, M. Bradshaw, and N. Eyre. 2013. Geographies of energy transition: Space, place and the low-carbon economy. Energy Policy 53: 331-40.
- Brown, D. C. 1980. Electricity for rural America: The fight for the REA . Westport, CT: Greenwood.
- ---. 1982. North Carolina rural electrification: Precedent of the REA. North Carolina Historical Review 59 (2): 109-24.
- Burton, C. W. 1934. Letter of Instruction No. 3. Raleigh, N. C. Rural Electrification Authority, Letters &amp; Information-1934 Survey (A-G) Box 42, Folder W. A. Faulkner. North Carolina State Archives, Raleigh, NC.
- ---. 1935. Report on North Carolina Rural Electrification Survey. Raleigh, N.C. Rural Electrification Authority, Letters &amp; Information-1934 Survey (AG) Box 42, Folder Reports. North Carolina State Archives, Raleigh, NC.

- Calvert, K. 2016. From 'energy geography' to 'energy geographies': Perspectives on a fertile academic borderland. Progress in Human Geography 40 (1): 105-25.
- Chakrabarty, D. 2009. The climate of history: Four theses. Critical Inquiry 35 (2): 197-222.
- Coates, T. N. 2014. The case for reparations. The Atlantic 313 (5): 54-71.
- Crampton, J. W. 2006. The cartographic calculation of space: Race mapping and the Balkans at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 7 (5): 731-52.
- ---. 2007. Maps, race and Foucault: Eugenics and territorialization following World War I. In Space, knowledge and power: Foucault and geography , ed. J. W. Crampton and S. Elden. 223-44. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
- Crampton, J., and S. Elden. 2006. Space, politics, calculation: An introduction. Social and Cultural Geography 7 (5): 681-85.
- Cresswell, T. 2012. Value, gleaning and the archive at Maxwell Street, Chicago Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 37 (1): 164-76.
- Daniel, P. 2013. Dispossession: Discrimination against African American farmers in the age of civil rights . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
- Field, G. B. 1990. 'Electricity for all': The electric home and farm authority and the politics of mass consumption, 1932-1935. The Business History Review 64 (1): 32-60.
- Foucault, M. 2003. ' Society must be defended': Lectures at the College de France , 1975-1976. New York: Picador.
- Freund, D. M. P. 2007. Colored property: State policy and White racial politics in suburban America . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Gilmore, R. W. 2002. Fatal couplings of power and difference: Notes on racism and geography. The Professional Geographer 54 (1): 15-24.
- Goldberg, D. T. 1997. Racial subjects: Writing on race in America . London and New York: Routledge.
- Hannah, M. G. 2009. Calculable territory and the West German census boycott movements of the 1980s. Political Geography 28 (1): 66-75.
- Harris, B. K. 1939. Jim Parker hopes ahead. Southern Historical Collection. Federal Writers' Project Papers #3709 . Southern Historical Collection, The Wilson Library, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
- Harrison, C. 2014. Power for all? Electricity and uneven development in North Carolina . PhD dissertation, Publication No. 1612601582. Ann Arbor, MI: Proquest/UMI.
- Howe, C. 2014. Anthropocenic ecoauthority: The winds of Oaxaca. Anthropological Quarterly 87 (2): 381404.
- Huber, M. T. 2009. Energizing historical materialism: Fossil fuels, space and the capitalist mode of production. Geoforum 40 (1): 105-15.
- ---. 2013a. Fueling capitalism: Oil, the regulation approach, and the ecology of capital. Economic Geography 89 (2): 171-94.
- ---.2013b. Lifeblood: Oil, freedom, and the forces of capital . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- ---. 2015. Theorizing energy geographies. Geography Compass 9 (6): 327-38.
- Hughes, T. 1983. Networks of power: Electrification in Western society, 1880-1930 . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Instructions for county field men to follow in securing data on the Rural Electrification Survey. c. 1934. Raleigh, N.C. Rural Electrification Authority, Letters &amp; Information-1934 Survey (A-G) Box 42, Folder W. A. Faulkner. North Carolina State Archives, Raleigh, NC.
- Kelley, R. D. G. 1993. 'We are not what we seem': Rethinking black working-class opposition in the Jim Crow South. The Journal of American History 80 (1): 75-112.
- Kooy, M., and K. Bakker. 2008. Splintered networks: The colonial and contemporary waters of Jakarta. Geoforum 39 (6): 1843-58.
- Labban, M. 2008. Space, oil and capital . London and New York: Routledge.
- Manganiello, C. J. 2015. Southern water, southern power: How the politics of cheap energy and water scarcity shaped a region . Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.
- Meeting of Governor's Commission on Rural Electrification. 1934. Raleigh, N.C. Rural Electrification Authority, Letters &amp; Information-1934 Survey (A-G) Box 42, Folder Project and Supplement. North Carolina State Archives, Raleigh, NC.
- Mitchell, T. 2009. Carbon democracy. Economy and Society 38 (3): 399-432.
- Norman, E. S. 2013. Who's counting? Spatial politics, ecocolonisation and the politics of calculation in Boundary Bay. Area 45 (2): 179-87.
- Omi, M., and H. Winant. 2015. Racial formation in the United States . 3rd ed. London and New York: Routledge/Taylor &amp; Francis Group.
- Phillips, S. T. 2007. The land, this nation: Conservation, rural America, and the New Deal . New York: Cambridge University Press.
- Pietila, A. 2010. Not in my neighborhood: How bigotry shaped a great American city . Chicago: Ivan R Dee.
- Rabinow, P., and N. Rose. 2006. Biopower today. BioSocieties 1 (2): 195-217.
- Rasmussen, K. S. 2011. Foucault's genealogy of racism. Theory, Culture &amp; Society 28 (5): 34-51.
- Reid, D. A. 2003. African Americans and land loss in Texas: Government duplicity and discrimination based on race and class. Agricultural History 77 (2): 258-92.
- Roediger, D. 2006. Working toward whiteness: How America's immigrants became white . New York: Basic Books.
- Rogers, D. 2014. Energopolitical Russia: Corporation, state, and the rise of social and cultural projects. Anthropological Quarterly 87 (2): 431-51.
- Rose, N., and P. Miller. 1992. Political power beyond the state: Problematics of government. The British Journal of Sociology 43 (2): 173-205.
- Rose-Redwood, R. 2012. With numbers in place: Security, territory, and the production of calculable space. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102 (2): 295-319.

- Sanders, W. 1933. Race attitudes of county officials . Chapel Hill, NC: W. B. Sanders.
- Scott, J. C. 1987. Weapons of the weak: Everyday forms of peasant resistance . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Shove, E. 2003. Comfort, cleanliness and convenience: The social organization of normality . New York: Berg.
- Smil, V. 1994. Energy in world history . Boulder, CO: Westview.
- Sugrue, T. J. 1996. The origins of the urban crisis: Race and inequality in postwar Detroit . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Szeman, I. 2014. Conclusion: On energopolitics. Anthropological Quarterly 87 (2): 453-64.
- Taylor, A. Y. 1936. Memo from A. Y. Taylor to N. O. Swanson, 6 June 1936. Records of the Rural Electrification Administration, Power Division Records re Wholesale Rates, 1935-42, New York 24 Oneida-N. C. 21 Sampson, Box 86, Folder North Carolina 16 Edgecombe. National Archives, Kansas City, MO.
- Thrift, N. 2007. Overcome by space: Reworking Foucault. In Space, knowledge and power: Foucault and geography , ed. J. W. Crampton, and S. Elden. 53-58. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
- U.S. Census. 1930. Decennial census of the United States . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
- ---. 1940. Decennial census of the United States ington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
- . Wash-
- Urry, J. 2014. The problem of energy. Theory, Culture &amp; Society 31 (5): 3-20.
- Wagner, W. D. n.d. Untitled. Tarboro, NC. Rural Electrification Authority, Letters &amp; Information-1934 Survey (S-Z) Box 43, Folder W. D. Wagner. North Carolina State Archives, Raleigh, NC.
- Walker, G. 2014. The dynamics of energy demand: Change, rhythm and synchronicity. Energy Research &amp; Social Science 1:49-55.
- Weaver, D. S. 1934. The Rural Electrification Survey in North Carolina. Raleigh, N.C. Rural Electrification Authority, Letters &amp; Information-1934 Survey (AG) Box 42, Folder W. A. Faulkner. North Carolina State Archives, Raleigh, NC.
- ---. 1938. Address of David S. Weaver to annual Extension Workers' Conference, NC State College Campus, 10-14 January 1938. Rural Electrification Authority, General Correspondence, 1935-1940 (AG) Box 1, Folder Extension Bulletin. North Carolina State Archives, Raleigh, NC.
- Woods, C. A. 1998. Development arrested: The blues and plantation power in the Mississippi Delta . London: Verso.

CONOR M. HARRISON is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography and the Environment and Sustainability Program at the University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208. E-mail: cmharris@mailbox.sc.edu. His research interests include questions around the interactions of energy, culture, and economy in the United States and the Caribbean.