## Heading Households and Heading Businesses: Rural Kenyan Women in the Informal Sector*

## Helen Ruth Aspaas

Utah State University

The dynamics of intra-household economics among sedentary farmers in rural Kenya suggest that women, whether or not they have a male household head, are responsible for providing basic resources to insure the daily survival of household members. Many rural Kenyan women operate small businesses in rural market centers in order to meet these obligations, and many of these women are also heads of their households. This paper examines women's resource bases for establishing and maintaining small-scale businesses. Compared to women who are associated with male-headed households, women who head households have fewer resources for establishing businesses which in turn generate lower earnings. At the same time, these women are almost completely dependent on their businesses for meeting the household's needs. Key Words: women-headed households, informal sector, intra-household economics, Kenya, small-scale businesses.

## Introduction

E stimates of the number of women-headed households vary throughout the world, and no precise census data are available. However, sources do agree that the number of womenheaded households is increasing at a constant and often alarming rate (Joekes 1987; International Research and T raining Institute for the Advancement of Women 1990; Social Development Division 1991; Feldman  1992;  Chant 1997; Seager 1997). Between 20% and 50% of sub-Saharan African households are headed by women. The variation is attibuted to different locations (rural and urban) and different interpretations of what constitutes women-headed households (Lycette 1994; International Affairs 1995; Gibbings 1996; Swift 1996). In Kenya, the percentage of women-headed households increased from 22% of all households in 1980, to 39% in 1990 (Barnes 1983; African News 1995; Folbre 1995).Thesewomenareeitherwidowed, divorced, separated, or never married, but they assume full responsibility for the well-being of the people with whom they share residence (Social Statistics and Indicators 1995).

The dynamics of intra-household economics in rural Kenya suggest that women, whether or not there is a male household head, are obligated to provide basic sustenance for household members. In an effort to acquire cash resources essential for meeting their provisionary obligations, many rural women establish and operate smallscale businesses in the rural market centers near their homes. Success of the businesses as defined by earnings  and  women's  subsequent use of those earnings for the benefit of their household members is frequently associated with the resources invested in those businesses at start-up time. This paper identifies significant differences in resources available to women who head households and women who live in male-headed households. The  findings  suggest  that  even whenthetraditionsofseparate purses (resources held  individually  by men and women)  exist, those women with access to the monetary and material resources of male household heads tend toward more profitable businesses.

## Rural Kenyan Women and the Informal Sector

As Kenya's agrarian economy evolved  from nearly complete reliance on subsistence agriculture to an increasing reliance on cash (generated by commercial agriculture, wage employment,

*I wish to thank the following for their input and interest in this research: The National Science Foundation, Sigma Xi Scientific Research Society, a Hodgson Fund Research Grant from the Association of American Geographers, Graduate Student Research Grants from the University of Colorado at Boulder Graduate School, a Brown-Ricketts Educational Grant from the American Association of University Women and the Brandenburg Graduate Student Scholarship for financial support; Deborah Jensen and Brad Wright of the GIS/Remote Sensing Laboratory at Utah State University who produced the map; and Jean Andrews and three anonymous reviewers for very helpful suggestions on the manuscript.

and small-business activities), the daily requirements that were formerly produced or provided within the farmstead are now purchased with cash (Guyer 1984). Cash is essential for purchasing basic household commodities like tea, sugar, salt, soap, and cooking fat. When family agricultural plots are used to grow cash crops, or in pre-harvest months, cash is necessary to purchase food requirements for the family. Cash pays for hired farm labor and is essential for purchasing public transportation, clothing, health care, household utensils, and building materials. Education is considered a sound investment, and cash is essential for paying school fees and purchasing other scholastic materials (Stamp 1975-76).

In order to generate the cash resources necessary to meet household and family obligations, rural women may participate in different income-generating opportunities. Among these are employment in the rural wage sector, production of cash crops providing they have access to land, and participation in the informal sector whereby they establish small-scale businesses. Women may phase in and out of different income-generating opportunities during different seasons and over the life course. My paper focuses on women's participation in informal sector activities as an option for generating cash resources.

The informal sector is characterized by the selling of goods or services in businesses that are usually small in terms of employees, but varied in the number of activities. Informal sector activities are neither protected, financed, nor operated by the state, its parastatals, or quasi-autonomous agencies (Jiggins 1989). Regulation by the government is usually limited to annual license renewals and market fees.

I examine women's participation in the informal sector of the rural market centers of Meru District in Kenya and make some generalizations about the differences between informal sector activities for those women who have a male household head and those women who carry full responsibility for the well-being of their homes and families. My research asks two questions relevant to women's participation in the informal sector. First, do the market women who head households have access to the same resources for meeting daily survival needs as women who are attached to a household with a male household head? Second, do the market women who head their households have access to the same resources for establishing and operating small-scale business as women who are attached to a male-headed household?

## Gender and Household Economics in Rural Kenya

The interaction between rural Kenyan women's reproductive work at home and their productive work in the informal sector is better understood when placed in the context of rural intra-household economics. Household economics consist of the rules, relations, and practices which govern household production, acquisition, and distribution of valued resources necessary for meeting daily needs of its members (Kabeer 1994). Intra-household  economic  patterns in this region are characterized by the practice of 'separate purses'  whereby men and  women maintain a certain level of independent control overtheir earnings and resources while adhering to gender-specific expenditure patterns.

In traditional agrarian households throughout much of East Africa, and particularly in Kenya, men and women are often responsible for performing separate tasks that collectively insure the household's survival. Men plow, care for the livestock, maintain the upkeep of the housing, and engage in trading activities. Women'srolesareprincipallyreproductive.T raditionally, rural African women shoulder the responsibility for the  daily nutrition  of the household's members; a responsibility met primarilythroughfarmingonusufructalland(Davison 1989). Besides providing food, women are responsible for daily activities related to food preparation and household maintenance as well as childrearing.

With the advent of a cash economy into rural areas, men increasingly engage in productive activities resulting in remuneration. Their responsibilities toward the household then include paying school fees, purchasing inputs for cash cropping, and buying building supplies necessary for housing (Bertrand 1993). Men's access to cash comes through wage labor or informal sector activities, and they also control the cash crop earnings.

With increased  reliance on cash to  meet household needs, women  now participate in productive activities which include informal sector work. This is especially necessary when hus-

bands or male household heads fail to meet obligations, especially for school fees (Chant 1997) and as women's kin responsibilities grow to include cash outlays (Staudt 1987). Women still maintain all of their reproductive roles as well. However, diminishing plot sizes, deteriorating land quality, and pressure by men to produce cash crops pose a threat to subsistence crop production and reduce the potential for women to produce cash crops whose income might fall under their control (Asamba and ThomasSlayter 1995).

The literature on gender and household economics in rural Africa tends to focus on the division of resources and work responsibilities along gender lines. Access to separate resources to enable men and women to meet their obligations is generally characterized by the maintenance of separate purses (Kabeer 1994). Much of the literature identifies the increased burden of responsibilities assumed by women as they participate in both reproductive and productive roles (Fapohunda 1988; Guyer 1988; Blumberg 1991; Ekejiuba 1995). The practice of maintaining separate purses and separate economic responsibilities becomes blurred when we examine businesswomenwhoareattachedtoahousehold with a male head. Women may not form a unified production unit with their male head but they do devise effective bargaining or negotiating strategies whereby resources are transferred across gender lines in order to mitigate economic risk to the household as a whole.

The  research reported here  suggests  that womenwhoaremarriedorotherwise associated with a male household head (in the form of a legal or common-law husband, father, father-inlaw, uncle, brother, or son who is co-resident) may still possess an economic advantage if the male household head has income or material resources that serve as a loan, gift, remittance to the women, or can provide access to farmland for business investment and household survival (Elson 1992). These women may be able to mobilize a more varied and productive set of resources  for establishing  income-generating opportunities and, as a result, garner greater earning power from the businesses which can in turn be redirected to benefit household members.

The negative impact of the lack of a male household head is therefore felt in several ways. The complete absence of financial or material contributions forces women to assume all productive  and  reproductive responsibilities  for their households. The absence of a male household head means that access to non-market production is diminished and may be completely omitted from the women's resource base. Often this includes income from agricultural land or access to land for subsistence agricultural activities. In the absence of a regular monetary or material contribution from a male household member, women seek income-generating opportunities in the informal sector. Consequently, women who head households may find themselves relying completely on their smallscale businesses as the sole source for family provisioning. All the earnings from the business may be required for daily survival.

## The Informal Sector in Kenya's Rural Market Centers

Kenya's informal sector operates within the broader spectrum of a mixed market economy, one that encourages private enterprise and commercial agriculture but controls major marketing functions through the work of parastatals. In recent years, public-sector hiring in Kenya has slowed and formal private sector growth has stagnated. Therefore, the Government of Kenya views the informal sector as a positive option for creating income-generating opportunities in  rural  areas  (Government of  Kenya 1989c; Gray et al. 1996). The government also maintains a positive perspective regarding women's roles in the informal sector (Government of Kenya 1989b).

The Kenyan government encourages the growth of the rural informal sector hoping that its success will, in part, diminish rural to urban migration. As growing rural populations face increasing land scarcity, alternative sources of income-generation in the rural areas are viewed very positively by the national government (Government of Kenya 1989a).

The informal sector is labor intensive which is consistent with Kenya' s abundant labor supply. Small-scale enterprises create new jobs at relatively low capital costs which is important when access to credit, especially in the form of small loans in rural areas, is limited. These businesses are noted for their efficient use of such scarce resources as financial capital, raw materials, and technology. Businesses operate at the microscale such that a single owner/operator is able to

manage and direct all business activities, often with little record keeping (International Labour Office 1972). Similarly, small-scale enterprises potentially provide local situations for improving job-related skills (Aleke-Dondo et al. 1986; Otero 1989). Licensing in Kenya is fairly simple and market fees are reasonable.

These businesses supply goods and services to low-income local consumers at affordable prices through the subsectors of trade, manufacturing, and services. A negative consequence occurs in individual  rural  market centers when  severe competition evolves among the enterprises that perform similar functions and offer identical goods and services.

Rural Kenyan womenparticipate in the informal sector to acquire cash in order to meet household provisioning responsibilities. The characteristics of the  informal  sector mentioned above allow women easy entry. The woman is the sole owner/operator with intermittent intervals of help from her children or other relatives who are generally unpaid. Many women devise strategies for traveling to neighboring periodic markets so that they can sell goods on a daily basis. Women strike an often difficult balance between reproductive activities at home and in the fields and productive work in the market centers.

## Methodology

In order to examine the questions concerning differential access to resources based on the gender of the household head, women who operate small-scale businesses in 35 rural markets of Meru District were interviewed using an extensive questionnaire (Fig. 1). The data collection took place between February 1 and June 1, 1991. A total of 352 women who operate small-scale businesses were interviewed.

Meru District was selected because its development  plans encourage  the growth of the small-scale enterprise sector within the broad context of agricultural development. The district is endowed with good agricultural potential extending across several agroecological zones. However, rapid population growth has resulted in repeated divisions of farm land and therefore alternate sources of income generation are needed (Ministry of Planning and Economic Development 1989).

Thedistrict has historical evidence of marketing, and rural market centers are distributed throughout the area (Bernard 1979; Ministry of Planning and National Development 1989). Exceptions are the western region which is comprised of national forest and northern and eastern regions which are semi-arid lands and more sparsely populated. Periodic markets are organized so that market days are consistent throughout the week. Additionally, all markets build permanent  structures that house businesses which are open daily. T ransportation networks operated by privately owned matatus (minibuses) allow access to the markets, and a dense rural population uses the markets for buying and selling necessary consumer goods. Women actively participate in the district' s informal sector. In 1987, Ng'ethe and Wahome reported that 21% of small-scale businesses in the district were owned by women.

The research population for this study comprised all women who own small-scale businesses in rural market centers in Meru District. Five percent of the total number of women business operators in each market center was the target for the minimum sample size which was reached and often surpassed during the interviewing process. The sample reflects only those businesses that were in operation on the days of the visits by the research team to the rural markets. The ephemeral quality of business practices in the rural areas may mean that more businesses would be open during a different agricultural season or during the evenings when people leave farm work and come to the local markets to make purchases. Nevertheless, the sample is representative of those women who were regularly involved in business operations.

Astratified random sampling procedure identified potential business operators for interviewing. First, visible businesses in the market centers were tallied. The sampling frame was divided into strata based on trade, manufacturing and service subsectors. Samples were then taken from each of these sub-populations. A concerted effort was made to interview women from a variety of activities in the subsector. The research team included women of all ages when possible, as well as women situated geographically throughout the open air market area and within the permanent structure area of each market center. Administration of the questionnaires followed consistent procedures for each market. Timing of surveys was coordinated with

Figure 1: Rural market centers in Meru District, Republic of Kenya.

<!-- image -->

seasonal variations in women's work loads (United Nations 1988).

Thequestionnaires were administered by two women from the district who had high school diplomas, were conversant in Kimeru, Kiswahili, and English and were familiar with many of the villages through contact with relatives and schools.  The  vast  majority  of questionnaires were administered in Kimeru except for those situations when the businesswomen came from outside the district in which cases Kiswahili or English was used. While the district development plans do not report a high rate of in-migration into the district, the research identified a number of women from nearby districts (Embu and Kirinyaga) who came to Meru District to participate in the informal sector.

The questionnaires elicited a range of information in qualitative and quantitative format relevant to women's participation in informal sector businesses. Pertinent information taken from the questionnaires that  applies  to  this analysis are age; self-reported marital status (single, married, divorced, separated, or widowed); an indication from each woman as to whether she recognized herself as head of the household; numberofchildren (including their ages and the number at home); the level of education; access to land (rented, owned, or usufructal) and if the land was used for cash cropping, subsistence cropping or both; the amount of capital each woman had to start up her business and if it was a gift, savings, or loan; and earnings per day from the business. If a woman received remittances, she was asked her relationship to the donor, the amount of money or kind of material contribution that the person gave, and if it was given on a regular basis (daily, monthly, yearly).

Throughout the interviewing process, women business operators were very cooperative. The women showed a willingness to share openly and frankly about their business experiences and to give detailed information about their business operations.

Figure 2: Women selling used clothing in a periodic market.

<!-- image -->

Figure 3: Women selling ropes, baskets and sacks in a periodic market.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4: A widow and her daughter who operate a small kiosk in a Meru village.

<!-- image -->

## Household and Demographic Information

The data were classified first by the gender of the household head as self-reported  by the womenwhowereinterviewed(T able1).Women were asked to designate the person responsible for the economic well-being of the household at the time of the interview. The responses given by the women represented both de jure and de facto headships. De jure household heads are the legally recognized head or representative of the household. Women who are de jure household heads are permanently separated from their husbands through widowhood or divorce. Others never married but have children or extended families for whom they are responsible (Bahemuka and Njeru 1988; Moser 1994; Social Statistics and Indicators 1995). De facto headship occurs when women find themselves placed in a position of responsibility whereby they provide for the family' s welfare, but are not recognized as the legal head of the household. These households may have male heads who must be away from the home for considerable lengths of time, especially if this is a function of employment opportunities (Bahemuka and Njeru 1988; Buvinic 1992). If a husband becomes incapacitated, loses his source of employment, or loses access to resources for income generation, the wife may become the de facto household head. Women in polygamous marriages may experience limited access to their husband' s resources and consequently become de facto household heads because they must bear the responsibility for providing for the children as well as themselves (Folbre 1991).

Of the 352 women interviewed, 277 (78.7%) reported that they were not the heads of their households(hereafter NWHH),and75(21.3%) considered themselves to be the heads of their households (hereafter WHH). Besides married womenwhoconsideredtheir husbands to be the heads, the NWHHalsocontainssingle childless women who lived at home and relied on their parents for partial support. The NWHH also includes youngsingle womenwhoreportedhaving only one child. These women were mostly adolescent mothers who conceived while in secondary school: They still lived at home with their parents upon whom they relied for some support. The percentage of female-headed households falls within the range suggested by recent United Nations statistics (Social Statistics and Indicators 1995).

Table 1 Socio-demographic Information for Households Headed by Men (NWHH) and Households Headed by Women (WHH)

|                 | NWHH   | NWHH   | WHH   | WHH   | t test           |
|-----------------|--------|--------|-------|-------|------------------|
|                 | #      | %      | #     | %     |                  |
| Sample          | 277    | 78.7   | 75    | 21.3  | -                |
| Children        | 2.6    | -      | 3.1   | -     | p=.397 f=.720    |
| Age (yrs)       | 30.6   | -      | 37 .9 | -     | p=.000* f=19.663 |
| Education (yrs) | 7 .8   | -      | 5.9   | -     | p=.335 f=.931    |
| *p<.05          |        |        |       |       |                  |

In both household sets, a majority of women were responsible for children less than 18 years of age. A t-test showed no statistically significant differences between the numbers of children in the two groups. However, a t-test showed the ages of the women in the two populations to be significantly different. The lower mean age for the NWHHmaybeattributedto the number of single women who were living at home with their parents, yet operated  small-scale  businesses in the rural market centers. Single women with only one child also tended to reside at home with their parents.

## Women's Differential Access to Resources for Household Provisioning

Information about resources for home and family provisioning came from three sources: remittances from husbands  or  relatives, access to farmland for cash or subsistence agriculture, and the daily earnings from businesses.

Table 2 presents numbers and percentages of women  who  received remittances from husbands or other family members. The monetary andmaterial goods provided to the womencame from a variety of sources including farm income, civil service employment, matatu (minibus) operations, and subsistence farming.  However, only twenty of the women could state an exact monetary amount that they could expect to receive on a regular monthly basis. The remainder commented that it was impossible to state a predictable amount. The common response was 'it just depends.'

Amongwomenwhoheadedtheirhouseholds, a large percentage (85.3%) received no remittances. Of those who did receive assistance, the

WHH could only state whether or not they received any assistance, but they could not state a  specific amount either in cash or material contributions. Their source of remittance was parents or other relatives. The number of WHH who did not receive remittances  is probably large because of traditional views on marriage. Upon marriage, a woman becomes economically and socially attached to her husband' s home and family. She exchanges the authority of her father for that of her husband. Children born to this marriage are legitimized by the payment of bridewealth and are members of their father's patrilineage (Siegel 1996). If a woman becomes the head of a household, she does not have the option of returning to her natal home. Neither can  she expect remittances  from  her  family members. In a test for differences in access to remittances, a two-sample chi-square value of 105.74 was considerably greater than the value of 6.64 (one degree of freedom) required for rejecting the hypothesis of no difference. Thus, the populations from which these samples were drawn are significantly different.

Access to land is a second measure of resources  for household provisioning.  Women who operate small-scale businesses in the rural markets often do so on a part-time basis when they have access to land for growing subsistence or cash crops. Women who have access to farm land, either through rental, usufruct rights, or legal ownership may diversify their economic risks by relying on land to help produce daily provisions. Women without land have no such alternative. T able 3 shows women' s access to land for subsistence and cash cropping.

BothNWHHandWHHreportedusingland to grow food. For those women whose land produced cash crops, NWHH indicated a larger variety of uses for the income. The list included household needs, education, food, clothing, restocking the business, livestock, improvements in the business, and hiring security guards to protect their businesses. WHH had more limited uses, mentioning household needs, education, and restocking their businesses.

For both subsistence farming and cash cropping, the numbers are very similar: 87.4% of NWHHhadaccesstolandforsubsistencefarming while 66.6% of WHH had access. Of the NWHH, 84.1% had access to land for cash crops while 64.0% of WHH had access. Chisquare tests for both subsistence and cash crop-

Table 2 Access to Remittances for Households Headed by Men (NWHH) and Households Headed by Women (WHH)

|                                  | NWHH   | NWHH   | WHH   | WHH   |
|----------------------------------|--------|--------|-------|-------|
|                                  | #      | %      | #     | %     |
| No remittance                    | 62     | 22.4   | 64    | 85.3  |
| Remittances from husbands        | 129    | 46.6   | 0     | 0     |
| Remittances from parents         | 80     | 28.9   | 7     | 9.3   |
| Remittances from other relatives | 6      | 2.1    | 4     | 5.4   |

ping indicated  statistically  significant differences between the two populations. For subsistence farming, a calculated chi-square value of 17.89 was greater than the required value of 6.64 (one degree of freedom) and for cash farming, the calculated chi-square value of 14.64 was also greater than the required value of 6.64 (one degree of freedom).

Finally, additional generalizations can be made about women's provisioning capacities by examining the data on reported earnings from the businesses. Women with a male household head were perhaps less likely to depend on the business earnings for family support, while the opposite case would hold for those women with limited support from outside sources. Women were asked to estimate their daily earnings for their businesses.  Interpretations  of this  data must  be  made with  caution  because women often could not estimate a mean daily amount. Forexample,fluctuationsinseasonalpurchasing among rural populations tend to be quite extreme. Consequently, women were asked to estimate a range of earnings, and a mean value was then calculated.

NWHHreportedthehighestmeandaily earnings (126.21 Kenyan shillings) per day. These women also had access to husbands' or parents' resources through remittances and farm land. WHHreportedmeanearningsof64.60Kenyan shillings which were about half the amount of NWHH(t-tests identified significant differences between the two populations: p=.003, f=8.941).

To summarize women's access to resources that may assist them in maintaining their provisioning roles in the household, it seems that NWHH tended toward the most alternative resources  and  in greater abundance. Consequently, they were probably less dependent on income from their businesses for survival, yet their  businesses  brought in  higher earnings.

Table 3 Access to Land for Households Headed by Men (NWHH) and Households Headed by Women (WHH)

|                   | NWHH   | NWHH   | WHH   | WHH   |
|-------------------|--------|--------|-------|-------|
|                   | #      | %      | #     | %     |
| Subsistence crops | 242    | 87 .4  | 50    | 66.6  |
| Cash crops        | 233    | 84.1   | 48    | 64.0  |

Those womenwhohead households were probably more dependent on their businesses for home provisioning because of limited remittances and reduced access to land. They were also the ones with lower earnings, and hence, they were in the more precarious economic situations, especially since their household size did not vary significantly from NWHH.

## Women's Differential Access to Resources for Business Start-Up and Operation

The second question in this study focuses on women's access to resources for establishing and operating businesses. The potential success and earning power of a small-scale business may be a function of the resources that women bring to bear in establishing those businesses. The two variables examined were the women's educational background and the cash available for the initial investment in their businesses. A higher level of education may be associated with women's abilities to investigate more profitable market opportunities and to manage businesses that bring more earnings. Greater investment at the onset may mean that businesses experience greater earnings. For example, ability to invest in a bundle of used clothing reaps higher profit margins when those garments are sold. However, a woman must have access to substantial cash in order to make the initial investment.

The education variable was not highly explanatory for several reasons (T able 1). For example, both NWHH and WHH included womenwhowereolderthan60yearsofage.The educational attainment of the older women in Kenya is quite low in both groups, while the younger women are advantaged with near universal primary education. None of the widows had ever been educated, yet this did not serve as a detriment for them to participate in the informalsector of the rural markets near their homes.

Investments for start up were categorized by savings, gifts, and loans. Savings were usually generated by the women from previous wage employment or from other small-scale businesses. Gifts came from husbands or other relatives and loans were acquired from formal lending institutions or relatives (T able 4).

For all three sources of start-up capital, t-tests show significant differences between the populations of the two groups of women. Again, the group of women with more alternatives and greater incomes from their businesses were also those who had greater start-up monies for establishing businesses and more cash for ongoing business improvements.

Correlations between women's investments and average daily earnings were significant for both groups of women and for the women as a whole.  The highest correlation  was  for the WHH, suggesting that investment is one important indicator of average daily earnings for this group. For NWHH, the amount of explained variance is smaller; an indication that other factors affect business earnings for this group. Analyses of earnings by type of business (retail, manufacturing, or service) may ascertain those businesses which are more lucrative.

## Discussion and Conclusion

Although this research focuses on only one district in Kenya, the size of the sample, its spatial

Table 4 Business Investment for Households Headed by Men (NWHH) and Households Headed by Women (WHH)

|                  |   NWHH |     WHH | t test           |
|------------------|--------|---------|------------------|
| Mean savings     |   4137 | 1243    | p=.002* f=9.857  |
| Mean cash gifts  |    668 |  251    | p=.004* f=8.365  |
| Mean loans       |   1618 |    1.33 | p=.015* f=11.682 |
| Total investment |   6360 | 1498    | p=.001* f=11.682 |
| *p<.05           |        |         |                  |

Table 5 Correlations between Investment and Average Daily Earnings for Households Headed by Men (NWHH), Households Headed by Women (WHH), and All Households

|             | NWHH   | WHH     | All Households   |
|-------------|--------|---------|------------------|
| Multiple R  | .259   | .575    | .310             |
| R Squares   | .066   | .331    | .970             |
| F-Statistic | 9.112* | 71.743* | 29.441*          |
| *p<.005     |        |         |                  |

distribution, the statistically significant findings and the ways in which the data represent intrahousehold African economics provide bases for some  tentative  generalizations.  In  particular, one avenue for future research relevant to business women in households headed by men is suggested, and policy recommendations are proposed for households  headed by women. The analyses reemphasize Elson's (1992) suggestion that women who are associated in some way with a male household head are generally economically superior to those who have no such access. This is indicated by more women who receive remittances, have greater access to farm land, and enjoy greater earnings from their small-scale businesses. Investments were also higher for business start-up.

Theresults of this study suggest that there are negotiations occurring within the households headed by men whereby women develop some strategies for accessing resources to enhance their reproductive and productive roles. A closer look at intra-household negotiation strategies may be a fruitful avenue for future investigation as we seek to clarify or perhaps disentangle some of the more dualistic concepts associated with reproductiveandproductivebehaviorsinhousehold dynamics and gain insight into strategies whereby resources are transferred across gender lines (Phillips 1989; Kabeer 1994).

The analyses suggest that women who head households and have the sole responsibility for providing for themselves and their household members are marginalized in terms of resources andearningsfromtheirbusinesses.Womenwho head households had less access to kinship support, to land for subsistence or cash farming, and to investment money in order to establish more economically viable businesses. In addition, the business earnings on which they were almost completely dependent, were lower.

Not only does past research in other regions of the Global South point to the lower economic status of women who head their households, but the literature emphasizes the social and economic impacts on the children in womenheaded households (Sen 1990; Buvinic et al. 1992; Jacquette 1993). These children are at higher risk for receiving inadequate nutrition, health care, and education (Desai 1991; Lloyd and Desai 1991).

Women's roles  in the  informal  sector  are viewed favorably by the government of Kenya,

and more broadly, small-scale business women are acquiring a positive reputation among international and bilateral donors. Women show a superior track record for repaying small loans and have indicated a willingness to make their businesses profitable so that they can remain in the rural areas in order to consistently meet the needs of their households (Otero and Rhyne 1994; SEEP Network 1997). Consequently, they are frequently targeted by micro-scale enterprise projects (Awori 1995).

This study suggests that women-headed households are a viable family unit deserving priority attention for enhancing their informal sector profits. New ideas and skills gained through training applied in concert with small loans may be one way to improve the earning potential of these small businesses, particularly if the business is able to expand its market to include a larger customer base (Awori 1995; Berger 1995).

Women-headed households are an ever-increasing  phenomenon  throughout the world and rural Kenyan markets provide a glimpse of the strategies women develop in order to meet the needs of households. By focusing on women who head households when developing policies directed toward the rural poor, we can expect that the opportunities and the options for their household members will improve.

## Literature Cited

- Africa News . 1995. African women in regional miniBeijing. August. Africa News .
- Aleke-Dondo, C., W. Kulundu-Bitonye, B. F . Makau, J. Mani, D. Sifuna, and L. Gatuguta. 1986. Mobilisation of the Informal Sector for Kenya's Development, Volume I . Nairobi: Friedrich Ebert Foundation and National Council for Science and T echnology.
- Asamba, Isabella, and Barbara Thomas-Slayter. 1995. From cattle to coffee: T ransformation in Mbusyani and Kyevaluki. In Gender, Environment, and Development in Kenya: A Grassroots Perspective , ed. Barbara Thomas-Slayter and Dianne Rocheleau, 105-32. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, Publisher.
- Awori, Thelma. 1995. T raining issues: Women in micro- and small-scale enterprises in Africa. In Women in Micro- and Small-Scale Enterprises in Development, ed. Louise Dignard and José Havet, 229-48. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Bahemuka, Judith M., and Helen E. N. Njeru. 1988. Women-headed households: A critical factor in urban development.  Nairobi: First International Conference on Urban Growth and Spatial Planning of Nairobi, Kenya. Mimeograph.
- Barnes, Carolyn. 1983. Differentiation by sex among small-scale farming households in Kenya. Rural Africana 15/16:41-63.
- Berger, Marguerite. 1995. Key issues on women's access to and use of credit in the micro- and smallscale enterprise sector. In Women in Micro- and Small-Scale Enterprises in Development , ed. Louise Dignard and José Havet, 189-216. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Bernard, Frank E. 1979. Meru District in the Kenyan spatial economy: 1890-1950. In The Spatial Structure of Development: A Study of Kenya , ed. Robert A. Obudho and D. R. F . T aylor, 264-90. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Bertrand, J. T ., ed. 1993. Factors Affecting Contraceptive Use in Sub-Saharan Africa . Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
- Blumberg, Rae Lesser. 1991. Gender, Family and Economy: The Triple Overlap. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
- Buvinic, Mayra. 1992. Females of Adolescent Mothers and Inter-Generational Poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean . Washington, DC: International Center for Research on Women.
- Buvinic, M., J. P . Valenzuela, T . Molina, and E. Gonzalez. 1992. The Fortunes of Adolescent Mothers and Their Children: A Case Study of the Transmission of Poverty in Santiago . Washington, DC: International Center for the Research on Women.
- Chant, Sylvia. 1997. Women-HeadedHouseholds: Diversity and Dynamics in the Developing World . Hampshire, England: MacMillan Press Ltd.
- Davison, Jean. 1989. Voices from Mutira: Lives of Rural Gikuyu Women . Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, Publisher.
- Desai, Sonaldi. 1991. Children at Risk: The Role of Family Structure in Latin America and West Africa . New York: The Population Council.
- Ekejiuba, F . I. 1995. Down to fundamentals: Womencentered hearth-holds  in  rural West  Africa. In Women Wielding the Hoe , ed. D. F . Bryceson, 47-62. Oxford: Berg Publishers.
- Elson, Diane. 1992. From survival strategies to transformation strategies: Women's needs and structural adjustment.In Unequal Burden:Economic Crises, Persistent Poverty and W omen's W ork , ed. Lourdes Beneria and Shelly Feldman,  26-48,  Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Fapohunda, Eleanor R. 1988. The nonpooling household: A challenge to theory. In A Home Divided: Women and Incomes in the Third World , ed. Daisy Dwyer and Judith Bruce, 143-54. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
- Feldman, Shelly. 1992. Crises, poverty and gender inequality: Current themes and issues. In Unequal Burden: Economic Crises, Persistent Poverty and Women's Work , ed.  Lourdes Beneria and  Shelly Feldman, 1-25, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

- Folbre, Nancy. 1991. Women on Their Own: Global Patterns of Female Headship . Washington, DC: International Center for Research on Women.
- ---.1995.Engenderingeconomics:Newperspectives on women, world and demographic change. World Bank Research Observer . Annual Conference Supplement .
- Gibbings, W. 1996. Caribbean population: Startling figures send governments planning. October 28. Inter Press Service .
- Government of Kenya.  1989a. Development Plan: 1989-1993 . Nairobi: Government Printers.
- Government of Kenya. 1989b. Gender Issues in SmallEnterprise Development . Nairobi: Government of Kenya, International Labour Office and United Nations Development Programme.
- Government of Kenya. 1989c. A Strategy for Small Enterprise Development in Kenya: T owards the Y ear 2000 . Nairobi: Government of Kenya.
- Gray, Kenneth, William Cooley, Jesse Lutabingwa, Bertha Mutai-Kaimenyi, and L. A. Oyugi. 1996. Entrepreneurship in Micro-Enterprises: A Strategic Analysis of Manufacturing Industries in Kenya. Lanham, NY: University Press of America, Inc.
- Guyer,  Jane.  1984. Family and Farm  in Southern Cameroon: African Research Studies #15. Boston: African Studies Center, Boston University.
- ---.1988.Dynamicapproachestodomesticbudgeting: Cases and methods from Africa. In A Home Divided: Women and Income in the Third World, ed. Daisy Dwyer and Judith Bruce, 155-72. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
- International Research and T raining Institute for the Advancement of Women. 1990. Women and development. INSTRAW News , 15.
- International Affairs . 1995. U.N. Conference on women held in China: Stats on Women. International Affairs , September 21, 688, A1.
- International Labour Office. 1972. Employment, Incomes and Equality: A Strategy for Increasing Productive Employment in Kenya . Geneva: International Labour Office.
- Jacquette, Jane S. 1993. The family as a development issue. In Women at the Center: Development Issues and Practices for the 90s , ed. Gay Y oung, Vidyamali Samarasinghe, and Ken Kusterer. West Hartford, CT: Kumerian Press.
- Jiggins, Janice. 1989. How poor women earn income in sub-Saharan African and what works against them. World Development 17(7):953-63.
- Joekes, Susan P . 1987. Womenin the World Economy: An INSTRAW Study . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Kabeer, Naila. 1994. Reversed Realities: Gender Hierarchies in Development Thought . New York: Verso.
- Lloyd, C., and S. Desai. 1991. Children's Living Arrangements in Developing Countries . New York: The Population Council.
- Lycette, Margaret A. 1994. Federal Document Clearing House: Congressional T estimony, Capitol Hill Hearing Testimony. April 15. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
- Ministry of Planning and Economic Development. 1989. Meru District Development Plan: 1989-1993 . Nairobi: Government Printers.
- Moser, Caroline O.N. 1994. Gender Planning and Development: Theory Practice and Training. New York: Routledge.
- Ng'ethe, Njuguna, and James G. Wahome. 1987. The Rural Informal Sector in Kenya: Report of a Survey in Nyeri, Meru, Uasin Gishu and Siaya Districts . Nairobi: Institute for Development Studies, University of Nairobi.
- Otero, Maria. 1989. Rethinking the informal sector: An interview with Maria Otero. Grassroots Development: Journal  of the Inter-American Foundation 13(1):3-8.
- Otero, M., and E. Rhyne. 1994. The New World of Microenterprise Finance . West Hartford, CT: Kumerian Press.
- Phillips, Lynne. 1989. Gender dynamics and household strategies. Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology 26(2):294-310.
- Seager, Joni. 1997. The State of Women in the World Atlas, 2nd ed. New York: Penguin Books.
- SEEP Network. 1997. Nexus: A Publication of the Seep Network . September, 38. New Y ork: The Small Enterprise Education and Promotion Network.
- Sen, Amartya. 1990. Cooperation, inequality and the family. Population and Development Review, Supplement 15:61-76.
- Siegel, Brian. 1996. Family and kinship. In Understanding Contemporary Africa, 2nd ed., ed. April A. Gordon, and Donald Gordon, 221-48. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, Publisher.
- Social Development Division, Women and Development Unit. 1991. The Vulnerability of Households Headed by Women: Policy Questions and Options for Latin  America and the Caribbean. Santiago: The United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean.
- Social Statistics and Indicators. 1995. The World's Women: 1995, Trends and Statistics , Series K (12). New York: United Nations.
- Stamp, Patricia. 1975-76. Perceptions of change and economic strategy among Kikuyu women of Mitere, Kenya. Rural Africana 24:19-44.
- Staudt, Kathleen. 1987. Uncaptured or unmotivated?: Womenandthefood crisis in Africa. Rural Sociology 52(1):37-55.
- Swift, P . 1996. Habitat II Mission: Providing shelter to world' s homeless. Buffalo News June 1:76.
- United Nations. 1988. Improving Statistics and Indicators on Women Using Household Surveys . New York: Department of International Economic and Social Affairs, Statistical Office, United Nations.

HELENRUTHASPAASisAssistant Professor in the Department of Geography and Earth Resources, Utah State University, Logan, Utah 84322-5240. Email: aspaas@cc.usu.edu. Her re- search addresses women's participation in micro enterprises in Africa and the Southwestern United States.

## Linked and Independent African American Migration from LosAngeles*

## Curtis C. Roseman and Seong Woo Lee

University of Southern California

This paper examines African American migration from Los Angeles County, 1985-1990, utilizing Census Public Use Microdata Samples (PUMS) data to identify linkages between Los Angeles migrants and others in destination households. Increased migration to suburban counties and to regions outside of the South, since 1975-1980, suggests an overall diversification of African American migration. The majority of outmigrants were 'independent' because they moved into 1990 destination households that contained only migrants from the same origin, Los Angeles County. Others were linked either to nonmovers or to migrants from other places in destination households. A discriminant analysis suggests that many migrants linked to nonmigrants were moving for assistance, depending on others at the destination for housing and financial resources. In contrast, independent migrants have the personal resources to set up their own destination households. Key Words: Los Angeles, African Americans, linked migration, independent migration.

T hird parties often play important roles in the migration process. Friends and relatives can influence destination selection of migrants as well as provide them assistance after arrival. Examination of kinship ties has a long tradition in migration research, for both internal migration (Morton 1960; Tilly and Brown 1967; Roseman  1971), and international migration (MacDonald and MacDonald 1964; Massey et al. 1993).

The importance of kinship and other interpersonal ties is a recurrent theme in research on the Great Migration of African Americans (Blacks) from the rural South, which extended from the World War I period until the 1960s (Henri  1975; Johnson and  Campbell  1981). Comfort and assistance at the destination, in finding housing or employment,as well as financial support was common. Such assistance was particularly important to rural migrants entering uncertain urban environments.

By the 1970s, the migration patterns of African Americans had become more diverse geographically, connecting all major regions and including significant urban to urban and urban to rural components. Whereas Blacks were migrating  under many different circumstances, kinship ties were still important to many Black migrants. This was true among both return migrants to the South (McHugh 1987; Cromartie and Stack 1989; Stack 1996) and migrants to other destinations (Johnson and Roseman 1990).

## Migrant Ties in a Household Context

In this research we examine the migration of Blacks who moved  away from Los Angeles County in the 1985-1990 period, to help illuminate some of the ways in which ties to the destination are important some seven decades after the onset of the Great Migration. We utilize

*We thank Gerald Jones for assistance with the PUMS data, and David Hodge and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments.