## Migration Permanence and Village Decline in Zacatecas: When You Can't Go Home Again

## Richard C. Jones

The University of Texas at San Antonio

At the same time that the Third World has become more dependent on international wage-labor migration, developed countries have become less hospitable to this migration. This inhospitality is beginning to have negative repercussions on rural sending regions such as north-central Mexico. This study is based on a survey of a stratified random sample of households in Villanueva municipio (county), Zacatecas, in 1988 and again in 2002, employing the same questions and methodology. The results suggest that restrictive U.S. border policies over this period have had a negative impact on village economies in the municipio. Although migrant families continued to hold a distinctive edge on nonmigrant families in terms of possessions and productive investments, there was a decline overall in levels of investment and remittances in the municipio. In the latter year, Villanueva had more nonmigrant families as well as more families with permanent migrants-both trends leading to less money remitted to rural families and lower agricultural investments. Observations and interviews with migrants and townspeople in the municipio in 2005 and 2008 strongly corroborate these trends. Rural villages are facing depopulation, disinvestment and, it might be argued, a deterioration of hope for the future. Key Words: border restrictions, international wage-labor migration, Mexico, permanent migration.

第三世界国家变得更加依赖于国际劳资迁移，与此同时，发达国家变得对这种劳资迁移不再 那么好客。这种敌对性正在对农村地区开始产生负面的影响，例如墨西哥的中北部地区。本 项研究是基于一项统计调查的结果。在1988年和2002 年，采用同样的问题和方法，对墨 西哥萨卡特卡斯，维拉纽瓦县（墨西哥的县称为穆尼塞泊）的家庭进行了分层随机抽样调查。 结果表明，美国边境的限制性政策，在此期间对该县的村级经济产生了消极影响。虽然移民 家庭相对非移民家庭在财产和生产性投资方面上仍旧继续保持独特的优势，该县在整体上的 投资和汇款水平上有所下降。此后一年，在维拉纽瓦县，有更多的非移民家庭以及更多的拥 有永久移民的家庭，都表现出汇给农村家庭的金额减少和降低农业投资的趋势。在2005年 和2008年，针对该县移民和城镇居民的观察和采访强烈证实了这些趋势。农村正面临人口 的减少，投资的减少，并且有可能恶化对未来的希望。关键词：边界限制，国际劳资迁移， 墨西哥，永久移民。

Al tiempo que el Tercer Mundo se ha hecho m´ as dependiente de la migraci´ on internacional de asalariados, los pa´ ıses desarrollados se tornan menos hospitalarios a esta migraci´ on. Tal falta de hospitalidad empieza a tener repercusiones negativas en regiones rurales generadoras de migrantes, como la parte centro-norte de M´ exico. El estudio se basa en una encuesta con muestra aleatoria estratificada en hogares del municipio de Villanueva, Zacatecas, en 1988 y de nuevo en 2002, con la aplicaci´ on de las mismas preguntas y metodolog´ ıa. Los resultados sugieren que las pol´ ıticas fronterizas restrictivas del lado estadounidense durante este per´ ıodo han tenido impacto negativo sobre las econom´ ıas aldeanas del municipio. Aunque las familias de migrantes siguen mostrando una condici´ on aventajada respecto de las no migrantes, en t´ productivas, las observaciones m´ as recientes muestran un declive general en los niveles de inversi´ on y remesas. En el ´ ultimo a˜ no, Villanueva ten´ ıa m´ as familias no migratorias lo mismo que m´ as familias con migrantes permanentes-ambas tendencias indicadoras de que habr´ ıa menos dinero remitido a las familias campesinas y menores inversiones agr´ ıcolas. Nuevas observaciones y entrevistas con migrantes y lugare˜ nos del municipio, en 2005 y 2008, corroboran con fuerza estas tendencias. Las aldeas rurales est´ an sufriendo de despoblamiento, desinversi´ on y, podr´ ıa decirse, de deterioro de la esperanza en el futuro. Palabras clave: restricciones fronterizas, migraci ´ on internacional de asalariados, M´ exico, migraci ´ on permanente .

T hird World countries today are more dependent than ever on wage-labor migration. Global migrant remittances-amounting to $300 billion in 2006-have roughly doubled in the past decade, and in twenty less-developed countries constitute more than 20 percent of their gross domestic product (International Fund for Agricultural Development 2006). Wage-labor-sending countries often lack competitive products in global demand or are not positioned to benefit from the new international division of labor because they lack the requisite infrastructure and business climate (Shafaeddin 1996; Antonopoulou 2000); or they may be well endowed in these ways but possess lagging regions left behind by globalization. In addition, in the post-Cold War period, they have been ignored by the First World in terms of foreign aid and inclusion in trade blocs (Ihonvbere 1992; Peet and Watts 1993).

Ironically, at the same time that the Third World has become more dependent on wagelabor migration, developed countries have become less hospitable to this migration. This is seen in political backlash against immigrants in European Union countries like Spain, Italy, France, Portugal, and Greece; the stiffening of residence requirements in East Asia; the fortification of the U.S. border with Mexico; and so forth. This backlash has stemmed only in part from economic recession and terrorism; cultural politics-in which outsiders become convenient scapegoats in times of trouble-is also to blame. These new legal and cultural barriers lower remittances in two ways: by preventing migrants from crossing in the first place and by forcing them into a more permanent existence at the destination. In the latter case, a 'new transnationalism' (Levitt 2001, 4-15; Pries 2001; Levitt and Waters 2002) enables them to maintain contact electronically and via remittances, but increasing evidence suggests that these ties are unsustainable over long periods of time.

This process appears to be playing out in the migrant hearth region of Mexico. Thomas Wolfe's (1940) novel, You Can't Go Home Again, tells the tale of a man who cannot return home. That is indeed the plight of many undocumented Mexican migrants today. Unlike the case with Wolfe's protagonist (whose home has turned against him), however, these

Mexican migrants are 'walled in' by a fortified border (Massey 2006), in which, quoting L´ opez-Castro (1986, 83), 'El sustento [esta] en un lado y el coraz´ on en otro' ('their livelihood is on one side, and their heart on the other').

Is migration today-as it was two decades ago (Massey, Durand, and Malone 2002)-a positive economic force for families in central Mexico's migrant hearth region? Over the 1990s, a time of increasing border restrictionism, has there been a reduction of migration from this region and an increase in its permanence? Do these trends have negative repercussions for rural development in the region? Althoughstudies of Mexican migrants at a given place and point in time are numerous, there are few studies that examine migrants in a given place over time. This article provides such a study.

## Migration and the Maintenance of Village Livelihoods

In the 1970s and early 1980s, criticism was leveled at international migration's role in village economies and societies. This migration was viewed as yet another form of international dependency, a capitulation to the forces of globalization and an abandonment of autonomous grassroots development schemes (see, for example, McArthur 1979; Reichert 1981; Brana-Shute and Brana-Shute 1982; Shrestha 1985). However, the realities of the late 1980s to the present-recession and global restructuring around the principles of competitive advantage-rendered many Third World regions bystanders in the development process and more dependent than ever on remittances from international migration. Since the late 1980s the functionalist school of thought has come to the fore, emphasizing the positive impacts on local growth of this migration, including higher levels of living, investment in economic and human capital, economic mobility, and the preservation of rural lifeways (see Conway 1985; Jones 1995a; Owusu 2000; Semyonov and Gorodzeisky 2005).

The positive (functionalist) view of the role of international wage-labor migration in village livelihoods and the negative feedback exerted by migration permanence are represented

diagrammatically in Figure 1. The core relationship proposes that migrants and migrant families are better off than nonmigrants, in the ways noted (arrow a); that is, they will have more possessions and will invest relatively more and support their community more. The facilitating mechanism for this is remittances (monetary as well as social) sent from the destination back to the origin. Finally, because migrants tend to prevail from rural areas, and these areas lag behind urban areas on most economic indicators, migrant remittances will improve the economic position of rural vis-` avis urban places. The positive or upper circuit of the diagram in Figure 1 is based on a substantial literature (cited earlier; see also Ling 1984; Keely and Tran 1989; Durand, Parrado, and Massey 1996; Lowell and de la Garza 2002; Cohen, Jones, and Conway 2005; Escobar et al. 2006).

However, there can be too much of a good thing, and extended periods of time abroad, particularly without returning home, may lead to migration permanence, which has a negative impact on village lifeways. This is the negative or lower circuit of the diagram (arrow b). Permanence at the destination ultimately truncates economic transfers that were the original motivation for migration. Lowell and de la Garza (2002), summarizing recent research on Hispanic immigrants to the United States,

## EXOGENOUSFORCES

Figure 1 International wage-labor migration counterforces in the maintenance of village livelihoods.

<!-- image -->

note that 'Adjustment to the United States reduces remitting . . . . Naturalized citizens, a status typically demonstrating commitment to the United States, are less likely to remit than are immigrants without permanent resident status' (see also Lozano 1993, 14). Other permanencerelated factors such as family abroad, home ownership abroad, and economic mobility abroad appear to lead in due course to lowered remittances (Comision Economica para America Latina 1991; Cort´ es 2002; Lyndersen 2005; Escobar et al. 2006; Cant´ u, Shaiq, and Urbaniva 2007).

The final relationships in the diagram explore the 'exogenous forces' that convince migrants and families not to migrate or, alternatively, to settle permanently (arrows c). As codified by Lee (1966), these include push factors at the origin (natural disasters, government indifference) and pull factors at the destination (host-country reception and job availability). They also include barriers (legal and physical impediments to crossing the border). These barriers make the incidence of (first-time) migration less likely and in addition, they make migration permanence more likely because, should a migrant return home, subsequent reentry is rendered difficult or impossible. Thus, formerly fluid and bidirectional migration streams become more permanent (Dandler and Medeiros 1988;

Mahler 1998; Jergens 2001; Smith 2001; Escobar et al. 2006; Cornelius 2007).

## Fading of Migration in the Mexican Migration Hearth?

Mexico provides a good example of how globalization has bypassed underdeveloped regions and accelerated emigration from them. It also illustrates the local repercussions when host countries buttress their borders against immigration. During the early 1980s, the Mexican government radically shifted from nationalist, statist policies to trade liberalization and privatization. Mexico joined the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in 1986 and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1994, and the country's competitive advantage in export manufacturing, petroleum, winter vegetables, and tourism was tapped by burgeoning foreign investment. Rural social programs that helped define the nationalist period-land redistribution, subsidies to dryland farmers, stimulation of crafts and cottage industries, and integrated rural development schemes-were all but abandoned. Apart from larger cities or commercial agricultural corridors with their export-based production, the states of central Mexico (Zacatecas, San Lu´ ıs Potos´ ı, Guanajuato, Michoac´ an, and Jalisco: see Figure 2, inset) languished. Emigration, and the remittances it brought, became a prime option for preserving rural livelihoods. Massey, Durand, and Malone (2002) characterize migration in this period as a 'relatively stable, smoothly functioning' system, of 'circular rather than settled' migration (71). Yet beginning in the 1990s and accelerating after 2000, emigration came under attack by forces out of the control of local residents. The souring of the U.S. economy and the fear of terrorist infiltration led to a surge in border and immigrant restrictions. This had significant impacts on the geography and incidence of border crossings (Massey, Durand, and Malone 2002, chapter 6). As of 2008, there is evidence that a combination of employer raids, border fencing, and jail time for first offenders has begun to reduce the net number of border crossers. These tactics have also left a residual population of Mexicans 'fearing deportation, but clinging to life in the U.S.' ('Fearing deportation but clinging to life in the U.S.' 2008).

TheimpactofU.S.policies on the economies of rural villages has scarcely been studied. Can we infer from existing studies what these impacts may be? The following discussion proceeds along the lines of the three relationships of Figure 1.

Compared to nonmigrant families in their towns of origin, Mexican migrant families tend to have more possessions, live in better homes, and have more land (Jones 1995a; Cohen, Jones, and Conway 2005). They invest proportionately more in agricultural inputs and small businesses (Jones 1995a; Cohen and Rodriguez 2005), and this investment gap of migrant over nonmigrant widens with increasing U.S. migration experience (Massey et al. 1987; Jones 1995a). There is increasing evidence for community improvement expenditures by migrant families, particularly as source areas have shifted to southern Mexico (Jones 1995b) where there are strong communal traditions (Van Wey, Tucker, and McConnell 2005), and as 'hometown associations' of Mexicans in the United States have promoted community development schemes such as the 3 × 1 matching-funds program in Mexico (Alarc´ on 2002; Bada 2003; Goldring 2004). Functionalist research has uncovered a surprising amount of recirculation of remittances in home communities in the form of 'migradollars' (Durand, Parrado, and Massey 1996). Finally, given the relative rural backwardness in Mexico, a channeling of remittances into rural places improves their income position vis-` a-vis urban ones-lowering urban-rural income inequalities (Jones 1995a, 82-84; Jones 1998) and preserving rural lifeways (Klooster 2005).

However, emerging research suggests that migration permanence in the United States may diminish economic ties with the origin. Ethno-surveys in Mexico's central western region show that as families cumulate migration time in the United States, remittances increase rapidly at first but later decline as a logical consequence of the family's becoming integrated into U.S. society (Massey et al. 1987; Cornelius 1990). Recent multivariate analyses come to the same conclusions, finding, for example, that homeward remittances drop when a spouse, children, or both

Figure 2 The study area: Villanueva municipio, Zacatecas.

<!-- image -->

have accompanied the migrant (Lozano 1993; DeSipio 2002; Lowell and de la Garza 2002; Mooney 2004). Regarding 'collective' (community) remittances, however, they appear to be greater when migrants are more integrated at the destination (Goldring 2004; Mooney 2004; Marcelli and Lowell 2005). It should be noted, nevertheless, that these community remittances are only a fraction (less than 5 percent) of total remittances.

Finally, there is mounting evidence that restrictive U.S. policies have more than compensated for economic push factors in Mexico (such as drought, the demise of rural development programs, and economic stagnation) to both curtail initial migration and to induce migrant families to remain permanently in the United States. Evidence for fewer first-time migrants, longer stays, and more family members currently living in the United States is found in Binford (2003), Reyes (2004), Riosmena (2004), and Massey (2006); these changes have been attributed to hardening of the U.S.-Mexican border since the early 1990s (Massey, Durand, and Malone 2002; Cohen 2004). First-time migrants must now contemplate the possibility of death in the desert-or spending months in jail if they are apprehended. In a survey by Cohen and Rodriguez (2005), Mexican migrants listed the fear and cost of crossing the border as second only to family considerations as impediments that might make them rethink their decision to come to the United States. Many throw caution to the wind anyway and manage to cross their spouses and other family members-a move that increases their likelihood of permanent residence through legalization (Roberts, Frank, and Lozano-Ascencio 1999; DiSipio 2002).

As a result of reduced migration and remittances, Mexican origin communities may find themselves increasingly estranged from their departed members and actually depopulating. Smith (2001), in his detailed study of migrants from Ticuari (a village in Puebla, Mexico) to New York City, finds that the town does not appear to be reproducing itself over time in NewYork by incorporating second-generation or new first-generation immigrants into the committee that oversees flows of resources back to the village. Although its ties to New York remain deep, the village is 'emptying out' as migrants to New York become more perma- nent and as the declining base population sends fewer and fewer migrants.

## Area of Study, Study Design, and Specific Goals

Area of Study

The state of Zacatecas, in north central Mexico (Figure 2), has been the focus of relatively little study-previous research having focused on the central west (Jalisco and Michoac´ an), where the largest number of migrants originate. However, no Mexican state has a higher rate of emigration than Zacatecas. Silver mining during the sixteenth to nineteenth centuries supported an opulent Spanish elite (especially in the capital city of Zacatecas). The Mexican Revolution (1910-1920) and subsequent regression of the mining and agricultural economies, however, without compensating industrialization or government support, led to economic marginalization over the rest of the twentieth century.

## Study Design

In 1988, a National Science Foundation Grant enabled me, with the assistance of one U.S. and four Mexican graduate student interviewers, to study U.S. migration from four municpios (counties) in central Zacatecas noteworthy for their large numbers of U.S. migrants. Towns and villages within these municipios were stratified by population size and location, and within strata a random sample of places was selected (except that the cabecera, or county seat, was always selected). This procedure was designed to preserve the actual urban-rural proportions in the municipio-an important consideration because so many demographic and mobility variables covary with urban size. A map of each town was obtained and divided into sectors of approximately equal population after consultation with the municipal president. Homes were chosen randomly and proportionately within each of these sectors. If one callback did not locate a family at home, another family nearby was selected.

A four-page interview schedule was administered to an adult member of each household by a two-person interview team. The questions were largely objective or close-ended and

covered (1) the demographic characteristics of the household, (2) household possessions, (3) a basic migration history of all family members, (4) purchases and expenses of the household, (5) support of community institutions, and (6) opinion of the respondent concerning the advantages and disadvantages of U.S. migration for the town. As a check on the interview schedules, and to glean in-depth information on prototypical families, ethnographic interviews were carried out later with a subset of our originally surveyed households.

In 2002, I employed two Mexican student interviewers to repeat portions of the interview schedule with families in the municipio of Villanueva (Figure 2), employing the same sampling methodology. Of the four municipios surveyed in 1988, Villanueva proved to be most typical of subsistence agricultural counties of north central Mexico-poor, demographically stagnant, and heavily dependent on migrant remittances. Unfortunately, owing to lack of time and money for carrying out the interviews, the 2002 schedule did not ask for monetary expenses or remittances. For this reason I am limited in the conclusions I can draw later about economic impacts over time. Only selected assertions in the literature that has been cited can be tested with these data. Nevertheless, the data do give us valuable insights-much as archaeological pieces fit into a skeletal model and by accretion and logic verify the dimensions of that larger skeleton.

In households where an adult was present, household interview rates were high, at approximately 95 percent for both years. Response rates to the survey questions were even higher; in the aggregate, fewer than 0.25 percent elicited a response of 'don't know,' 'refused to answer,' or 'no answer.' The responsiveness of our interviewees is attributed to the facts that (1) the respondents were interviewed in their homes in Mexico, where they felt free to answer questions about 'illegal' trips to the United States; (2) our student interviewers made it clear that they were unaffiliated with any Mexican or U.S. governmental body, church group, and so on; and (3) our respondents were typically female heads of household who knew the details of family migration behavior and finances.

In the following analyses, a total of 301 households constitute the study population in

Table 1 Demographics of the surveyed households, 1988 and 2002

| Indicator                                                          |   1988 |   2002 |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|--------|--------|
| Households surveyed                                                |  301   |  233   |
| %urban (places with population of 2,500 or more)                   |   35.9 |   35.2 |
| %of households receiving remittances from U.S. migrants, past year |   45.2 |   37.3 |
| %of households that owned:                                         |        |        |
| A car                                                              |    7.6 |   15.5 |
| A truck                                                            |   22.8 |   33   |
| A telephone                                                        |    1   |   39.1 |
| A stereo                                                           |   34.1 |   49.4 |
| A refrigerator                                                     |   40.7 |   85   |
| A television                                                       |   84.1 |   93.1 |

1988, and 233 households in 202. The demographics of the sample households are given in Table 1. Note that the urban percentage is very similar in the two periods. The percentage of households receiving remittances declined over the period, even as the percentage of households with specific possessions increased. This suggests that in rural Mexico the impacts of international migration, both positive and negative, are embedded in a situation of generally improving living standards. Regarding the time frame, 1988 marked a time of relatively open borders and the beginnings of neo-liberalism under presidents Miguel de la Madrid (19821988) and Carlos Salinas (1988-2004); 2002 marked an acceleration of U.S. border restrictions that had begun in the early 1990s and economic recession. As such, this time frame encompasses the operation of exogenous forces pertinent to this analysis. To judge whether my conclusions might be corroborated by 'ground truth' (and to bring them up to date) I revisited the area in December 2005 and again in January 2008 to observe the cultural landscape and human activity in the municipio and to talk with residents about the impact of migration.

A case study of one municipio cannot be extrapolated to all migrant areas of Mexico. However, as explained earlier, Villanueva is fairly typical of poorer upland municipios in the Mexican migration hearth-areas that still account for a majority of Mexican wage-labor migrants to the United States.

## Specific Goals

My specific goals in this case study of Villanueva are to address certain research

questions that are unanswered in the literature on Mexican migration or that have been answered only obliquely or incidentally. First, do migrant families in the municipio consume and invest more than nonmigrant families, and is migration more of a rural than an urban phenomenon? If so, is this true for both 1988 and 2002? Second, do migrant families who exhibit signs of greater 'permanence' consume and invest less and hail less from rural areas than migrant families who exhibit less permanence, and is this true for both years? Third, did migration from the municipio decrease and did permanence of migration increase between 1988 and 2002? Fourth, were these changes accompanied by overall declines in consumption and investment in the municipio between the two years or not? Finally, does the current cultural and demographic landscape of the municipio, as revealed by field research, suggest decline and disinvestment rather than dynamism and development?

## Results

To place the survey data in proper perspective, I begin with a statistical summary of Villanueva municipio, Zacatecas, and Mexico based on the Mexican censuses of 1990 and 2000 (Table 2). These data paint a picture of economic backwardness and demographic stagnation in Zacatecas and, in particular, in Villanueva municipio. Compared to Mexico overall, the state of Zacatecas is poorer, slightly older, and it grew more slowly over the decade. In turn, compared to the state of Zacatecas,

Villanueva municipio is poorer and older still, and it actually lost population (6 percent) over the period. The municipio's depressed socioeconomic profile is attributable to its rural areas, which are poorest of all and declining the most demographically (losing 20 percent of their population during the 1990s). Rural population loss was accompanied by a relative decline in males and an increase in the economically inactive population, suggesting migration out of the area by working-age men. Interestingly, the county seat (the town of Villanueva, the sole urban place in the municipio) grew at above the national level (24 percent vs. 20 percent) and had a more favorable economic profile than its rural hinterland. Analysis of the survey data that follow offers further insight on the causes of this rural decline.

Migration, Consumption, and Investment at Family Level

The first research question is whether migrant families in the municipio consume and invest more than nonmigrant families and whether migration is disproportionately a rural phenomenon. To answer this question, I have developed indicators for each of the preceding concepts, as much as possible with the survey data. A migrant family is defined as one in which at least one household member (whether currently living at home or not) has ever worked in the United States. A nonmigrant family, then, has never had any member working in the United States. Consumption (in the absence of data on actual expenditures) is expressed by an index that cumulates the incidence of the

Table 2 A statistical profile of Villanueva, Zacatecas, and Mexico, 1990 and 2000

|                                   | Villanueva municipio: Total   | Villanueva municipio: Total   | Villanueva municipio: County seat   | Villanueva municipio: County seat   | Villanueva municipio: Villages   | Villanueva municipio: Villages   | State of Zacatecas   | State of Zacatecas   | Mexico   | Mexico   |
|-----------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------|----------|
|                                   | 1990                          | 2000                          | 1990                                | 2000                                | 1990                             | 2000                             | 1990                 | 2000                 | 1990     | 2000     |
| Population (1,000s)               | 35 . 373                      | 32 . 140                      | 8 . 908                             | 11 . 057                            | 26 . 465                         | 21 . 083                         | 1,276                | 1,354                | 81,250   | 97,483   |
| Population /Delta1 1990-2000 (%)  | -9.1                          | -9.1                          | + 24.1                              | + 24.1                              | -20.0                            | -20.0                            | + 6.1                | + 6.1                | + 20.0   | + 20.0   |
| %of population 50 years and older | 15 . 2                        | 16 . 5                        | NA                                  | NA                                  | NA                               | NA                               | 12 . 9               | 12 . 8               | 12 . 0   | 12 . 4   |
| %population male                  | 48 . 1                        | 47 . 1                        | 47 . 3                              | 47 . 5                              | 48 . 4                           | 46 . 9                           | 48 . 9               | 48 . 3               | 49 . 1   | 48 . 8   |
| %population inactive              | 75 . 2                        | 75 . 5                        | 63 . 6                              | 59 . 3                              | 80 . 0                           | 84 . 1                           | 71 . 6               | 69 . 6               | 61 . 5   | 52 . 1   |
| Per-capita monthly income ($)     | 103                           | NA                            | 120                                 | NA                                  | 97                               | NA                               | 123                  | NA                   | 154      | NA       |

following eight possessions owned by the household at the time of the interview: television, refrigerator, sewing machine, stereo, vehicle, nondirt floor, more than six hectares (fifteen acres) of land, and more than four rooms in the house. This index also serves as a crude indicator of family income. The index can vary from 0 to 8. Investment has two dimensions: private and community. Because this is predominantly an agricultural municipio, private investment is measured in terms of whether the family purchased land, agricultural inputs, or a truck in the past year. Community investment is measured by whether the family gave to a community project in the past year. A rural place is defined as having fewer a population of fewer than 2,500 at the time of the interview. The town of Villanueva, with about 8,900 people in 1990 (one quarter of the municipal population) and 11,000 in 2000 (one third of the municipal population), was the only urban place in the municipio in either year. Remittances constitute the connecting link between migration and consumption and investment in the town. Although the monetary amount of remittances was not requested of our interviewees in 2002, in both years we did ask whether the family received remittances from someone in the United States in the past year, and it is this indicator that appears here.

The results in Table 3 indicate that U.S. migration played a positive role in the economic status of families in Villanueva. Migrant families had more possessions and were more likely to invest in agriculture and in their community than nonmigrant families, in both 1988 and 2002. Furthermore, migrant families came disproportionately from rural areas in both years. Given that urban per capita incomes exceeded rural incomes in 1990 (Table 2), the benefits of migration would have tended to reduce the income gap between rural and urban areas. Finally, as expected, the receipt of remittances is greater for migrant families in both years. The fact that some nonmigrant families receive remittances suggests a 'halo effect' in which households receive money from extended family members working abroad. It is worth noting in Table 3 that the migrant-nonmigrant ratio is not only above one for 1988 and 2002 but also increased over the period for every indicator in the table. That is to say, the family-level benefits of migration were positive and increasing over this period of time. We might be tempted to conclude that migration is sustaining rural livelihoods in the face of exogenous influences that are eroding these livelihoods.

Such a conclusion would not necessarily be warranted. Table 2 makes it clear that there was an absolute decline in rural population (and in the municipio's population overall) through the 1990s. Furthermore, closer inspection of Table 3 reveals a significant decline in the percentage of families investing in agriculture

Table 3 The role of U.S. migration in the economic status of households in Villanueva, 1988 and 2002

|                                                            | 1988                       | 1988                         | 1988                       | 2002                       | 2002                          | 2002                       |
|------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------|
| Concept and indicator                                      | Migrant families (n = 205) | Nonmigrant families (n = 96) | Ratio, migrant/ nonmigrant | Migrant families (n = 121) | Nonmigrant families (n = 112) | Ratio, migrant/ nonmigrant |
| Consumption                                                |                            |                              |                            |                            |                               |                            |
| %with possession index of 5 or greater a                   | 22.0                       | 20.8                         | 1.06                       | 55.4                       | 45.5                          | 1.22                       |
| Investment                                                 |                            |                              |                            |                            |                               |                            |
| Private: %investing in agriculture or a truck in past year | 30.7                       | 21.9                         | 1.40                       | 17.4                       | 9.8                           | 1.78                       |
| Community: %who gave to community project in past year     | 62.4                       | 55.3                         | 1.13                       | 77.7                       | 65.8                          | 1.18                       |
| Rurality                                                   |                            |                              |                            |                            |                               |                            |
| %who lived in rural areas                                  | 68.3                       | 55.2                         | 1.24                       | 78.5                       | 50.0                          | 1.57                       |
| Monetary remittances                                       |                            |                              |                            |                            |                               |                            |
| %who received remittances, past 12 months                  | 57.6                       | 18.8                         | 3.06                       | 60.3                       | 12.5                          | 4.82                       |

Table 4 U.S. residency and the economic status of households in Villanueva, 1988 and 2002

|                                                          | 1988                                           | 1988                                      | 1988                    | 2002                                           | 2002                                     | 2002                    |
|----------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| Concept and indicator                                    | At least one legal migrant; permanent (n = 44) | No legal migrant; not permanent (n = 161) | Ratio, legal/ not legal | At least one legal migrant; permanent (n = 54) | No legal migrant; not permanent (n = 67) | Ratio, legal/ not legal |
| Consumption                                              |                                                |                                           |                         |                                                |                                          |                         |
| %with possession index of 5 or greater a                 | 31.8                                           | 19.3                                      | 1.65                    | 66.7                                           | 46.3                                     | 1.44                    |
| Investment                                               |                                                |                                           |                         |                                                |                                          |                         |
| Private: %investing in agriculture or truck in past year | 29.5                                           | 30.4                                      | 0.97                    | 16.7                                           | 17.9                                     | 0.93                    |
| Community: %who gave to community project in past year   | 61.4                                           | 62.7                                      | 0.98                    | 75.9                                           | 79.1                                     | 0.96                    |
| Rurality                                                 |                                                |                                           |                         |                                                |                                          |                         |
| %who lived in rural areas                                | 34.1                                           | 43.5                                      | 0.78                    | 24.1                                           | 43.3                                     | 0.56                    |
| Monetary remittances                                     |                                                |                                           |                         |                                                |                                          |                         |
| %who received remittances, past 12 months                | 63.6                                           | 55.3                                      | 1.15                    | 68.5                                           | 53.7                                     | 1.28                    |

a Index records how many of the following possessions the household had at the time of interview: television, refrigerator, sewing machine, stereo, truck, nondirt floor, more than six hectares of land, and more than four rooms in the house. The index can range in value from 0 to 8.

between 1988 and 2002. Also in Table 3, migrant families became more rural and nonmigrant families became more urban between 1988 and 2002, suggesting that a residual group of migrant families is holding its own in rural areas while many nonmigrant families are moving into Villanueva, the municipal capital. If this is true (and it is speculation), then although migrant families are doing relatively better than before, there is only a slight multiplier effect on the rural villages as a whole because these villages are declining in population and are beset with economic problems. Metaphorically, migration is not creating new points of light in this part of rural Mexico; it is keeping some lights burning as many others dim and go out. These trends are elucidated further along in the analysis.

## Migration Permanence and Consumption or Investment at Family Level

The second research question is whether migrant families who exhibit greater permanence in the United States consume and invest less, and hail less from rural areas, than migrant families with less permanence. Migration permanence is measured by U.S. residency; that is, by whether or not a family has at least one legal migrant in terms of citizenship, legal residency, or temporary resident alien status in the U.S. As such, it distinguishes between families with a legal migrant and families without a legal migrant. Legal status is widely considered one of the most reliable measures of migration permanence-and closely related to other indicators of permanence such as total time abroad, living with family members abroad, and socioeconomic integration abroad (Massey et al. 1987; Cornelius 1990; DiSipio 2002; Lowell and de la Garza 2002).

Table 4 gives evidence that legality promotes consumption but has little effect on investment in the place of origin, and that legal migrant families come disproportionately from urban rather than rural areas. Families with a legal migrant both send money home with greater frequency and cumulate more possessions than families without a legal migrant. This finding runs counter to research suggesting that remittances drop with migration permanence, but the fact that investment propensity, both in agriculture and for community projects, is slightly less (or virtually the same) for families with a legal migrant and families without a legal migrant, offers some support for the literature

cited earlier. Legality places migrants 'on the path to settlement' (Cant´ u, Shaiq, and Urbaniva 2007), with the result that long-run investments in the home village, such as the purchase of agricultural equipment or the investment in community projects, become of lesser priority. Regardingrurality, families with a legal migrant are found disproportionately in the urban place of the municipio, whereas those without a legal migrant are found in the rural villages. Legalization thus diverts remittances from rural to urban areas, exacerbating urban-rural economic differentials.

These conclusions are basically the same for 1988 and 2002.

## Migration and Its Permanence in the Municipio Between 1988 and 2002

Thethird research question is whether the incidence and permanence of migration increased or decreased for the municipio as a whole between 1988 and 2002. To examine both incidence and permanence of migration simultaneously, I employ a cumulated-time profile of U.S. migration experience that has been used instructively in prior studies (Massey et al. 1987; Jones 1995a; Cohen 2004). This profile classifies families in terms of the total years their members have spent working in the United States. As such, it is a measure of the quantity of family migration experience.

Table 5 reveals a time profile (percentage distribution of families by quantity of migration) in which both nonmigrants and long-term migrants increased between 1988 and 2002. Whereas in 1988 just under one third (32 percent) of families had no migrants, by 2002 almost half (48 percent) fit this category-a 50 percent increase. At the same time, the percentage of families with more than ten years of working time in the United States rose from 14 percent to 21 percent-also a 50 percent increase. In other words, the municipio's time profile of migration, or migration pyramid, bulged out at the bottom and top, respectively, and constricted in the middle. Accompanying these trends was a trend toward legality: The proportion of migrant families with at least one legal migrant more than doubled, from 21 percent to 45 percent, over the period. Not shown in Table 5 is the fact that by 2002, 82 percent of families with more than ten years of experience

Table 5 Changes in the cumulated time profile of U.S. migration for Villanueva families between 1988 and 2002

| Indicator                                                 |   1988 |   2002 |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|--------|--------|
| Households surveyed                                       |  301   |  233   |
| %of families that have ever had a U.S. migrant            |   68.1 |   51.9 |
| %of families                                              |        |        |
| (a) With no working time in the United States             |   31.9 |   48.1 |
| With up to 2 years working time in the United States      |   21.3 |   12.9 |
| With 2 to 5 years working time in the United States       |   18.9 |    9.4 |
| With 5 to 10 years working time in the United States      |   14.3 |    8.6 |
| With more than 10 years working time in the United States |   13.6 |   21   |
| Total                                                     |  100   |  100   |
| (b) Averaging > 1 year per migrant, latest trip           |   43.7 |   64.5 |
| (c) With at least one legal migrant, latest trip          |   21.2 |   44.6 |
| Means, migrant families only                              |        |        |
| Households surveyed                                       |  205   |  121   |
| Number of months working in the United States             |   79   |  183   |
| Months on latest trip, per migrant                        |   21.8 |   23.2 |
| %of migrants legal, latest trip                           |   23.6 |   66.9 |

had a legal migrant, compared to only 19 percent for migrant families with ten or fewer years. In other words, longevity and legality appear to go hand in hand. The means at the bottom of the table provide corroborating ratio-level measurements for legality and longevity.

Figure 3 attempts to summarize and generalize the results in Table 5 in a hypothetical model of migration pyramids over time for a place (town, county, etc.), with and without immigration restrictions. Just as with population pyramids, the vertical and horizontal axes of the pyramid represent percentage distributions. The vertical axis represents total years abroad, divided into a large number of categories. For simplicity of labeling, this time profile of migrant families is reduced to three categories: nonmigrant, short-term migrant, and longterm migrant (see key at bottom). The horizontal axis represents legal status. The top portion of the pyramid (representing migrant families) is divided down the middle by a line that proportions families into those with a legal migrant and those without a legal migrant. Pyramids evolve through three stages of migration for the

## A. Few Immigration Restrictions

Figure 3 Migration pyramids: Time profile and legal status for families at different stages of wage-labor migration, for a place.

<!-- image -->

place, drawing from diffusion theory (see Jones 1998): (1) the innovator stage, in which migration from a town is just beginning and its few migrants are better educated and risk-taking 'innovators'; (2) the early adopter stage, when migration has taken hold among a more representative cross-section of the population; and

(3) the late adopter stage, in which a majority of families have migrants. The shape of these pyramids over time is chiefly determined by two different host-country policy situations. In Figure 3A, with few immigration restrictions, the migration pyramid evolves from a 'sailboat' to a 'smokestack' to a 'tornado,' as more

families gain migration experience (reducing the nonmigrant base of the pyramid) and as more migrant families cumulate time abroad (expanding the top of the pyramid). In Figure 3B, with immigration restrictions taking hold (at the middle stage), the migration pyramid is profoundly affected, changing from a sailboat to an 'hourglass' and finally returning (more or less) to a sailboat. The arrows at this middle stage suggest what has happened: The costs and dangers of border crossing have enlarged the pyramid at the bottom (expanding the nonmigrant class) and also at the top (expanding the long-term migrant class). The pyramid in this middle stage has in essence been 'hollowed out' and the town's families are increasingly separated into two groups: nonmigrants and long-term migrants. Ultimately, in the last stage, entire families move and aging parents back home die off, and the long-term migrant class is severely reduced because there are no longer any immediate family members at the origin to be interviewed (see arrows at the last stage).

## Consumption and Investment in the Municipio Between 1988 and 2002

The fourth research question is whether these changes-a reduction in migration and an increase in its permanence-were accompanied by reductions in consumption and investment in the municipio over the same period. Table 6 reveals that possessions have continued to accumulate but that remittances and agricultural investments have diminished. The indicator of family possessions more than doubled over the period, suggesting that levels of living went up generally (a suggestion supported by Table 3), owing to many factors that might include the general improvement of life in the country. Regarding remittances, it is notable in Table 6 that whereas 45 percent of families received them in 1988, by 2002 this had dropped to 37 percent. Also, the proportion of families investing in agricultural inputs or a truck fell from 28 percent to 14 percent. This suggests a decline in the productive use of remittances. Additionally, it might (and this is speculation) reflect the continuing lack of interest in subsistence agricultural programs by the Mexican government, as well as the difficult physical conditions for agriculture

Table 6 Change in economic status over time: Migrant families compared to total families in Villanueva, 1988 to 2002

| Indicator                                            |   1988 |   2002 |   Ratio, 2002/1988 |
|------------------------------------------------------|--------|--------|--------------------|
| Total families                                       |        |        |                    |
| Households surveyed                                  |  301   |  233   |                    |
| Possession index of 5 or greater a                   |   21.6 |   50.6 |               2.34 |
| %who received remittances, past 12 months            |   45.2 |   37.3 |               0.83 |
| %who invested in agriculture or a truck in past year |   27.9 |   13.7 |               0.49 |
| %who gave to community project in past year          |   60.2 |   72   |               1.2  |
| %who lived in rural areas (villages)                 |   64.1 |   64.8 |               1.01 |
| Migrant families                                     |        |        |                    |
| Households surveyed                                  |  205   |  121   |                    |
| Possession index of 5 or greater                     |   22   |   55.4 |               2.52 |
| %who received remittances, past 12 months            |   57.6 |   60.3 |               1.05 |
| %who invested in agriculture or a truck in past year |   30.7 |   17.4 |               0.57 |
| %who gave to community project in past year          |   62.4 |   77.7 |               1.25 |
| %who lived in rural areas (villages)                 |   63.3 |   78.5 |               1.24 |

a Index records how many of the following possessions the household had at the time of interview: television, refrigerator, sewing machine, stereo, truck, nondirt floor, more than six hectares of land, and more than four rooms in the house. The index can range in value from 0 to 8.

(e.g., the run of dry crop years in the 1990s). One bright spot in Table 6 is the fact that the percentage of families who gave to a community project rose from 60 percent in 1988 to 72 percent in 2002. This may be explained by the expanding role of collective remittances (Goldring 2004) from Villanueva migrants in the United States. Zacatecas was the first Mexican state to formally establish hometown associations (in the Los Angeles area), and the origin of the 3 × 1 program (in which Mexican municipal, state, and federal governments contribute one dollar for each dollar raised by a hometown association targeting public works such as roads, dams, schools, hospitals, rest homes, and so forth; de la Garza and Lowell 2002). We should be cognizant, however, that collective remittances are a small portion of total remittances (less than 5 percent), which some authors attribute to a distrust of governmental (especially federal) involvement and to the much higher priority given to family needs.

Two migration-related forces are acting simultaneously to lower remittances and reduce agricultural investments among families in Villanueva: (1) lower incidence of migration (relationship a in Figure 1), and (2) greater permanence of migration (relationship b in Figure 1). An unanswered question is which of these two forces is more important. The lower panel of Table 6 offers an answer. Note that every value of the 'ratio 2002/1988' drops between an indicator in the lower panel (migrant families) and the corresponding indicator in the upper panel (total families). Specifically, these changes are 2.52 to 2.34 for possessions, 0.57 to 0.49 for investment in agriculture, 1.25 to 1.20 for giving to the community, and 1.05 to 0.83 for receipt of remittances. This suggests that the statistical inclusion of nonmigrant families leads to less favorable economic changes over the period and supports the argument that the negative effects of fewer initial migrants are more important than the negative effects of greater permanence of migrants. If the 'ratio 2002/1988' had increased instead of dropped with the inclusion of nonmigrants, this would have supported the converse argument.

## Evidence from Visits to Villanueva Municipio in 2005 and 2008

The final question is whether field research (personal observations and the accounts of migrant families and townspeople) suggests decline and disinvestment in the municipio, as opposed to dynamism and development. I was able to spend two days in Villanueva in late December 2005 and again in early January 2008, seeking answers to these questions. One thing was immediately obvious. Although it was the Christmas season, villages such as Malpaso, Boca de Rivera, and Felipe Angeles (Figure 2) appeared almost lonely: There were Christmas lights on renovated city squares, and stately homes nearby, but few people around to enjoy them and few operating businesses. In contrast, the county seat of Villanueva was a beehive of activity with carnivals, bands, itinerant merchants, and celebrating people, including migrants and residents strolling and cruising around the plaza, patronizing a plethora of nearby restaurants, clothing stores, and other shops. In the villages I was often told that the ornate but apparently vacant homes I observed were owned by families in the United States and visited on holidays; occasionally, they were identified as 'abandoned' homes not visited in years. Among the homes with family members present, I was often told that the migrant breadwinners often had not been back for five to ten years because of the costs and difficulties of returning to the United States. In one case, a migrant related how he was jailed for a month on charges of being a Middle Eastern terrorist. I was informed that many (in fact, a majority of) family members living in the United States had their papers. Even allowing for a little obfuscation on this question, I have no doubt that a substantial proportion of those living in the United States had legal documents. Regarding the overt civic improvements, I was informed that the new gazebo, the plaza benches, the new basketball court, the road entering the town, the water reservoir, and more were the result of joint migrant and community investments. I was also, however, told that migrant families seldom invested in agriculture because of recent drought coupled with parcels of ( ejido, or collective) land too small to be economical. Families related how much the cost of living in the United States had risen, so that they could not afford to remit. These observations and interviews support the statistics derived from the household surveys.

My interview with Aurora Ortega (a pseudonym) in January 2008 in her tienda (convenience store) on the main square of Boca de Rivera (see Figure 2) is illustrative. Aurora's husband Juan has been working for the past eight years as a dishwasher in a Chicago restaurant. Juan has not returned home during these eight years. However, he remits money to Aurora regularly, to support her and their seven-year-old daughter and to invest in the tienda. I asked Aurora whether she or her neighbors invest in agriculture. She laughs and says 'No, none,' and when I inquire why, she answers, 'Many have just left because there's no irrigation here'; and, 'Cuando siembra, no llueve; cuando no siembra, llueve' [When you sow, it doesn't rain; when you don't sow, it rains]. I asked whether the new kiosk and covered basketball court were built with communal remittances. Her reply was that local moneymaking events (rodeos, fiestas, etc.) were more important than remittances. Pertinent to the survey findings, I discovered that Juan

remits less to his family in Boca than in the past because of the high cost of living in the United States and because he must support their other three children who live with extended family in Chicago. Juan has just obtained his legal papers (six years after applying). Despite the cold weather and cost of living in Chicago, it is unlikely that he will return to Mexico permanently. It is much more likely that Aurora and her daughter will join him there. I inquire about the apparently vacant mansions that I noticed on entering the town. She points out that they are usually occupied by some family member or the other. Although their owners intend to return permanently, few actually do so. They visit occasionally, during holidays. Commenting on the overtly prosperous town, with its public improvements and new homes, I reflect to Aurora about how things have changed since I interviewed there twenty years before. Without hesitating, she replies, 'No, Boca anda el mismo' [Boca continues the same]. That is to say, it might appear more developed, but this is an illusion.

## Conclusions

The results of this study suggest that restrictive U.S. border policies have had a negative impact on village economies in Villanueva, a subsistence agricultural county in rural central Mexico. Although over the period 1988 to 2002 migrant families continued to hold a distinctive edge on nonmigrant families in terms of possessions and productive investments, there was a decline overall in levels of investment and remittances in the municipio over this period. I argue that this decline was due in substantial measure to restrictive U.S. migration policies during these years. U.S. border militarization has been accompanied, in Villanueva, by fewer initial migrants as well as more permanent migrants, with both trends leading to less money remitted to rural families and lower levels of agricultural investment.

Observations and interviews with migrants and townspeople in the municipio in 2005 and 2008 strongly corroborate these trends. Returnee migrants gave harrowing accounts of desert crossings and apprehension by the U.S. Border Patrol. Families talked of members who had not been home for five to ten years be- cause of two factors: the costs of recrossing, coupled with their diminished wages in the United States. They reiterated the seemingly unrelenting deterioration of rural conditions in Mexico-drought, lack of irrigation, government indifference-that make continued investment of their hard-earned remittances in such places problematical, an exception being newly constructed homes for holiday visits and possible retirement and the occasional improvement of town squares. Small towns are losing their younger residents to the United States and their older residents to nearby urban centers.

What are the implications of this research for the future of rural development in Mexican migrant sending regions and more broadly for the economic progress of the migrants themselves? The reduction of migration and return migration are contributing to the further economic peripheralization of these regions bypassed by globalization. Many researchers assume that migrants cherish and eventually return to their villages of birth. The reality is that most migrants do not return; that their economic and social ties to their villages attenuate over time and across generations; and that as functional economic entities these places are disappearing from the landscape. Is all this necessarily bad? On the one hand, we cannot deny the agency or the efficacy of millions of rural dwellers deciding on their own accord to emigrate and better themselves and their families, even though it ultimately results in the death of their villages. On the other hand, those left behind might well be worse off than before, and this includes nonmigrants, internal migrants (Massey and Espinosa 1997; Lindstrom and Lauster 2001; Parrado 2005), and the country as a whole. And, of course, families cannot better themselves through international migration-long or short term-if restrictive policies prevent them from ever migrating in the first place. Remittances are the third or fourth largest generators of Mexican foreign exchange earnings, and the most important in terms of income redistribution-a sort of U.S. foreign 'aid' targeting the poorest regions.

The continuing irony of this situation is the policy disconnect between the opening of borders to goods, services, financial transactions, and tourists and the closing of these same borders to wage-labor migrants. Until the leaders

of developed countries come to appreciate the important redistributive benefits of wage-labor migration to sending countries (not to mention the benefits of these new workers and their families to host societies), rejecting restrictionist solutions and cultural politics in favor of guest worker programs and facilitated paths to residency, the situation of migrationdependent Third World villages will continue to deteriorate. /squaresolid

## Literature Cited

- Alarc´ on, R. 2002. The development of the hometown associations in the United States and the use of social remittances in Mexico. In Sending money home: Hispanic remittances and community development, ed. R. O. de la Garza and B. L. Lowell, 101-24. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
- Antonopoulou, S. 2000. The process of globalisation and class transformation in the West. Democracy and Nature 6 (1): 37-54.
- Bada, X. 2003. Mexican hometown associations. Citizen Action in the Americas 5 (March): 1-10.
- Binford, L. 2003. Remittances and (under) development in Mexico. Critique of Anthropology 23 (3): 305-36.
- Brana-Shute, R., and G. Brana-Shute. 1982. The magnitude and impact of remittances in the Eastern Caribbean: A research note. In Return migration and remittances: Developing a Caribbean perspective, ed. W. F. Stinner, K. Albuquerque, and R. S. Bryce-Laporte, 267-89. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.
- Cant´ u, B., F. Shaiq, and A. Urbaniva. 2007. Migration and local development. In Impacts of border enforcement on Mexican migration: The view from sending communities, ed. W. A. Cornelius and J. M. Lewis, 129-47. La Jolla, CA: Center for Comparative Immigration Studies, University of California at San Diego.
- Cohen, J. 2004. The culture of migration in southern Mexico. Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Cohen, J., R. Jones, and D. Conway. 2005. Why remittances shouldn't be blamed for rural underdevelopment in Mexico. Critique of Anthropology 25 (1): 87-96.
- Cohen, J., and L. Rodriguez. 2005. Remittance outcomes in rural Oaxaca, Mexico: Challenges, options, and opportunities for migrant households. Population, Space, and Place 11 (1): 49-63.
- Comision Economica para America Latina. 1991. Remesas y economia familiar en El Salvador, Guatemala, y Nicaragua [Economic Commission for Latin America]. Report LC/MEX/L.154. New York: United Nations.
- Conway, D. 1985. Remittance impacts on development in the Eastern Caribbean. Bulletin of Eastern Caribbean Affairs 11 (4-5): 31-40.
- Cornelius, W. 1990. Labor migration to the United States: Development outcomes and alternatives in Mexican sending communities. Final report to the Commission for the Study of International Migration and Cooperative Economic Development. La Jolla, CA: Center for U.S.-Mexican Studies, University of California at San Diego.
- ---. 2007. Introduction: Does border enforcement deter unauthorized immigration? In Impacts of border enforcement on Mexican migration , ed. W. Cornelius and J. M. Lewis, 1-15. La Jolla, CA: Center for Comparative Immigration Studies, University of California at San Diego.
- Cort´ es, G. 2002. ¿Hacia una neo-territorialidad Andina? Sistemas de movilidad y circulacion migratoria de los campesinos Bolivianas [Towards a new Andean territoriality? Migrant mobility and circulation systems of Bolivian peasants]. In The Andean exodus: Transnational migration from Bolivia, Ecuador, and Peru, ed. T. Salman and A. Zoomers, 53-76. Amsterdam: Centre for Latin American Research and Documentation.
- Dandler, J., and C. Medeiros. 1988. Temporary migration from Cochabamba, Bolivia, to Argentina: Patterns and impact in sending areas. In When borders don't divide: Labor migration and refugee movements in the Americas, ed. P. Pessar, 8-41. New York: Center for Migration Studies.
- DeSipio, L. 2002. Sending money home . . . for now. In Sending money home: Hispanic remittances and community development, ed. R. O. de la Garza and B. L. Lowell, 157-87. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
- Durand, J., E. Parrado, and D. S. Massey. 1996. Migradollars and development: A reconsideration of the Mexican case. International Migration Review 30 (2): 423-44.
- Escobar, A., K. Hailbronner, P. Martin, and L. Meza. 2006. Migration and development: Mexico and Turkey. International Migration Review 40 (3): 707-18.
- Fearing deportation but clinging to life in the U.S. 2008. New York Times 18 January:A14.
- Goldring, L. 2004. Family and collective remittances to Mexico: A multi-dimensional typology. Development and Change 35 (4): 799-840.
- Ihonvbere, J. O. 1992. The Third World and the new world order in the 1990s. Futures December:9871002.
- International Fund for Agricultural Development. 2006. Sending money home: Worldwide remittance flows to developing countries. Luxembourg: International Fund for Agricultural Development.
- Jergens, J. 2001. Shifting spaces: Complex identities in Turkish-German migration. In New

- transnational social spaces: International migration and transnational companies in the early twentyfirst century, ed. L. Pries, 94-112. London and New York: Routledge.
- Jones, R. C. 1995a. Ambivalent journey: U.S. migration and economic mobility in north-central Mexico. Tucson: The University of Arizona Press.
- ---. 1995b. Immigration reform and migrant flows: Compositional and spatial changes in Mexican migration after the Immigration Reform Act of 1986. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 85 (4): 715-30.
- ---.1998.Remittancesandinequality: A question of migration stage and geographic scale. Economic Geography 74 (1): 8-25.
- Keely, C. B., and B. N. Tran. 1989. Remittances from labor migration: Evaluations, performance, and implications. International Migration Review 23:500-25.
- Klooster, D. J. 2005. Producing social nature in the Mexican countryside. Cultural Geographies 12:321-44.
- Lee, E. 1966. A theory of migration. Demography 3:47-57.
- Levitt, P. 2001. The transnational villagers. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Levitt, P., and M. C. Waters. 2002. Introduction. In The changing face of home: The transnational lives of the second generation, ed. P. Levitt and M. C. Waters, 1-30. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
- Lindstrom, D. P., and N. Lauster. 2001. Local economic opportunity and the competing risks of internal and U.S. migration in Zacatecas, Mexico. International Migration Review 35:1232-56.
- Ling, L. H.-M. 1984. East Asian migration to the Middle East: Causes, consequences, and considerations. International Migration Review 18: 19-36.
- L´ opez-Castro, G. 1986. La casa dividida: Un estudio de caso sobre la migraci´ on a Estados Unidos en un pueblo michoacano [ The divided house: A case study of migration to the United States from a Michoacan town ]. Zamora, Mexico: Colegio de Michoc´ an y Asociaci´ on Mexicana de Poblaci´ on.
- Lowell, B. L., and R. O. de la Garza. 2002. A new phase in the story of remittances. In Sending money home: Hispanic remittances and community development, ed. R. O. de la Garza and B. L. Lowell, 3-27. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
- Lozano, F. L. 1993. Bringing it back home: Remittances to Mexico from migrant workers in the United States. Monograph Series 37. San Diego, CA: Center for U.S.-Mexican Studies, University of California at San Diego.
- Lyndersen, K. 2005. Out of the sea and into the fire: Latin American U.S. immigration in the global age. Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press.
- Mahler, S. 1998. Theoretical and empirical contributions toward a research agenda for transnationalism. In Transnationalism from below, ed. M. Smith and L. Guarnizo, 64-100. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
- Marcelli, E., and B. L. Lowell. 2005. Transnational twist: Pecuniary remittances and the socioeconomic integration of authorized and unauthorized Mexican immigrants in Los Angeles County. International Migration Review 39 (1): 69-102.
- Massey, D. S. 2006. The wall that keeps illegal workers in. The New York Times, Op-Ed section, 4 April.
- Massey, D. S., R. Alarc´ on, J. Durand, and H. Gonzalez. 1987. Return to Aztlan: The social process of international migration from western Mexico. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Massey, D. S., J. Durand, and N. J. Malone. 2002. Beyond smoke and mirrors: Mexican immigration in an era of economic integration. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
- Massey, D. S., and V. M. Espinosa. 1997. What's driving Mexican-U.S. migration? A theoretical, empirical, and policy analysis. American Journal of Sociology 102:939-99.
- McArthur, H. J., Jr. 1979. The effects of overseas work on return migrants and their home communities: A Philippines case. Papers in Anthropology 20 (1): 85-104.
- Mooney,M.2004.Migrants'social capital and investing remittances in Mexico. In Crossing the border: Research from the Mexican migration project, ed. J. Durand and D. Massey, 45-62. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
- Owusu, T. Y. 2000. The role of Ghanaian immigrant associations in Toronto, Canada. International Migration Review 34 (4): 1155-81.
- Parrado, E. 2005. Economic restructuring and intragenerational class mobility in Mexico. Social Forces 84 (2): 733-57.
- Peet, R., and M. Watts. 1993. Development theory andenvironmentinanageofmarkettriumphalism. Economic Geography 69:227-53.
- Pries, L. 2001. The approach of transnational social spaces: Responding to new configurations of the social and the spatial. In New transnational social spaces: International migration and transnational companies in the early twenty-first century, ed. L. Pries, 3-33. London and New York: Routledge.
- Reichert, J. S. 1981. The migrant syndrome: Seasonal U.S. labor migration and rural development in central Mexico. Human Organization 40 (1): 56-66.
- Reyes, B. 2004. U.S. immigration policy and the duration of undocumented trips. In Crossing the border: Research from the Mexican migration project, ed. J. Durand and D. Massey, 299-320. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

- Riosmena, F. 2004. Return versus settlement among undocumented Mexican migrants, 1980 to 1995. In Crossing the border: Research from the Mexican migration project, ed. J. Durand and D. Massey, 265-80. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Roberts, B. R., R. Frank, and F. Lozano-Ascencio. 1999. Transnational migrant communities and Mexican migration to the U.S. Ethnic and Racial Studies 22 (2): 238-66.

Semyonov, M., and A. Gorodzeisky. 2005. Labor migration, remittances, and household income: A comparison between Filipino and Filipina overseas workers. International Migration Review 39 (1): 45-68.

Shafaeddin, S. M. 1996. Risks of further marginalization of sub-Saharan Africa in international trade. Journal of Developing Societies 12:254-74.

Shrestha, N. R. 1985. The political economy of economic underdevelopment and external migration in Nepal. Political Geography Quarterly 4:289-306.

- Smith, R. 2001. Comparing local-level Swedish and Mexican transnational life: An essay in historical
- retrieval. In New transnational social spaces: International migration and transnational companies in the early twenty-first century, ed. L. Pries, 37-58. London and New York: Routledge.
- Van Wey, L. K., C. M. Tucker, and E. D. McConnell. 2005. Community organization, migration, and remittances in Oaxaca. Latin American Research Review 40 (1): 83-107.

Wolfe, T. 1940. You can't go home again. NewYork: Harper &amp; Row.

RICHARD C. JONES is a Professor of Geography in the Department of Political Science and Geography at The University of Texas at San Antonio, 1 UTSA Circle, San Antonio, TX 78249-0648. E-mail: richard.jones@utsa.edu. His research interests include the impacts of international migration on origin areas, migrant adjustment in cities, and the social and economic geography of small towns in the Southwest.

Copyright of Professional Geographer is the property of Taylor &amp; Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual Use.