## Countryside Recreational Access  in the United States: A Statistical Comparison of Rural Districts

Hugh Millward

Department of Geography,  Saint Mary's  University n  the  period  since 1945 the  demand  for recreational sites and activities has inI creased greatly  in all developed nations as a consequence of both increased leisure  time and  greater mobility  (Hillman 1984; Pigram 1983; Simmons 1975:lO-15). These  changes notwithstanding, our  knowledge  of  recreational areas and their accessibility  to the public remains  modest.  In  particular, little  attention has  been  focused  on  settled  rural  areas-the countryside-which afford the most extensive and most varied  spaces  for  informal  outdoor recreation.

Most  outdoor recreational activity takes place within a few  hours' travel of major urban centers rather than in isolated areas of wilderness  (Glyptis 1991  :I 06-1 08; Greer  and  Wall 1979; Travis  and  Veal 1976). Yet  despite  the importance of readily accessible 'everyday'  or 'vernacular' landscapes as recreation resources in the United States (Aschmann 1969; Jackson 1984; Penning-Rowsell and Lowenthal 1986; Wilson 1989), there  has  been little empirical  research  on recreational  access  within such  areas.  While  geographers have  thoroughly  studied  recreation  in the  British  countryside,  often with emphasis  on planning and policy implications  (Glyptis 1991), there  is  no comparable body  of  work  for the  United States' countryside.

Demand  for 'intensive-use' or 'user-oriented'  activities  such as  swimming,  camping, golf,  or downhill skiing can be accommodated in limited spaces through the provision of specific  facilities, often  of  a  commercial  nature (Bryant,  Russwurm,  and  McLellan 1982:125140). But the more popular 'extensive-use'  activities,  termed  'intermediate'  and  'resourcebased'  (Clawson and  Knetsch 1960), require extensive tracts of land and/or landscape as  a recreational resource. Such activities (e.g., automobile  touring,  walking,  cycling,  canoeing, cross-country skiing, snowmobiling, fishing,  and  hunting) typically  involve  movement as  an integral part of the recreational experience,  hence the  provision of publicly accessible  routes and zones within the countryside becomes an important component on the supply side of the recreational equation.

The aim of this  study  is to gauge the supply of roads,  tracks,  lands,  and waterways that are available  for  public  recreational  movement  in representative rural districts of  the United States. The concept of access rigor will be employed to categorize routes and zones accordi ng  t o  the recreational groups capable of using them  and  to  identify  regional  and  local  variations  in access availability  and the reasons for them.

## Access Supply,  Land Ownership, and Land Value

In a recent paper, the author outlined a conceptual  framework  which  positioned  recreational  access  in a broad spectrum  of environmental  and  cultural settings and  suggested measures of access supply  suitable  for statistical analysis (Millward 1991). The concepts and measures were applied to 13 Canadian countryside  districts  (Millward 1992) and 15 West European  districts  (Millward 1993); in  each study regional  variations in  the  quality  and quantity  of public access  were  identified and related  to  intensity of land  use,  amplitude  of relief,  the type  of natural vegetation,  and the history of land settlement and survey. This paper on recreational access in the United States complements these  earlier  surveys.  Given the

size and diversity of the United States,  regional variations  in  recreational access  provision are expected to be considerable;  older and more densely  settled  regions  such  as  the  Northeast should resemble the West European (and parsettled lands  in the West should  have more in com- ticularly British) case, while  recently mon with areas of western Canada.

Recreational  access  is  supplied  or  provided wherever the public may freely  use  routes or zones  for  recreational  movement (Cloke and Park 1985:334). The amount supplied is related t o   the  geographic  extent  of opportunities  for recreation, irrespective of the degree of utilization.  Access  routes  include roads  (paved and unpaved), tracks,  paths,  and waterways,  while access zones range from public parks to areas of exploitation (e.g.,  cropland and pasture) and natural areas (e.g.,  bush, forest,  beach,  barren). The two categories often overlap in that access zones  may  be  criss-crossed  with  pathways, while  linear  features  such  as  rivers,  beaches, and lakes may be regarded as  either  routes or zones depending on scale. The two categories are  also  complementary  in  that  routes  allow movement to zones,  while adjacent zones increase the recreational value of routes.

In the case of both routes and zones,  public access to recreation may be assured or prohibited by right (de jure),  or  by custom,  convention,  or permission/denial  (de facto) (Millward 1991  :243; Sidaway 1986:26). In  this study, routes and  zones are considered open to the public  if  there  is  either  de jure  or  de  facto access  and closed if there are  legal,  physical, monetary,  or psychological barriers to access.

## Access Routes

The  network  of public  roads and tracks  allows physical and visual  entry  into the  countryside  even when adjacent  lands are  barred. For many motorists, a "trip  in the country" is a leisure pursuit in i t s own  right (Patmore 1974:7-71; 1987). Access is increased in areas of high agricultural value,  because such  areas require a dense network of exploitation roads-most of which become public rights-ofway.  Access  is  also  affected  by  the  scale  of original landholdings: an area with smaller landholdings has a finer  cadastral  mesh which  requires  more public roads.  Landholding size  is often related in turn to the period of settlement and to the character of earlier farming systems. The shape of original landholdings also affects the  subsequent  availability of  public  access routes:  in formal land survey systems,  compact parcels  require denser road networks than do long lots  of the  same  size,  particularly  when the  latter  are  ranged  in  double-front  fashion (Thrower  1966). Irregular surveys  (metes  and bounds)  also tend to have lower road densities. Even where  subsequent farm enlargement and/or  farmland  abandonment  reduces  the economic  justification  for  a  dense  road  network,  rights-of-way  are  likely to remain as  residual elements in the landscape,  and hence as routes of access for public  recreational  use.

## Access  Zones

One third of the United States is federal land, most of which is accessible to the public (Garrett 1985:40-41. See Clawson 1972; 1983; and Wolf 1981 for  detailed  descriptions  of federal landownership  and  access policies).  These lands, however, are almost entirely located beyond  the  recreational hinterlands of  urban America; although  important  as  vacation  resources,  they  rarely  satisfy  demands  for  dayuse or weekend recreation.

More accessible for recreational purposes is land around cities.  This  land  is  often  used  intensively  for  agriculture and is higher in value. Theoretically,  high-value  land is more likely  to be in private ownership and protected against trespass (Bromley  1991 :I 41  -7). Lands with high economic  value  for  production,  privacy, or  game are  usually  guarded through fencing, posting,  and  threats  of  prosecution  or  even physical harm. By contrast,  where land is plentiful  and  cheap,  owners  spend  less  time  and money  fencing  or  policing their  lands;  uninvited  users  thus  may acquire  de facto (and  in some jurisdictions  de jure)  access to the land. The entrenchment of legal or customary rights acquired  during  a  period  when  population pressure  and  land  values  are  low  may  cause friction  with  subsequent  increases  in  recreational pressures.

In traditional rural societies, landowners often  extend  informal  access  rights  to  neighbors on a reciprocal basis. Reciprocity tends to be  greatest  in  egalitarian  societies  in  which

most residents are landowners and most landholdings are similar  in size and value. In Sweden,  reciprocal access  rights  led to  the  legal concept of a//ernansr;itt (Colby 1988), but  in the United States and Canada de jure access was seldom granted in well-settled areas (Bromley 1991; Bryant 1972; Dysart and Clawson 1989; Lambden 1976; Wolf 1981 ).  As recreational  pressures on many rural areas  increase,  Canadian  and  American  landowners are unlikely to extend their traditional tolerance of informal access to city-based strangers who may cause  damage  through  ignorance,  carelessness,  or willfulness.

Various studies have investigated the reasons why landowners prohibit access to their  land (Brown 1974; Brown  and  Thompson 1976; Brown,  Decker,  and  Kelley 1984; Guynn and Schmidt 1984; Holocek  and  Westfall 1977; Womack, Christiansen, and Gum 1975; Wright, Kaiser,  and  Fletcher 1988). Farmers stress  the  problems  of  property  damage  and livestock protection, while some woodlot owners cite safety as  a reason for  prohibiting hunters.  Legal liability  for  injury to trespassers is  a  serious  concern  for  all  property  owners (Butler  and  Troughton 1985; Gramann  et  al. 1985; Kaiser and Wright 1985; Wright and Fesenmaier 1990). Although  most  research  on landowner  provision  of  access  to  the  public typically  focuses on one region or one activity (particularly on hunting),  a recent national survey of landowners in the United States (Wright, Cordell and Brown 1990) reports that some 20 percent  of  private  acreage  is  open and free to public use. The thinly settled Rocky Mountain region registers the highest percentage (29), followed  by the  North (24), Pacific Coast (14), and South (13). Wright and Fesenrnaier (1 990) suggest that an exclusionary 'private  land ethic'  may  be stronger  in the south and west than in the north and east.

The larger point is that the majority of private lands in the United States are not open to the general public;  nor has there been much in the way of advocacy of public rights to these lands (but see Aschmann 1969; Fawcett et al. 1981; Livingston 1981  -1  982). This contrasts with the situation  in  crowded  Britain,  where  geographers  and  others  have  voiced  opposition  to 'access  apartheid'  (Shoard 1980; 1987; Norton-Taylor 1982).

## Access Demand and

## Recreational Specialization

The  demand  for  recreational  access  varies inversely  with distance  from  the  city  (Glyptis 1991  :I 06-1 08) and directly with the attractiveness of a locality for a range of popular recreational  pursuits.  In  general,  the  most  popular activities are non-specialized  and require ready access by car. Bryan (1  977:175) defines recreation specialization as  a continuum of behavior from the general to the particular as  reflected in the  equipment  and  skills  needed,  and the activity  settings  (sites or  locales)  required. As specialization  increases,  users  require  more specific settings (contrast the needs of walkers or  cyclists  with  those  of  canoeists  or  rockclimbers),  and  are  more concerned  to  avoid crowding and disturbance (Hollenhorst 1990:82). In  terms  of  access,  therefore,  specialization often  translates  into  the  distance one is willing to move away from one's car and the difficulty or  rigor  of that  movement. Clark and  Stankey (1979) suggested  four  levels  of access difficulty,  and  subsequent  refinements to their scheme have specified  up to 15 levels (Lichtkoppler  and  Clonts 1990; U.S.  Department of Agriculture,  Forest Service 1986). Almost all of these access levels relate to the type and  quality  of  routes,  and  most  require field identification,  so  that  they  are applicable  only in relatively  small  study  areas  (e.g.,  Buist  and Hoots 1982; Daniels and Krannich 1990).

Millward (1  991  :242-244) has suggested five levels of access rigor vis-a-vis modes of movement and the types of routes and zones over which movement occurs. These are:

Passive access. This is the least-rigorous level of access. Movement  is restricted to routes  accessible year-round  by automobiles or to areas of 'easy going' ( e g ,  short grass  or  sand  beaches)  within 100 m  of such routes. This level is employed by the largest proportion  of recreationists and  in the great majority of recreational trips.

Casual access. In  this case, recreationists move more  than 100  rn from  the  road, making short  forays  on tracks  and  footpaths  or  on off-track  areas  of easy  going for  no  more than  a  one-hour  round-trip and a distance of 3  km from the road.

Vigorous  access. At this  level,  recreationists

move between 3 and 20 km from the road (the  latter  being  a  day's  round-trip),  yet remain  on tracks,  paths,  or  areas  of easy going. Vigorous users seek specific recreational activities that require either physical training (e.g.,  hiking,  Nordic skiing,  mountain  biking) or the  purchase of expensive equipment (e.g.,  all-terrain  vehicle,  snow- m  o  bile).

Rugged  access. This  level  involves  movement of 100 r n or  more into areas of hard going,  yet within  3  km of  roads  or  paths and  20  route-kilometers  of  an  all-season road. By trekking into the bush,  meadow, or barrens,  or by navigating a lake or river, the recreationist gains access to zones of activity,  often for  hunting and fishing.  Included in the rugged zone are lakes, navigable  rivers,  and sheltered  coastal  waters 3  k m  or  less from shore.

Arduous  access. The  most  rigorous  access level is defined by zones that are 20 routekilometers or  more  from  an  all-season road and beyond 3  km from other routeways, i.e., in truly remote  wilderness. Movement is  also  arduous  in particularly ill-favored terrain within  these distance cut-offs,  such  as  marsh,  swamp,  permanent ice, scree,  cliff,  and very steep slopes (over  35  degrees).  The  arduous  zone  is effectively  closed  to  all  but  a  handful of travellers  since  access  generally  requires overnight camping in the wild. Activities in this zone include wilderness trekking, mountaineering,  and guided  hunting and fishing trips.

## The Study Areas: Selection and Appraisal

The  only  feasible  way  of  measuring access availability nationwide  is  through  the  use of topographic maps combined with field verification.  Since the great bulk of recreational activity  takes  place  in the  settled or  semi-settled countryside,  our interest focuses  on these areas.  More  specifically, the  study  areas  selected are located in regions having  continuous blocks of ecumene with rural densities exceeding  t w o  people per square kilometer (as shown in Figure 1) (Espenshade and Morrison 1986:86). Extensive  areas of desert,  mountain, and northern forest  are  excluded from  study, as  are regions containing only small pockets of scattered  settlement.

To  facilitate  analysis  and permit comparison with  other  studies,  the  United States  was  divided  into five  regions  differentiated  with  respect to their  natural vegetation,  dates  of settlement,  and  culture.  The  five  units  range  in size from 100,000  to 500,000  square  km,  and their boundaries are drawn  through  thinly populated  areas  or  along  major  rivers  (Figure 1).  Within  each  region,  three  representative  settled  areas  were  selected,  each  being 1,000 square  kilometers  in  area  (40  km  by 25 km).  The study areas met three criteria;  they are:  1) largely  rural with a few  tracts  of urban or suburban development;  2) mixed in topography,  water  features,  land  cover,  and  settlement types,  while accentuating features typical of the local setting;  and 3) representative of  the landscape mix in each region and of the nation as  a  whole.  The  fifteen  selected  areas,  which are  named  after  their major  settlement,  are mapped in Figure 1  and listed in Tables 1  and 2.

The  study  areas  in  the  Northeast  afford  a variety  of topography  (see amplitude  of relief, Table 2),  ranging from coastal plain (Plymouth, Massachusetts)  to  the  incised  Allegheny  Plateau  (Corning,  New  York).  They  also  vary  in settlement  vintage,  from  the  early  1600s (Plymouth), to the early 1700s (Red Lion,  Pennsylvania),  to the  early  1800s (Corning).  Irregular survey schemes and road layouts are typical in all  three  areas.  Pennsylvania's  Red  Lion  is the most intensely agricultural,  with a strong orientation to dairy farming.  Plymouth and Corning are  less  agricultural owing to the  reversion  of farmland to forest-a process that has been extensive  in Plymouth and moderate  in Corning (see  percent  land  cover, Table  2).  Plymouth has also experienced considerable exurban development.

The  Midwest study  areas  are  less  diverse topographically,  save for  the ridges and knolls of the  Hocking Hills in Ohio's  Lancaster  area. The latter's natural woodlands were divided by irregular  survey  in the  early  18OOs,  while  the tall-grass  prairie  of  Mattoon  (Illinois) and  the parkland  of  Portage  (Wisconsin)  were  partitioned  by sectional  survey  in the  mid-I  800s. Some land abandonment has occurred in LanMattoon (feedgrain) and Portage (dairying) remain over- caster's hills, but the lands in whelmingly agricultural.

Figure 1. Location of the study  areas. The key to names appears in Table  1, columns 1 and 2

<!-- image -->

The  three  Southern  study  areas  exemplify t h e  region's  diversity.  Danville  (Kentucky) was settled  earliest  (c. 1790); it  occupies  a  portion of the  well-settled Bluegrass Plateau in the north  (mostly livestock  and  tobacco  farming) and  a  section  o f the  indented  and  heavily wooded  Cumberland  Plateau in the  south. Statesboro (Georgia) includes swampy coastal plain  in  the southeast and gently rolling coastal terrace  in  the  northwest. The latter  was  wellsettled in the  early 1800s, and  remains  in mixed farming. Clarksdale (Mississippi)  lies entirely  in the Yazoo Basin floodplain (the Delta), which is heavily farmed for cotton. Both Statesboro  and  Danville exhibit  irregular  surveys, while Mississippi's Clarksdale area, settled around  1840,  has  a  modified  version  o f the sectional survey.

On the  Great  Plains,  Meridian  (Texas) was originally open woodland, while Bedford (Iowa) and  Healy  (Kansas) were tall-grass  and short-grass  prairie,  respectively.  Meridian  and

Bedford were  settled  at  moderate  densities around 1850, while Healy's more marginal  environment was thinly settled in the 1880s.  Sectional  surveys  were  used  in all  three  areas, though  with  many  irregularities  in  the  hillier sections  o f Meridian.  Farming  specializations are beef cattle (Meridian),  feed-grain (Bedford), and wheat (Healy).

The  California study areas  exemplify  the naturally wooded coastal valleys and hills (Watsonville) and the natural grasslands o f   the Sacramento Valley  (Maxwell)  and San Joaquin Valley  (Delano). Lowland  portions o f   Watsonville, settled around 1860, are characterized by fruit and  truck  farming  with  some  exurban  development. The Maxwell and  Delano areas,  settled by means o f   sectional survey around 1870 and  1880, respectively,  are  now  irrigated  for orchard and field  crops.

I t   w as also useful to include o n e   national park in each  regional  setting  as  a  'control  case.' Since these  parks  have  experienced  little  hu-

| Table 1 . Characteristics of Study Areas.   | Date of Exurban Natural Vegetation Settlement Land Division Land Cover Farming Type Encroachment hilly forest forest flat forest early 1700s c. 1810 early 1600s unsystematic irregular surveys unsystematic farmland, forest dairy low farmland, forest dairy moderate forest dairy very extensive   | forest tall grass forest, grass early 1800s mid-I800s mid-1800s irregular surveys square sections square sections farmland, forest mixed moderate moderate feedgrain farmland farmland dairy moderate   | forest c. 1800 c. 1790 c. 1840 unsystematic unsystematic square sections farmland, forest mixed low farmland, forest mixed moderate farmland cotton low   | grass c. 1850 c. 1850 square sections square sections (irregular) farmland feedgrain very low farmland, forest beef cattle very low                                       | grass shrub, grass marsh marsh c. 1880 mid-1800s c. 1870 c. 1880 none none none none square sections irregular surveys square square none none none none farmland wheat very low farmland, forest, fruit, cattle extensive very low low none none none none none none none   |
|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Table 1 . Characteristics of Study Areas.   | Predominant                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                           | fruit, vegetables cotton, fruit                                                                                                                                           | none none none none none                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Table 1 . Characteristics of Study Areas.   | Predominant                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                           | sections sections farmland, marsh farmland, marsh grass                                                                                                                   | forest forest grass forest, alpine forest, alpine                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Table 1 . Characteristics of Study Areas.   | Identifier Topography rolling to hilly nearly                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | flat to hilly flat gently rolling                                                                                                                                                                       | flat to rolling forest, swamp flat to hilly forest flat swamp,                                                                                            | WA ML DE gently rolling grass, forest rolling to low hills gently rolling short open forest, flat to low forest, mountains flat short grass, flat to rolling short grass, | low mountains forest mountains forest hilly short grass high mountains forest, aloine hiih mountains forest, alpine                                                                                                                                                          |
| Table 1 . Characteristics of Study Areas.   | RL CO PL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | LA MA PO                                                                                                                                                                                                | ST DA CL                                                                                                                                                  | CA CA BE ME HE                                                                                                                                                            | VA (E) TN-NC SH GS BA RM SE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Table 1 . Characteristics of Study Areas.   | Study Area Northeast NY MA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Lancaster, OH Mattoon, IL Portage, WI                                                                                                                                                                   | Statesboro, GA Danville, KY Clarksdale, MS                                                                                                                | IA TX Watsonville.                                                                                                                                                        | CA Parks Shenandoah, Great Smokv ~ Mountain; Badlands, SD Rocky Mtn, CO Seauoia, CA                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Table 1 . Characteristics of Study Areas.   | Red Lion, PA Corning, Plymouth,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Midwest                                                                                                                                                                                                 | South                                                                                                                                                     | Great Plains Bedford, Meridian, Healy, KS California iMaxwell,                                                                                                            | Delano, National                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

| Cover Built                           | 1 2 6 3 2 2 1 2 1 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 1 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 0 0                                                | 0 0 0 0                                                     | 1 __          |
|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| Land Open                             | 75 50 14 47 72 91 83 82 52 84 89 75 99 80 100 93 82 98 99 93 78                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 9 2                                                | 100 37 46 41                                                | 66 -          |
| Percent Wooded                        | 24 47 80 50 26 7 16 16 47 14 10 24 1 20 0 7 16 2 0 6 20                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 91 98                                              | 0 63 54 59                                                  | 33            |
| Amditude 0; relief (m)                | 160 261 59 162 108 46 78 77 42 99 21 54 60 96 59' 72 262 21 43 109 96                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 655 843                                            | 123 911 1190 765                                            | 320           |
| Weighted Index of Access Availability | 74 56 70 67 62 57 52 57 60 46 49 52 49 43 31 41 55 34 48 46 53                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 36 25                                              | 19 19 12 21                                                 | 42            |
| Closed                                | 19 31 9 20 35 39 41 38 26 46 34 35 50 33 60 48 18 54 45 39 36                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 0 0                                                | 0 0 0 0                                                     | 24            |
| of counters) Arduous                  | 0 0 2 1 0 0 2 1 2 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 1 11                                               | 4 14 30 1 3                                                 | 5             |
| (percent Rugged                       | 5 11 7 7 1 2 5 3 10 5 4 6 1 15 0 5 17 2 0 6 6                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 50 54                                              | 77 63 54 60                                                 | 24            |
| Access Mode Vigorous                  | 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 I 1 0 1 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 2 12                                               | 8 8 11 8                                                    | 3             |
| Easiest Casual                        | 6 6 25 12 4 4 2 3 6 6 25 12 1 21 16 13 23 19 14 19 12                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 33 13                                              | 4 9 3 12                                                    | 12            |
| Passive                               | 70 52 57 60 60 55 50 55 56 43 36 45 48 31 23 34 42 24 41 36 46                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 14 10                                              | 7 6 2 7                                                     | 33            |
| No. of Quadrats                       | 40 40 38 118 40 40 40 120 40 40 40 120 40 40 40 120 40 40 40 120 598                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 54 54                                              | 61 56 302 77                                                | 900           |
| ldentfier                             | RL CO PL LA MA PO ST DA CL BE ME HE WA ML DE                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | SH GS                                              | BA CO RM SE                                                 |               |
| Study Area                            | Red Lion, PA Corning, NY Plymouth, MA Northeast Lancaster, OH Mattoon, IL Portage, WI Midwest Statesboro, GA Danville, KY Clarksdale, MS South Bedford, IA Meridian, TX Healy, KS Watsonville, CA Maxwell, CA Delano, CA Great Plains California All Settled Districts | Shenandoah, VA Great Smoky Mountains (East), TN-NC | Badlands, SD Rocky Mountain, All National Parks Sequoia, CA | All Districts |

man modification, they serve as  'control'  areas against which settled areas may be compared. They  are  also  important  recreational magnets in  their  o w n   right,  even  when  remote  from settled  regions.  In order for  parks to serve  as controls,  they  had to be equivalent  in size to the settled  study  areas. This  requirement  precluded the use of Acadia in the Northeast,  and Shenandoah,  on northern Virginia's Blue Ridge, was substituted for it. The eastern  half of Great Smoky  Mountains  park  was  selected  in  the South,  and  Sequoia  in California.  The  lack  of parks  in the Midwest and Great Plains settled areas necessitated substituting Badlands (South Plains. Rocky Mountain National Park (Colorado) was chosen  to  represent  the  western  mountain

Dakota)  on  the  fringe  of  the  Great parks.

Topographic maps  at  a  scale  of  1:24,000 were used to identify all routeways in the study areas and to categorize  them by access  rigor. Hard  or improved-surface roads, including light duty  roads,  were  classed  as  passive,  except short  lanes  leading to a  single  house  or farmstead,  which were assumed to be private roads. Unimproved dirt roads, tracks,  and trails were classed  as  casual or vigorous depending on distance from an improved road (the 3  krn and 20 km cut-offs described earlier),  again excepting private lanes. Waterways wide enough t o  be shown by double lines on the map were eligible  for  designation  as rugged  provided they  had vehicle  access.  Further  details  of the method are  provided  in Millward (1991:244246).

To identify off-route zones open to the public (and thus generally rugged or arduous),  certain assumptions were made regarding de facto access, and corroborated through literature review and correspondence with state and federal agencies  (U.S.  National Park  Service,  Bureau of Land Management,  and Forest Service, and a selection  of state departments responsible for  state  parks,  state  forests,  and fish  and game). Field verification was undertaken in the Corning,  Red Lion, Great Smoky,  Danville, and Lancaster study areas in the spring of 1990; the author  also  drew on the experience  of earlier field  excursions  in many parts  of the country. Detailed  guidelines  were  then  prepared  for gauging  probable de  facto access  from  map evidence. To  summarize,  lands open to public access  include  national  parks  (and  variants), state  parks, national  and  state  forests,  game sanctuaries,  and  preserves,  as  well  as  woodlands,  barrens,  marsh, and unfenced rangeland 500 m or more from a building  (a rule of  thumb derived from fieldwork) and accessible  from a public  route over  other  open land.  Off-route zones  identified  as  open to  the  public  were classed  as  rugged  or  arduous,  depending  on the  cut-offs  and  conditions  described  earlier. As  for closed  lands, these include  military property,  lands  demarcated  for  other  government facilities,  airports,  docks,  urban-industrial lands,  and clear  (white) areas associated  with farms  or  other  settlement,  including orchards and golf courses.

Figure  2  maps  access  patterns  in  selected portions  (10  km  square)  of five  study  areas. Given their  differences  in physical setting and cultural characteristics, these  areas illustrate many  of the  ways  in which  public  access  is provided or denied. In intensely  settled areas, exemplified  by Red Lion in Figure 2b,  a dense network  of public  roads allows  nearly  ubiquitous passive access,  but the prevalence of private  farmland affords  little opportunity  for  offroad recreation (a few  tracks and a stretch of the  wide Susquehanna  River).  In areas where settlement  thins  and  farm  parcels  are  larger (Bedford  and Statesboro),  road access  diminishes  yet  productive farmland  precludes  rugged  access.  Exceptions  occur  in  Statesboro's wooded  and  swampy  valleys  (notably  along Little  Lotts  Creek). Watsonville's  varied topography shows an  equally  varied  pattern  of access:  private farmland  with many roads in the valleys  contrasts  with  the  unroaded  but  ruggedly accessible  Santa Cruz  mountains  to the north. The hills in the southwest are laced with exurban development, and thus generally closed  to  access.  The  Rocky  Mountain  segment depicts  an  intensively  used  recreational area in the northeast (Glacier Creek), with trails providing casual access near the roads and vigorous access toward the glaciers  and peaks of the continental divide. All off-trail land is open t o  the public,  and is mostly in the rugged category,  with steeper  slopes  classed as  arduous.

## Comparative Measures of

## Access

Figure 2 presents only a small fraction of the study  areas  (500  square km  of  the  22,500 square-km total). In order to compare and analyze access in all study areas, previously

<!-- image -->

defined access types were applied to quadrats aligned to the map grid. A  nested scheme was squares  into  larger  quadrats.  The  quadrats  of 5  k m   square  were  thus  subdivided  into  100 Millward employed to aggregate from smaller  'counter' counters of 500 m square (see 1991  :244-246).

Access was determined for each counter on a nominal basis of presence or absence,  beginning with the easiest mode (passive), and then testing for  increasingly  rigorous modes. In the case  of  route  access,  a  counter  must  simply contain  a  section  of the  appropriate  type  of public  route,  while  for  zonal  access  (rugged and arduous) a majority of the counter must be open to the public. Each counter was assigned and  if counters (and hence of area) in each rigor category was t o   the  easiest  available  rigor  category, none were available,  it was classed as  'closed.' For  each  quadrat  the  percentage o f then calculated.

## Access

## Profiles

Table 2  summarizes  access  measures for all 20 study areas. The table reports mean quadrat percentages for  five  levels  of access  (passive through  arduous) and for  areas closed to the public.  The  'access profile'  for  a  district  or region is provided by the percentage distribution  of  counters  within  this  descending  sequence of access modes. For the United States as  a whole  (all districts),  three  modes are well represented (passive,  rugged, and closed, with 33,  24,  and  24  percent of area,  respectively), and three  are  much less common (casual, arduous,  and  vigorous,  with  12,  5,  and  3  percent).  However,  this  national  average  represents  neither  the  typical  settled  area  nor  the typical park;  indeed,  only two areas-watsonville and Meridian-resemble the mean access

Figure 2. Access  routes  and  zones  in portions of five selected study areas. The areas illustrate a range of access  regimes  varying  by  type,  availability,  and pattern.

distribution  for  the  US.  These  two  areas  are topographically  varied  and economically  mar- ginal.

Strong  contrasts  are  evident  in  the  access profiles for settled districts and parks. Consider parks. Only 7 percent of their area is accessible by car  (passive),  but in compensation  there is greater  provision of tracks and trails,  which increase access to back-country areas by the vigorous mode  (8  percent). By their nature, parklands  are  almost  entirely  open  to  crosscountry travel;  hence rugged access is plentiful (60 percent).  In mountainous  parks,  however, much terrain falls  into the arduous  level of access  (30  percent in Sequoia).  In contrast,  settled  districts  are  typified  by high road access and large proportions of closed lands-53 percent  on average.  Passive access  (car) prevails in  46  percent  of the  counters,  casual  access (non-car routes) in 12 percent, and rugged access  (cross-country)  in 6  percent.  Passive access  is  greatest  in the  Northeast,  followed  by the  Midwest, South, California, and  Great Plains. Regions and districts with lower passive access tend t o   have more  casual access, though Plymouth in the Northeast has high levels of both.

By definition,  vigorous access is almost nonexistent in settled areas,  so that its mean value rounds to zero. Rather,  off-road access in such areas is almost entirely casual or rugged. Casual access averages 12 percent, albeit with noticeably  lower figures  in the Midwest (3  percent) and notably  higher ones  in California (19  percent). Districts with little casual access typically contain  intensive agriculture and smaller  farms ( e g ,   Red  Lion,  Portage,  Bedford).  Rugged access averages 6 percent in settled districts, with only  the  Midwest  varying  to  any  degree  (3 percent).  The  rugged  percentage  rises  in districts  with stronger  relief,  greater  forest  cover, or  lower settlement  density  (e.g.,  Watsonville, Meridian,  Corning,  and Statesboro).

The proportion of closed land (no public access) is highest in areas which are fully farmed, settled later, and coarse-grained in their cadastral survey. The latter results in larger landholdings served  by fewer  public  roads (access for land  exploitation  being supplemented  by private farm tracks). Examples are Healy and Bedford on the Great Plains,  Maxwell and Delano in California, and, less explicably, Danville, Kentucky.

## Weighted Index of Access Availability

The potential for access is of little use if few people  wish  to  take  advantage  of  it.  In  this sense, the more rigorous  modes of access are less  'available'  to the general  public  than  are easier  and  more  leisurely  modes.  To  weight supply by potential demand, the percentage of counters at each level of access rigor is multiplied by an  estimate  of the  proportion of the public willing to participate at that level. Based on conceptual considerations  (Millward 1991 ; Figure 2) and empirical evidence (e.g.,  Glyptis 1991  :I 06-1 21; Simmons 1975:26-29), these weights  are  set  at 1.0 (passive), 0.5 (casual), 0.25 (vigorous), 0.1 (rugged),  and 0.02 (arduous). Closed lands are weighted  at zero, though  it  is  recognized  that  they  may  host more  recreational  activity (through  trespass) than  do  remote areas  with  legal but  arduous access. Summing for each quadrat the weighted  percentages  in each  mode yields  a single index of access availability which ranges from zero to one hundred.

Weighted  availability indices  averaged  for each  district,  park,  and  region  appear  in Table 2. They confirm many of the points already noted.  Note that  access  availability  is  high  in the intensively  settled  Northeast and Midwest (averages of 67 and 57, respectively)  belowaverage in the more thinly settled areas of the Plains and California (41 and 46), and intermediate (52) in the South (which is similar to the national  average of 53 for  settled  districts).  In the settled districts,  index values range from 74 (Red Lion) to 31 (Healy). The latter's low score, like that of some other districts with unfenced cropland, reflects  summer  conditions:  during winter,  when most closed  land would shift to the rugged category, this district's score would increase to around 36.

With the exception of Shenandoah, national parks all have weighted scores below those of settled districts. Paradoxically, therefore,  but inherent in their opposed functions of conservation versus recreation (Lemons and Stout 1982; Runte 1987), the  national  parks provide rneager  access for  the general  public (who restrict themselves  to  peripheral  and  often  rationed 'honeypot'  areas)  while  reserving  the  great bulk  of  their  area for  a  small minority  of  specialized or expert recreationists.  Sequoia is the most extreme in this regard: its weighted score of 12 i s  remarkably consistent with Yoho in the

Canadian Rockies and La Vanoise in the French Alps  (Millward 1992; 1993).

## Statistical Analysis of Access Deter  m  in  ants

Quadrat  scores for  each  access mode may be regarded  as  dependent  variables,  and  related to such  independent variables as  settlement  density, topography, and  land  cover. These variables were analyzed statistically because they can be measured simply and objectively  on topographic  maps;  they  cannot  be viewed,  however,  as  the  only  determinants. Various forms  of regression analysis were performed,  but owing to the non-linear nature of almost all relationships, multiple regression proved  to be  an inappropriate technique. Fourth-order polynomial regressions were found  to  offer  a  good  approximation  of  the curvilinear  relationships and these serve as the focus  of the following discussion.

## Topography

Topography affects access via the amplitude or degree of local relief; amplitude is measured from  the  number  of  separate  contours  per quadrat,  and converted to meters.  In areas of low  or  moderate  relief,  easier  access  modes should be prevalent and in areas of high relief, more rigorous  modes should prevail.

Table 3 presents  correlations  between  arnplitude of relief and the various access modes. Significance levels  for  the  product-moment correlations  are  not provided,  since  the  variables are not normally  distributed;  note however that with our sample size of 900, correlations exceeding pluslminus 0.1 are likely to be highly significant.  As  expected,  the linear correlation  with  relief  is  strongly  negative  for  the easiest  access  mode, neutral  for  the  casual mode,  and increasingly  positive for  more rigorous modes. The more extreme modes (passive  and  arduous)  show  fairly  linear  relationships (suggested by the similarity of linear and fourth-order polynomial coefficients, and confirmed by the graph of fourth-order regressions,  Figure 3). Also  largely linear  is the  relationship of the vigorous mode, since paths and tracks  in  this  category  tend  to  occur  only  in

Table 3. Linear  and Polynomial Correlations  between Access  Scores,  Topography,  and Land Cover,  for All Quadrats  (n = 900).

| Regression                    | Linear r   |   Fourth-order R |
|-------------------------------|------------|------------------|
| X = Amplitude of relief (m)   |            |                  |
| Y = YO passive                | -0.61      |             0.64 |
| Y = % casual                  | -0.04      |             0.31 |
| Y = YO vigorous               | +0.49      |             0.5  |
| Y = Yo rugged                 | +0.61      |             0.68 |
| Y = 70 arduous                | +0.62      |             0.67 |
| Y = Yo closed                 | -0.64      |             0.71 |
| X = Land with wood cover (YO) |            |                  |
| Y = O/O passive               | -0.27      |             0.39 |
| Y = % casual                  | +0.26      |             0.33 |
| Y = % vigorous                | -0.04      |             0.31 |
| Y = 70 rugged                 | +0.42      |             0.45 |
| Y = % arduous                 | +0.16      |             0.17 |
| Y = YO closed                 | -0.60      |             0.6  |
| X = Land with open cover (Yo) |            |                  |
| Y = 70 passive                | +0.23      |             0.4  |
| Y = % casual                  | -0.26      |             0.33 |
| Y = '/O vigorous              | -0.25      |             0.3  |
| Y = YO rugged                 | -0.41      |             0.45 |
| Y = % arduous                 | -0.1 5     |             0.16 |
| Y = % closed                  | +0.60      |             0.61 |
| X = Land built-up (Yo)        |            |                  |
| Y = % passive                 | +0.29      |             0.42 |
| Y = o / o casual              | -0.06      |             0.08 |
| Y = ' YO vigorous             | -0.08      |             0.14 |
| Y = Yo rugged                 | -0.1 2     |             0.23 |
| Y = % arduous                 | -0.07      |             0.11 |
| Y = Yo closed                 | -0.06      |             0.06 |

rough and  remote terrain.  By  contrast,  casual and rugged modes indicate curvilinear relationships  which  peak  at  amplitudes  of  700  and 900  m,  respectively.  From  inspection  of the polynomial coefficients,  all modes but the casual exhibit strong relationships with relief.

Closed  areas,  lacking  public  access,  occur much more frequently  at lower levels of relief. The relationship is strong and of the negative exponential type (R = 0.71).  Note,  however, that relief in most quadrats  is less than 200  m, and at these lower amplitudes the considerable variation in closed area results  mostly from the effect of other variables.

## land Cover

Topographic maps  at  1:24,000 scale  were used to measure the three main categories  of land  cover (woodland,  open  country, and built-up  areas).  The  woodland  and  built-up categories  are  homogenous,  each  with  fairly uniform economic (i.e.,  land use), physical,  and visual character.  Open or clear  land,  however, though typically farmland,  may also  be natural grasslands,  semi-natural  range, badlands, alpine  meadow, or  bare  rock.  This presents some  problems  of  interpretation. For each quadrat, the  percentage  area  in  each  cover category was estimated by summing the number of counters dominated by the cover type. Mean figures  for  districts  and  regions  appear in Table 2. Overall, 66 percent of all study areas is  in  open  cover,  33  percent is  wooded,  and only  1 percent is  built-up.  The  national parks are more wooded than open (59 percent to 41 percent),  while  settled  areas  are  highly open (78  percent).  The  Northeast,  being  the  least agricultural region,  has an  even mix of woodland and open cover  (50 and 47  percent,  respectively).

The expectation was that highly wooded areas should have  below-average  car access

Figure  3. Relationships  between  amplitude  o f   relief  and  the  percentage  o f   counters in  each  access  category, based  on fourth-order polynomial regressions  (n=900). Easier access  modes predominate  in  flatter  landscapes.

<!-- image -->

(passive),  above-average  trail and cross-country access  (casual,  vigorous,  and rugged),  and less  closed  land.  The  reverse  should  be true for open country, at least insofar as  it is agricultural.  Table 3  indicates that woodland cover is inversely related to passive access,  directly related to more rigorous access  modes (except vigorous),  and inversely related to closed land. Comparison of the linear  and fourth-order coefficients  shows  linearity  in the rugged,  arduous,  and  closed  relationships, with  the  latter being strong.  The woodland-arduous relationship is  both flat  and weak,  since  remote and difficult terrain (e.g.,  in Sequoia) is only marginally  more likely  to  be wooded  than  open. In t he  curvilinear relationships, passive  access peaks at  around 20  percent woodland,  while casual  access  peaks  at  90  percent woodland (with a secondary peak at 10 percent).

Correlations between access modes and the percentage of area with open cover are almost the  reverse  of  those  for  percent  woodland. The fourth-order correlations  in Table 3  show similar  strengths,  and a comparison  of simple and fourth  correlations  shows the only  major difference to be a more linear  relationship for the vigorous  mode. The  relationships for  passive  and casual access  remain somewhat  curvilinear.

Very  few  of the 900 quadrats  contain  more than  20  percent built-up area,  hence relationships  with  this  type  of land  cover  should  be

treated  with  caution.  Not  surprisingly,  there is a  strong positive  (and curvilinear) relationship between  passive  access  (road) and  built-up area.  Other  access  modes  are  negatively  related  to  built-up  area  but,  with  the  exception of   the rugged  mode, the relationships are very weak.

## Road Density (Intensity of Land Use)

I t   was earlier argued that the degree to which land is  productively  utilized affects  its  economic valuation  by owners, and hence the degree  o f access  they  are  willing  to  allow  the public. The  intensity  o f land use may  be gauged  indirectly from the presence and density of buildings and  roads  on  topographic maps. The ubiquity  of  buildings  is  a  problematic  measure, since  it is much  affected  by cadastral and settlement patterns (notably, whether farmsteads are nucleated or dispersed). Rural roads, however, almost all originated  to enable land  exploitation, irrespective o f   settlement pattern. The index o f   passive access  is  a  direct  measure  o f road  density  (it shows the  percentage of  counters  containing a  section of all-season  road),  and  thus  is  an excellent surrogate measure o f   the intensity of land  use. When viewed  in  this  light,  it  may  b e regarded  as an  independent variable  affecting other modes o f   countryside access. At one end of   the  intensity  scale, wilderness  regions  with no roads will  by definition  offer  largely  rugged or arduous access. As all-season roads become more  prevalent  (i.e.,  as  land-use  intensity  increases), an increasing proportion o f   land area should shift to easier access modes, though w e also expect more land to be closed to the public.

Table 4 presents linear and  fourth-order polynomial correlations  between  road  density and  the  percentage  o f   area  in  each  non-road access  mode. Looking first  at the  overall correlations  (n = goo),  all  polynomial  relationships are fairly strong (R exceeds 0.4 and rises to  0.79  in  the  rugged  case).  Comparison  of linear  and  polynomial coefficients  reveals that most  relationships  are  non-linear,  particularly those for casual access and closed area. These relationships are graphed in cumulative fashion in  Figure  4. As expected, arduous and rugged modes are most prevalent at low road density, both  peaking at zero. Vigorous  access, which is  by  definition  remote  from  all-season  roads, also peaks at zero density, but is o f   minor  im-

Table 4. Linear and  Polynomial  Correlations between Access Scores and All-Season  Road  Density.

| Regression                    | Linear r   |   Fourth-order R |
|-------------------------------|------------|------------------|
| X = Intensity of land use     |            |                  |
| Y = Yo casual: all (n = 900)  | -0.1 7     |             0.42 |
| Northeast (n = 118)           | -0.46      |             0.47 |
| Midwest (n = 120)             | -0.1 0     |             0.22 |
| South (n = 120)               | -0.58      |             0.62 |
| Great Plains (n = 120)        | -0.64      |             0.7  |
| California (n = 120)          | -0.41      |             0.45 |
| national parks (n = 302)      | +0.25      |             0.34 |
| Y = % vigorous: all           | -0.52      |             0.65 |
| Y = Yo rugged: all            | -0.73      |             0.79 |
| natural grasslands (n = 261)  | -0.63      |             0.76 |
| natural woodlands (n = 639)   | -0.81      |             0.85 |
| Y = Yo arduous: all           | -0.42      |             0.53 |
| Y = O/i closed to public: all | +0.38      |             0.62 |
| Northeast                     | -0.1 3     |             0.29 |
| Midwest                       | -0.70      |             0.74 |
| South                         | -0.31      |             0.49 |
| Great Plains                  | -0.20      |             0.35 |
| California                    | -0.54      |             0.58 |
| national parks                | -0.03      |             0.1  |
| natural grasslands            | +0.26      |             0.63 |
| natural woodlands             | +0.53      |             0.73 |

portance.  Casual  access  peaks  at  20  percent density,  and closed  land at 40  percent.

Figure 4  shows the characteristic  mix of access  modes at  each  density  level.  Thus  at 10 percent road density  (which may be regarded as the ecumene margin),  we expect 10 percent of counters  to  contain an  all-season  road,  an additional  24  percent  to  contain  tracks  and paths  (casual and vigorous),  49  percent  to be accessible  only across country (rugged and arduous),  and  17 percent to be private.  At  33 percent road density-the average  for  all  U.S. districts-both off-road and track  access fall to 16 percent each,  while closed area expands to 36 percent. At density levels above 50 percent, very little non-road access  is available.

The  smooth  trends in  Figure 4 are not equally applicable in all regions and districts, as further investigation of the more important casual,  rugged,  and closed  modes reveals.  Looki ng first at the relationship between road density  and casual access  (Table  4  and  Figure  51, t he  regional  polynomial correlations  are  typically higher than the overall coefficient of 0.42. The relationship is strongest on the plains ( R = 0.70),  where  almost  all  casual  routes  are  dirt roads  forming  part  of  the  sectional  survey: where more roads are paved,  fewer dirt roads remain. Both California and the Northeast have above-average  levels of casual access at  most density levels,  while the Midwest is below average.  The weak  relationship for  the  Midwest (R = 0.22) may relate to the mix of sectional and irregular  surveys  in this region. The South has unusually  high casual access at low density levels  (those between 20 and 35 percent), but mirrors the national trend at higher levels.

Regarding  land  closed  to  the  public (Table 4),  the regions  show weaker  relationships than the nation as  a whole;  that is,  they exhibit greater  within-region  variation  than  betweenregion  variation.  The  exception  again  is  the Midwest with its high fourth-order  correlation coefficient ( R = 0.74).  The Northeast tends to have  less  area  closed  at  most  density  levels (Figure  6); the  density  of  the  road  network here  reflects  formerly  intense  agricultural  usage, but there has been widespread land abandonment  in  the  past  century  so  that  many woodland areas are  now  open to the public. The national trend is somewhat meaningless at l o w  density  levels (say,  below 25 percent) as  it reflects  neither  the  situation  in national  parks (which are entirely open to the public) nor that

Figure 4. Easiest available access mode (cumulative percentage of counters) and all-season road density, based on fourth-order polynomial regressions (n=900). In areas  of  low  density,  cross-country access modes are typical. In areas  of high density,  the proportion of closed land is high.

<!-- image -->

in marginally settled  areas. In the latter-almost all  in the west-the percentage of closed land increases almost to the ecumene limit,  and falls sharply only beyond the ecumene.

The relationships between road access  and the other access modes are affected by natural vegetation  (Table  4  and  Figures  7  and 8).  For these  regressions, Kuchler's vegetation  map (Espenshade  and  Morrison  1982:84-85) and the  evidence of the topographic  maps themselves  permits a crude division  of study  areas into  "grasslands" (Mattoon,  Bedford, Healy, Badlands,  Gridley,  and  Delano)  and  "woodlands"  (the rest). When these two groups are regressed separately, the relationships are considerably  stronger  for  the  woodlands  group than for all quadrats combined. The regression lines also take a different form: the percentage of closed  land  peaks  at a higher  road-density level  in woodlands than  in grasslands,  and  is much lower at lower density levels  (Figure 7). The percent of land with rugged access begins t o  rise rapidly at densities  below 40  percent in

Figure 5. Percentage of counters with casual as easiest access mode, against all-season road density, by region. The curves are fourth-order  polynomial regressions.

<!-- image -->

woodlands, but  only  below 20 percent  in grasslands  (Figure 8).

An explanation  for these  differences  lies  in the  fact  that  natural  grasslands  were  much more easily brought into cultivation than woodlands, and can be more easily maintained in  cultivation.  Thus  even  with  low  levels  of return per unit area (i.e.,  low land-use intensity and hence low road density)  almost  all lands are  cultivated,  and  through  most  of  the  year zonal or cross-country access is denied. Below road-density  levels of 10 percent, however, one  leaves  the  ecumene,  and  the  grasslands are neither cultivated nor fenced. The land be- comes  freely  accessible  in the  rugged  mode; hence the percentage rugged approaches that in  woodland  wilderness  areas  (Figure  8).  In more northerly areas,  unfenced grainfields  are often open to recreationists during the winter freeze,  so that levels of rugged access are seasonally  comparable  with  woodland  areas of similar  road density.

## Summary

This study has investigated the availability  of recreational routes and zones in representative

Figure 6 . Percentage of counters closed to the  public,  against all-season road density,  by region. The curves are fourth-order polynomial regressions.

<!-- image -->

countryside districts  of the United States-the sorts  of  everyday rural  landscapes  that  are most likely to be used for  informal public  recreation.  Also  included  is  a sample  of national parks,  which are  important  recreational  magnets in their  own right,  and which  serve  as  a control  group of wilderness areas against which more settled districts may be compared.

Topographic  maps  at 1:24,000 scale  were used  to  delimit  areas  open  to  public  access, and the proportion of area  accessible  by five levels  of  access rigor. Settled  districts  allow much passive  or  car-borne  access,  but  they also have much closed land, so that access by off-road modes is in short supply.  Such access, usually in  the  casual  and  rugged  modes, i s more  prevalent  in  areas  with  stronger  relief, greater  forest cover,  or  lower  settlement  density. The national parks,  by contrast,  have little

Figure 7. Percentage of counters closed to the public,  against all-season road density, by natural vegetation.  The curves are fourth-order polynomial regressions.  Naturally-wooded areas have less closed land, particularly  at  lower density levels.

<!-- image -->

60

Figure 8. Percentage of counters  with rugged  as easiest access  mode, against ail-season road density, by  natural  vegetation.  The  curves  are  fourth-order polynomial regressions. At most density levels, grasslands offer less cross-country  access.

<!-- image -->

area  accessible by  car, but  they  do  provide more casual and vigorous access by means of off-road  routes  and  they  are  almost  entirely open to cross-country  movement (rugged and arduous). When access supply  is weighted by estimates of demand,  we find that access availability  is highest in the intensely settled Northeast,  low in the Great Plains, and extremely low in the national parks.

The  average  access  profile  in  the  United States is intermediate  between those of Western  Europe  and Canada.  For  settled  districts, the  weighted  index  of  accessibility is 53, as compared to 73 in Western  Europe (Millward 1993) and 42 in Canada  (Millward 1992). It  is worth  noting, however, that the  Northeast scores more highly than Great Britain.  At most levels  of  land-use  intensity  (as  measured  by road  density),  the  United  States  offers  more opportunities for casual  access  than  Canada, but  less  than  Europe.  The  amount  of  land closed  to  the  public  is  greater  than  in  either Canada or Western Europe at low density  levels, but  intermediate between  the  two  at higher density  levels.

Polynomial regressions  indicate  strong relationships between  the  availability of  access types  and  the  independent  (but  interrelated)

variables  of topography,  land cover,  and road density.  Though correlations  between local relief  and  the  access  categories  are  generally high,  the  key determinant  of access  in all except mountainous areas is the intensity of rural land  use,  as  indicated  by  road density.  In  intensely  utilized areas,  road access  is  plentiful, but there are few trails and almost no zonal or cross-country access. Landowners find it worthwhile  to  exclude  the  public  from  lands having high economic  value,  and  particularly necessary to do so in areas of high recreational demand.  Lightly  settled  districts,  by contrast, provide more opportunities  for  cross-country travel.  The observed  relationships of access to land  cover  and  topography  also  may  be  explained by 'land-use  intensity,'  in that farming activity  is more likely in areas of low relief and, in natural woodlands at least, corresponds spatially  t o   areas  of  open  land  cover.  In  natural grasslands, even land of low intrinsic value may be used productively,  so that cross-country access is denied even where properties are large and roads are few.  Many legal and customary rights and constraints  related to public  access may be viewed as  outcomes of the land-value factor  (Bromley 1991  :I 43).

Several  other  variables  seem  to  affect  the degree  and  type  of  public  access,  but  these were not  investigated statistically. Variables such as the date of settlement, the type of land allotment and survey,  the original size of landholdings,  and  the  dominant  type  of  farming (grouped  under  the  label  'scale of  original landholdings') can be seen as  having an effect separate from  land-use intensity,  though often interrelated  with  it.  For  a given  level of intensity,  large landholdings require a coarser cadaster with  fewer public  rights-of-way; this i s reflected  in less access of the passive and casual types,  and more closed land. Original landholdings were smallest  in areas settled earliest, particularly in the Northeast,  since the technology of the time limited the area exploitable by a single family. Where family labor was supplemented by slaves  or  hired hands,  particularly in  the  South, original  holdings  were  often larger;  the  same  applies  in  regions  settled  for mechanized agriculture  (particularly the Plains and  California).  In  areas  where  farm  enlargement  and  farmland  abandonment  have  subsequently  reduced  the  economic  justification for  dense  public  access  networks,  roads  and tracks  remain  as  residual features  available  to the public.  In a more egalitarian  society,  pow-

erful landowners  have been less able to erase rights-of-way  than  they  were  in  eighteenthcentury Britain (Millward 1993); that said,  landowners in high-value areas have probably encroached  considerably on  customary footpaths.

The empirical research reported here should underscore  the  importance  of  roads  as resources  for  informal  outdoor  recreation. Although much of the countryside  in the United States contains few trails and little cross-count r y   access,  it  does  contain  a  dense  and  littleused network  of local roads.  The  recreational potential of this network for passive and casual movement  could  be  more  fully  realized  by policies  that  provide  interpretive  information, signposting,  roadside  pull-offs,  and rest areas. Policymakers  might  also  address  the  lack  of cross-country access in settled areas: land trusts are one important means by which wider access  may  be gained  (Wright 1993),  while a second  is  the  British  policy of negotiated  access agreements (Beard 1994).

## Acknowledgments

Financial support for this research provided by the Social Science and  Humanities  Research Council of Canada (grant no. 41  0-89-0038) is gratefully acknowledged.

## References

- Aschmann, H. 1969. People, Recreation, Wild Lands,  and Wilderness.  Landscape 18(1):40-44.
- Beard, C. 1994. Negotiating Access to the Countryside.  Town and Country Pfanning 63:118-I 21.
- Bromley, D. 1991. Environment and Economy, Property  Rights  and  Public  Policy.  Cam  bridge, Massachusetts: Basil Blackwell.
- Brown,  T . 1974. New York  Landowners' Attitudes toward Recreation Activities.  Transactions,  North American  Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference 39:173-I  79.
- Brown,  T., Decker,  D.,  and Kelley,  1. 1984. Access to Private Lands in New York, 1963-1 980. Wifdfife  Society Bulletin 12:344-349.
- Brown,  T. , and  Thompson,  D. 1976. Changes  in Posting and  Landowner Attitudes  in New York State 1963-1973. New York Fish and Game/ournal 23:lOl-137.
- Bryan, H. 1977. Leisure Value Systems and Recreation Specialization: The Case of Trout Fishermen. ]ournal of Leisure Research 9:174-I  87.
- Bryant,  C., Russwurm,  L., and  McLellan,  A. 1982. The City's Countryside. New York: Longman.
- Bryant, R. 1972. Land: Private Property, Public Control. Montreal:  Harvest House.
- Buist,  L., and Hoots,  T. 1982. Recreation  Opportunity  Spectrum  Approach  to  Resource Planning. journal of Forestry 80:84-86.
- Butler, R.,  and Troughton,  M.,  eds. 1985. Public Access to Private Land in Ontario. Symposium Proceedings.  London,  Ontario:  Department of  Geography, University of Western Ontario.
- Clark, R., and  Stankey,  G. 1979. The  Recreation Opportunity Spectrum: A Framework  for  Pfanning, Management, and Research. General Technical Report PNW-98. Seattle: U.S.  Department of Agriculture, Forest Service.
- Clawson,  M. 1972. America's  Land and its  Uses. Baltimore:  The  Johns  Hopkins  Press  for Resources for the Future,  Inc.

- .

1983. The Federal Lands Revisited. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press for  Resources for  the Future,  Inc.
2. Clawson,  M.,  and  Knetsch,  J. 1966. Economics of Outdoor Recreation. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press.
3. Cloke,  P . , and Park, C. 1985. Rural  Resources Management. Beckenham,  Kent: Croom Helm.
4. Colby, K. 1988. Public  Access  to  Private  LandAllemansratt  in Sweden.  Landscape and Urban Planning 15:253-264.
5. Daniels,  S., and  Krannich, R. 1990. The  Recreational Opportunity Spectrum as  a Conflict Management Tool. In Social Science and Natural Resource  Recreation  Management,  ed.  J. Vining, pp. 165-1 79. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.
6. Dysart,  B.,  and Clawson,  M., eds. 1989. Public  lnterest  in  the  Use of Private  Lands.  New  York: Praeger.
7. Espenshade, E., and Morrison, J., eds. 1986. Goode's  World Atlas, 17th ed.  Chicago:  Rand McNally.
8. Fawcett,  J. A., Manus,  A.  T . , Sorenson, J. C., eds. 1981. Proceedings of a Forum on Recreational Access  to  the  Coastal Zone.  Los Angeles:  University of Southern  California, Institute for Marine and Coastal Studies.
9. Garrett, W., ed. 1985. Atlas of North  America. Washington,  D.C.:  National Geographic Society.
10. Glyptis, S. 1991. Countryside  Recreation.  Harlow, England: Longman.
11. Gramann, J . , Bonnickson, T. ,   Albrecht, D.,  and Kurtz, W. 1985. Recreational  Access  to  Private  Forests: The Impact of Hobby Farming and Exclusivity. lournal of Leisure Research 17:234-240.
12. Creer,  T., and Wall,  G. 1979. Recreational  Hinterlands:  A  Theoretical  and  Empirical  Analysis.  In Recreational Land Use in Southern Ontario,  ed. G.  Wall,  pp. 227-246. Department of Geogra-

- phy,  Publication  Series  No. 14. Waterloo,  Ontario:  University of Waterloo.
- Guynn,  D.,  and  Schmidt, J. 1984. Managing Deer Hunters  on  Private  Lands  in Colorado.  Wildlife Society Bulletin 12:12-I 9.
- Personal Mobility and Access to Leisure. Department of Town and Country Planning, Occasional Paper no. 12. Manchester,  England: University of Manchester. Hillman, M. 1984.
- Hollenhorst, S. 1990. What  Makes  a  Recreation Specialist? The  Case  of  Rockclimbing. In  Social Science and Natural Resource Recreation Management,  ed. ]. Vining,  pp. 81 -90.  Boulder,  Colorado: Westview  Press.
- Holocek,  D.,  and Westfall,  R. 1977. Public  Recreation on Private Lands-the Landowner's Perspective.  Research Report 335. East  Lansing,  Michigan:  Michigan Agricultural  Experiment Station.
- Jackson, J. B. 1984. Discovering the Vernacular Landscape.  New Haven: Yale University Press.
- Kaiser,  R. , and Wright,  B. 1985. Recreational Use of Private Lands:  Beyond the  Liability Hurdle. /ournal of Soil and Water Conservation 40:478-481.
- Lambden,  D. 1976. Public  Rights,  Private  Lands.  In Public  Recreation  and  the  Law:  Seminar  Proceedings, pp. 40-44. Toronto: Conservation Council of Ontario.
- Lemons, J., and Stout, D. 1982. National Parks Legislative  Mandate in the United States of America. Environmental Management 6:199-207.
- Lichtkoppler, R., and  Clonts, H. 1990. Recreation Opportunity Spectrum Re-evaluated: Its Application  to  the  Eastern  U.S.  In  Social Science  and Natural Resource  Recreation  Management,  ed. J. Vining,  pp. 105-1 21. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.
- Livingston,  M. 1981-1982. Do the People O w n  the Shore? Water Spectrum 14:l-11.
- Millward, H. 1991. Public  Recreational  Access  in the  Countryside:  Concepts  and  Measures  of Physical  Rigour. lournal of Rural Studies 7:241251.
- . 1992. Public  Access  in  the  Canadian  Countryside: A Comparative Survey. Canadian Geographer 36:30-44.
- . 1993. Public  Access in  the  West  European Countryside:  A  Comparative  Survey.  /ournal of Rural Studies 9:39-51.
- Whose Land is it Anyway? Agriculture,  Planning and Land Use in the British Countryside.  Wellingborough,  United Kingdom: Turnstone Press. Norton-Taylor,  R. 1982.
- Patmore,  J. 1974. Routeways  and  Recreation  Patterns.  In  Recreational  Geography,  ed.  P . Lavery, pp. 70-96. Newton Abbot: David and Charles.
- . 1987. A Case Study in National Park Planning. In  Rural  Planning: Policy  into  Action?, ed.  P . Cloke,  chapter 6.  London: Harper and Row.
- Penning-Rowsell,  E.,  and  Lowenthal,  D.,  eds. 1986.
- Landscape Meanings and Values.  London: Allen and Unwin.
- Pigram, J.  1983. Outdoor Recreation and Resource Management. New York,  New York:  St.  Martin's Press.
- Runte,  A. 1987. National Parks:  The  American Experience, 2nd  ed.  Lincoln:  University  of  Nebraska Press.
- Shoard,  M. 1987. This Land is Our Land:  The Struggle for Britain's  Countryside. London:  Paladin G rafton.
- . 1980. The Theft of the Countryside.  London: Temple Smith.
- Sidaway,  R. 1986. Towards  a  New  Understanding of  Access  and  Accessibility:  Action, Policy  and Implementation. In New Approaches  to Access in the  Countryside,  ed. Countryside  Recreation Research  Advisory  Group,  pp. 70-96. Bristol, England:  G.R.R.A.G.  Conference  Proceedings.
- Simmons,  I. 1975. Rural Recreation in the lndustrial World.  New York: John Wiley.
- Thrower,  N. 1966. Original  Survey and Land  Subdivision:  A  Comparative  Study of the  Form  and Effect of Contrasting Cadastral Surveys.  Association of American Geographers Monograph No. 4. Skokie,  Illinois: Rand McNally.
- Recreation  and the Urban Fringe: Conference Proceedings. Birrningham,  England:  University  of Birmingham,  Centre
- Travis, A,, and  Veal, A. 1976. for  Urban and Regional Studies.
1986. D.C.:  US.
- U.S.  Department of Agriculture. Forest Service. The 1986 ROS  Book.  Washington, Government Printing Office.
- Wilson, D. 1989. The  Rhetoric and  Esthetics of Haphazard Landscapes.  Landscape 30(2):23-33.
- Wolf,  P . 1981. Land in America:  Its Value, Use,  and Control. New York,  New York: Pantheon Books.
- Wornack,  J.,  Christiansen, R., and  Gum, R.  1975. An Evaluation of the  ASCS  Pilot Public  Access Program. Washington,  D.C.: US. Department of Agriculture Research  Service, Resource  Document.
- Wright,  B.,  Cordell,  H.,  and Brown,  E. 1990. Public Recreational Access:  A National Study of Policies and  Practices of Private  Landowners.  In  Social Science and Natural Resource Recreation  Management, ed. J. Vining,  pp. 181-198. Boulder, Colorado: Westview  Press.
- Wright,  B.,  and Fesenmaier, D. 1990. A Factor Analytic Study of Attitudinal  Structure and its Impact on Rural  Landowners' Access  Policies.  Environmental Management 14:269-277.
- Wright,  B., Kaiser,  R., and  Fletcher,  J. 1988. Hunter Access Decisions by Rural Landowners:  An East Texas  Example.  Wildlife  Society Bulletin 16:152158.
- Wright, 1. 1993. Cultural Geography and Land Trusts  in Colorado  and  Utah.  Geographical Review 83:269-279.

Submitted 6/94; Revised 2/95,  4/95; Accepted 5/95.

Millward,  Hugh. 1996. Countryside Recreational Access in the United States: A Statistical Comparison of Rural Districts. Annals o f the Associafion of American Geographers 86(1  ):I  02-1 22. Abstract.

This comparative study employs the concept of physical rigor to map and measure recreational routes and zones available to the public. The comparison is made for 20 representative countryside districts in five regional settings (Northeast, Midwest, South, Great Plains, and California). Five of the  districts  are  national  parks,  while  the  rest are  40  x  25  km settled  areas chosen to typify  landscapes of their region.

Statistical measures of access availability are derived from 1  :24,000 topographic maps for five levels  of access  rigor.  Access was  determined for  small quadrats  (500  m  square)  on a presence/absence  basis,  beginning with  the  easiest  access  mode  (passive) and  then  testing  for increasingly  rigorous modes (casual, vigorous,  rugged, arduous, and closed). Polynomial regressions  show  strong  relationships  between levels of  access  and  the  independent  variables  of topography,  land cover,  road density (a surrogate for land-use intensity),  and natural vegetation. In highly utilized areas of low relief there is plentiful access via the road network, but few trails, and  much closed land.  By  contrast,  remote  wilderness  areas,  exemplified  by  national parks, offer  little  road  access,  but  provide  ubiquitous  cross-country  access  for  a small  minority  of specialized or expert recreationists.

Regional  variations  in access  availability  are  also  tentatively  related  to the  scale  of  original landholdings,  in turn related both to date of settlement  and type of land allotment and survey. For given levels of land-use intensity, areas of large-scale landholdings have fewer public rightsof-way,  and more land closed to the public. Key Words: access, countryside, landowners, public, recreation,  United States.

Correspondence: Department of Geography,  Saint Mary's  University,  Halifax, Nova Scotia,  Canada,  B3H 3C3.