## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Love Actually: Youth Mediators and Advisors in North India

Jane Dyson

To cite this article: Jane Dyson (2018): Love Actually: Youth Mediators and Advisors in North India, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2017.1403879

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2017.1403879

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 18 Jan 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 44

View related articles

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Love Actually: Youth Mediators and Advisors in North India

Jane Dyson

School of Geography, University of Melbourne

This article uses ethnographic research conducted in Bemni, a village in Uttarakhand, north India, to make a distinctive contribution to geographies of love. Building on fieldwork with young people between sixteen and thirty years old who work as 'mediators' or 'advisors' in Bemni in relation to premarital or extramarital affairs, I argue that practices and narratives of romantic love are strongly implicated in processes of social change. In the rural Uttarakhandi context, young people often use the idea of being specialists in 'love' to bolster their own position and resolve conflict. I also provide a counterpoint to geographical youth research stressing the reactionary politics of marginalized young people. I show instead that in a region relatively unaffected by strong religious- or caste-based conflict, youth are able to ameliorate rather than exacerbate violent action, even while they reproduce aspects of caste, class, and gender inequality. Key Words: India, love, social action, youth.

本 文 运 用 在 印 度 北 部 北 阿 坎 德 邦 中一个 名 为 本 穆 尼 的 村 落 中 进 行 的 民 族 志 研 究 , 对 于 爱 的 地 理 做 出 特 殊 贡 献 。 我 根 据 在 本 穆 尼 对 年 龄 介乎 十 六 岁 到 三 十 岁 、 从事 婚 前 或 婚 姻外 事 务 的 ' 中介 者 ' 或 ' 咨 询 者 ' 工 作 的 年 轻 人 所 进 行 的 田 野 研 究 , 主 张 罗 曼 蒂 克 的 爱 之 实 践 与 叙 事 , 强 烈 涉 及 社 会 变 迁 的 过 程 。 在 北 阿 坎 德 邦 的 乡 村 脉 络 中 , 年 轻 人 经 常 运 用 身 为 ' 爱 ' 的 专 家 之 概 念 , 支 撑 其 身 份 并 解 决冲 突 。 我 同 时 对 于 强 调 边 缘 化 的 年 轻 人 的 反 动 政 治 之 地 理 青 年 研 究 提 供 反 面 的 观 点 , 展 现 在 一个 相 对 较 少 受 到 强 大 的 宗 教 或 种 姓 冲 突 所 影 响 的 区 域 之中 , 青 年 能 够 缓 解 、 而 非 加剧 暴 力 行 动 , 即 便 当 他们 再 生 产 种 姓 、 阶 级 与 性 别 不 平 等 之 时 。 关 键 词 ： 印 度 , 爱 , 社 会 行 动 , 青 年 .

Este art  ıculo utiliza una investigaci  on etnogr  afica llevada a cabo en Bemni, una aldea de Uttarakhand, en la India septentrional, para hacer una contribuci  on distintiva a las geograf  ıas del amor. Edificando a partir de un trabajo de campo realizado con gente joven, entre los diecis  eis y los treinta a ~ nos de edad, que trabajan como 'mediadores' o 'consejeros' en Bemni sobre cosas relacionadas con asuntos premaritales o extramaritales, sostengo que las pr  acticas y narrativas del amor rom  antico est  an fuertemente implicadas en los procesos del cambio social. En el contexto rural uttarakhandi, la gente joven a menudo usa la idea de ser especialista en 'amor' para fortalecer su propia posici  on y resolver el conflicto. Tambi  en suministro un contrapunto a la investigaci  on geogr  afica de la juventud enfatizando la pol  ıtica reaccionaria contra la gente joven marginada. En contraposici  on, muestro que en una regi  on relativamente poco afectada por conflictos de origen religioso o de castas, los j  ovenes pueden disminuir en vez de exacerbar la acci  on violenta, aun si ellos reproducen aspectos de desigualdad por casta, clase y g  enero. Palabras clave: India, amor, acci  on social, juventud.

I was walking though the village of Bemni in March 2012 when Rajendra Singh ran around a corner and almost knocked me off the path. Rajendra was in his late twenties and referred to himself as unemployed, although he was a small farmer and he earned money working on government projects in the village.

'What's up?' I asked.

'Sorry, I'm rushing. I've got crucially important work!'

'On the farm?' I asked.

'No, no . . . , ' he said, 'There is a man who has been having an extramarital affair. I am going to help sort out the situation.' He stopped as I looked at him. 'What can I do?' Hethen went on. 'I have got to sort it out ( theek karna hai ).'

Negotiations surrounding 'affairs' was a topic that constantly emerged during my social research in the north Indian village of Bemni. In 2012 I would often be sitting outside the small room in which I stayed in the village and find myself being drawn into conversations about the infidelity of a married man in Bemni or the intimate relations that had developed between two college students (see also Parry 2001; Mody 2002; Smith 2011). I soon came to understand the importance of premarital elopements and marital affairs in social discussion and the particular significance that the concept of love (the English word) had developed in social reflection on these events. What also became increasingly evident

was that a self-styled generation of young people between sixteen and thirty years old were important players in efforts to understand and resolve love and affairs, not through reactionary efforts to police marriage or romantic intimacy but at the more mundane level of seeking to resolve the issue at hand: 'sort it out' ( theek karna hai ) as Rajendra expressed the idea. By investigating the role that educated unemployed or underemployed youth in Bemni play in mediating and advising on disputes over affairs, I seek in this article to inform geographical scholarship on love and youth.

I contribute to research on love in geography by showing how practices and narratives of love are closely intertwined with processes of social reproduction and social change in a region of north India. I draw particular attention to the role of young people as interpreters of love and as agents of some degree of social transformation (cf. Smith 2009; Pratt 2012; Morrison, Johnston, and Longhurst 2013). The article also makes a more specific contribution to geographical research on marginalized youth. I argue that educated unand underemployed young people engage inventively and somewhat constructively with notions of love and intimacy, even in the face of social disappointment. My account of youth also serves as a specific counterpoint to studies that have focused on the violent and reactionary behavior of marginalized youth in South Asia with respect to notions of love and intimacy (Chowdhry 2007; Smith 2009, 2012).

## Love

It is possible to discern two distinct but overlapping strands of work on love within contemporary human geography (see also Morrison, Johnston, and Longhurst 2013). The first strand examines how love, in the sense of a powerful feeling of attachment typically involving strong romantic affection, has been implicated in social and political processes in different sites and at various periods in history. Such work includes consideration of how political organizations shape hegemonic visions of love (Smith 2009, 2012), accounts of the affective process through which scholars might develop an 'ethics of care' (Lawson 2007), analysis of migrant women who maintain strong affective ties across national boundaries (Pratt 2012), and discussion of the social and political processes through which people develop various types of 'nonhuman' love-for pets (Nast 2006), objects (Geoghegan and Hess 2015), and landscapes (Wylie 2009), for example.

There is a geographical bias in this growing body of work. Although some of these studies have been in the Global South-including Nagar's (2006) research on the role of love in building communities of practice in India and Hunter's (2010) account of love, work, and illness in South Africa (see also Smith [2009] and Mayer [2012])-scholarship on love and geography have been mainly prosecuted in North America, Australasia, and Europe. This limits the capacity of scholars to develop a global and comparative perspective on how love relates to social and political change.

A second strand of research within geography has focused on how narratives of love-a word that obviously has different meanings in different places, at different times, and for different people (see Morrison, Johnston, and Longhurst 2013)-reflect, reinforce, or change social and political processes. In this field, attention is centered not so much on the affective 'fact' of love but on the capacity of the idea of 'love' and cognate terms, to shape private and public opinion, territorial struggles, and gendered bodily practice (Gupta 2009; Smith 2012). Queer theory has informed some of this work. Scholars such as Berlant (1998) and Edelman (2004) have shown how powerful institutions link love to particular types of wealthy middle-class affection between men and women (see also Ahmed 2004). Such research includes Hunter's (2010) discussion of how ideas of 'provider love' and 'romantic love' shape economic practice in South Africa. Other accounts draw on feminist theory or feminist geopolitics. This includes Ahmed's (2004) analysis of right-wing U.S. nationalism, Rasool's (2013) work on how women seek to escape abusive relationships in South Africa, and the research of Das (2008), Mayer (2012), and Oza (2001) on how religious and political organizations manipulate discourses of love to prosecute their goals. Still other work draws on nonrepresentational theory to highlight the limited nature of language itself, especially how the idea of love obscures the complexity of people's attachments to others and their environment (Wylie 2009).

This article engages with this literature and relevant South Asian research on love (e.g., Mody 2002; Fuller and Narasimhan 2008; Majumdar 2009; Smith 2012) through examining how young people use particular understandings of love to develop social goals. It is often held that 'youth' in the sense of those between sixteen and thirty years old are in a particularly critical phase of development where strong attachments and attractions take shape and where they encounter societal notions of romantic love for the first time and most intensely. Geographers have begun to explore

how young people in varied parts of the world develop an attachment to romantic partners (Hunter 2010), friends (Dyson 2010), and places (Jeffrey, Jeffery, and Jeffery 2008). Yet the particular manner in which young people engage with love-as a sense of attachment and as an idea shaping practice-has not been subject to intense geographical scrutiny. I use a focus on youth as a means of showing how practices and narratives of love both reflect aspects of how societies work in specific conjunctures and also serve as a type of crucible within which social change can occur.

## Youth

The article contributes to geographies of youth through highlighting the constructive everyday social action of young people in north India, even in the context of unemployment and underemployment. Young people have become agents of change in various parts of the contemporary Global South (Ansell 2016). This reflects a social revolution occurring across large parts of this region. First, in many parts of Latin America, Africa, and Asia since the early 2000s, the spread of new communication technologies has heightened young people's understanding of dynamics occurring outside their local areas. Mobile phone ownership has increased rapidly, and an increasing percentage of the population have access to the Internet (Doron and Jeffrey 2013). Second, a spread of education has provided people with basic literacy and numeracy skills and also in many cases instilled new aspirations, as evident in South Asia and subSaharan Africa. Third, there has been a spread of citizenship norms across the Global South, in particular, for example, through school textbooks and via the media, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and government pronouncements. An increasing number of people have come to believe in norms of liberal government, for example, regarding the importance of an impartial bureaucracy and 'clean' government (Arnot 2009).

This social revolution has had a particular effect on nonelite youth between sixteen and thirty years old. Young people tend to have better access to new communication technologies than other sections of nonelite society. Youth are more likely than their parents to be educated. In addition, young people are especially well versed in notions of liberal government as reflected in their tendency to be in the vanguard of anticorruption initiatives, for example (Jeffrey 2010; Bayat 2013).

Yet, at the same time as they benefit from the social revolution, nonelite young people often find their path to economic and social progress blocked. They cannot acquire good quality schooling and college education. The public primary and secondary school system in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia is particularly poor. In addition, those young people who acquire high school qualifications or university degrees encounter major obstacles trying to obtain secure employment, reflecting the failure of economic growth to create secure and well-paid jobs in many countries in the Global South (e.g., Stambach 1998; Mains 2012).

Studies suggest that nonelite young people have reacted to this predicament in one of two ways. A first body of literature refers to young people's tendency to respond to frustration by becoming involved in practices that tend to reinforce gender, class, caste, ethnic, and religious inequalities and harm those most marginalized within society. In Africa, such work includes Newell's (2012) description of widespread crime in West Africa and Jones's (2010) discussion of informal theft in Zimbabwe. In India, such studies include the work on underemployed young men's involvement in Hindu-Muslim riots (Hansen 1996) and research on young people's participation in gender violence (Rogers 2008).

Several of these studies refer explicitly to young people's participation in reactionary activity related to the issue of love, marriage, and intimate relationships. For instance, in Africa, Newell (2012) described how young people become important in critiquing forms of love and marriage that contravene local norms. In north India, Kaur (2010) and Chowdhry (2004, 2007) highlighted the role of educated underemployed youth in caste panchayats -extralegal bodies in which villagers deliberate on alleged contraventions of custom in the sphere of love and marriage. Kaur and Chowdhry argued that educated unemployed young men, who are often demoralized about their own inability to marry, become involved in violently punishing youth who have married across caste lines or eloped without their parents' consent. Smith (2009) made similar arguments when describing youth wings of religious political organizations in Ladakh, which sometimes manage interfaith partnerships through exiling couples from their local area. These points resonate, too, with work on a section of Hindu nationalist youth who have recently argued that Muslim men are feigning love for Hindu women as part of a drive to convert non-Muslims to Islam. Colluding with the media, Hindu nationalists use the notion of Muslim 'Love Jihad' to exploit religious national anxieties (Gupta 2009; Rao 2011; see also Das 1995; Oza 2001; Bacchetta 2004).

A second set of studies has focused on more 'civic' action among disenfranchised youth. This includes

research on young people working in NGOs that address issues of poverty and inequality (Kamat 2002; Nagar 2006; Mains 2012). It also includes work on young people participating in everyday civic action; for example, through spreading environmental awareness (Thieme 2010), acting as intermediaries between the poor and the state (Krishna 2002), or engaging in lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender activism (Dave 2011).

Within this work on constructive action among marginalized youth, the theme of love and intimacy emerges strongly (see Mains 2012). Scholars have suggested that young people can often play roles as mentors for younger youth with relation to questions about 'love' (see Cole and Thomas 2009). In a similar vein, I argue here that young people in the north Indian village of Bemni have responded to social revolution and blocked mobility by assisting in the management of premarital elopements and extramarital affairs, thereby preventing some forms of violent conflict.

I place particular emphasis on young people's capacity to understand and flexibly deploy different visions of love. Love is defined in varied ways in India and in relation to diverse agents-including not only other humans but also animals and gods (Orsini 2006). Moreover, ideas of love have changed over time. As Dwyer (2000) pointed out, there was a particularly important shift in the last quarter of the twentieth century in many of India's largest cities toward notions of bourgeois individualism and-in close association with this move-a rise in ideas of romantic heterosexual love (Uberoi 2009), which came to coexist, or compete, with older ideas of intimacy (see also Trawick 1990; Orsini 2006; Grover 2009, 2011). This shift has been associated with the proliferation of films, books, and songs about romantic love. In some contexts, there has been an associated change in marriage practices; for example, through the rise of more explicitly 'companionate marriages' in which the capacity of people to 'fall in love' became a key consideration in the negotiation of alliances (Donner 2002). The rise of romantic love has also been evident in the emergence of a consumer culture oriented toward heterosexual desire and manifest in practices as diverse as the celebration of Valentine's Day, romantic vacations, Hindi films valorizing 'love marriages' that are subsequently condoned by senior kin, and the everyday use of text messages to express affection. The English word love in this Indian context simultaneously tends to suggest close attachment and desire, as in other contexts, but can also connote a particular type of upper middle-class modernity (see also Illouz

1997). The claim to be 'in love' commonly indexes purchasing power and a familiarity with metropolitan India, as Fuller and Narsimhan (2008) showed in their work on an emerging south Indian middle class.

The state, religious organizations, political parties, and caste associations have often sought to defend older visions of love and intimacy in some regions of India (Chowdhry 2007), and they have often done so through manipulating the language of love (see Rao 2011). In some regions and at particular points in time, such organizations have been able to circumscribe quite tightly how young people relate to ideas of romantic love. For example, Smith (2009) showed how religious leaders in Ladakh exaggerated fears about the 'irrepressible desires' of youth to police young people's unions. At the height of fears about 'Love Jihad,' Muslim young people found themselves the subject of intense media and state scrutiny (Gupta 2009). In other regions and at other times, thoughincluding, as I argue here, rural Uttarakhand in the early to mid-2010s-there are slightly more opportunities for young people to reinterpret love and its meanings.

## Bemni, Uttarakhand

Uttarakhand was established as a separate state in 2000. It contained approximately 10 million people in 2011. Uttarakhand ranks near the bottom of the table of states in India in terms of infant mortality, life expectancy, literacy, death rate, birth rate, percapita income, and electrification of villages. Poor governance, especially a poor record of policing, exacerbates problems of economic growth and human development.

Two thirds of the Uttarakhand population are upper caste (Brahmins and Kshatriyas, also called general castes [GCs]), with 17 percent scheduled caste (SC) in 2011 (Office of the Registrar General [ORG] 2011). There is close overlap between people's caste status and access to land, social contacts, and salaried work in Uttarakhand (see Dyson 2008, 2010). Strong gender norms are characteristic of rural Uttarakhand such that women are not expected to engage in paid work outside the household. In other cases they are permitted to do so but only in a narrow range of areas, such as teaching and work in government nurseries (Klenk 2010). In addition, cultural prescriptions surround the sexual activity of girls and young women. In rural areas in particular, people typically regard a girl or woman

entering sexual relations prior to marriage or outside the conjugal relationship as having transgressed social mores (see Chowdhry 2004).

NGOs have emerged to address gender issues, and scholars are beginning to show how, at the everyday level, rural women in Uttarakhand find ways to challenge or transform relationships of gender dominance (Klenk 2010; Dyson 2008, 2014). Women, however, and especially young women, are typically subordinated in local and regional gender hierarchies.

The village of Bemni is located in Chamoli district in a relatively remote part of Uttarakhand, bordering Tibet, at an altitude of about 2,500 m. Chamoli district is overwhelmingly rural and agricultural in character, as 90 percent of people lived in rural areas in 2011 according to the national census (ORG 2011). People in Bemni typically practice a form of agro-pastoralism. They plant wheat, barley, and millet in fields around the village while also using the surrounding forest to graze cattle and goats. In 2012, Bemni had a population of 940, of which 69 percent were GCs and 31 percent were SCs (author's household census 2012).

Between March 2012 and March 2015, I conducted seven months of research in Bemni, which built on fifteen months of doctoral research that I conducted in the same village in 2003 and 2004. Between 2012 and 2015, I examined the economic, social, and political practices of marginalized youth, especially those who were educated but unemployed or underemployed in the sense of being confined to work that did not reflect their educational qualifications or ambitions. In addition to the village census that I conducted, I carried out semistructured interviews concerning young people's educational and employment experiences, marriage, views on politics, social life, and intimacy. I interviewed forty-five of the fifty young people (ages sixteen to thirty) who had at least a Tenth Class (high school) pass and defined themselves as unemployed or underemployed. I also carried out participant observation that involved a wider set of youth.

The village changed dramatically between 2003 and 2012. The government greatly increased its development assistance to rural areas of Uttarakhand between 2003 and 2004. The introduction of a state employment program-the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS)-in 2005 resulted in a threefold increase in the money arriving annually with the village council ( panchayat ) and substantially enhanced the capacity of the village council to provide work to local people and construct village facilities, such as irrigation channels, paths, and recreational facilities. The government's increased assistance also took the form of stand-alone projects: Ninth and Tenth Classes were added to the local secondary school in 2005; a communications tower was constructed in the village in 2009; electricity arrived in the village in 2010; and a dirt road connecting the village to the local town became usable in 2012.

Between 2003 and 2012, Bemni was absorbed into wider circuits of knowledge and information, especially as a result of rising phone ownership: 60 percent of households had at least one mobile phone in 2012, compared to just 4 percent in 2003 (author's household census 2012). Schooling levels rose sharply, too. For example, 90 percent of men and 69 percent of women age sixteen to twenty-five in Bemni had at least an Eighth Class pass in 2012 compared to 64 percent of men and 10 percent of women age thirty-six to forty-five, even though girls' and SCs' education continues to lag behind that of boys and GCs.

As young people are increasingly educated, their employment aspirations have shifted away from farming. Moreover, climate change and declining prices for key crops have undermined the viability of agriculture. There are very few formal jobs for school and university graduates, however. Over two thirds of the young men twenty to thirty-four years old who live and work the land in Bemni describe themselves as unemployed or underemployed.

These shifts had led to attitudinal changes, especially evident in relation to love. Between 2003 and 2012, there was a marked increase in instances in which people referred to love, often using the English word love , which has the specific sense of romantic love, or the more general Hindi terms for love, prem and pyar , frequently employed to describe close attachment to family members (see also Abraham 2002). By the early 2010s, a series of new practices connected to love had also emerged, including couples taking trips without their children to scenic parts of the mountains and the inclusion of a double bed in the dowries provided by a girl's parents at the point of marriage.

At the same time, villagers continued to expect that young people would not enter sexual relationships until marriage. Moreover, people continued to believe that it was parents' responsibility to arrange the marriage of children and that young people should have limited opportunities to meet prior to an alliance. A young man's parents typically assume responsibility for searching for a bride, assisted sometimes by the young

man's maternal uncle or uncles. They usually approach the parents of a prospective bride to discuss the suitability of the match.

Traditional forms of marriage are nevertheless fluid. Until the late 1990s, a brideprice system operated in Bemni. Reflecting the importance and value of women's agricultural labor to a household, a groom's family made a token payment to a bride's family. In this system, young women had some autonomy after marriage to return to their natal homes, partly reflecting the low cost of marriage. In addition, secondary marriage-wherein a husband took a second wife-was common in the region in the mid-twentieth century (Berreman 1963).

The perceived declining value of women's agricultural work in the 2000s led to a transition in this period to a dowry system of arranged marriage. Parents remained primarily responsible for negotiating alliances in the dowry system of arranged marriage, but in this new system a bride's family paid a small dowry in kind to a groom's family. In 2012, the costs of marriage had increased tenfold in real terms from a decade earlier. Commentators have pointed to the negative implications of this system for young women's agency. Women sometimes become bargaining counters in the efforts of a groom's family after marriage to continue dowry payments, exposing them to violence (see Chowdhry 2004, 2007). More broadly, the dowry system is associated with a relatively narrow strategic approach to arranging the marriage of young people, such that considerations of economic and social profit frequently take precedence over questions of compatibility, women's safety after marriage, and romantic attachment. At the same time, however, the notion that a marriage requires people to be companions and to love one another featured in parental discussions about marriage, reflecting the influence of ideas of companionate marriage circulating in Bemni by the late 2000s and early 2010s and perhaps also the influence of notions of romantic compatibility that were discussed in the previous brideprice system.

## Youth in Bemni

Several young people said that they had become downhearted as a result of rising unemployment. At the same time, many reflected on their position in more positive terms. They said that they constituted a new generation in Bemni of youth ( yuwa or jawaani ). Until the 1980s, young people married in their midteens, moving directly from childhood ( bachpan ) to adulthood ( bare ). Rising education among men and later women, however, led to a delay in marriage. By 2012, the average age of young women at marriage was around twenty-three and for young men around twenty-seven (author's household census 2012). This shift created a new period of 'youth' that had not previously existed in the village. In Bemni, youth ( jawaani ) is commonly imagined as a period that lasts from puberty until marriage. For men, the notion of youth has extended still further. As many men and some young women continue education into their late twenties and even thirties, and after getting married, the category of youth has become partially detached from its former association with a premarital period.

Young people also maintained that a social revolution in India associated with improved communication, rising education, and increasing understanding of citizenship meant that youth are able to serve wider society. Several young men and young women provided children with tutorials free of charge, volunteered in government schools, offered health advice to villagers, assisted neighbors or relatives in times of medical crisis, campaigned vis- a-vis the state on issues of corruption and welfare provision, and helped to resolve political conflicts in the village-all practices more prevalent in the 2010s than in the 1990s or 2000s (see Jeffrey and Dyson 2014). As Naafs and White (2012) found in an Indonesian context, young people often argued that they are particularly well placed to perform this work because as youth they have a closer knowledge of education, health, relationship, and work issues than do people in their forties and fifties. Young people sometimes explicitly referred to themselves as an 'in-between generation' ( beech ki pithi ) who could assist children in a context in which those children's parents lacked recent knowledge of the spheres of education, health, work, and relationships.

The claim to be able to assist effectively in resolving disputes related to love and especially extramarital affairs was crucially important in young people's wider assertion to be a distinctively skilled in-between generation. The rise of romantic love alongside other social changes, such as young people's increasing propensity to study in local towns, was leading to the growing frequency of premarital sexual relationships or sexual relations outside of marriage. Young people's work as mediators and advisors in the village was often focused on coordinating a response to these contested events.

Young people argued strongly that their involvement in the resolution of affairs in Bemni, as mediators

or advisors, was important in preventing violence, conflict, and social suffering among those directly affected by the situation at hand. The weight of the evidence that I collected in Bemni provided qualified support for this assertion. Between 2012 and 2015, I encountered twenty cases of premarital elopement or extramarital romantic relationships, all of which villagers described as affairs, using the English word. In five of the twenty cases I encountered, young people were not closely involved in managing the fallout of the affairs. In all five of these cases, the affairs led to conflict and prolonged hardship for several of those involved. By contrast, of the fifteen cases in which young people were closely involved in resolving the affair, nine were settled relatively peaceably, largely reflecting the role of youth as mediators or advisors. Qualitative analysis of specific cases in which young people did not participate or were closely involved in assisting in the fallout of affairs illuminates why young people's involvement might have some constructive effect. In each instance that follows, I use a particular case study to exemplify key aspects of a wider 'analytic set' of incidents that I collected in the field.

## Youth Exclusion from Social Disputes

The case of Lila, a seventeen-year-old GC girl, illuminates themes I encountered in the five instances in which young people were not closely involved in assisting with affairs and in which the issue led to tension and relatively prolonged hardship. In October 2012, Lila went missing for two days. Her parents assumed that she was with her grandmother, but they began to worry when a school friend said that both Lila and her classmate, an SC young man called Indra Lal, had missed school for the past three days. The youngsters were known to be great friends ( dosti ).

Possibly because the case involved members of two different castes, local government representatives assumed charge of the hunt for the young people. A higher caste (GC) man in his mid-forties, who served as head ( pradhan ) of the local government council ( panchayat ), and a GC man in his late fifties, who headed the government-appointed forest council ( van panchayat ), led a search party. On the third day of the hunt, they found the couple hiding in an abandoned cow shed outside the village. The intercaste character of the elopement was crucial in bringing the incident into the public domain (cf. Mody 2002). It is likely that if the couple had both been SC or GC, they would have simply received a reprimand and been allowed to continue their relationship. In this case, however, several members of Bemni's panchayat and van panchayat beat Indra Lal severely. They then sent him and Lila back to their parents.

The mainly middle-aged men who served on the panchayat or van panchayat then met to discuss how to resolve the matter. At this point, several younger men volunteered to assist. One of these men, an educated but underemployed youth named Om Pal, said that he had tried hard to convince his 'seniors' to let him help with the Lila incident. Om Pal said, 'I told them that I could understand the pressures on young people and how friendship can turn to love.' Om Pal also spoke to Lila's family briefly to provide advice on how to minimize the fallout from the affair. Om Pal strongly advised Lila's father, Bal Ram Singh, not to take the matter to the police. Panchayat members and Bal Ram Singh ignored the younger man's advice, however.

The head of the van panchayat instead met with a police inspector from the local town and Bal Ram Singh to discuss how to address what had happened. The three men decided to impose a fine on Indra Pal's family of Rs 60,000 (roughly equivalent to $1,000, or six months' wages from manual labor), which the impoverished Dalit family was compelled to pay to Bal Ram Singh, who in turn provided a share of the money to the police. They also sent Lila to live with distant relatives in Delhi.

These actions increased public knowledge of the incident. Several young people said that the reputation of the village had suffered as a result, with corresponding possible negative implications for parents who wished to arrange marriages between their daughters and men from other villages. The response to the affair also had more direct negative implications for members of Lila's family. Villagers argued that the family's contact with an SC had tainted the household. Others refused to issue invitations to Lila's family to eat in GC homes, attend GC marriages, or share local water sources. Villagers accused Bal Ram of having profited from his daughter's elopement; some even called him a pimp ( dalaal ). Lila's parents even complained that they would be unlikely to be able to arrange marriages for her two younger sisters.

Several young people in Bemni said that Lila's story illustrated how a 'small incident' could spiral into a catastrophe when youth are not involved in resolving the issue at hand. This was also the case in the four other instances I encountered in which young people had not been involved in resolving a premarital affair

and social tension and conflict had resulted. Commenting on such cases in general, one young woman in the village complained that older men, who assume that they know everything, 'have no understanding of modern love.' Another man said that cases such as that of Lila where youth are not closely involved as mediators illustrate the inability of the state or police to manage affairs effectively: 'They talk and talk for hours but still come to the least sensible solution.' At the same time, however, youth tended to interpret the issue of caste in relation to the affair in a similar manner to that of their seniors. Young people also argued that it was wrong ( gullit ) for a GC and SC to enter into a romantic relationship and that such unions had to be 'sorted out' ( theek ho jae ).

## Mediators

Young people also emphasized their capacity to manage affairs in Bemni through citing instances in which they had intervened to help resolve particular incidents. I encountered nine such cases in Bemni and surrounding villages, six in which the key youth actor was a man and three in which they were women. Within this analytic set of incidents, four related to postmarital affairs and five to premarital affairs. Broadly, young people's roles in these incidents fell into the category of mediator or advisor, although they sometimes performed both roles. Men usually played the role of mediator and women more frequently worked as advisors, although this was not a strict division. It was more common for young people to serve as mediators in the case of extramarital affairs and advisors in the instances of premarital liaisons.

The story of Pradeep, and the assistance offered by his friend Dinesh, illustrates many of the key features of young people's roles as mediators in the case of extramarital affairs. In early June 2012, twenty-sevenyear-old Pradeep was discovered to have been having an affair with a young woman named Meena while living near Delhi. Pradeep was a degree-educated higher caste man in his late twenties in 2012. Born and raised in Bemni, he married in 2006 and by 2012 he had three children. Like many men in the village, Pradeep had been unable to find secure salaried work in or near the village, so he had migrated to a temporary position as a factory supervisor near Delhi. In 2010 he began a sexual relationship with Meena, who worked nearby. Pradeep told Meena that he was single. In June 2012, while Pradeep was on leave from his work and back at home, Meena decided to travel to Bemni for a surprise visit. After making the two day journey from Delhi, she arrived in the village only to find Pradeep at home with his wife and children.

At this point Pradeep called on four friends to assist him. Chief among these friends was Dinesh. Like Pradeep, Dinesh was in his late twenties, married with three children, and imagined himself as underemployed. He had tried unsuccessfully to obtain salaried work and in 2012 worked his small family farm and volunteered part time in a local school. Dinesh acted as a general mediator in the village, assisting other people in resolving issues around relationships as well as health and education. Recognizing this, Pradeep sought assistance from Dinesh and three other men who also had reputations as social helpers in the village.

Together the four young men worked quickly to address the emerging conflict surrounding Meena's arrival. First they helped Meena leave the village and found her accommodation in the local town. They persuaded Meena's brother, who had traveled with her from Noida, not to escalate the problem by involving the local police in the dispute. Dinesh also spent many hours comforting Pradeep's parents and arranging for a female friend to counsel Pradeep's wife.

After two days spent managing these immediate problems, Dinesh approached Meena and her brother to recommend that they return to Noida. The conversation was long and difficult, but Dinesh said that he had eventually made Meena and her brother 'see sense.' They returned to Noida, and Pradeep later left his job and returned to his wife.

Dinesh emphasized his achievement. He and his team of mediators had prevented any physical violence, avoided police or state involvement, and also ensured that the affair had been relatively contained within Bemni. Dinesh also emphasized the importance of his own pragmatism in the resolution of the issue.

Reflecting a wider trend among youth in the village, Dinesh used the word love to refer to romantic relationships between people and the Hindi terms prem and pyar to denote love between family members. He viewed love primarily as an intense form of attachment based on sexual attraction. As such, it could-in his view-be temporary in nature and controlled. 'A tough person can control love,' he said.

Dinesh also said that his observations of how 'love stories' play out among youth in urban areas suggest that it is important to understand love in relation to

social context. Dinesh said, 'Sometimes love is too difficult and will not work.' He also said, 'Love is just a word, but you also have to look at reality. I always believe in seeing what there is actual mein [in actual fact].' Dinesh argued that Meena and Pradeep were unlikely to be happy because of the scale of the social difficulties facing them, chief among them the point that Pradeep was married with three children. In this situation, they should learn to 'abandon love,' in Dinesh's words.

The success of mediators reflected their distinctive skill set. Like many other young men and several young women, Dinesh had spent a period between his late teens and late twenties seeking work and training opportunities in the state capital, Dehra Dun, as well as Delhi. While there, he had gained an appreciation of how large cities work, as well as experiencing cultures of romantic love and how love articulates with other ideas. Dinesh understood how the police station operates in the local town and how to arrange swift travel for Meena and her brother between Bemni and Noida. At the same time, and reflecting his having returned to live in Bemni as an adult, Dinesh had a keen awareness of the best ways to comfort and reassure Pradeep's elderly parents.

In assisting other young people in managing 'affairs,' youth such as Dinesh could counter negative stereotypes of unemployed or underemployed youth as 'useless' ( bekar ) or a threat. He demonstrated his utility to other villagers and also advertised his particular knowledge of love and affairs, two words especially associated with urban India and the middle classes (Dwyer 2000). This work therefore subtly communicated the idea that Dinesh was someone with one foot outside the village, a person marked for mobility and further progress, even while he remained underemployed in the village. 'Love' suggested a familiarity with middle-class urban India.

Other work has charted how young men recover a sense of powerful masculinity in India through forms of sexual harassment (Rodgers 2008) and sometimes through the cynical manipulation of the language of love (Gupta 2009). In the Bemni case, however, young people built gendered identities as people who could manage the fallout of affairs and defuse rather than exacerbate social tensions around love.

It is important not to romanticize the work of Dinesh and other social intermediaries, however. Dinesh and his male friends repeatedly prioritized the issue of the village's and Pradeep's reputation ( izzat )

over Meena's feelings and desires or those of Pradeep's wife. Moreover, in reflecting on the incident, Dinesh emphasized that Meena's higher caste standing had made him relatively sympathetic to Pradeep and Meena. The implication was that if Pradeep had been involved with an SC young woman, young people in the village would have handled the incident differently. Indeed, Dinesh expressed a strong aversion to discussing intercaste marriage, even in the abstract. He said that his interest was in guaranteeing 'social order' and avoiding what he termed the 'storm' ( tufaan ) that he imagined would inevitably flow from a union between an SC and a GC. It was also noticeable that Dinesh had a rather domineering, paternalistic attitude toward Meena. Mediators operated largely within the parameters of social norms set by caste, gender, and propriety, even as they sought to subtly shift some aspects of those norms to support those marrying 'for love' among GCs. Caste and gendered ideas shaped youth practice, albeit in a less direct way to that described, for example, by Smith (2009) and Rao (2011).

## Advisors

My argument about young people's broadly supportive, service-oriented approach to managing tensions over intimate relationships becomes still clearer through consideration of an analytic set of five cases in which youth worked as advisors. All of these cases related to premarital affairs. In three instances, the advisor was a woman, and in two instances, the advisor was male. The case of Pooja is indicative. Twentythree years old, Pooja was in a difficult situation in 2012. Her parents had been ill for some years and had moved to the city to live. Pooja's two brothers were both based in the city, although their wives and children remained in Bemni. Pooja had been left to farm the land practically single-handed since the age of seventeen. At the same time, villagers were increasingly talking about Pooja becoming 'overage' and stressing the need for her to get married. With nobody in Bemni to arrange a marriage for her, Pooja's mother had told her to look out for someone she liked.

Pooja was at a friend's wedding in April 2012 when she first saw Manoj. He was the wedding photographer, slick and efficient with his hired camera equipment and trendy low-slung trousers. Several times that day, they stole shy glances at each other, but they never spoke.

It was the height of the wedding season, so it was just two weeks later when Pooja saw him again. After more furtive glances, she quietly asked her friends who he was. It turned out that Manoj had done the same thing, and a few days later, he called Pooja's brother's wife (with whom she lived), claiming to have dialed the wrong number. They chatted, though, and discovered some common relatives. The calls continued until, on the fourth occasion Manoj phoned, it was Pooja who answered. So began what was to become a year-long phone courtship-a platonic but emotionladen 'affair.' Finally, at Manoj's request, his parents approached Pooja's mother and brothers. Their horoscopes were consulted and a marriage was arranged.

Pooja said that, although her mother had given her license to look out for a partner, her brothers and other villagers could have ostracized her for beginning an affair prior to marriage and subsequently seeking an alliance with the boy. The marriage had happened in large part because of the help and advice she had received from her friend Santoshi. Santoshi was in her late twenties in 2012 and much better educated than Pooja. She had attended the local government degree college in Gopeshwar and made several trips to Dehra Dun and Delhi, where she had relatives. Santoshi had a BA degree and came from a relatively wealthy higher caste family in Bemni, but she had failed to find a salaried job. Santoshi herself said that she had been instrumental in assisting Pooja. She pointed out that, having failed to find secure salaried work, she had the time to devote to assisting youth in Bemni. She said that she saw herself as a type of advisor or mentor and she stressed her relative worldliness: 'I know both town and village ways,' she said.

Santoshi assisted Pooja in three main ways. First, she reassured and motivated Pooja. She encouraged her to persist with the phone calls, set her sights on the young man, and refuse to bow to pressure if others questioned her actions. Santoshi was critical in persuading Pooja that there was no unseen logic that would bar her from being with her partner. Santoshi reported, 'I told her, 'In actual fact, it can work'' ( actual mein chalega ). Like Dinesh, Santoshi put heavy emphasis on the importance of pragmatism but in this case as a basis for emphasizing the power of love.

Second, Santoshi offered Pooja practical assistance. Santoshi had owned a mobile phone for a relatively long period and recognized the value of this technology for continuing a relationship in secret and in a comparatively safe way. She lent Pooja her phone and explained practices of phone use that are common in urban areas. Through Santoshi, for example, Pooja learned that sending a 'miss call'-ringing off before a person answers-is a means of signaling affection.

Third, Santoshi defended Pooja against critiques from family members and other villagers and provided her with a language and script for her activity. Santoshi, like Dinesh, understood love as mainly denoting romantic attachment and thus as distinct from the Hindi terms prem and pyar . She said that love and prem/pyar all signal strong emotional connections and that the three terms are therefore similar in key respects. Santoshi communicated this idea to Pooja as part of her work as an advisor. She said that love is a positive idea and need not be tainted by its association with sneakiness. 'You love your parents, you love your boyfriend; it is okay,' she said, in this case using the English word love throughout.

Santoshi also encouraged Pooja to write herself into a story that followed the narrative arc of the many Bollywood movies in which a young couple convince doubtful elders of their love. She also told Pooja that it is common in urban area for marriages to be 'lovearranged.' In Santoshi's view, a love-arranged marriage is one in which love is the context for marriage. Santoshi said, 'It is a sequence. First there is love, then the marriage is arranged' (cf. Baas 2007).

During the meetings with family members, in particular, Santoshi advocated pragmatism built on the idea of the power of love. 'They are in love,' she told the brothers, emphasizing the term love . 'It is there, you need to accept it, what is the use in trying to object?' Santoshi also subtly alluded to Pooja's reputation in the village for having been a flirt during her teenage years. Santoshi intimated that others have heard 'stories' ( kahani ) about Pooja. This point, alongside the danger of the current flirtation leaking out, meant that any family-led search for a marriage partner might be difficult in the future.

The example of Pooja's alliance and Santoshi's assistance resonates with the four other stories I heard in which young people were heavily involved in assisting youth with premarital affairs in Bemni. The five stories can be considered as an analytic set because in each instance young people ensured that the youth who were participating in the affair were able to achieve a lovearranged marriage. In all cases, too, these youth advisors exhibited a type of frank pragmatism that centered on love as a social fact. Smith (2009) referred to people in Ladkah deploying the notion of love as inevitable and an aspect of 'fate' in discussions regarding interreligious unions. In that context, this type of agency in

rethinking dominant norms could not develop very far, given the constraints imposed by dominant institutions representing religious or political interests. In Bemni, young people were able to deploy ideas about romantic love relatively freely.

The question of whether Santoshi was reproducing or challenging gender and caste norms is complex, however. Youth advisors commonly provided young people involved in premarital affairs with a narrative that could guide their conversations with others, one in which love figures as a challenge to patriarchal norms. At the same time, young people playing this role did not question parents' power over deciding on a suitable marriage and in no instance did they seek to champion intercaste intimacy. What is relatively clear is that GC young people playing advising roles were often able to achieve a measure of mobility through this work and that their work did redistribute local power away from older villagers and into the hands of youth to a certain extent. Santoshi said that her reputation as an advisor was important in her ability to secure a position as a temporary worker in the local government nursery, which in turn strengthened her capacity to work as an advisor still further. She said that she is also interested in the future in becoming involved in NGOs that work on women's issues.

## Limits to Youth Action

I encountered six cases-two premarital and four relating to extramarital affairs-in which young people had been unable to achieve any type of 'positive' resolution after an affair. The instance of Yeshvir Singh is instructive in this context. Yeshvir was in his early thirties in 2012 and married with one child. He lived in Bemni, where he ran a small carpentry workshop. In May of that year it became known that he had been having an affair with a sixteen-year-old school girl in the village named Purnima. On the day that it emerged, Yeshvir took Purnima to a nearby market town and hid her in a privately rented room.

Yeshvir's relatives asked an educated, underemployed young man named Rajendra to assist as a mediator. Rajendra's first thought was to prevent Bemni from acquiring a 'bad reputation,' in part out of concern for the future marriage prospects of youth in the village. He physically barred Yeshvir's wife, Preeti, from running away from the village, catching her as she fled along a mountain road and leading her back to

Bemni. Rajendra told Preeti to remember her responsibility to her son: 'You must protect him, come what may,' he said.

Because the story had already spread to the local town, there was little Rajendra could do to prevent police involvement. Yeshvir was imprisoned and charged with abduction. Within a couple of days, however, Purnima's father, Lal Singh, discovered that his daughter was pregnant by Yeshvir and announced that Yeshvir would have to look after her. Purnima said that she wanted to live with Yeshvir. Reinvoking traditions of secondary marriage in the region (see Berreman 1963), Rajendra and several other young men in the village petitioned Yeshvir to bring Purnima to live with him alongside Preeti. In this case, Rajendra and his compatriots did not seek to use the idea of love as a basis for coming to this solution, nor did they refer, even obliquely, to any model 'love story' existing within film or music. Rather, they referred primarily to Yeshvir's fatherly responsibility ( zimmedaari ) to his son and unborn baby. When Yeshvir acceded to this demand, the young men used their understanding of the local police bureaucracy and courts to negotiate Yeshvir's release, with some assistance from the local pradhan .

In March 2013, six months after Purnima joined Yeshvir's household, I interviewed the two wives together. They talked candidly. The two women had become allies and sought strength from the repeated outbursts of their husband. 'When he's angry with one of us, he just beats us both,' said the younger wife, with a shy giggle, instinctively touching her pregnant belly. She was due in a month, and Yeshvir's first wife had just given birth to another son. Purnima's arrival in the household appeared to have precipitated a new and fairly unusual social alliance, moderating to some degree the effects of Yeshvir's violence and creating a type of sisterly relationship between the two women. Purnima and Preeti said that neither of them had any 'love' for Yeshvir (using the English word).

When I returned to the village in October 2013, though, the situation had changed dramatically. Purnima had given birth, but after a month, the sickly child had died. Distraught, she had begged her parents to let her return to them. They relented, and she was living in her natal home, hopeless and depressed. On 20 October 2013, six days after I left the village, Purnima committed suicide. Yeshvir and Preeti remain together with two sons.

The story of Yeshvir, Purnima, and Preeti is a tragic one. Suicide is a growing problem in the region, especially among young people, and this case forms part of a

wider story, articulated in other work that I have conducted on the hardships facing children and youth in the region (Dyson 2014). A key point is that, despite their efforts to intercede in social conflicts, circumstances often prevented young people from resolving affairs. Nor did young people have the appetite or ability to challenge some of the gender- and age-based inequalities that prevent young women from playing a large role in deciding on the outcome of an affair. Young people's action in relation to love and intimacy in the region played a general role in preventing social conflict while leaving aspects of inequality that threaten and disenfranchise young women substantially in place.

## Conclusions

This article informs the linked fields of geographies of love and geographies of youth by highlighting how a section of youth society can utilize the rise of practices and ideas of romantic love to achieve a measure of social change. Existing literature within geography on love has pointed to the close relationship between regional processes of socioeconomic change and intimate processes associated with practices of love (see Hunter 2010; Morrison, Johnston, and Longhurst 2013). I have contributed to this work by showing that youth are often especially important in mediating how regional change and practices of love intersect. In particular, young people have deployed ideas of love to challenge received wisdom about where responsibility lies for managing social conflict in the village and improve their own standing in a context of widespread unemployment and underemployment. These strategies represent a notable social change, particularly where young women are able to develop identities as effective informal advisors. Against the background of the absorption of rural Uttarakhand into the wider space economy, young people are finding ways to hitch self-interest to a form of community service, frequently through reference to the idea of love.

Wider geographical work has stressed the importance of examining love as a narrative that reflects, but sometimes also changes, social life within specific regional settings (Morrison, Johnston, and Longhurst 2013). The dissemination of notions of romantic love is crucial to social change in Bemni, where young people have a relative freedom to curate ideas of love at least some remove from powerful religious and caste organizations promulgating reactionary norms (cf.

Smith 2009, 2012). Love in the hands of these young people is a flexible and sometimes ambivalent signifier that is understood-and can be resourced-in different ways at different times (see also Ahearn 2001; Mody 2002; Grover 2009). For example, on some occasions, young people invoke stylized versions of popular filmic 'love stories' as a means of instilling confidence in other youth. In other cases, they tack between valorizing romantic love and reminding other youth of the need to accept that such love needs to be placed alongside other attachments and affiliations. In still other situations, such as Santoshi's engagement with Pooja's plight, young people seek to render romantic love acceptable by establishing an equivalence between love and notions of close attachment associated with the Hindi terms pyar and prem .

In making these points, my analysis also contributes to the literature on marginalized young people's agency in the Global South (Durham 2008; Jeffrey 2010; Mains 2012; Dyson 2014). Youth in Bemni do not engage in reactionary violent action (cf. Hansen 1996; Newell 2012). Rather, they commonly sought to prevent conflict through addressing problems that emerge out of premarital and extramarital affairs.

Given the prominent position that the figure of the marginalized youth occupies in the popular imagination in India, where they are often perceived to be agents of reactionary forces, it is important to note that Bemni youth did not usually belong to religious groups or caste associations (cf. Smith 2009), set up village courts to adjudicate on premarital affairs (cf. Chowdhry 2007), or condone physical violence as a solution to conflicts over love (cf. Kaur 2010). These points reflect the relative absence of strong caste-based or religious conflict in Uttarakhand in the early 2010s. My material therefore provides a counterpoint to the work of Chowdhry (2007) and Kaur (2010) in areas of Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh in which caste boundaries were tightly drawn and that of Smith (2009), who studied love in Ladakh in a context of intense conflict over religion and territory. It also contrasts with the work on the politically motivated cultural production of Hindu youth who have circulated fears of a 'Love Jihad' (Gupta 2009; Rao 2011).

I have stressed the theme of brokerage and intermediation throughout the analysis. Youth in Bemni often regarded themselves as people occupying an 'inbetween' generation capable of brokering the relationship between younger youth and parents in their forties or fifties. In developing this role as successful mediators

and advisors, young people stress their spatial acumen, in particular. They are better able than older generations at moving between rural and urban areas, balancing in their minds cultural notions associated with 'the urban' and 'the rural,' and managing new technologies circulating in provincial rural areas. This finding ties my study to work on subaltern cosmopolitanism in geography, which likewise stresses the creative capacity of relatively subordinated sections of society to move between multiple sites or idioms (Gidwani and Sivaramakrishnan 2006; Jeffrey and McFarlane 2008). Youth repurpose the notion of being stuck in between-impoverishment and the middle class, childhood and adulthood, the rural and urban-to stress instead the power of 'inbetween-ness' (cf. Newell 2012; Young and Jeffrey 2012).

At the same time as emphasizing change and imaginative brokerage, however, I have pointed to the dangers of romanticizing young people's social action. A type of paternalism and interest in 'respect' among young people involved as mediators or advisors in resolving local struggles around love and marriage militated against any substantial change in relationships based on caste. A form of low-level discrimination appeared to operate in Bemni distinct from the violent, assertive caste and religious discrimination discussed by scholars such as Chowdhry (2007), Smith (2009), and Rao (2011). Youth social service in Bemni should not be romanticized, too, because GC young people used the notion of 'love' to bolster claims to being part of a nascent rural lower middle class distinct from the poorest-mostly SC-sections of the village. Analysis of young people's engagement with love in rural Uttarakhand thus highlights continuities as well as changes in the reproduction of social inequalities.

## Acknowledgments

I am grateful the Institute of Economic Growth, Delhi for my affiliation (2012-2014). I am indebted to the people of Bemni village for their ongoing kindness and support. I also thank Craig Jeffrey, Trent Brown, Amanda Gilbertson, Nik Heynen, and two anonymous referees for insightful comments on earlier drafts. The usual disclaimers apply.

## Funding

The Economic and Social Research Council, UK (ES/J01 1444/1), funded the research on which this article was based.

## References

- Abraham, L. 2002. Bhai-behen , true love, time pass: Friendships and sexual partnerships among youth in an Indian metropolis. Culture, Health &amp; Sexuality 4 (3):337-53.
- Ahearn, L. M. 2001. Invitations to love: Literacy, love letters and social change in Nepal . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
- Ahmed, S. 2004. Affective economies. Social Text 22 (2): 117-39.
- Ansell, N. 2016. Children, youth and development . London and New York: Routledge.
- Arnot, M. 2009. A global conscience collective? Incorporating gender injustices into global citizenship education. Education, Citizenship and Social Justice 4:117-32.
- Baas, M. 2007. 'Arranged love': Marriage in a transnational work environment. International Institute for Asian Studies Newsletter 45:9.
- Bacchetta, P. 2004. Gender in the Hindu nation: RSS women as ideologues (Vol. 1). New Delhi, India: Women Unlimited.
- Bayat, A. 2013. Life as politics: How ordinary people change the Middle East . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Berlant, L. 1998. Intimacy: A special issue. Critical Inquiry 24 (2):281-88.
- Berreman, G. D. 1963. Hindus of the Himalayas . Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Chowdhry, P. 2004. Caste panchayats and the policing of marriage in Haryana: Enforcing kinship and territorial exogamy. Contributions to Indian Sociology 38 (1-2):1-42.
- ---.2007. Contentious marriages, eloping couples: Gender, caste, and patriarchy in northern India . Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
- Cole, J., and L. M. Thomas. 2009. Thinking through love in Africa. In Love in Africa , ed. J. Cole and L. M. Thomas, 1-30. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Das, V. 1995. Critical events . Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
- ---. 2008. Violence, gender, and subjectivity. Annual Review of Anthropology 37:283-99.
- Dave, N. N. 2011. Indian and lesbian and what came next: Affect, commensuration, and queer emergences. American Ethnologist 38 (4):650-65.
- Donner, H. 2002. One's own marriage: Love marriages in a Calcutta neighbourhood. South Asia Research 22 (1): 79-94.
- Doron, A., and R. Jeffery. 2013. The great Indian phone book . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Durham, D. 2008. Apathy and agency: The romance of agency and youth in Botswana. In Figuring the future: Globalization and the temporalities of children and youth , ed. D. Durham and J. Cole, 151-78. Santa Fe, NM: SAR.
- Dwyer, R. 2000. All you want is money, all you need is love: Sexuality and romance in modern India . London: Cassell.
- Dyson, J. 2008. Harvesting identities: Youth, work and gender in the Indian Himalayas. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 98:160-79.
- ---. 2010. Friendship in practice: Girls' work in the Indian Himalayas. American Ethnologist 37:472-98.
- ---. 2014. Working childhoods: Youth, agency and the environment in India . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Edelman, L. 2004. No future: Queer theory and the death drive . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

- Fuller, C. J., and H. Narasimhan. 2008. Companionate marriage in India: The changing marriage system in a middle-class Brahman subcaste. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 14 (4):736-54.
- Geoghegan, H., and A. Hess. 2015. Object-love at the science museum: Cultural geographies of museum storerooms. Cultural Geographies 22 (3):445-65.
- Gidwani, V. K., and K. Sivaramakrishnan. 2006. Subaltern cosmopolitanism as politics. Antipode 38 (1):7-21.
- ---.2009. Lived experiences: Marriage, notions of love, and kinship support amongst poor women in Delhi. Contributions to Indian Sociology 43 (1):1-33.
- Grover, S. 2011. Marriage, love, caste, and kinship support: Lived experiences of the urban poor in India . Delhi, India: Social Science Press.
- Gupta, C. 2009. Hindu women, Muslim men: Love Jihad and conversions. Economic and Political Weekly XLIV (51):13-15.
- Hansen, T. B. 1996. Recuperating masculinity: Hindu nationalism, violence and the exorcism of the Muslim 'other.' Critique of Anthropology 16 (2):137-72.
- Hopkins, P. E. 2007. Young people, masculinities, religion and race: New social geographies. Progress in Human Geography 31 (2):163-77.
- Hunter, M. 2010. Love in the time of AIDS: Inequality, gender, and rights in South Africa . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- Illouz, E. 1997. Consuming the romantic utopia: Love and the cultural contradictions of capitalism . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Jeffrey, C. 2010. Timepass: Youth, class and the politics of waiting . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Jeffrey, C., and J. Dyson. 2014. Generative politics: Youth and the state in India. Comparative Studies in Society and History 56 (4):967-94.
- Jeffrey, C., P. Jeffery, and R. Jeffery. 2008. Degrees without freedom? Education, masculinities, and unemployment in north India . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Jeffrey, C., and C. McFarlane. 2008. Performing cosmopolitanism. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 26 (3):420-27.
- Jones, J. L. 2010. 'Nothing is straight in Zimbabwe': The rise of the kukiya-kiya economy 2000-2008. Journal of Southern African Studies 36 (2):285-99.
- Kamat, S. 2002. Development hegemony: NGOs and the state in India . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Kaur, R. 2010. Khap panchayats, sex ratio and female agency. Economic and Political Weekly 45 (23):14-16.
- Klenk, R. 2010. Educating activists: Development and gender in the making of modern Gandhians . Bloomington, IN: Lexington Books.
- Krishna, A. 2002. Active social capital: Tracing the roots of development and democracy . New York: Columbia University Press.
- Lawson, V. 2007. Geographies of care and responsibility. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 97 (1):1-11.
- Mains, D. 2012. Hope is cut: Youth, unemployment, and the future in urban Ethiopia . Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
- Majumdar, R. 2009. Marriage and modernity: Family values in colonial Bengal . Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
- Mayer, T., ed. 2012. Gender ironies of nationalism: Sexing the nation . London and New York: Routledge.

Mody, P. 2002. Love and the law: Love-marriage in Delhi.

Modern Asian Studies

36 (1):223-56.

- Morrison, C. A., L. Johnston, and R. Longhurst. 2013. Critical geographies of love as spatial, relational and political. Progress in Human Geography 37 (4):505-21.
- Naafs, S., and B. White. 2012. Intermediate generations: Reflections on Indonesian youth studies. The Asia Pacific Journal of Anthropology 13:3-20.
- Nagar, R. 2006. Playing with fire: Feminist thought and activism through seven lives in India . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Nast, H. J. 2006. Loving . . . whatever: Alienation, neoliberalism and pet-love in the twenty-first century. ACME: An International E-Journal for Critical Geographies 5 (2): 300-27.
- Newell, S. 2012. The modernity bluff: Crime, consumption, and citizenship in C ^ ote d'Ivoire . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Office of the Registrar General (ORG). 2011. Census of India . New Delhi: Government of India.
- Orsini, F., ed. 2006. Love in South Asia: A cultural history . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Oza, R. 2001. Showcasing India: Gender, geography, and globalization. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 26 (4):1067-95.
- Parry, J. 2001. Ankalu's errant wife: Sex, marriage and industry in contemporary Chhattisgarh. Modern Asian Studies 35 (4):783-820.
- Pratt, G. 2012. Families apart: Migrant mothers and the conflicts of labor and love . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Rao, M. 2011. Love Jihad and demographic fears. Indian Journal of Gender Studies 18 (3):425-30.
- Rasool, S. 2013. Re-constructing discourses of love to facilitate help-seeking after woman abuse. Agenda 27 (2): 56-64.
- Rogers, M. 2008. Modernity, 'authenticity,' and ambivalence: Subaltern masculinities on a south Indian college campus. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 14 (1):79-95.
- Smith, S. H. 2009. The domestication of geopolitics: Buddhist-Muslim conflict and the policing of marriage and the body in Ladakh, India. Geopolitics 14 (2):197-218.
- ---. 2011. She says herself, 'I have no future'': Love, fate and territory in Leh District, India. Gender, Place and Culture 18 (4):455-76.
- ---. 2012. Intimate geopolitics: Religion, marriage, and reproductive bodies in Leh, Ladakh. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102 (6):1511-28.
- Stambach, A. 1998. 'Too much studying makes me crazy': School-related illnesses on Mount Kilimanjaro. Comparative Education Review 42 (4):497-512.
- Thieme, T. 2010. Youth, waste and work in Mathare: Whose business and whose politics? Environment and Urbanization 22 (2):333-52.

- Trawick, M. 1990. Notes on love in a Tamil family . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Uberoi, P. 2009. Freedom and destiny: Gender, family, and popular culture in India . Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
- Wylie, J. 2009. Landscape, absence and the geographies of love. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 34 (3):275-89.
- Young, S., and C. Jeffrey. 2012. Making ends meet. Economic &amp; Political Weekly 47 (30):45-51.

JANE DYSON is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Geography at the University of Melbourne, Carlton, VIC 3053, Australia. E-mail: jane.dyson@unimelb.edu.au. Her research interests include gender, work, and social transformation in rural north India.