<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

ISSN: 0004-5608 (Print) 1467-8306 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## Latino Immigrants and Rural Gentrification: Race, 'Illegality,' and Precarious Labor Regimes in the United States

Lise Nelson, Laurie Trautman &amp; Peter B. Nelson

To cite this article: Lise Nelson, Laurie Trautman &amp; Peter B. Nelson (2015) Latino Immigrants and Rural Gentrification: Race, 'Illegality,' and Precarious Labor Regimes in the United States, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 105:4, 841-858, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2015.1052338

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2015.1052338

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 20 Jul 2015.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 232

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

## Latino Immigrants and Rural Gentrification: Race, 'Illegality,' and Precarious Labor Regimes in the United States

Lise Nelson,* Laurie Trautman, y and Peter B. Nelson z

* Department of Women's Studies and Department of Geography, The Pennsylvania State University y Border Policy Research Institute, Western Washington University z Department of Geography, Middlebury College

This article examines the emergence of immigrant-based precarious labor regimes in U.S. rural areas undergoing gentrification. Drawing on field-based research in rural Georgia and Colorado, we explore how Latino and Latina immigrant workers were recruited to places that had been largely off the map of Latino immigrant settlement prior to the late 1990s to work in service and construction employment stimulated by gentrification. We trace evolving recruitment and labor practices that drew on hierarchies of race and 'illegality' to fundamentally improve the productivity and profitability of gentrification-linked sectors. Key to this process was the active recruitment of Latino workers in the 1990s and early 2000s (usually recruited off subcontracted crews hired out from distant metropolitan areas) and the establishment of personal relations of loyalty and dependence between those workers and their white bosses. Over time, these personal relationships often produced informal labor brokers for business owners, brokers who facilitated access to immigrant networks necessary for further recruitment of immigrant workers and critical to producing the high degree of flexibility and discipline that began to characterize these emerging labor regimes. Our analysis makes two key theoretical contributions. First, by exploring how precarious labor regimes become instantiated into rural spaces we decenter the urban in our understanding of these regimes as theorized by Theodore and others. Second, we highlight the importance of attending to the imbrication of class, race, and 'illegality' in rural gentrification research. Key Words: Latino immigration, migration, precarious labor, rural gentrification.

本 文 检 视 美 国 正 在 经 历 缙 绅 化 的 乡 村 地 区 中 ， 以 移 民 为 基 础 的 不 稳 定 劳动 体 制 的 浮 现 。 我 们 运 用 在 乔 治 亚 州 与 科 罗 拉 多 州 乡 村 地 区 进 行 的 田 野 研 究 ， 探 讨 拉 丁 裔 的 男 、 女 性 移 民 工 ， 如 何 被 招 募 至 1990 年 代 末期 之 前 ， 拉 丁 裔 移 民 社 群 地 图 中 几 乎不 存 在 的 地 方 ， 从事 由 缙 绅 化 所 助 长 的 服 务 及 营 建 工 作 。 我 们 追 溯 演 变 中 的 招 募 工 作 及 劳动 实 践 ， 这 些 实 践 在 根 本 上 利 用 种 族 阶 层 高 低 及 ' 非 法 性 ' ， 来 促 进 缙 绅 化 相 关 部 门 的 生 产 力 及 获 利 。 此 一 过 程 的 关 键 ， 是 1990 年 代与 2000 年 代 早 期 ， 对 拉 丁 裔 工 人 积 极 展 开 的 招 募 工 作 （ 通 常 是 从 较远 的 大 都 会 地 区 聘 雇 的 转 包 契 约 工 群 中 招 募 而 来 ） ， 以 及 在 这 些 工 人 和 其 白 人 老 板 之 间 建 立 的 私 人 忠 诚 与 依 赖 关 係 。 这 些 私 人 关 係 ， 经 常 随 着 时 间 ， 为 企 业 所 有 者 培 养出 非 正 式 劳 动 的 代 理 人 ， 协 助 其 接 触 移 民 网 络 ， 而 这 些 移 民 网 络 ， 对 进 一 步 招 募 移 民 劳 工 是 必 要 的 ， 且 对 生 产 成 为 这 些 浮 现 中 的 劳动 体 制 之 特 徵 的 高 度 弹 性 化 、 规 训 而 言 ， 是 相 当 关 键 的 。 我 们 的 分 析 提 供 两 项 重 要 的 理 论 贡 献 。 首 先 ， 我 们 透 过 探 讨 不 稳 定 劳动 体 制 如 何 进 入 、 并 成 为乡 村 空 间 的 实 例 ， 对 我 们 根 据 西 奥多 及 其 他 学 者 理 论 化 这 些 体 制 时 ， 聚 焦 城 市 之 理 解 进 行 去 中 心 化 。 再 者 ， 我 们 凸 显 在 乡 村 缙 绅 化 研 究 中 ， 关 照 阶 级 、 种 族 与 ' 非 法 性 ' 的 重 叠 之 重 要 性 。 关 键 词 ： 拉 丁 裔 移 民 ， 迁 徙 ， 不 稳 定 劳动 ， 乡 村 缙 绅 化 。

En este art  ıculo se examina la aparici  on de reg  ımenes laborales precarios relacionados con inmigrantes en  areas rurales de los EE.UU. en proceso de aburguesamiento [ gentrificaci  on ]. A partir de investigaci  on de campo en zonas rurales de Georgia y Colorado, exploramos el proceso de reclutamiento de inmigrantes latinos como trabajadores y trabajadoras hacia lugares en gran medida situados fuera del mapa t  ıpico de asentamiento de estos inmigrantes, antes del final de los 1990, con empleo en el campo de los servicios y la construcci  on, estimulado por el aburguesamiento. Le seguimos la pista a esta emergente forma de reclutamiento y pr  acticas laborales, que descansan en jerarqu  ıas de raza e 'ilegalidad,' fundamentalmente orientados a mejorar la productividad y lucro de sectores ligados al aburguesamiento. Clave en este proceso fue el activo reclutamiento de trabajadores latinos en los a ~ nos 1990 y principios de la d  ecada siguiente (usualmente reclutados entre equipos subcontratados que a la vez fueron integrados con trabajadores de  areas metropolitanas distantes) y el establecimiento de relaciones personales de lealtad y dependencia entre aquellos trabajadores y sus patronos blancos. Con el tiempo, estas relaciones personales a menudo dan lugar a bolsas informales de empleo para los due ~ nos de negocios, cuyos organizadores facilitaban acceso a redes de inmigrantes, lo cual es necesario para ampliar el reclutamiento entre

este tipo de inmigrantes, estrategia cr  ıtica para producir el alto grado de flexibilidad y disciplina que desde entonces caracteriza estos reg  ımenes laborales emergentes. Nuestro an  alisis hace dos contribuciones te  oricas claves. Primera, al explorar la manera como los reg  ımenes laborales informales se afincan en las  areas rurales descentramos lo urbano en nuestro entendimiento de estos reg  ımenes, seg  un lo han teorizado Theodore y otros. Segunda, destacamos la importancia de asistir en la imbricaci  on de clase, raza e ilegalidad en la investigaci  on del aburguesamiento rural. Palabras clave: inmigraci  on latina, migraci  on, trabajo precario, aburguesamiento rural.

Day labor and other forms of temporary, casualized and precarious employment lie at the center of an emergent employment regime that is effectively rewriting labor market rules and refashioning the opportunity structures open to vast segments of the labor forces of major US cities.

-Theodore (2003, 1812)

B uilding on work by Allen and Henry (1996), Peck (1996), and Sassen (1996), Theodore explored the role of day labor contractors in producing a 'precarious labor regime' in globalized Chicago during the 1990s. He argued that the explosion of day labor contractors was fundamental to a spatially distinct reindustrialization of Chicago in the context of globalization. That urban growth model, he contended, was premised not only on a centrally located and globally linked producer services sector but also on a deregulated and decentralized manufacturing sector (located increasingly in suburban spaces) dependent on a flexible and highly exploitable workforce. Focusing on the day labor industry that transported workers to suburban manufacturing sites, and particularly the use of homeless residents in the day labor industry, Theodore (2003, 1821) argued that '[t]he low wages paid and the uncertainty associated with poorly paid, temporary employment place most workers in an unenviable position: unable to work themselves out of poverty through day labor, yet dependent on staffing agencies as a means of their very survival.' These dynamics both shaped the nature of contingent employment and transformed work for those in more permanent lines of work.

This article engages the concept of precarious labor regime to understand an important and understudied dimension of rural gentrification in the United States over the past fifteen to twenty years: the recruitment of, and economic dependence on, low-wage and often undocumented Latino and Latina workers for the production and maintenance of gentrifying places. The concept of precarious labor regimes provides a conceptual entry point-and a connection to urban theories of political economic transformation-for analyzing how social relations marked by class, race, and 'illegality' have become fundamental to these rural landscapes. Our use of the term illegality draws on the work of DeGenova (2005) to problematize sociopolitical processes of illegalization and the everyday palpable sense of deportability this entails. The concept is deeply racialized, as in practice Latino residents are often treated as illegal regardless of their actual legal status or nativity. 1

Our previous research documents quantitatively the relationship between the arrival of wealthy, overwhelmingly white amenity migrants and the arrival of low-wage Latino immigrants to high-amenity rural areas since the mid-1990s (see P. B. Nelson, Oberg, and Nelson 2010). The analysis presented here takes our exploration of linked migration further by sharing qualitative data from two case studies in Colorado and Georgia that demonstrate how Latino workers were recruited and incorporated into gentrifying rural economies and how this process over time fundamentally transformed labor regimes in ways akin to those found in urban contexts. In doing so, we respond to calls for 'greater conceptual and empirical integration of urban and rural scholarship' (Lichter and Brown 2011, 566; see also McCarthy 2007) and help draw connections between urban and rural restructuring under globalization (Woods 2007).

Theodore's work contributes to the literature on shifting labor regimes and modes of capital accumulation in the context of neoliberal globalization, scholarship that grounds globalization within urban landscapes (see also Sassen 1988, 2001; Allen and Henry 1996; Peck 1996; Wills, Datta, and Evans 2010). 2 Sassen (1988), for example, reconceptualized the relationship between labor mobility and capital accumulation by articulating the connections between the expansion of the high-wage professional service sector (tied to a globalizing economy), urban gentrification, and the arrival of low-wage immigrant workers to global cities in the 1980s. Drawing on Theodore, Torres et al. (2013, 145) defined precarious labor regimes as 'characterized by less regulation and enforcement of worker protections; greater flexibilization of labor; contingent temporary employment; low wages; poor working conditions; and racially segmented and polarized employment of vulnerable groups such as immigrants.' Scholars articulating the

<!-- image -->

Figure 1. Amenity landscapes in Routt County and Rabun County. Left photo from Steamboat Springs, Colorado; right photo taken near Clayton, Georgia. Source: Photos by authors. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

emergence of urban precarious labor regimes are not claiming that contingency and racial segmentation did not exist prior to the neoliberal era. Instead, these researchers examine the economic and political displacement of more stable, often unionized jobs and the emergence of new social-spatial configurations that depend on hierarchies of class, race, and illegality to discipline a contingent, flexible workforce.

The analysis presented here decenters the urban in our understanding of precarious labor regimes by examining the emergence of similar regimes in the rural United States-specifically in areas affected by domestic amenity migration and ensuing processes of rural gentrification. From Jackson Hole, Wyoming, to Cooperstown, New York, high-amenity rural areas have attracted significant inmigration of wealthy, overwhelmingly white domestic migrants, a process echoed in other postindustrial contexts (for a review, see Gosnell and Abrams 2009). Although urban-to-rural, so-called back-tothe-land domestic amenity migrations in the United States can be traced back to the 1970s, it was not until the mid-1990s that numbers increased rapidly as a flood of wealthy newcomers built vacation homes or permanently relocated to their imagined rural paradise-whether paradise was defined by fly fishing, skiing, golf courses, or assumptions of rural homogeneity, neighborliness, and security. Figure 1 shows rural landscapes of consumption in our case-study communities.

Researchers from a range of disciplines have explored demographic and political economic shifts in high-amenity rural areas. Few, however, have considered the immigrant-based labor regimes that over the last fifteen to twenty years have often underpinned these transformations (for review see L. Nelson and Nelson [2011]). This scholarship would benefit from a closer engagement with the literature on the dispersal of Latino immigrant settlement patterns to new immigrant destinations post-1990. We return to both of the gentrification and new destinations literatures in the next section to develop our argument that attention to the economic dependence on immigrant workers in the context of rural gentrification is critical to understanding the economic transformations generated by amenity migration flows and the reconfiguration of social relations in these contexts. Despite the fact that it is predicated on powerful processes of exclusion and invisibility for low-wage immigrant newcomers subordinated by hierarchies of class, race, and illegality, the growing Latino presence in these areas represents an important demographic and socioeconomic transformation. Scholars should avoid reproducing this invisibility by paying closer attention to the issue of labor in the context of rural gentrification and, ultimately, to the economic, cultural, and political role of immigrant residents in these high-amenity rural areas.

## Theoretical Contexts

[The] contradictions of capitalism [are] worked through and embedded in the production of the geographical landscape. (Harvey 2001, 27)

According to Harvey (2001), crises of overaccumulation are resolved (temporarily) by spatial fixes that

replicate the contradictions of capital over broadening geographical terrains. One kind of spatial fix that acts as a countercyclical solution to overproduction is the investment of surplus capital in the expansion or reconfiguration of the built environment, including infrastructure, commercial development, and residential housing. Although Harvey focused his attention on urban environments, landscapes of rural gentrification in the United States, particularly their expansion in the late 1990s and beyond, also represent such a spatial fix. The capital necessary to build or buy the Steamboat Springs home pictured in Figure 1 (adjacent to a golf course and walking distance from the ski lift) originated in urban spaces far from the high Rockies-whether that be Los Angeles, Chicago, or Denver-and largely by a class of high-wage professionals linked to the globalized service sector. Rural gentrifiers tend to come from a similar class position as those involved in urban gentrification. 3

The literature on urban gentrification examines dimensions of the broader dynamic of spatial fixes theorized by Harvey. N. Smith (1979, 462) defined gentrification as 'the transformation of inner-city workingclass and other neighborhoods to middle- and uppermiddle-class residential, recreational, and other uses.' Urban theories of gentrification explore the processes through which the urban gentry (professional and managerial residents) (re)occupy urban spaces and in the process displace low-income housing and workingclass residents. N. Smith (1979, 1996) emphasized capitalist production of gentrified landscapes, seeing the emergence of a rent gap as key (defined as the devalorization of inner-city property relative to its potential value if gentrified). Others, such as Ley (1986), pointed to the cultural taste and purchasing power of the gentrifiers themselves as paramount. Although current work seeks to bridge the gap between these explanations (see Lees, Slater, and Wyly 2007), what is clear is its diffusion over timeby the 2000s gentrification had begun to move down the urban hierarchy (N. Smith 2002).

The emergence of rural gentrification studies can be traced to U.K.-based scholarship that began to examine middle- and upper-class inmigrants moving to rural areas in the 1970s and 1980s. Like its urban counterpart, this process reshaped the built environment and displaced-both physically and culturally-long-term residents. Much of the early U.K.-based literature on rural gentrification focused on housing stock, land markets, and planning (Little 1987; Lowe et al. 1993; Phillips 2002), class colonization (Phillips 1993;

Murdoch and Marsden 1994; Cloke, Phillips, and Thrift 1995), and the draw of idyllic understandings of rurality for the middle classes (Cloke and Thrift 1987; Halfacree 1993). More recent scholarship continued the focus on working-class displacement, critiquing, for example, rural planners' emphasis on landscape protection over affordable housing (Scott 2011; D. P. Smith 2011).

Although similar population and socioeconomic dynamics emerged in the United States during roughly the same period, U.S.-based scholars have been less inclined to use the word gentrification and instead most frame such processes as amenity migration or exurban migration (see Gober, McHugh, and Leclerc 1993; Frey and Liaw 1998; Krannich and Smith 1998; Shumway and Otterstrom 2001; P. B. Nelson, Stege, and Nicholson 2004; Brown, Dorius, and Krannich 2005). For much of this U.S.-based literature, questions of land markets and housing prices, often a focus of U.K. scholarship, are merely the backdrop to research on environmental clashes and class polarization (see P. B. Nelson 2001; Walker and Fortmann 2003; Gosnell and Abrams 2009).

A small but growing number of U.S.-based scholars have begun to draw on the language of gentrification to theorize these processes. Ghose (2004) drew parallels between transformations emerging in Missoula, Montana, during the 1990s and urban gentrification, including changing lifestyle preferences, the commodification of space, and the displacement of workingclass residents (see also Darling 2005). Lawson, Jarosz, and Bonds (2008) examined representations of poverty and the poor (including Latino farm workers) among Pacific Northwest business and political leaders promoting rural gentrification as an economic development strategy. Finally, Hines (2010) used the concept of gentrification to theorize the colonization of rural places by ex-urban elites, arguing that this process is linked to broader postindustialization processes. 4

What is missing from existing approaches to rural gentrification in the United States (or other conceptual framings such as amenity migration) is a deeper engagement with social and spatial restructuring of labor in the context of neoliberal globalization since the 1990s, particularly the diversification of Latino immigrant employment and settlement patterns. 5 The literature on post-1990, new destinations for Latino immigrants can add insights to our understanding of rural gentrification processes. First, new destinations research includes both rural and urban and suburban destinations (see Suro and Singer 2002; Arreola 2004;

Kandel and Parrado 2005; Z  u ~ niga and Hern  andezLe  on 2005). Second, new destinations scholarship on ethnic and racial demographic patterns (Donato et al. 2007; Lichter and Johnson 2009) and racial segregation (Lichter et al. 2010) raise issues of race and ethnicity that have largely not been on the agenda for U.S. amenity migration and rural gentrification scholars.

Our work also provides unique contributions to long-standing debates concerning the drivers of new Latino immigrant settlement patterns. Although an in-depth engagement with new destinations scholarship is beyond the scope of this article, we identify rural gentrification as an important but underconceptualized type of new Latino immigrant rural destination. Kandel and Parrado (2008), for example, charted the extraordinary urban and rural dispersal of Latinos over the last two decades but fell back on the assumption that Latino settlement in rural destinations is driven by industrial restructuring such as meat packing, even as they conceded that they have only limited understanding of the labor market processes underlying the geographic dispersion of settlement patterns. Lichter and Brown (2011) examined key demographic, social, and economic dynamics emerging in what they termed 'rural American urban society' but they continued to frame 'rural America as a place of consumption' (resort and retirement areas) as conceptually separate from 'rural America as new immigrant destination' (754-56). New destinations scholars would benefit from teasing out the different types of immigrant-based labor regimes emerging in rural places, a move that would allow them to draw new insights at the urban-rural interface. For example, whereas rural meat-packing or food processing sites present a certain spatial configuration of labor markets characterized by employment (and housing) in a concentrated location, immigrant labor markets and housing in gentrifying rural spaces are dispersed-with employment opportunities spread out at construction sites, landscaping jobs, and in various back-room spaces of restaurants, private households, and hotels. The labor regimes and associated geographies of social reproduction in rural gentrification areas are distinct, yet relatively unexamined in new destinations scholarship. 6

The empirical analysis presented here draws on indepth qualitative research that comparatively explores how dependence on Latino workers emerged and became consolidated in two rural gentrifying communities in Georgia and Colorado. We trace the recruitment and integration of Latino immigrants into service and construction sectors in these relatively isolated areas and consider how and why this led to the establishment of immigrant-based precarious labor regimes resembling those found in urban contexts. In short, employers 'discovered' Latino workers in a time of labor shortage (mid- to late-1990s) as the demand for construction and other gentrification-linked sectors expanded rapidly. 7 What was seen by many employers initially as a short-term solution to labor needs led to a transformation in the nature of job supply and demand in these sectors. New immigrant-based labor regimes improved the fundamental productivity and profitability for a range of businesses, even as these labor practices helped solidify new hierarchies of difference and belonging in these communities. By bringing the concept of precarious labor regime to rural gentrifying spaces, we make visible how racialized exclusion and exploitation-processes intimately linked to discourses of illegality-have undergirded recent U.S. rural gentrification.

## Comparative Case Studies of Precarious Labor Regimes Produced by Rural Gentrification

Jorge is a twenty-four-year-old Mexican national working without authorization in Steamboat Springs, Colorado, since 2008. Jorge lives in a trailer park that has escaped redevelopment in an era of skyrocketing property values because it is on a floodplain. It also largely escapes the sight of tourists and does not impinge on the day-to-day spatial routes of middleand upper-class residents.

In the summers Jorge works with an all-Latino maintenance crew moving between ranches. In the winter Jorge shovels snow for a property maintenance company serving wealthy homeowners. In addition to these seasonal jobs, Jorge is on the nighttime cleaning crew for a local grocery store from 9 p.m to 2 a.m., six nights a week. After he described his multiple jobs, I asked him when he sleeps. He laughed, 'I only sleep three or so hours a night.' He has one day off a week, the only day he could schedule an interview with me.

Jorge's story (drawn from field notes) illustrates the nature of emerging labor regimes in sites of rural gentrification, regimes characterized by the growing presence of low-wage immigrant workers, many undocumented, who provide dependably flexible, hard-working, and relatively cheap labor for a range of service

Table 1. Growth in Latino population in Rabun and Routt Counties

|   Year | Routt County     | Routt County      | Rabun County     | Rabun County      |
|--------|------------------|-------------------|------------------|-------------------|
|        | Total population | Percentage Latino | Total population | Percentage Latino |
|   1990 | 14,088           | 2.5               | 11,648           | 0.6               |
|   2000 | 19,690           | 3.0               | 15,050           | 4.5               |
|   2010 | 23,509           | 7.0               | 16,276           | 8.0               |

Note:

Data from the U.S. Census.

and construction industries that have significant seasonal fluctuations in labor demand. Although the seasonality of labor demand existed prior to the arrival of immigrant workers, the intensity of this demand in the 1990s fundamentally changed the labor needs in these places (driven not just by the numerical expansion of homes but the pace of this process and new levels of extravagance in the built environment). 8 Over time, as business owners tapped into this new labor force, immigrants (especially the undocumented) became fundamental to how a range of companies grew their operations-a process that ultimately changed the nature of job supply and demand, as well as demographics, in Steamboat and Routt County.

Our analysis is based on extensive field work in Routt County, Colorado, and Rabun County, Georgia. We completed 280 formal interviews in these communities, with employers (especially construction and service industries), workers (immigrant and nonimmigrant), city and county officials, longtime residents, teachers, retirees and other gentrifiers, social service providers, and staff of nongovernmental service organizations. 9 Participant observation over thirteen weeks between 2010 and 2012 also allowed us to observe a range of social spaces and interactions-from church services to community celebrations-and to talk informally to residents in the context of daily life. We also collected textual data, including local newspapers, planning documents, real estate ads, local surveys, and popular local histories. Together, these data provide insight into evolving labor relations (the focus of this article) and social geographies as both communities experienced gentrification and significant growth in their low-wage, racialized, and undocumented immigrant populations.

These two case study sites were selected through a process that identified nonmetropolitan counties throughout the United States experiencing the inmigration of wealthy, mostly white domestic migrants as well as low-wage Latino immigrant workers during the

1990s and beyond. We narrowed this list to those counties that showed signs of gentrification in terms of property values and other indicators (for detailed methodological discussion, see P. B. Nelson et al. 2010). Rabun and Routt counties were selected as case study communities: Both experienced the gentrification boom during roughly the same period (late 1990s-mid-2000s), and both witnessed a significant and fairly rapid growth in their Latino population (see Table 1). Both of these counties have historically been overwhelmingly white. The U.S. Census indicates that non-Hispanic whites made up 96.3 percent of Routt County's population and 98.4 percent of Rabun County's population in 1990. We were also interested in comparing shifting labor regimes in the context of gentrification in two different regions-the Rocky Mountain West and the U.S. South.

## Rabun County, Georgia

Rabun County, 1.5 hours from Atlanta, sits at the southern edge of the Appalachian mountain range in the northeast corner of Georgia (see map, Figure 2). With 377 square miles of area and a total population of 16,276 (U.S. Census Bureau 2010), Rabun County is a very rural place. Beyond simply its population density, the county is unique in that a few large landowners hold nearly 75 percent of its land area (mainly the Forest Service and Georgia Power Company). Thus, intact forests surround much of its agricultural valleys-creating pristine views and a deep sense of rurality. In addition, the county contains three large reservoirs created when power generation dams were built in the 1930s. Wealthy people from Atlanta began to build cottages on these reservoirs (Lake Rabun, Lake Burton, and Seed Lake) starting in the 1930s and 1940s to enjoy the cooler summer temperatures. It was not until the 1990s, however, that these rustic summer cottages were systematically replaced with much larger

Figure 2. Map of Rabun County, Georgia. Cartographer: Meche Lu. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

homes designed for long-term (part-year and yearround) residence.

Amenity development that had once been contained to portions of the year and along the lakeshores became more year-round and spatially-dispersed in the 1990s, a process that can be traced to a range of political and economic transformations both regional and global. Expansion of the transportation system in the 1980s and early 1990s dramatically cut the travel time between Rabun County and Atlanta. Equally important were demographic and structural economic factors that put a growing number of wealthy people on these improved roads and looking for their rural paradise: the aging of the baby boom (see P. B. Nelson, Stege, and Nicholson 2004) and the impacts of economic globalization on cities such as Atlanta. During the 1990s Atlanta was one of the fastest growing metropolitan areas in the country-both economically and demographically. As Atlanta became home to corporate headquarters for companies such as Coca Cola, AT&amp;T Mobile, and Home Depot, the pool of potential gentrifiers expanded (on Atlanta's growth, see Rutheiser 1996).

Examining rural gentrification processes in the United Kingdom during the 1980s, Phillips (1993, 126) argued that second homeownership and access to rurality became an important 'positional good' for the wealthy. For the Atlanta elite, property on Lake Rabun or Lake Burton serves this purpose. According to Atlanta Magazine, 'You can buy your way onto Rabun, Burton or Seed, but you can't buy your way in' (Coppola 2001, 72-73):

A red-tailed hawk gazing on the lakes on any given Saturday in the high season could discern, in a few moments' flight, an unparalleled concentration of Atlanta's power elite-some of the richest, most successful, politically connected, creative and influential men and women the state has ever known. . . . Over the last decade, these pristine North Georgia lakes have become upscale Atlanta's playground of choice.

Limited lake access, few public beaches, and greatly constrained supply of developable land combine to create a deep sense of exclusivity associated with these lakefront properties.

By the early 2000s Rabun County was experiencing a construction boom (Figure 3). Rapid expansion of second homes and permanent amenity-migrant homes occurred not only on the lakes-now the domain of millionaires and celebrities-but also in the valleys, mountain slopes, and ridgelines throughout the county.

## Routt County, Colorado

Steamboat Springs, Colorado, has a different history, although one driven by similar demographic and economic transformations at national and global scales. Although the first ski area opened in 1963, in terms of economy and identity, Steamboat largely remained a ranching and mining town into the late 1970s. The growth of the ski resort did attract amenity-oriented inmigrants-the beginning trickle of mostly young adults who often came for a visit after

Figure 3. Growth of building permits issued in Rabun County, Georgia, and Routt County, Colorado. Source: U.S. Census Bureau (2011). (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

college and never left-but according to a number of longtime residents, the economy and fundamental character of the town did not begin to shift profoundly until the 1980s and beyond largely due to its distance (3.5 hours) from Denver (see Figure 4).

By the early 1990s, mining and commercial ranching were playing a reduced role in the economy (although so-called hobby ranching by millionaires was expanding). Steamboat was becoming a prime winter and summer vacation resort town and a soughtafter site for a growing number of amenity migrants who fit a similar profile as those transforming Rabun County, Georgia: white, professional, middleto upper-class urbanites seeking a full-time or part-year refuge from urban life. In this way, Steamboat is emblematic of other Western amenity boom towns (Beyers and Nelson 2000; Loeffler and Steinicke

2007). The two advertisements shown in Figure 5 are directed at these distinct groups: short-term tourist visitors and potential amenity migrants.

Property values over the past two decades have skyrocketed, pressuring all but the richest residents to move out of town and vacate the county (see Figure 6). For the last twenty years, Steamboat has transformed into a commuting labor regime: Even professionals, from teachers to lawyers, frequently hold multiple jobs and live thirty to forty minutes from town (Yampa Valley Partners 2010).

The comparative analysis of shifting labor regimes in Routt and Rabun counties presented here provides a fresh perspective on geographies of rural gentrification and shifting Latino immigrant settlement patterns in the United States. It also offers a model for considering the production of precarious labor regimes across

Figure 4. Map of Routt and Moffat counties, Colorado. Cartographer: Meche Lu. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 5. Two advertisements seeking to attract distinct groups (tourists and amenity migrants) to Steamboat Springs. The ad on the left is from Steamboat Home Finder, a real estate magazine (Fall 2011). The ad on the right is from The Official Steamboat Springs Visitor's Guide (Summer 2011). (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 6. Data from Routt County Tax Assessor.

<!-- image -->

space, beyond large urban centers. It would be a mistake to claim that labor regimes prior to the 1990s in either rural Georgia or Colorado were not precarious in many ways, as there is a long history of vulnerability of low-wage workers in both places. The permanent settlement of Latino workers in these areas, however, was constitutive of seismic shifts in the nature of lowwage work during the gentrification boom and beyond. The overwhelmingly white, native-born labor force used almost exclusively in these sectors prior to this time did contend with low wages and employment seasonality, but they did not face the daily threat of deportation or racialized narratives of criminality and threat discursively attached to brownness in the contemporary United States (see DeGenova 2005). The recruitment and permanent settlement of Latino workers in these places transformed local labor regimes, ones increasingly characterized by new levels of flexibility for employers on one hand, and insecurity and discipline for low-wage workers on the other. 10 Both sides of this coin (flexibility and insecurity) are constituted by class, race, and illegality, and they echo dynamics usually examined in global cities (see Gomberg-Mu ~ noz 2011).

## Race, Illegality, and the Consolidation of Immigrant Labor Regimes

A key empirical concern underlying our research was the question of how immigrant workers and rural employers in these areas find each other given their relative isolation from urban centers usually associated with larger pools of immigrant workers. Although in both cases there was a history of Latino immigrants involved in farm and ranch work, we found this source less important (particularly in Colorado) than a process that might be described as the diffusion of immigrant-based precarious labor regimes from urban areas, primarily through the subcontracting relationships that emerged during the gentrification-driven construction boom. The spatial extension of subcontracting networks used by businesses to cope with the construction and amenity service boom led to the establishment of immigrant labor brokers and networks in these areas. Out of thirty-four Latino respondents in our Routt County sample, only two had any connection to ranching either as a source of employment (currently or in the past) or as the conduit through which they chose to come to and settle in Routt County or its environs. In Rabun County, six of the thirty-six interviews with Latino residents indicated that they were recruited to the area initially as farm laborers or through friends or family who worked in farm labor. 11 The rest of our respondents came through contacts made on subcontracting crews coming from urban areas or kith and kin working in those same sectors.

According to business owners and our review of local newspaper reports from the 1990s and beyond, Routt and Rabun counties experienced severe labor shortages as the construction sector expanded in the late 1990s and early to mid-2000s (see Olson 1997). In response, many business owners began to recruit Latino immigrant workers-most commonly by subcontracting work with companies based in larger cities. The arriving crews were largely Latino. It was not uncommon for employers to recruit a new worker right off a visiting crew, and to offer higher wages than could be found in the city. As new employer-worker relations were established, this provided mechanisms for recruiting more immigrant workers through social networks available through those early hires (cf. Waldinger 1997).

This gentrification-driven recruitment process drove both the demographic changes captured in the U.S. Census (see Table 1) as well the transformation of local labor regimes. New divisions of labor emerged-ones marked by race, nationality, and illegality-as well as a new repertoire of business and labor practices that together produced a precarious and contingent workforce. These labor regimes were decidedly more complex than the ones they replaced in either area, and they transformed the profitability and productivity of rural capitalism as well as the experience of work for immigrant and nonimmigrant workers in these sectors.

At the center of these new regimes, and the profitability associated with them, is vulnerability-vulnerability created by intersecting structural processes. First, most undocumented immigrant workers live in fear of deportation and have little recourse for demanding basic rights-a situation that produces 'compliant workaholics' (a term from Harrison and Lloyd 2011). Second, even if documented, Latino immigrants face racialized assumptions about their rights to belong and to a home life-feeding expectations and assumptions about how hard they will work and how little they should complain. Complicating things further, many documented low-wage immigrants have family members who are undocumented. Third, most of the newly arriving immigrant workers

involved in low-wage work struggle under poverty. The intersection of class, race, and illegality thus produced a highly flexible, dependable, and productive workforce for the benefit of entrepreneurs wanting to profit from the gentrification boom. These new regimes allowed rural businesses to improve the speed and efficiency of their operations, outcompeting those that continued with the traditional, local source of labor and set of labor practices.

A majority of employers we interviewed insisted that they did not hire Latino workers because they could pay them less but because they were generally more productive, reliable, and flexible. From the employer's perspective, they were a labor force that could respond quickly to increased demand and work a sixteen-hour day on short notice. When work was in short supply, they could be laid off without any bother. This precarious regime improved business efficiency and profitability. What might have started out as an effort to simply find workers during a labor shortage turned for many into a preference for immigrant workers. As a construction company owner in Georgia noted:

I think about, if I had to get rid of the nine Hispanics that I've got tomorrow and replace them with locals, to get the same amount of output, I would have to hire fifteen instead of nine and I'd probably have to pay them $1 an hour more each, and that figures up quick. And there's sometimes that you just can't find people to do the work.

Employers appreciated the fact that most immigrant workers 'come here to work' and they organize their lives around it.

In both Colorado and Georgia divisions of labor between different sectors and within the workplace quickly became racialized and shaped by perceptions of legality and illegality. In construction, for example, drywallers, masons, and roofers became mostly Latino by the early 2000s (many of whom were undocumented, or assumed to be, by employers), whereas finish carpenters were usually white and legal. In landscaping, largely Latino crews engaged in manual labor implementing designs produced by white professionals. In both Georgia and Colorado, back-room restaurant work is now predominantly Latino, including dishwashers and cooks, whereas wait staff are usually white women (on similar divisions of labor in cities, see McDowell, Batnitsky, and Dyer 2007).

As employers were undergoing a cognitive shift about labor and profit, this first group of hires provided a mechanism for recruiting additional immigrant workers. It was common for employers in construction, landscaping, and restaurants to report that they had a stable relationship with one or two key Latino employees since the 1990s. In Georgia, one business owner was so close to one of his Latino workers that he took his whole family to Mexico to visit that worker's family. These core immigrant employees were fundamental to the emergence of a new labor regime in these areas, as they acted as labor brokers for their employers by recruiting and supervising additional (often monolingual) immigrant workers in times of growth in those industries. 12 One construction worker in Rabun County, Roberto Reyes (thirty-four years old), described his role this way:

LN: The other four Latinos on your crew, did you bring them to the job or did your employer find them on his own?

Roberto: No, he told me, 'You look for workers.' And so I looked and I brought them in. This is how it went with every Hispano that came into the company. The boss said what he needed, and I told my people. . . .

LN: Were you expected to be responsible for how those workers behaved? That is, if they did something wrong?

Roberto: Yes, and more or less I knew all of the jobs [in the company] and so I went around supervising everyone. I would tell them [the workers], 'You should do this and this.' Because they understood me, they would do it. The boss would arrive and he liked the work. 'This is good.' They [the workers I hired] did it quickly, and so little by little he began to trust me more. Soon he was leaving me alone, in charge.

Thus, although it was common for local construction companies to begin hiring Latino immigrant workers after using out-of-town subcontractors who had Latino crews, these initial contacts led to the establishment of a new node of immigrant-employer relations that could independently draw in additional workers as needed.

Matthew Scott, owner of a high-end property maintenance and concierge company in Steamboat, claimed that his most valuable worker (and labor broker) was Miguel Rojas (thirty-two years old), who he met in 2005. When asked about the extent to which he drew on Latino workers in his business, he began lamenting the fact that Miguel had been deported a month prior to our 2011 interview.

I use a ton of Hispanics, I love 'em. I love 'em. They all show me papers but I know they're not all legal. And I

don't mind, and I don't care, I'm very vocal about it. [Then] My best guy got a knock on the door a month and a half ago. Because his roommate was wanted for something and it was immigration and boom they shipped him off as well, he's gone. . . . He was the best employee I've ever had, out of every business I've had [over eighteen years], every white guy, every American guy, he's by far the best, most polite and responsible employee I've ever had. . . . It was terrible because literally for all the years he worked for me, he knew my family, he knew my kids, I trusted him more than I trusted anybody working for me. . . .

The Hispanics work, they save a lot of money, they send a lot of money home, they work their tails off, they don't care if its Saturday, Sunday, Monday, they don't care if they work seven days a week, twelve hours a day, they don't complain, if I treat them well. . . . I pay all my guys $25 an hour flat out across the board. If they don't do good work, they don't work anymore, but if they do good work, they get $25 an hour and I bill out at $65 an hour so I'm still making great money and they are making great money and if they are making great money they're happy.

The narrative related by Scott reflects a perspective held by many employers. Few were as open about admitting they were hiring undocumented workers, but many emphasized that their relationships with immigrant workers, particularly labor recruiters and managers, were critical to the expansion of their businesses for a decade or longer.

Perhaps more surprising is the finding that immigrant social networks served as a key recruitment tool and mechanism of discipline not only for formal businesses but also for individuals hiring short-term workers. In both rural Colorado and Georgia, by the early 2000s homeowners had become accustomed to hiring Latino workers for home and yard maintenance. Some turned to day labor sites for these projects, which is not surprising considering the expansion of day laborer sites throughout the United States from the mid-1990s (Valenzuela et al. 2006). More compelling is the evidence that wealthy newcomers (gentrifiers) tended to not use anonymous day laborers if they hired home or yard maintenance workers. Instead, they commonly developed long-term, personal relationships with Latino workers who operated in ways that were not profoundly different from the labor broker used by formal businesses discussed in the preceding text.

The story of Leopoldo Pe ~ na (age thirty-five) exemplifies these dynamics. Leopoldo had worked for over a decade in Rabun County supervising other Latino workers in a small-scale factory. That job, which comes with an apartment, offers him forty-five hours per week reliably and up to eighty or ninety hours when things are busy. In a slower work week of fortyfive hours, he supplements his income with small home and yard maintenance jobs that come exclusively through personal contacts with homeowners. He described one such relationship with a homeowner:

Leopoldo: I got to know him through my brother. He [my brother] told me once 'This man needs you to work in his garden,' and so that is how I met this man [in 1995]. From that point on every time he needs anyone, to work in his flower bed, put in grass, cut grass, wash his cars, fix his deck, I go and help him.

LN: And what if you are too busy when he calls?

Leopoldo: I find someone else if I cannot [go], I send other friends of mine. But always, he [the homeowner] says to me . . . you see he has a great deal of trust ( confianza ) in me, and I always tell him that when I cannot do it I will send a friend of mine. He says that is okay as long as it is a friend of yours and you know them.

Leopoldo has five homeowners in his network, helping them find (often on short notice), someone 'trustworthy' to accomplish yard or home projects. He described feeling responsible for the workers he sends, because if they do not do the job right the homeowners see him as responsible-a mechanism of labor discipline that individual employers appreciated. Thus, labor brokers also operated within informal economic activities, in ways that facilitated the use and engagement of immigrant workers by individual homeowners.

In addition to productivity, flexibility is the other operative word for what these new immigrant-centered labor regimes bring to sites of rural gentrification (for further discussion, see P. B. Nelson, Nelson, and Trautman 2014). Particularly in resort economies, which entail seasonal fluctuations in demand for services, and in sectors (e.g., construction) that can shift unpredictably on a weekly basis, Latino immigrant workers have proven ideal for businesses. The norm for all male Latino workers we interviewed, and most female ones as well, was that they held multiple jobs and that they could be called on to work at a moment's notice and likewise would accept being told to stay home on short notice. This was overwhelmingly true for undocumented workers but many documented immigrants as well. One undocumented worker, Jos  e Castillo (forty-eight years), has worked in a hotel and restaurant for nearly fifteen years and supervises of a

range of (Latino) workers in the company. When asked to describe his work, Jos  e replied

I work in everything, I am a cook . . . I take care of what is needed there, I am in charge of a group of workers. I have a group of workers who work outside, those that take care of the garden and cut the grass. I do nothing more than go around telling everyone what to do, what is needed over here and over there. This is what I do. But if they need me to be a cook, I am a cook too, or a busboy. . . . I do anything in any part of the restaurant. Now that I have been there nineteen years I can do everything, and the boss values me. . . . He gives me housing for free, when other workers have to pay to stay in his apartments.

Awillingness to do all jobs and respond to the employer's needs was fundamental.

These characteristics inspired employers to hire Latinos in times of labor shortage and economic expansion. They also led employers to retain those same workers even as the economy crashed after 2008. The primary work of Rosa Ortiz (forty-two years old) is fast food, although she also works as a hotel maid on the side when needed by one local hotel. At the fast food restaurant she describes her work since the economic downturn:

Rosa: I am not the manager, I am an assistant to them, the managers. And I think I am one of the few workers at this place that has not had my hours cut back this year.

LN: Why do you think that is the case?

Rosa: Well, you see I know all of the jobs in the restaurant. Right now I work forty-two to forty-five hours per week, but when things are bad they only give me thirtyfive hours. But there are other employees that get even less, they are down to twenty to twenty-five hours a week. There is little work.

For her job in the hotel, Rosa simply receives a call from the owner explaining how many rooms he needs cleaned on a particular day. If she is able, given her restaurant schedule, to clean the rooms she does it for $4.50 per room. If Rosa cannot clean the room, she calls a friend to clean it, and she pays her $3.50 per room, keeping the difference. The restaurant is able to keep an employee (Rosa) who knows all of the jobs in the restaurant even as her hours fluctuate, because she balances that work with cleaning hotel rooms, which can be subcontracted out when needed. The hotel owner benefits because he only pays for the rooms that need cleaning on a particular day, rather than keeping a maid on a regular salary. This situation is aided by his knowledge that if Rosa cannot clean the rooms she will be responsible for another worker to complete it. Chains of vulnerability and flexibility are complex and demonstrate how immigrant networks are fundamental to shifting rural capitalisms in the context of gentrification.

The corollary to specific jobs being racialized as Latino within this new labor regime is a shifting notion of whiteness and the white worker. Framing Latinos as hard-working and responsible employees invokes in employers a mirror discourse to justify their reluctance to hire white workers for some jobs. In both Rabun and Routt counties, business owners often construed white male workers as unreliable and less willing to work hard or to work extended hours. This characterization was shaped by the particular geographic and cultural milieu: In Rabun County, white male workers were seen as especially unreliable during hunting season, and in Steamboat many reported a similar pattern if twelve inches of fresh snow had fallen overnight. To return to the interview with Mike Scott (property maintenance company in Steamboat):

I'm not against not hiring local white Americans. I've had too many ski bums, I've had too many guys that are here that are lazy, have different priorities in life, as far as where they want to get to. They are here to ski. They smoke pot on the job. You get some guy smoking pot on the job. He works on the mountain in the winter and then needs part time work in the summer, you hire them and then you catch them smoking pot. The priorities of some of the kids, even some of the adults in Steamboat is very lax.

This construction of white workers was pervasive. As one labor recruiter in Steamboat framed it, 'The problem is, Americans still come to the table-not to sound jaded again-but they come to the table with 'So how much vacation time do I get?''

In both Routt and Rabun counties, employers and workers (immigrant and nonimmigrant) experienced the transformation in business and labor practices that came with rapid gentrification in the late 1990s and beyond. These labor practices and regimes, fundamentally constituted by class, race, and illegality, maximized production and efficiency at a time of rapid expansion. Contractors could build houses more quickly and at less cost, and small hotel owners could avoid maintaining a year-round maid service. Individual homeowners could have their house cleaned or yard weeded by highly trustworthy, disciplined workers

who would come and go as required. White workers were not entirely absent from these sectors, as there remain white landscapers and construction workers, but the new regimes created fine-grained divisions of labor according to race (e.g., white carpenters, Latino stone masons in construction) and also created a new set of expectations of productivity affecting all workers.

Theodore's (2003) analysis of precarious urban labor regimes focuses on new patterns of industrialization and the formal systems (day labor companies) that emerged to deliver (inner-city) workers on an 'as needed' basis to suburban industries. He argued that within the context of globalization, a range of industries relocated to suburban areas and engaged labor contractors and agencies to deliver and discipline an inner-city workforce. He carefully charted the day-today operations of these labor contractors and how they produce a high degree of precariousness and disciplinary control-for racialized minorities, homeless residents, and urban immigrant residents.

In Routt and Rabun counties, similar regimes evolved to deliver highly motivated workers on a flexible basis for businesses large and small. These workers were similarly disciplined by a range of mechanisms largely absent prior to this period, mechanisms that were rooted within the interrelated effects of poverty, racism, and real or perceived legal status. Although clearly there are stark differences between these two contexts, one considering industrial labor regimes in Chicago and the other tied to dispersed and rural service-sector employment, there are provocative similarities. Most important, day labor contractors and agencies lie at the center of Theodore's analysis, agencies that transport inner-city workers to employment sites. These agencies employ a range of mechanisms to discipline workers and lock them into a precarious position (if they want continued access to employment). Although in Routt County there is one formal temp agency engaging in this kind of activity, we found that in these rural contexts there emerged much more widespread and perhaps even more effective informal mechanisms to efficiently deliver and discipline the workforce. These mechanisms operate primarily through immigrant social networks and the structural positioning of immigrants in terms of class, race, and illegality. These forces discipline workers to be 'here to work,' highly productive and loyal, even as they also produced flexibility for business owners.

Employers found that, over time, they could take on and let go workers on very short notice. Latinos were conditioned (by these structural factors) to accept staying home and being ready to come back when needed. If they took another job or simply left, they usually could be replaced by mobilizing the same networks that led to their initial hiring. Whereas the labor contractors offered that flexibility in Theodore's case study, longstanding personal relationships with labor brokers in many businesses in Routt and Rabun counties allowed employers to access immigrant networks as needed, and they offered an important disciplining effect as well. The effectiveness of these mechanisms worked to shape employers' expectations of how to treat immigrant workers, and influenced what many workers themselves expected. Employer expectations had much less to do with hourly wage than the idea that these workers work twice as hard, will not take a break or lunch if need be, work overtime, or stay home and come back when needed. These expectations and repertoire of labor practices-a just-in-case workforce-became normalized as immigrant-based precarious labor regimes solidified in the late 1990s and beyond.

## Conclusion

Over two decades ago Hamnett (1991, 174) asserted that gentrification represented 'one of the major 'leading edges' of contemporary metropolitan restructuring.' Today, gentrification represents an important conceptual entry point to understanding how neoliberal capitalism produces space (and is produced spatially) across a range of locales and regionscreating the need to conceptualize global geographies of gentrification. The move toward a more global framing of gentrification has been brewing for a decade or longer. Gentrification scholars, once focused exclusively on large, metropolitan areas, began by the early 2000s to recognize the ways in which gentrification processes were moving down the urban hierarchy and across nominal North-South divides (see D. P. Smith 2002). Lees, Slater, and Wyly (2007) furthered this trend toward theorizing gentrification in broader terms, critically considering, for example, the conceptual benefits and drawbacks to broadening classic and narrow understandings of gentrification to include new-build gentrification, tourism gentrification, and rural gentrification. Nevertheless, despite nods toward acknowledging a diversity of spaces within which gentrification is operating, gentrification as an urban phenomenon continues to be a reflexive assumption in most of the literature.

We join scholars who embrace these expansive understandings of gentrification. Given that neoliberal capitalism has been marked the world over by growing inequalities, landscapes of gentrification in urban cores or more rural amenity locations (and other spaces) can be seen as a key aspect of the spatialization of these inequalities. The colonization of space by the wealthy in both urban and rural settings, understood as a material and ideological process, is a fundamental outcome of the multiple ways in which neoliberal globalization has concentrated wealth across the globe. Bringing the concept of precarious labor regime to our research on rural gentrification brings attention to a set of political economic and social issues thus far underexamined in the U.S. context: the growing presence and dependence on immigrant labor for the production and maintenance of rural gentrified landscapes.

Our findings suggest that landscapes of rural gentrification as they emerged in the 1990s and 2000s in the United States cannot be understood without attention to the immigrant-centered precarious labor regimes that have been essential to their production (and maintenance). Of course, the impact of these labor regimes extends far beyond business models, employment practices, and new levels of efficiency and flexibility for rural capitalism that lie at the center of the empirical analysis presented here. As Latino immigrants arrived in Routt and Rabun counties for work, they shifted what had historically been a much less visible and usually seasonal farm and ranching immigrant presence to a population of immigrants who lived year-round in town. Permanent settlement by families meant previously unheard of English-language-learner programs in the schools, church services in Spanish, and new enactments of place and community that often challenge both implicitly and explicitly racialized concepts of place that normalize whiteness. Future research should explore shifting and contested social geographies in these contexts, contributing to burgeoning work on place, identity, and social change in new destination communities (see Marrow 2011; Winders 2013).

The changes described in this study were driven by labor market transformations and brought to the fore the profound tensions between the economic integration of immigrant workers and powerful processes of social and political exclusion that both undergird and emerge from these labor regimes. Understanding the specificities of precarious labor regimes in the context of rural gentrification extends and reworks the urban literature on the topic. At the same time, scholars of rural gentrification would benefit from considering labor and labor regimes, issues that have been largely absent from that scholarship in the U.S. context.

## Acknowledgments

We are grateful to the women and men in Rabun and Routt counties who shared their stories and perspectives with us during the course of this research, as well as their friendship and their hospitality. The development of this project and our analysis benefited from support and insights offered by Alec Murphy, Vicky Lawson, Nancy Hiemstra, and Dan Tichenor. We are also appreciative of the research assistance offered by Graciela 'Meche' Lu. Richard Wright in his capacity as editor was enormously helpful, and we found the insights offered by a number of anonymous reviewers very useful. All errors or omissions are our own.

## Funding

Research for this article was made possible by the National Science Foundation, Geography and Regional Science Program (BCS-0852104 and BCS0851375).

## Notes

1. DeGenova (2005, 8) argued that 'migrant 'illegality' proves to be a decisive feature of the distinctive racialization of Mexicans in the United States.' We avoid the use of scare quotes around this term throughout the remainder of the text for readability but continue to problematize it in this way.
2. Although the term labor market lends itself to more abstracted and quantitative representations of the economy, the idea of a labor regime embeds labor within broader social relations, power dynamics, and history (see Sassen 1996; Theodore 2003).
3. One important way to measure this flow is to trace the spatial redistribution of nonearnings income in relation to nonmetropolitan areas (P. B. Nelson 2005).
4. Although we are among those scholars who think the language of gentrification brings helpful conceptual tools for understanding contemporary rural changes, we do not want to split hairs over terminology (rural gentrification vs. amenity migration). Both terminologies refer to broadly similar dynamics-the flow of wealthy and usually white domestic migrants, who over the past several decades have becomes attracted to high-amenity rural places and who generate

- economic, social, and political changes in those communities.
5. Although concerns about geographies of work are not new to scholars of amenity migration and rural gentrification in the United States (see Gober, McHugh, and Leclerc 1993), few have explored how labor regimes and social relations writ large have been transformed as Latino immigrants have been recruited to work in gentrifying rural communities since the mid-1990s (for exceptions, see case studies by Nelson and Hiemstra 2008; Hiemstra 2010; Schmalzbauer 2011).
6. There are recent examples of excellent, nuanced research on social geographies of identity and belonging in new destinations, particularly work by Marrow (2011) and Winders (2013). Both monographs, however, deal with destinations shaped by distinct labor regimes and sociospatial contexts: rural food processing employment in the former and urban spaces in the latter.
7. This expansion of local demand for workers benefited from the increased flows of labor from Mexico to the United States during the 1980s and 1990s more generally. These flows were produced by the confluence of neoliberal restructuring in Mexico, which economically displaced millions, and new demands for lowwage workers in the United States (aided by the existence of immigrant social networks between the two countries-see Massey and Espinosa 1997). We emphasize the demand side here because these broader labor flows largely did not reach Rabun or Routt counties until employers actively recruited them from large urban centers.
8. For example, according to the Census of Retail Trade , both Routt and Rabun counties experienced a more than 25 percent increase in the number of restaurants between 1998 and 2012.
9. All names associated with interview quotations are pseudonyms, and some details have been changed or omitted to protect the identities of the respondents.
10. Although there were some seasonal agricultural workers (farm workers in Georgia and ranch hands in Colorado) present in both areas prior to the gentrification boom, we see this as a distinct process that did not substantively affect labor regimes or social relations writ large. The exploitation of farm workers, although also affected by race and illegality, is distinct due to their seasonal status and the fact they are usually housed on the farm (e.g., labor camps). For example, although farm workers circulated in and out of Rabun County, Georgia, since the 1980s, their presence was largely invisible to the wider community-nor did they work side by side with white residents or send their children to local schools.
11. Recruitment of immigrants was a profoundly gendered process, as both agriculture workers and construction crews were and are overwhelmingly male. The vast majority of Latina workers in these areas arrived via their spouses or parents, who usually arrived first and whose employment drove their settlement choice.
12. Although this echoes to some extent Waldinger's (1997) groundbreaking scholarship on immigrant networks and labor markets, it makes a unique contribution given that Waldinger did not identify the

emergence of labor brokers to the extent found in our work. Waldinger suggested that immigrant network recruitment benefits the immigrant community (and allows them to shut out 'outsiders' and achieve social mobility), but we focus more heavily on the way immigrant network recruitment benefits the employer, not just in terms of ease in replacing workers (Waldinger's central point) but in terms of increasing flexibility and discipline.

## References

- Allen, J., and N. Henry. 1996. Fragments of industry and employment: Contract service work and the shift towards precarious employment. In Changing forms of employment: Organisations, skills and gender , ed. R. Crompton, D. Gallie, and K. Purcell, 65-82. London and New York: Routledge.
- Arreola, D., ed. 2004. Hispanic spaces, Latino places: Community and cultural diversity in contemporary America . Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Beyers, W. B., and P. B. Nelson. 2000. Contemporary development forces in the nonmetropolitan west: New insights from rapidly growing communities. Journal of Rural Studies 16 (4): 459-74.
- Brown, R. B., S. Dorius, and R. S. Krannich. 2005. The boom bust-recovery cycle: Dynamics of change in community satisfaction and social integration in Delta, Utah. Rural Sociology 71:28-49.
- Cloke, P., M. Phillips, and N. Thrift. 1995. The new middle classes and the social constructs of rural living. In Social change and the middle classes , ed. T. Butler and M. Savage, 220-38. London and New York: Routledge.
- Cloke, P., and N. Thrift. 1987. Inter-class conflict in rural areas. Journal of Rural Studies 3(4): 321-33.
- Coppola, V. 2001. You can buy your way onto Rabun, Burton or Seed, but you can't buy your way in. Atlanta Magazine August:72-73.
- Darling, E. 2005. The city in the country: Wilderness gentrification and the rent gap. Environment and Planning A 37:1015-32.
- DeGenova, N. 2005. Working the boundaries: Race, space and 'illegality' in Mexican Chicago . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Donato, K. M., C. Tolbert, II, A. Nucci, and Y. Kawano. 2007. Recent immigrant settlement in the non-metropolitan United States: Evidence from internal census data. Rural Sociology 72 (4): 537-59.
- Frey, W. H., and K. Liaw. 1998. Immigrant concentration and domestic dispersal: Is movement to nonmetropolitan areas 'white flight'? The Professional Geographer 50 (2): 215-32.
- Ghose, R. 2004. Big sky or big sprawl? Rural gentrification and the changing cultural landscape of Missoula, Montana. Urban Geography 25 (6): 528-49.
- Gober, P., K. E. McHugh, and D. Leclerc. 1993. Job-rich but housing-poor: The dilemma of a Western amenity town. The Professional Geographer 45 (1): 12-20.
- Gomberg-Mu ~ noz, R. 2011. Labor and legality: An ethnography of a Mexican immigrant network . London: Oxford University Press.

- Gosnell, H., and J. Abrams. 2009. Amenity migration: Diverse conceptualizations of drivers, socioeconomic dimensions and emerging challenges. Geojournal 76:303-22.
- Halfacree, K. 1993. Locality and social representation: Space, discourse and alternative definitions of the rural. Journal of Rural Studies 9:23-37.
- Hamnett, C. 1991. The blind men and the elephant: Towards a theory of gentrification. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 16:173-89.
- Harrison, J. L., and S. E. Lloyd. 2011. Illegality at work: Deportability and the productive new era of immigration enforcement. Antipode 44 (2): 365-85.
- Harvey, D. 2001. Globalization and the 'spatial fix.' Geographische Revue 3:22-30.
- Hiemstra, N. 2010. Immigrant 'illegality' as neoliberal governmentality in Leadville, Colorado. Antipode 42 (1): 74-102.
- Hines, D. 2010. In pursuit of experience: The postindustrial gentrification of the rural American West. Ethnography 11 (2): 285-308.
- Kandel, W., and E. A. Parrado. 2005. Restructuring of the US meat processing industry and new Hispanic migrant destinations. Population and Development Review 31 (3): 447-71.
- ---.2008. New Hispanic migrant destinations: A tale of two industries. In New faces in new places: The changing geography of American immigration , ed. D. S. Massey, 99123. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
- Krannich, R. S., and M. D. Smith. 1998. Local perceptions of public lands natural resource management in the rural west: Toward improved understanding of the 'revolt in the West.' Society and Natural Resources 11 (7): 677-95.
- Lawson, V., L. Jarosz, and A. Bonds. 2008. Building economies from the bottom up: (Mis)representations of poverty in the rural American Northwest. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 9 (7): 737-53.
- Lees, L., T. Slater, and E. Wyly. 2007. Gentrification . London and New York: Routledge.
- Ley, D. 1986. Alternative explanations for inner-city gentrification: A Canadian assessment. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 76 (4): 521-35.
- Lichter, D. T., and D. L. Brown. 2011. Rural America in an urban society: Changing spatial and social boundaries. Annual Review of Sociology 37:565-92.
- Lichter, D. T., and K. M. Johnson. 2009. Immigrant gateways and Hispanic migration to new destinations. International Migration Review 43 (3): 496-518.
- Lichter, D. T., D. Parisi, M. C. Taquino, and S. M. Grice. 2010. Residential segregation in new Hispanic destinations: Cities, suburbs, and rural communities compared. Social Science Research 39:215-30.
- Little, J. 1987. Gentrification and the influence of local level planning. In Rural planning: Policy into action? , ed. P. Cloke, 185-99. London: Harper and Row.
- Loeffler, R., and E. Steinicke. 2007. Amenity migration in the U.S. Sierra Nevada. The Geographical Review 97 (1): 67-88.
- Lowe, P., J. Murdoch, T. Marsden, R. Munton, and A. Flynn. 1993. Regulating the new rural spaces: The
- uneven development of land. Journal of Rural Studies 9:205-22.
- Marrow, H. B. 2011. New destination dreaming: Immigration, race and legal status in the rural American South . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Massey, D. S., and K. E. Espinosa. 1997. What's driving Mexico-U.S. migration? A theoretical, empirical, and policy analysis. American Journal of Sociology 102 (4): 939-99.
- McCarthy, J. 2007. Rural geography: Globalizing the countryside. Progress in Human Geography 32 (1): 129-37.
- McDowell, L., A. Batnitsky, and S. Dyer. 2007. Division, segmentation, and interpellation: The embodied labors of migrant workers in a Greater London hotel. Economic Geography 83 (1): 1-25.
- Murdoch, J., and T. Marsden. 1994. Reconstituting rurality: Class, community, and power in the development process . London: UCL Press.
- Nelson, L., and N. Hiemstra. 2008. Latino immigrants and the renegotiation of place and belonging in small town America. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 9 (3): 319-42.
- Nelson, L., and P. B. Nelson. 2011. The global rural: Gentrification and linked migration in the rural USA. Progress in Human Geography 35 (4): 441-59.
- Nelson, P. B. 2001. Rural restructuring in the American west: Land use, family and class discourses. Journal of Rural Studies 17 (4): 395-407.
- ---. 2005. Migration and the spatial redistribution of nonearnings income in the United States: Metropolitan and nonmetropolitan perspectives from 19752000. Environment and Planning A 37:1613-36.
- Nelson, P. B., L. Nelson, and L. Trautman. 2014. Linked migration and labor market flexibility in rural amenity destinations in the United States. Journal of Rural Studies 36:121-36.
- Nelson, P. B., A. Oberg, and L. Nelson. 2010. Rural gentrification and linked migration in the United States. Journal of Rural Studies 26:343-52.
- Nelson, P. B., E. H. Stege, and J. Nicholson. 2004. The baby boom and nonmetropolitan population change, 19751990. Growth and Change 24 (4): 526-44.
- Olson, D. 1997. Labor shortage likely to get worse. Steamboat Pilot 12 March:B1.
- Peck, J. 1996. Work-place: The social regulation of labor markets . London: Guilford.
- Phillips, M. 1993. Rural gentrification and the processes of class colonisation. Journal of Rural Studies 9 (2): 123-40.
- ---. 2002. The production, symbolization and socialization of gentrification: Impressions from two Berkshire villages. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 27:282-308.
- Rutheiser, C. 1996. Imagineering Atlanta: The politics of place in the city of dreams . London: Verso.
- Sassen, S. 1988. The mobility of labor and capital: A study in international investment and labor flow . New York: Cambridge University Press.
- ---. 1996. New employment regimes in cities: The impact on immigrant workers. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 22 (4): 579-94.

- ---. 2001. The global city: New York, London, Tokyo . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Schmalzbauer, L. 2011. 'Doing gender,' ensuring survival: Mexican migration and economic crisis in the rural mountain west. Rural Sociology 76 (4): 441-60.
- Scott, M. 2011. Exclusive countrysides? Rural gentrification, consumer preferences and planning. Interface 12 (4): 493-596.
- Shumway, J. M., and S. M. Otterstrom. 2001 Spatial patterns of migration and income change in the mountain West: The dominance of service-based, amenity-rich counties. The Professional Geographer 53 (4): 492-502.
- Smith, D. P. 2002. Extending the temporal and spatial limits of gentrification: A research agenda for population geographers. International Journal of Population Geography 8 (6): 385-94.
- ---. 2011. What is rural gentrification? Exclusionary migration, population change and revalorised housing markets. Interface 12 (4): 596-605.
- Smith, N. 1979. Toward a theory of gentrification: A back to the city movement by capital, not people. Journal of the American Planning Association 45 (4): 538-48.
- ---. 1996. The new urban frontier: Gentrification and the Revanchist City . New York: Routledge.
- ---. 2002. New globalism, new urbanism: Gentrification as global urban strategy. Antipode 34 (3): 427-50.
- Suro, R., and A. Singer. 2002. Latino growth in metropolitan America: Changing patterns, new locations . Washington, DC: Center on Urban &amp; Metropolitan Policy and Pew Hispanic Center.
- Theodore, N. 2003. Political economies of day labour: Regulation and restructuring of Chicago's contingent labour markets. Urban Studies 40 (9): 1811-28.
- Torres, R., R. Heyman, S. Mu ~ noz, L. Apgar, E. Timm, C. Tzintzun, C. Hale, J. Mckiernan-Gonzalez, S.
- Speed, and E. Tang. 2013. Building Austin, building justice: Immigrant construction workers, precarious labor regimes and social citizenship. Geoforum 45:145-55.
- U.S. Census Bureau. 2010. U.S. census of population . Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau. http://www. census.gov/2010census/ (last accessed March 15, 2011).
- ---. 2011. Building permits survey . http://www.census. gov/construction/bps/ (last accessed March 15, 2011).
- Valenzuela, A., N. Theodore, E. Melendez, and A. Gonzalez. 2006. On the corner: Day labor in the United States. Technical report, UCLA Center for the Study of Urban Poverty, University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
- Waldinger, R. 1997. Social capital or social closure? Immigrant networks in the labor market. Working Paper No. 26, Lewis Center for Regional Policy Studies, University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
- Walker, P., and L. Fortmann. 2003. Whose landscape? A political ecology of the 'exurban' sierra. Cultural Geographies 10 (4): 469-91.
- Wills, J., K. Datta, and J. Evans. 2010. Global cities at work: New migrant divisions of labour . London: Pluto.
- Winders, J. 2013. Nashville in the new millenium: Immigrant settlement, urban transformation and social belonging . New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
- Woods, M. 2007. Engaging the global countryside: Globalization, hybridity and the reconstitution of rural place. Progress in Human Geography 31 (4): 485-507.
- Yampa Valley Partners. 2010. Community indicators project 2009-2010 report . Steamboat Springs, CO: Yampa Valley Partners.
- Z  u ~ niga, V., and R. Hern  andez-Le  on. 2005. New destinations: Mexican immigration in the United States . New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Correspondence: Department of Geography, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, e-mail: lknelson@psu.edu (L. Nelson); Border Policy Research Institute, Western Washington University, Bellingham, WA 98225, e-mail: laurie.trautman@wwu.edu (Trautman); Department of Geography, Middlebury College, Middlebury, VT 05753, e-mail: pbnelson@middlebury.edu (P. B. Nelson).