## The Geographical Review

VOLUME 98

October 2008

NUMBER 4

## PLACE MAKING, HAZARDOUS WASTE, AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF TOOELE COUNTY, UTAH*

## J.  MATTHEW SHUMWAY and RICHARD H. JACKSON

ABSTRACT. Declining  populations,  aging inhabitants and infrastructure, limited economic opportunities, and under- or unappreciated natural environments characterize a number of rural communities in the western  United States. Faced with the challenges of providing for their residents,  some of these communities have chosen to permit undesirable land-use activities,  including the disposal of hazardous or nuclear waste. Central to the development of such sites is how a place is perceived and portrayed. Our purpose in this article is to examine how a dominant perception  and portrayal  of one such place-Tooele County, Utah-was created and used to facilitate the development of hazardous-waste-disposal  sites. We use the geographical  concept of 'place' to illustrate  how meanings and values are attached to a region in order to justify its becoming what it is and how such views persist. Keywords: hazardous waste, NIMBY, perception, place,  Tooele Counw, Utah.

Except for localized boom-and-bust cycles of  mineral  exploitation,  many rural areas in the intermontane  U.S. West have always been economically marginal. Because of the typically arid climatic conditions at the lower elevations, which limited agricultural development without irrigation, and the difficulty of settlement at higher elevations, the rural parts of this region have two overriding traits that set it apart from other  regions  in  the United  States: sparse and widely scattered  rural settlement patterns and federal government ownership of large swaths of land. These two factors, along with the general aridity of the region, provide the context within which ongoing globalization  has and is creating new rural geographies.

Globalization  has  accelerated  competition  for the  products  that the rural West produces, making many traditional activities economically marginal (Galston and Baehler 1995; Beyers and Lindahl 1996; Power 1996; McGranahan  1999, Deller and others 2001;  Shumway  and Otterstrom 2001; Stauber 2001; Walker  2003; Green, Deller, and Marcouiller 2005). This has led to economic restructuring and the creation of new spatial patterns of rural development, which can be classified

* We  thank Jeremy Bryson  for assistance with the initial research, the anonymous reviewers for helpful feedback on earlier versions of the article, and the editor of the Geographical Review for valuable suggestions and for such a smooth and quick review process.

9t  DRS.  SHUMWAY and JACKSON are professors  of  geography at Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah 84602.

into four general areas: a set of highly successful, amenity-rich  regions  that are valued for their localized natural amenities (such as Jackson Hole, Wyoming; Sun Valley, Idaho; and Park  City, Utah); concentrations  of  extractive productionfarming or mining-in the few areas that  can  compete on a global scale (Clark County, Idaho; Big  Horn County, Montana; and Sublette County, Wyoming); emerging metropolitan centers in previously  nonmetropolitan  areas  (Pocatello, Idaho; Saint George, Utah; Grand Junction, Colorado; and Flagstaff, Arizona) and growth of the region's few large cities (Phoenix, Arizona; Las Vegas, Nevada; Denver,  Colorado;  and Salt  Lake City,  Utah);  and regions in which localized,  extractionbased  economies have been  so marginalized  that  they  are  no longer feasible (San Juan County, Utah; Harding County, New Mexico; Lander County, Nevada).

A landscape of relatively isolated, small farms, abandoned mines, overgrazed land, and sparse forests characterizes these marginalized areas of the rural, intermontane West. The communities that make up the marginalized West are characterized by slow-growing, stable, or declining populations,  aging inhabitants and infrastructure,  limited economic opportunities, and under- or unappreciated natural environments that seem to be forgotten by most, but not all, of society. A number of them have become locales of undesirable land uses. Activities ranging from waste disposal to prisons, to nuclear repositories, and to power plants seek places that are so desperate for investment they agree to accept land uses that  more prosperous communities will not accept. The result is  the location of  undesirable land uses known as 'NIMBY' (Not In My Back Yard). Residents of more prosperous places not only avoid but also protest vehemently should a NIMBY be suggested for their community. However, people in areas experiencing economic difficulties o€ten see NIMBYS as opportunities for economic development (Kousis 1998; Wulfhorst 2000; Eser and Luloff 2003; Kasperson 2005; van der Horst 2007). Whether to accept a socalled NIMBY must be seen within the context of rural restructuring, which has limited  the  ability  of  economically marginal  communities  to engage in  what were traditional economic activities: mining, ranching, farming, and timber. These traditional types of economic activities provided  the rationale for the initial  settlement of such rural communities but can no longer be used as a means for local sustainability (Power 1996).

As Jeffrey Davis points out in his work on nuclear testing on the Bikini Atoll (2005), how a place under consideration is perceived and presented, both by those who live within it and by those who live outside it, is crucial to the acceptance of different types of noxious or dangerous land uses. The perception must be created that, whatever the activity, its location is 'natural'  and backed by 'common sense,' not created by a particular set of historical and social processes. However, following the logic of J.  D. Wulfhorst's findings ( ~ o o o ) , the reaction to such labeling by local residents is much more complex than simply accepting a proffered label, for it depends on local economic circumstances.  In those counties with great economic needs, residents may either be nonaccepting of or ambivalent about the label that their local area is the 'natural' place for a specific NIMBY but willingly accept the asso-

ciated long-term risk from hazardous  or noxious land uses because of its shortterm economic gains. In some cases local residents will even accept the label if they believe it will maintain their local community's social and cultural cohesion in the face of what is perceived to be another type of short-term, high-risk activity, rapid residential growth. Once a particular view of a place becomes dominant, a 'perceptual lock in' occurs that is difficult to change because it provided a justification for a NIMBY in the first place. The locals then accept, adopt, and adapt the label for their own use, and the local area becomes more like the label.

## CONCEPTUALIZING PLACE AND PLACE PERCEPTION

Geographers have developed a number of concepts to help understand  human modification of the earth's surface, including the idea of 'place.'  Robert Sack defined place as the milieu in which humans transform the earth into the home of humankind (1999). The juxtaposition of the physical environment, social relationships, and place perception create milieus in which what Sack calls 'projects' happen. Projects are what we  as humans do-everything from teaching students, to incarcerating criminals,  to creating industrial wastes that are toxic. In order for such a project to occur, a place must be created: Every activity has to happen somewhere, and every project we undertake either creates a new place as a requirement for its fulfillment  or appropriates another place that was designed for another project. Projects often occur in multiple places that must be linked by communication,  transportation, and socioeconomic networks. Thus the geography of our world results from the fact that our lives and our projects require a geographical structure of specific places and associated networks of flows that must be maintained-at least until they are no longer useful-in order for the original projects to succeed.

Places and networks gain strength and power through rules, selectivity, and continuity. Rules determine what projects can occur at a given location and the types  of spatial interaction with  other  places. For  example, one outcome of an urbanized, industrial society is  the creation of waste products with varying levels of toxicity. Finding a place for toxic wastes that does not despoil the local milieu, generally defined  as  'where we  live,' can be viewed as a particular  project  that relies on a differentiated  space where the construction of  disposal sites becomes necessary for successful industrialization.  Local 'growth machines'  (Logan and Molotch 1987), together with  state and federal regulators,  establish rules  for site selection  and use  of  the site based  on the origin of the waste products, toxicity levels, perceived threats to nearby population  centers, political jurisdiction,  local environmental conditions, landownership, and economic issues. Once established, the rules tend to favor specific locations-which limits  competition  from other places-and provide an institutional framework that gives the initial location(  s) continued advantages. One caveat: The creation of rules is a political process with a great deal of uncertainty, so it is difficult to predict specific  rules or how they will be used. Rules determine the appropriateness of specific  activities in specific places and embed asymmetrical power structures in different places.

Selectivity is  the process  of attracting participants,  both  human and nonhuman, with specific  characteristics necessary for projects to be successful. Selectivity provides a crucial linkage between place and project while simultaneously reinforcing the rationale for which the place was originally constructed.  Rules influence selectivity by legitimizing the unique synthesis of nature, meaning, and social relationships into a place (Sack 1999).  Again with  respect to toxic waste disposal, the successful location of one type of toxic waste in an area, with its associated rules, selectively  draws new types of waste to the area because the institutional and physical infrastructure is already in place. Previous institutional and physical infrastructure development lowers the cost of future waste disposal. The selective flow of new waste then justifies the original investment and institutional processes and makes it more economically and politically feasible for future flows.

We all view different places differently,  because how we view a place is based on our experience with it, our information about it, and our position with respect to it -for example, whether we live there and, if so, for how long, whether the place is in the news, and whether we have visited it. In Sack's  conceptualization (i999), place has three elements: nature, social relations, and meanings (values, ideas, and beliefs). The natural and the social intersect to create project-specific places, but related meanings are necessary for continuity of the original creation. We create and use meanings to influence views,  beliefs,  and values  concerning  various places (Davis 2005). Frequent  transmission  of  specific place representations  to both  local and nonlocal communities creates a consistent place meaning. The representation  of places and the medium of transmission of what a place is brings additional force to the establishment of one meaning over other possible place meanings. Once established, dominant place meanings link the perceptual and the real. Such a link is necessary in order for the continuity of the project.

According to Rob Shields (i99i), dominant views about a place come through three main processes: reducing the place to one or two traits, amplifying those traits as the most important, and labeling, or giving a place its essential identity through a label. Once a place meaning achieves coherence and longevity the meaning becomes a semipermanent place myth that provides legitimacy. The power of place myths is that they naturalize that which is contingent and  historical, provide a  justification for certain types of events while limiting others, and give places an identity in  terms not of an open and changing milieu but as a statement of truth. Place myths also legitimize particular types of social practices that provide the structure for altering or maintaining the material landscape in order to bring it into line with or maintain a particular place meaning. That is, different social groups-both local and multilocal-with competing views of what a place should be create place myths to legitimize and  justify their particular view and attempt to change or maintain the material landscape in order to reflect these place myths and to delegitimize other potential projects  (Vandergeest and DuPuis 1996). For example, the view that the entire U.S.  Great Basin, including the West Desert, is a wasteland facilitates the observation of both local and nonlocal audiences that this is a natural place for the

location  of noxious projects  (Larsen and Brock 2005). These views can then  lead to policy decisions-rules and the formation of institutional infrastructures-such as the creation of a hazardous waste zone in Tooele County by the County Commission.  Such  an action  legitimized  the view  of the  area  as  a  natural  place  for hazardous wastes and simultaneously justified  similar land uses in the future.

## THE  FORGOTTEN AND MARGINALIZED RURAL WEST

Most of the recent focus in the rural western United States has been on areas where economic growth is occurring-the 'New West.' Steven Deller and his coauthors demonstrated that economic growth  in the rural West  is concentrated  in highamenity areas (2oo1), whereas stagnant economic growth characterizes most lowamenity areas. This can lead to the perception  that low-amenity areas with stagnant economies  are good locales for activities that  other places are unwilling to accept: waste  deposits, prisons, material testing  and disposing  of  toxic  material, and industrial-scale livestock production. Whereas more affluent communities may resist and more powerful communities may retard such activities, struggling communities will often compete with each other for the right to host such waste flows, arguing that any economic development is better than none. This 'rhetoric of despair' creates a perceptual  context  that facilitates the economic rationale  for the location of  activities that are generally thought of as undesirable by more prosperous communities and simultaneously allow negative labels to become dominant in order to justify the location of such activities (Bourke 1994).  An examination of one such locale illustrates how place meanings  are created and then  used to influence future development.

## TOOELE COUNTY,

## UTAH

With a land area of 6,919 square miles (Murphy  igg4,559), Tooele County, Utah, is about the size of Massachusetts  (Figure 1). It  is  an arid area that typically receives less than 6 inches of rainfall a year, and only the local mountains receive sufficient rainfall to support trees. More than half of the county  comprises Utah's West Desert and includes most of the Salt Flats that surround the Great Salt Lake. Throughout its history  this area  has been  described  as a vast, unforgiving landscape with  few redeeming qualities (Schultheis 1996).  Early observers characterized the West Desert as barren, arid, and not worthy of human settlement. For example, when passing through the West Desert in 1860, humorist Mark Twain commented that the place was 'one of the most rocky, wintry, repulsive wastes that our country or any other can exhibit' ([1872]  1994,118).  Another visitor, the explorer Jedediah Strong Smith, remembered  of  his first view of  the West Desert: 'I durst not tell my men  of the desolate prospect ahead, but framed  my story so as to discourage them as little as possible .  .  . but the view ahead was almost hopeless' (ig34,20). As Edwin Bryant's company set off for the journey across the West Desert their guide's parting advice was: 'Now, boys, put spurs to your mules and ride like hell!' (1848,172).  This early view of the area by visitors to the region has not changed much in the past hundred

FIG. 1-Although  the land area of Tooele County, Utah, is approximately the same as that of Massachusetts, the county is far less densely populated despite its proximity to Salt Lake City. (Cartography by the Brigham Young University Geography  Department)

<!-- image -->

years. Although modern transportation has alleviated many of the concerns associated with  traversing Tooele County, the West Desert still presents  a generally arid and unprepossessing landscape to observers. For  example,  in The Hidden West, Rob Schultheis referred to the Great Basin region, in which Tooele is located, as 'America's geographic purgatory'  (1996, 138).

Even though it can safely be said that the West Desert of Tooele County possesses few of the traits that modern American society values for recreation destinations, retirement living, or other purposes that currently drive economic growth in the rural West  (Shumway and Otterstrom 2001), that does not mean that others

have not found value in the region. A number of authors document the continued importance of the region, particularly its spiritual importance, to its first inhabitants as well  as to those who  came later and stayed  (Raymond 1997; Francaviglia 2003; Goin and Starrs 2005). On the other hand, some groups have used the perception  of  the  region  as dry, distant, and marginal  as justification  for  using  the region  as a 'national sacrifice zone'  (N. Campbell  2000; Beck 2001; Johnson and Lewis 2007). Various  actions by  federal, state, and local governments,  together with private industries, created an institutional framework that used Tooele's geographical  characteristics-aridity, government landownership,  small population size,  few  economically extractable resources,  but good  relative  accessibility-to create the ideal sacrifice zone.

Tooele County's earliest industries were similar to those in many other Mountain West communities from 1850 to 1940: Farming, ranching, and mining formed the lifeblood  of  the local economy. Ranching and grazing interests created Tooele County's first economy. In  1847 Mormon pioneers  settled neighboring  Salt Lake Valley, and by  1848 the influx of  people  and accompanying  livestock  into that valley had quickly outstripped its livestock capacity.  New grazing lands were needed, and one of the places to which Mormons pushed was westward over the Oquirrh Mountains  into the eastern part of what is now Tooele County (Blanthorn 1998, 63). Early ranchers  grazed  many head of cattle and initially found great success. However, competition  for the rangeland,  coupled with gross overuse, resulted  in serious depletion  of the land. After cattle came sheep, creating massive overgrazing. The early impact of grazing activities in Tooele County caused the Grantsville newspaper  to report  on 25  September 1879 that 'This country, which was one of the best ranges for stock in the territory, is now among the poorest. The myriads of sheep that have been herded here for the past few years have almost entirely destroyed our range' (quoted in Blanthorn  1998, 232). Ranching activities continue, but at a much-reduced rate. The early ranching industry provides our first glimpse into a trend in Tooele County that sees short-lived  industries prosper, then falter, leaving the community to cope with the consequences.

Mining in Tooele County owes its origins to prospecting by soldiers from California who were assigned to Fort Douglas in Salt Lake City.  The Rush Valley Mining District was organized by some of these soldiers in 1864,  and by 1865 they had registered more than 500 mining claims for copper, gold, silver, lead, and zinc. By  the 1870s  mining in the Oquirrh Mountains dominated the economy of Tooele County, with ephemeral boomtowns such as Stockton, Mercur, and Ophir (Blanthorn 1998, 13, 227). The mining boom in Tooele County was only part  of the larger mining boom in Utah's mountains, including Bingham Canyon on the western side of the Salt Lake Valley and the Park City areas of the Rocky Mountains. Much of the mining in  Tooele County and elsewhere in Utah  relied on non-Mormon prospectors and entrepreneurs  because Brigham Young, the Mormon leader, was committed to an agrarian  society. Rapid population  growth among the Mormon settlers and the arrival of the transcontinental  railroad  in 1869 prompted growth of industrial

activities,  especially mining,  agricultural  equipment, and ore smelters. Like the boomtowns with which  they were  associated, many of the early smelters were small and short-lived, but by the 1890s large-scale smelters began  to replace the smaller ones near the mining towns. Growth in mining and smelting employment prompted  immigration of non-Mormons  into the state, primarily  from eastern and southern  Europe (Notarianni 1994).

Growth of mining in Bingham Canyon in the 1890s was associated with everlarger smelters, so that, by the end of the nineteenth century, many Salt Lake City residents considered the smoke and other negative externalities associated with at least six different smelters and refineries in the Salt Lake Valley undesirable (Notarianni 1994). Government and industrial leaders responded by spearheading a campaign to encourage the construction of a large smelter on the western side of the Oquirrh Mountains, in Tooele County, that would relieve the residents of populous Salt Lake Valley.  By  igio the Anaconda  Copper Company-backed International Smelter in Tooele County just east of Tooele City began accepting lead and copper ore and other concentrates from the Salt Lake Valley mining districts as well as the rest of Utah, Idaho, and Nevada (Murphy 1994).  The relocation of the smelter and the growth of the mining industry in Tooele County sparked the creation of a local culture willing to accept potentially  noxious  facilities as a trade-off for economic stability.  The early move of the smelter to Tooele County  laid the foundation for the perception of Tooele as useful for NIMBYS.

The Great Depression dealt a heavy blow to mining activities in Tooele County. Many mines closed, but perhaps most devastating was the closure of the International Smelter from 1931  to 1934, which resulted in the loss of nearly 2,000 jobs. The county had the highest per capita relief expenditures in the state, and Utah had the third highest of all the states (E. Campbell 1983). Ranching and grazing activities were practiced only at a small scale, the mining industry became considerably less significant when  the International Smelter closed, and both of these factors were compounded by the general discouragement during the depression. Like many of its contemporary communities,  Tooele County searched for economic development, including tourism, to revive its dying economy.

One of the unusual aspects of Tooele's emergence as a site for unwanted activities is that, after the Mormons settled the Salt Lake Valley, the lake itself was only incidental to the Mormon settlement of the region. A number of small resorts capitalized on the warm, salty waters of the lake during summers in the 1860-1890  period, but beyond that the primary use of the lake was for winter grazing of cattle on its islands, for extracting salt, and for sailing (van Alfen 2002). The growing numbers of non-Mormons in Salt Lake City, combined with the decision by Mormon leaders in the early 1890s  to attempt to become more a part of mainstream America,' prompted the Mormon Church to sponsor development of Saltair, a destination amusement park on the southeastern shore of the Great Salt Lake designed primarily to provide an alternative to the non-Mormon amusements on the lake and in Salt Lake City, where  church leaders believed  that Mormons  were  mixing with

FIG.  2-No-nonsense warnings like this one deter visitors to restricted-access areas in Tooele County, Utah. (Photograph by Richard Jackson,  May 2007)

<!-- image -->

groups with  lower  standards  (McCormick and McCormick  2002). In 1892 a railroad was constructed to Saltair,  and the resort opened in 1893. The Mormon Church originally  held  half  of  the shares in  Saltair, but by 1906 it  had  sold  its interest  to private  parties.

Highly successful even though  it was open only during the summer months, Saltair billed itself as the 'Coney Island of the West.' It attracted more than 100,ooo visitors its first year, and the numbers of visitors had increased to about 500,000 a year before it burned in 1925 (McCormick and McCormick 2002). Although it was rebuilt by the summer of  1926, Saltair fell on hard times during the economic depression of the 1930s and never regained its importance after World War 11.

## THIS  LAND  Is MY  LAND

Counties in the West tend to be large. One of the reasons for their large size is that the region's arid climate cannot support the same settlement density found east of the 100th meridian  (see Figure I), and many areas remain  relatively uninhabited. Because farming was never profitable in much of the West, the U.S.  government maintained ownership of the most of the land in Utah and other western states; for example, the federal government owns approximately 80 percent of Tooele County, and the State of Utah  owns another 6 percent  (UAC  2002, 45). It  is  impossible to

FIG. 3-A large portion of  the land  in  Tooele County, Utah, is  used  for military  and  industrial purposes. Source: Tooele County GIS, May 2007. (Cartography by the Brigham Young University Geography Department)

<!-- image -->

understand anything about land use in the West without  knowing that much of what  takes place has been  and continues to be  influenced by U.S. government policy. For example, when the United States entered World War I1 and needed to quickly create  military bases, testing  ranges, and munitions  depots, the government chose to develop sites on sparsely inhabited land it already controlled (Figure 2). Previous  research  suggests that the federal government tended to locate such facilities in rural areas experiencing economic difficulties, had a conservative population, and were accustomed to the omnipresent role played by federal agencies  (Rothman 1998; Girdner 2002). Tooele County meets these criteria.

During World War I1 the U.S. military injected tens of millions of dollars and thousands of jobs into the Tooele County economy by constructing the Tooele

Army Depot, Deseret Chemical Depot, and Dugway Proving Grounds (Figure 3). Following the logic of  Dale Rothman  and, more recently, of  Eddie Girdner  and Jack Smith, Tooele County was particularly well suited to these types of military establishments, in part because of the very low population  density and the necessary expansive buffer  zones required  (Rothman 1998; Girdner and Smith 2002). The federal facilities promised Tooele County relief from its economic and demographic depression and offered the county a way to showcase its patriotism. Moreover, the fact that Tooele County residents had already experienced the location of a noxious  facility in their  midst by a larger and more powerful  entity-Salt Lake County-provided the appropriate perceptual  framework for acceptance.

The immediate  economic  impact  of  the military facilities  in  Tooele County cannot be overstated. In just two years following the military's  entrance into the area, both the population  and the assessed value  of  Tooele County tripled.  By 1943, $52 million  had been  spent on war  facilities in  Tooele,County (Malmquist 1943).  Employment was the prime concern for most Tooele residents, and the new facilities provided an estimated 4,000 jobs. Tooele City's population increased from 5,000 to 15,000 in the months during and after the construction of these facilities (E. Campbell 1983).  As the cold war wound down, however, so did the economic impact of the military in Tooele County. Nevertheless, as late as 1989 the defense industry still accounted for more than 5,000  jobs, or 49 percent of the total Tooele County  employment (State  of Utah 2000).  The  long-term effect  of the military  facilities  in Tooele County also changed the perception regarding the arid expanses of the county. Land that was once of little economic value was now viewed as a major asset, even if it was valuable only for industries engaged in storing and disposing ofhazardous and noxious materials. The initial location and subsequent growth of dangerous federal  facilities  provided another 'fact on the ground'  that demonstrated the usefulness of Tooele County for these types of activities. As Dan van der Horst shows (2007), people's perception of NIMBYS are generally  determined  by proximity, local  economic context, and the value of the land being used. Because the military facilities are relatively isolated, the local economy was weak, and the foremost view of the land was that it was of little value, the perception  of the military locating in Tooele County tended to be positive  (Blanthorn 1998).

## 'SMELLS

## LIKE  JOBS TO ME'

The perception of Tooele County as a national sacrifice zone had been woven together from early  strands of its  physical  geographical  characteristics-the  view that the land was valueless for most traditional types of economic activities-together with a set of social relationships between the local population and larger, wealthier, and more powerful neighboring counties, the state of Utah, and ultimately the federal government. Local residents  came to  believe  that, whatever the activity  might be, they  had little  choice  in the decision-making  process. A general  feeling  was  prevalent that weapons  depots and smelters were the only types of industries capable of economically exploiting the 'valueless' land and that  jobs in them were preferable  to unemployment (Bauman 2001).  An excel-

lent example  of  how  these  perceptions  continued to affect  land use in Tooele  County  was the establishment of  the Magnesium Corporation of America, or  MagCorp, a magnesium-processing facility,  in 1972.

The mining industry that had  struggled  since the 1930s rebounded when MagCorp located its facility  on the western shores of the Great Salt Lake (Figure 4). It represented the first development on the Great Salt Lake since Saltair opened. When the facility was first announced in 1968 the Tooele County residents were in full support of the 'magnesium project.' After overcoming one hurdle in the development process, Utah Governor Calvin L. Rampton proclaimed the facility 'an important breakthrough toward the establishment of a major complex on the Great Salt Lake. It will have a huge impact upon the economy and the industrial growth of Utah (TT-B 1968).  MagCorp leases 100,ooo acres of land owned by the Bureau of Land Management land and produces approximately 45,000 dry tons of magnesium a year, making it the third-largest producer of the mineral in the world. The facility,  which includes evaporation ponds and a refinery,  employs between 500 and 700 people, making it the fourth-largest employer in the county (Thomas Consultants 2002).  Supporting industries for MagCorp and various tax-revenue streams associated with the company and affiliated economic enterprises also directly benefit the economy of Tooele County.

Although MagCorp has been extolled for its economic benefits, the company's noxious NIMBY aspects are dramatic. Magnesium chloride is obtained by evaporating water from the Great Salt Lake in open-air enclosures. The evaporate is processed to separate the magnesium from the chloride in the MagCorp plant, so tens of thousands of tons of deadly chlorine pollutes the atmosphere every year. In 2001, for example, 55,000 tons escaped into the atmosphere. MagCorp had the dubious distinction  of being ranked by the U.S.  Environmental Protection Agency as the nation's worst toxic polluter for many years, often outpacing its closest competitor by a large margin (EPA  2001).

The closest town to the MagCorp plant in Tooele County is Grantsville. Temperature inversions, common in mountainous landscapes during the winter, are particularly severe in the town because so much errant chlorine is in the air.  MagCorp has reduced its pollutant emissions, but on days when the odor is particularly bad many residents, particularly children, choose to stay indoors while others brave the toxic weather, calmly remarking that it 'smells like jobs to me' (Ward 1999,190191).  The acceptance of noxious  NIMBYS  in Tooele County and the willingness to live with the negative  side effects illustrate the widespread acquiescence  to the dominant label of toxic as a natural part of how Tooele County should be viewed and the overriding importance of land-use activities that provide employment for local residents regardless of their potential negative effects.

## TOXIC  CONVERGENCE

When the flow of federal dollars declined after the cold war ended in the late 1980s, Tooele County leaders and residents feared the onset of another economic depres-

FIG.  +-The  U.S.  Magnesium Corporation, commonly called 'MagCorp,'  opened this magnesiumexTracting facility in Tooele County, Utah, in 1972. (Photograph by Richard Jackson, May 2007)

<!-- image -->

sion,  and  a rhetoric of  despair  pervaded  local  newspapers.  Residents  and local officials were unaware that national concerns about the environment would set in motion other forces that would exploit the growing perception  of the county as a sacrifice zone, a place well suited to store and manage hazardous activities.

The United States'  hazardous waste industry underwent important changes during the 1980s after Congress passed the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA). This act forced the industry to seek appropriate sites for new commercial disposal facilities that would meet the RCRA regulations. The siting of such facilities is bound to be geographically and socially  inequitable. Such inequality occurs when the risk of  living  adjacent  to or  being affected  by hazardous  wastes  or  pollutants is distributed unequally among different segments of the population living in different geographical regions (Goetz and Kemlage 1996). In Tr a n s f o r m i n g En v i r o n m e n t a l i s m (2007),  Eileen McGurty argues that this process-the required siting of hazardous waste facilities by state and industrial interests-in rural Warren County, North Carolina,  was the origin of the environmental justice movement in the United States, which came about in response to  real and/or perceived inequality  in the siting  of noxious facilities.  The  majority of environmental justice  literature focuses  on  how siting  hazardous waste facilities  places unwarranted  risks on racial and ethnic minorities  (Goetz and Kemlage 1996; Atlas 2001; Robyn 2002; McGurty 2007). McGurty argues that opposition to the siting of a

FIG.  5-Clean Harbors is one of two hazardous-waste landfills in Tooele County, Utah. (Photograph by Richard Jackson, May 2007)

<!-- image -->

hazardous waste facility in Warren  County turned into a race-and  poverty-based environmental justice  argument only after  every other tactic  had failed  to dissuade the state from locating it there. Because Tooele County's population  is predominantly white and is within a state and region that is also predominantly white, an environmental justice argument would have less traction, so the county's residents did not try to use it.  Another difference  for non-high-amenity  rural counties in the western United States  is that economic restructuring since the 1980s  has dealt serious economic blows to local economies, forcing them to look for alternative development strategies. The fact that these places are relatively isolated, have small populations,  and have high proportions of their land controlled by federal and state entities facilitates the creation of necessary places and flows for disposing of industrial waste.

As it  did  in  Warren  County, hazardous waste  disposal  first  came to Tooele County as the uninvited  guest of  state regulators. The Vitro  uranium smelter in southern Salt Lake County had left a heritage  of more than 4 million  tons of radioactive tailings  from the uranium boom of the  1950s. Salt Lake City and its suburbs petitioned the state to clean  up these tailings,  and, after  identifying  a number of potential locations, officials selected Tooele County's West Desert  (see Figure 3). The site seemed perfect  for hazardous waste storage activities: remote, with  an arid climate and low-permeability  soils, state owned, and with  little apparent value. Tooele County officials, though, were not anxious to house the Vitro tailings because they believed that the county already had more than  its fair share

of hazardous materials. For ten years the county fought the proposed state action, but the protests only delayed the inevitable: Between 1985 and 1987 the state transported the Vitro uranium tailings 50 miles westward  to  Clive because  Salt Lake County residents and the State of Utah viewed Tooele County as the most convenient local  place  for a toxic  landfill  (Verdoia  2001; Mogren  2002). That is, the initial geographical  characteristics of Tooele County that limited  agricultural  development  and population  settlement  eventually provided  a geographical rationale for the location  of  noxious facilities  (Figure 5).  The tailings  are stored in above-grade disposable cells designed to contain them for 1,000 years. Perhaps the most important outcome of the long negotiation  is that Tooele County managed to gain some economic benefit from their  new NIMBY. The county would receive $ioo,ooo annually for fifteen years from Salt Lake County in exchange for hosting the waste  (Bern 1987b).

This event became an important benchmark  for Tooele County residents  regarding acceptable land uses and a wake-up call showing how little control they had over their own destiny.  Although county residents and officials had viewed the oreprocessing mill and the military facilities as economically beneficial and even patriotic, the imposition of the Vitro tailings was a clear demonstration  of the county's economic and political weakness. The realization reinforced the willingness of local leaders to maximize the economic benefits  of their situation by accepting potentially toxic NIMBYS. In a 2001 interview, County Commissioner Teryl Hunsaker recalled  the paradigm shift:  'The commissioners then  at that time decided  that because  of what  had happened  it would be well  if  they  commercialized  on the hazardous waste industry out on the west desert' (Verdoia 2001). Although  the county leaders had vociferously opposed  the Vitro tailings, the money they eventually  convinced the state to pay them opened their eyes to the potential  wealth associated  with  hazardous  waste storage facilities.

Before the first load of the Vitro tailings arrived at Clive, the county approved two  more proposals  for hazardous waste landfills; and by the  time the operator opened the first disposal facility, the Tooele County Commission  was considering two proposals for hazardous-waste incinerators (Figure 6). Between 1981 and 1993 the commission approved the development of Envirocare, a large hazardous waste disposal, and two waste incinerators began full operations in the West Desert. County Commission members saw these actions as logical. One commissioner  remarked, 'The ground where the Vitro tailings are .  .  . is already tainted. It has no other commercial use' (quoted in Bern 1987a).

Other hazardous  waste managers  recognized  the potential  financial rewards for using the West Desert as a hazardous waste storage and disposal site. In February 1987 two  hazardous waste  handlers, USPCI and Aptus Environmental, approached  Tooele County for permission to operate waste incinerators  in the West Desert.  County officials favored the proposals  from the  outset,  apparently  concluding that the desert would  not be negatively  impacted by hazardous waste activity. Moreover, they believed that locating an incinerator in the county would

entice other industries into the area, further helping their economy. As  one county commissioner concluded when discussing noxious land uses and hazardous wastes, 'We're [Tooele County residents] not new at this type'of thing' (TT-B  1987).

In 1987 Tooele County commissioners voted to create  Hazardous  Industries Zoning Districts-the first  in  the United  States-in order to 'provide areas in appropriate remote locations where hazardous and radioactive wastes may be stored, treated  and disposed of in a safe manner' (TCED  2005). Between 1988 and 1993 all of the districts' current tenants  arrived.  Envirocare  (now Energy  Solutions) was the first to begin  operations near Clive, followed by Aptus at Aragonite, and then USPCI  at Clive. By  1993 the  zone was complete, with  two  functioning  hazardous waste landfills  (Grassy Mountain and Envirocare)  and two  operating hazardous waste incinerators  (Aragonite and Clive). Each  facility paid  the county a tippage fee (a fee for the right to dump or burn hazardous waste), initially set at $25.00 per ton for Envirocare  and $180,000 per year for the Aragonite  incinerator.  The fees from hazardous waste dumping continue to be the largest single source of revenue for Tooele County (Thomas Consultants  2002).

## NONLOCAL PUBLIC PERCEPTION

Although  locals  accepted  the  idea  that the West  Desert  is  a  sacrifice zone, the national press did not view what was happening in such a favorable light. A firestorm of  negative  attention erupted concerning Tooele County's willingness  to accept hazardous  NIMBYS, and the press  castigated  the county for allowing such noxious activities. Outside magazine ran a story in 1993 entitled  'Happiness Is a Toxic Waste Zone' and claimed that 'Tooele County is the most polluted  place in America' (Webster 1993, 61).' Fortune magazine titled  its  article  'IMBY, Please' and said that 'in Tooele County, it's toxins over taxes any day' (Martin 1993, 13). Similarly, the New York Times ran at least three articles that discussed the county's hazardous activities  (Brooke 1996; Egan  1996). Salt  Lake City newspapers  also expressed negative commentary regarding the hazardous waste industry in Tooele County-which is ironic, given that Salt Lake County and the State of Utah used their political  muscle to site the Vitro tailings  in Tooele County despite the resistance of Tooele residents. The publication  of articles in the popular press identifying Tooele County as polluted and toxic is part of the labeling process and helped to create the dominant place myth that Tooele is toxic.

One result of this negative perception was that state legislators became concerned that a number of hazardous waste companies were selecting the West Desert for the development  of  additional facilities, so they enacted  legislation  that  required  any new facilities to be approved by both the legislature and the governor, taking control of  the process away from Tooele County. Except for a proposal by the Goshute Indian Reservation (see  Figure 3),  over which the state has no  control, no new proposals have emerged since the state passed that legislation (Spangler and Spangler 2001).

Even though Tooele County has been used for almost every type of toxic waste, it has been able to forego the distinction of being a dumping ground for high-level

FIG. 6-Timeline of the location of military and industrial events in Tooele County, Utah. (Diagram by  Richard Jackson)

<!-- image -->

nuclear  waste. Seemingly, this was about to change in the twenty-first  century. In the early iggos the  Skull Valley Band  of  Goshute Indians proposed the development of  a temporary repository  for spent nuclear  fuel on their  Tooele County reservation.  In May 1997 the tribe signed a lease with Private Fuel Storage (PFS), a consortium of nuclear waste-producing utility  companies, to store the high-level nuclear waste on its reservation.  PFS filed an application with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission  (NRc)-which is  responsible for approving nuclear waste  storage sites-for permission  to store waste on the  Goshute Indian  Reservation  (PFS n.d.).  The proposal met with  intense  opposition  (Figure 7)) and state officials pursued a variety of legal and legislative avenues to stop the project.  Despite this state opposition, in April 2005 the NRC was considering granting approval for the license to store the waste at the Goshute site (Nokkentved 2005)) but after almost a decade of litigation  and negotiation the NRC  rejected the lease for the facility on the reservation  in  September 2006 (Struglinski 2006).

FIG.  7-A negative perception of the proposed nuclear waste storage facility on the Goshute Indian Reservation  in  Tooele County, Utah, as portrayed  in  this cartoon from the Ogden [Utah] Standard Examiner. (Reproduced courtesy of Cal Grondahl, Ogden Standard Examiner)

<!-- image -->

## PERCEPTION AND PATH  DEPENDENCE

Although the proposed Goshute nuclear waste storage site marked a turning point in statewide attitudes toward the increasing amount of toxic waste in the West Desert (Spangler and Spangler 2001), the attitudes of local residents have been  less sanguine about the turning tide of opinion. The ambivalence of local attitudes stems from the fact that some longer-term  residents would rather have toxic waste facilities that pay a living wage than increased population growth from new arrivals who are not economically tied to the county. Some residents do not mind the dominant label of 'Toxic Tooele' if  it keeps people from moving into, and changing the nature of, their  small communities  (Janofsky 2002). In fact, some residents embrace the perception  of  Tooele County as one of the nation's premier dumping grounds because these  residents  do not believe in immediate health  risks, and the perception  acts as a disincentive  for people  to move to Tooele County, which  the local residents see as a more immediate threat (Wulfhorst 2000).

Local residents would like to be recognized for the sacrifices they have made by allowing hazardous  land uses that are necessary  for U.S. military and industrial projects; that is, for accepting waste products from more prosperous communities whose  residents then  censure them for doing so. Having so much toxic waste in their backyard has forced Tooele residents to face one of the main dialectical issues

of our day: Our current  lifestyle generates  enormous amounts of waste, some of which is toxic and harmful, and that waste has to go somewhere. A place has to be created-through the specificity  of the natural environment (arid and isolated), social relationships (economically struggling and politically weak), and meanings ('We're used to this type of stuff')-in order for our society to function. As one local planner  remarked  when  confronted  with  disparaging  statements  concerning Tooele, ''I  know where my waste  is, do you know where yours is?' (quoted in  Janofsky 2002). Most of us do not, nor do  we want to, know where our wastes go, thus places like Tooele are necessary. Tooele's problem is that it is not quite isolated enough. As Salt Lake's metropolitan population has grown and continues to grow, it is spilling over into Tooele County; where some residents  see population  growth as a more immediate threat than the risk that hazardous waste poses.

During the iggos, particularly  in  the last  part  of  the  decade, Tooele County had  the highest  rates of population  growth  of any county in Utah.  From 1990 to 2000, the county's population  increased  from 27,000 to 42,000 residents,  and by 2007 another 16,000 individuals  had moved  to the county (U.S. Census  Bureau 2008).  Relatively  low housing costs,  availability of land, and proximity to Salt Lake City attracted the new  residents,  people who are not linked to the 'old' economy of Tooele County and thus do not generally support the storage of additional waste-especially high-level nuclear  waste-just down the road. New population  growth with limited economic ties to the local extractive, hazardous waste, or military economies will likely work to change the perception  of Tooele County as a natural  sacrifice zone.

## WASTING

## THE WEST

Tooele County's locational characteristics provide  a compelling geographical context for selecting the area as a sacrifice zone, and, although these geographical characteristics are necessary for understanding the creation of 'Toxic Tooele,' they are not sufficient. The development of  rules with both intended and unintended  consequences created an institutional infrastructure that facilitated the creation of Tooele as a sacrifice zone. Clearly  the relatively weak local  political  economy of  Tooele County vis-a-vis Salt Lake County, the state of Utah, and the federal government was an important factor in facilitating the idea of Tooele as a toxic waste dump. After being forced to accept hazardous waste from Salt Lake County and having the U.S. military locate numerous noxious facilities in its midst, Tooele County sought to capitalize on its (mis)fortune by creating Hazardous Industries Zoning Districts (specific place, with  specific rules) to selectively attract similar land-use activities. The county's response reinforced the perception of Tooele as a toxic wasteland and sacrifice zone. Finally, labeling was used  to justify  the activities as legitimate and natural. In Tooele's case the dominant label  came to be that  of 'Toxic Tooele,' a barren, godforsaken, unfit-for-living  natural sacrifice zone.

Tooele's experience  has  important ramifications  for other rural  areas  in  the Mountain West. Numerous counties in the rural West can be characterized as iso-

lated, with  few natural  amenities,  stagnant economies,  and out-migration. One result is that residents who are either unable or unwilling to relocate often accept the perception that their only hope for economic sustainability hinges on their willingness to accept noxious activities. In Utah alone a number of counties accept waste from outside the region. In one county, where mining was once the dominant economic activity and is still important, a local community constructed  a large municipal waste facility in order to attract waste from all over the country; another county recently accepted low-level radioactive nuclear material from Japan  for  reprocessing; and a third  is now home to the West's largest hog farm, producing more than 1 million  hogs and their  assorted wastes annually. In all of these counties local residents  and their  leaders have developed  a rhetoric of despair in which the undesirable characteristics of their places become paramount in conversations, perceptions, and decisions, leading to accepting hazardous  wastes and other so-called rich-area NIMBYS.

Desperate to stem the tide of out-migration and to provide jobs and a tax base, places have been and are being 'created'-that is, rules developed, participants selected, meanings attached-not only for hazardous or toxic wastes but also for other activities, such as prisons, large-scale corporate feedlots for cattle, mega hog and dairy  farms,  and  coal-fired power plants. More than merely acceptable to  local populations, these activities are sought after and embraced. The economic difficulty and political weakness of these places enables negative place myths to be created, thus legitimizing the use of desperate and weak places as locations for the wastes from the rest of the country.

A number of other questions concerning the geography of waste in the rural West are worth pursuing. Probably the most important task is simply to document the growth of these types of land use over the past few decades, for no easily accessible data sources with this information exist. Other foci should include the different locational strategies of  the different  types of activities-both extensively and with numerous historical case studies-along with research on the differential impacts by type of activity.  Although high-amenity areas have had and will continue to have a disproportionate impact on,how  the rural West is viewed, a different and not so glamorous rural geography  is also being created. It  is important that we understand the processes that are creating and maintaining a forgotten West and what the unintended consequences may be of locating noxious NIMBYS within fragile natural and social ecosystems.

## NOTES

1 . Statehood for Utah in 1896 was accompanied by an 'unwritten agreement' that it would change from a theocracy to a democracy in which the role of the Mormon Church in business and politics would be similar to the role of religion elsewhere in the Untied States.  Consequently, during the early years of the twentieth century the church sold off its controlling interest in most businesses,  keeping an interest only in those that provided jobs for the poor and needy (Arrington 1958).  Anxious to prove that they were patriotic citizens  of the United States  the Mormons rapidly transformed their cultural milieu from one of public or private support for a quasi-independent  Mormon  Empire to one of vocal patriotism. B y  the time the United States entered World War I in 1917, 'Unlike much of the rest of the

country, where United States involvement originally met with widespread opposition, Utahans strongly supported the war effort' (McCormick and McCormick 2002,177). At the time the U.S. military began to construct  military bases in Tooele County the church's role was very indirect. It supported federal spending in Tooele primarily because it provided jobs in one of the most economically depressed parts of the state  following  the Great  Depression,  and because  Utah's  congressional  representatives  were Mormon it could be argued that the church was indirectly involved in attracting military activities to Tooele County. However, the official support for the military is found primarily in the non-Mormon newspapers, the Salt Lake  Tribune and the Tooele Transcript-Bulletin.

2. This point is certainly debatable, but the EPAS annual report for 2000  shows that Tooele  County's emission of more than zi,ooo tons of materials, largely by MagCorp, that cause neurological  or respiratory difficulty was more than twice as great as that of the next-largest county in the nation. Recently, however, conditions have improved in MagCorp country. In 2002 the company completed a $45 million facility upgrade that moved the open-air chlorine-separation  process into sealed containers. The reduction  in chlorine emissions by more than 60 percent, to 21,ooo tons a year, allowed MagCorp to meet increasingly strict environmental regulations. As a result, MagCorp no longer ranks as the nation's worst overall toxic polluter; it is now the third worst (EPA  2001).

## REFERENCE s

- Arrington,  L. 1958. Great Basin Kingdom: Economic History of  the Latter-Day Saints, 1830-1900. Lincoln: University of  Nebraska  Press.
- Atlas, M. K. 2001. Safe and Sorry: Risk, Environmental  Equity, and  Hazardous Waste Management Facilities. Risk Analysis 21  (5): 939-954.

Bauman, J.

2001.

Tooele Residents Support Facility.

Deseret News

[Salt Lake City],

14

February,

$A, 10.

- Beck, J. 2001. Without Form and Void: The American Desert  at Trope and Terrain. Nepantla: Views from the South 2 (1): 63-83.
- Bern, D. i987a. Commissioners Caught in the Middle of Proposal. Tooele Transcript-Bulletin, 3 December, $A, 1.
- . i987b. Incinerator Would Boost Economy,  Companies Say. Tooele Transcript-Bulletin, 16 April, 5.4.3.
- Beyers,  W. B., and D. P .   Lindahl. 1996. Lone Eagles and High Fliers in Rural Producer Services. Rural Development Perspectives 11  (3): 2-10,
- Blanthorn, 0. 1998. A History of Tooele County. Salt Lake City: Utah State Historical Society.
- Bourke, L. 1994. Economic Attitudes and Responses  to Siting Hazardous Waste Facilities in  Rural Utah. Rural Sociology 59 (3):  465-496.
- Brooke, J. 1996. Next Door to a Danger, a Booming City. New York Times, 6 October, §A, 22.
- Bryant, E. 1848. Being the Journal of a Tour, by the Emigrant Route and South Pass of the Rocky Mountains, in the Years 1846-1847. New York: D. Appleton and Co.
- Campbell, E. 1983. The M Factors in Tooele's History. Utah Historical  Quarterly 51  (3): 272-288.
- Campbell, N. 2000. The Cultures of the American  West. London: Routledge.
- Davis, J.  S. 2005. Representing Place: 'Deserted Isles' and the Reproduction  of Bikini Atoll. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 95  (3): 607-625.
- Deller, S. C., T.-H. (S.) Tsai, D. W.  Marcouiller, and  D.  B .   K  English. 2001. The Role of Amenities and Quality of Life in Rural Economic Growth. American Journal  ofAgricultural Economics 83 ( 2 ) : 352-365.

Egan, T.

- EPA (U.S.  Environmental Protection Agency]. 2001. /tri/].
1996. Error Fans Fears of Chemical Cleanup at Utah Plant. New York Times, 1 September,  $A, 16. Toxic Releases Inventory Program. [www.epa.gov
- Eser, S. G., and A. E.  Luloff. 2003. Community Controversy over a Proposed Limestone Quarry. Society and Natural Resources 16  (9):  793-806.
- Francaviglia, R. 2003. Believing in Place: A Spiritual Geography of the Great  Basin. Reno: University of Nevada Press.
- Galston, W. A., and K.  J.  Baehler. 1995. Rural Development  in  the  United States:  Connecting Theory, Practice, and  Possibilities. Washington, D.C.:  Island  Press.
- Girdner, E. J., and J.  Smith. 2002. Killing Me Softly: Toxic Waste, Corporate Profit, and the Strugglefor Environmental Justice. New York: Monthly Press.
- Goetz, S. J., and  D.  J.  Kemlage. 1996. TSD Facilities Location  and Environmental  Justice. Review of Regional Studies 26 (3): 285-300.

- Goin, P.,  and P .   F .   Starrs. 2005. Black Rock. Reno: University of Nevada Press.
- Green, G. P., S. C. Deller, and D. W. Marcouiller, eds.  zooj. Amenities and RuralDevelopment: Theory, Methods, and Public Policy. Northampton, Mass.: Edward Elgar.
- Janofsky,  M.  zooz.  Utah County's Toxic Tradition Is under Threat. New York Times, 20 October, §A, 16. Johnson,  D. L.,  and L. A. Lewis.  2007. Land Degradation: Creation and Destruction. 2nd ed. Lanham, Md.: Rowman &amp; Littlefield.
- Kasperson, R. 2005. Siting Hazardous Facilities: Searching for Effective Institutions and Processes. In Managing Conflict in Facility  Siting: An International  Comparison, edited  by S. H. Lesbirel and D. Shaw, 18-35.  Cheltenham, England: Edward Elgar.
- Kousis, M.  1998.  Ecological Marginalization  in  Rural Areas: Actors,  Impacts,  Responses. Sociologia Ruralis 38  (1): 86-108.
- Larsen, S. C., and T. J.  Brock. 2005. Great Basin Imagery in Newspaper Coverage of Yucca Mountain. Geographical Review 95 (4): 517-536.
- Logan, J. R., and H. L.  Molotch.  1987. Urban Fortunes: The Political Economy of Place. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Malmquist,  0.  N.  1943.  More Than $jz,ooo,ooo  Spent on Tooele  County War  Plants. Salt Lake Tribune, 11 July, $A, 4.
- Martin, J. 1993.  IMBY, Please. Fortune, 4 October, 13-14.
- McCormick, N. D.,  and J.  S. McCormick. 2002. Saltair. In Great Salt  Lake: An Anthology, edited by G. Topping, 167-186.  Logan: Utah  State University Press.
- McGranahan,  D. A.  1999. Natural Amenities Drive Rural Population  Change. Agricultural  Economic Report No. 781. Washington, D.C.: U.S.  Department of Agriculture, Economic  Research Service.
- McGurty, E. 2007. Transforming Environmentalism: Warren Couny, PCBs and the Origins of Environmental Justice. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.
- Mogren, E. 2002. Warm Sands: Atomic Mill  Tailings in the Atomic West. Albuquerque:  University of New Mexico Press.
- Murphy, M. B. 1994.  Tooele County. In Utah Historical  Encyclopedia, edited by A. K. Powell, 559. Salt Lake City: University of  Utah  Press.
- Nokkentved, N. S. 2005. Utah Still Has Cards to Play in N-Waste Game. Daily Herald [Provo, Utah], 16 April, §A,  1.
- Notarianni,  P .   F . 1994.  Mining. In Utah Historical Encyclopedia, edited by A.  K. Powell, 368-369.  Salt Lake City: University of  Utah  Press.
- PFS  [Private  Fuel  Storage].  N.d. Developing  Safe, Clean, Temporary  Storage  for Spent Fuel  from Commercial  Nuclear  Power Plants.  [www.privatefuelstorage.com].
- Power, T .  M.  1996. Lost Landscapes and Failed Economies: The  Search for a Value of Place. Washington, D.C.:  Island  Press.
- Raymond, E.  1997.  When  the Desert Won't  Bloom: Environmental  Limitation  and the Great Basin. In Many Wests:  Place, Culture, and Regional Identity, edited by D. M. Wrobel and M. C. Steiner, 7192. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
- Robyn,  L. 2002. Indigenous  Knowledge  and Technology:  Creating  Environmental  Justice in  the Twenty-First Century. American Indian Quarterly 26 ( 2 ) : 198-220.
- Rothman, D. S.  1998.  Environmental  Kuznets Curves-Real Progress or Passing the Buck? A Case for Consumption Based Approaches. Ecological  Economics z j (2): 177-194.
- Sack, R. D.  1999.  A Sketch of a Geographic Theory of Morality. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 89 (1): 26-44.
- Schultheis, R. 1996. The Hidden West:  Journey  in the American Outback. Guilford, Conn.: Lyons Press. Shields, R. 1991.. Places on the Margin: Alternative Geographies of Modernity. New York Routledge.
- Shumway, J.  M., and S. Otterstrom. 2001. Spatial Patterns  of Migration  and Income Change in the Mountain West: The Dominance of Service-Based, Amenity-Rich  Counties. Professional Geographer 53  (4):  492-502.
- Smith, J. S. 1934. The Travels ofJedediah Smith: A  Documentary Outline including the Journal of the Great American  Pathfinder. Edited by M. S. Sullivan. Santa Ana, Calif.: Fine Arts Press.
- Spangler, J.  D.,  and D.  K.  Spangler.  2001.  Toxic Utah: Paying the Price. Deseret News [Salt Lake City], 13 February, $A, 1.
- State of Utah. 2000. Tooele County Demographic and Economic Profile. Salt Lake City State of Utah, Department of Workforce Services.

- Stauber, K.  N.  2001.  Why Invest in Rural America-And How? A Critical Public Policy Question  for the 2ist Century. Economic Review [Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City],  March, 33-63.
- Struglinski, S.  2006.  PFS Site Looks Doomed: 2 Rulings Likely to Keep N-Waste Out of Utah. Deseret Morning News [Salt Lake City], 8 September, §A, 01.
- TCED  [Tooele County Engineering  Department].  2005.  Tooele County Land  Use  Ordinance 17-3, Hazardous Industries Zoning Districts. Tooele County Engineering Department. [www.co.tooele .ut.us/PDF/Land\_Use/TCORD94-17.pdf].
- Thomas Consultants.  2002.  Tooele Valley Demographic  and  Market  Assessment.  [www.co.tooele .ut.us/PDF/Economics%~oT00ele%~oValley0/o~omaster%~oplan.pdf] .
- TT-B [ Tooele Transcript-Bulletin]. 1968.  Proposed  Salt Lake Waterfront  Plant. Tooele [Utah] Tram script-Bulletin, 23 April, $A, 01.
- . 1987.  County Considers Possibilities of Hazardous Waste Location. Tooele [Utah] TranscriptBulletin, 17 February $A, 01.
- Twain, M. [ 18721 1994. Roughing It. New York  Penguin.
- UAC  [Utah Association  of  Counties].  2002. Utah County Fact  Book. Murray:  Utah  Association  of Counties.
- U.S.  Census  Bureau.  2008.  Population  Estimates  and  Projections,  2007.  [www.census.gov/poyest /datasets.html].
- Van Alfen, P.   G.  2002.  Salt and Steam: Great Salt Lake's Boats and Boat Builders, 1847-1901.  In Great Salt Lake: An Anthology, edited by G. Topping, 204-228.  Logan: Utah State University Press.
- Van  der Horst, D.  2007.  NIMBY or Not? Exploring  the Relevance of Location  and the Politics of Voiced Opinions in Renewable Energy Siting Controversies. Energy Policy 35  (5): 2705-2714.
- Vandergeest,  P .   and  E.  M.  DuPuis.  1996.  Introduction.  In Creating the Countryside: The Politics of Rural  and  Environmental Discourse, edited by E.  M. DuPuis  and  P .   Vandergeest, 1-25. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
- Verdoia,  K. ~ O O I .   Interview with Teryl  Hunsaker. [ www.kued.org/productions/skullvalley/documentary /intervicws/hunsaker.html].
- Walker, P.  A.  2003.  Reconsidering  'Regional' Political Ecologies: Toward a Political Ecology of  the Rural American West. Progress in Human Geography 27 (1): 7-24.
- Ward, C. 1999. Canaries on the Rim: Living Downwind in the West. New York Verso Press.
- Webster, D.  1993.  Happiness Is a Toxic Waste Zone. Outside, September, 58-63,130-136.
- Wulfhorst,  J.  2000.  Collective Identity  and  Hazardous Waste Management. Rural  Sociology 65  (2): 275-294.