This article was downloaded by: [BYU Brigham Young University]

On: 13 January 2015, At: 22:59

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,

37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## With Numbers in Place: Security, Territory, and the Production of Calculable Space

Reuben Rose-Redwood a

a Department of Geography , University of Victoria Published online: 09 Nov 2011.

To cite this article: Reuben Rose-Redwood (2012) With Numbers in Place: Security, Territory, and the Production of Calculable Space, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 102:2, 295-319, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2011.620503

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2011.620503

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## With Numbers in Place: Security, Territory, and the Production of Calculable Space

Reuben Rose-Redwood

Department of Geography, University of Victoria

Recent geographical scholarship on the politics of calculation has led to a reevaluation of the role of statistics, census-taking, and mapping as calculative techniques that have been of primary importance to the rise of the modern territorial state. The current study contributes to this literature by examining how the political technologies of street addressing have been employed to reconfigure the territory of the United States as a calculable space of security. Drawing on extensive archival research and thirty semistructured, in-depth interviews, this study provides a genealogy of calculable space, focusing particularly on the extension of citystyle street addressing systems into rural communities to aid emergency management, homeland security, and various other governmental measures as part of the general process that Foucault (2007) has referred to as the 'urbanization of the territory.' As a case study, I consider the campaign to readdress rural areas in West Virginia to illustrate the social and political processes at work in remaking the territory into a space of calculation by encoding the landscape with a spatial regime of inscriptions. The results presented here show how 911 addressing systems have been central to the reorganization of political space at a time when the apparatuses of security are being 'enhanced' by the apparent marvels of geospatial technology. To the extent that such technologies are themselves implicated in reshaping the very spaces that they are designed to represent, this study calls our attention to the pervasive role that spatial calculation plays in the production of a geo-coded world. Key Words: emergency response systems, geo-coding, governmentality, security, street addressing.

最近在计算政治的地理学术成就导致了对统计，人口普查，和制图等计算技术的作用的重新评估，这些技术对现 代领土国家的崛起具有头等重要性。本研究考察给街道定址的政治技术是如何作为一种可计算的安全空间被应用 到重新配置美国的领土的研究中的，从而有助于这一领域的文献发展。借鉴于广泛的档案研究和三十个半结构化 的深入访谈，这项研究提供了一个可计算空间的族谱，特别致力于把城市风格的街道定址系统延伸到农村社区， 以帮助应急管理，国土安全，和其它各种被福柯（2007年）称为"领土的城市化进程"之一般过程的一部分的 政府举措。作为一个案例研究，我考察在西弗吉尼亚州的农村重新定址的运动，以说明通过使用铭文空间制度对 景观编码，从而把领土重新变为计算空间的工作中的社会和政治的进程。这里介绍的结果显示911定址系统，在 当今安全设备正被地理空间技术的显著奇迹所"强化"的时代，已经成为重组政治空间的中心。在一定程度上， 这种技术本身被牵涉在重塑它们所代表的这些空间过程中，本研究要求我们注意到空间计算在一个地理编码的世 界的生产中所发挥的无孔不入的作用。关键词：应急响应系统，地理编码，治理性，安全性，街道定址。

El reciente inter´ es de la academia geogr´ afica por la pol´ ıtica del c´ alculo ha llevado a la revaluaci´ on del papel de la estad´ ıstica, el levantamiento censal y la cartograf´ ıa como t´ ecnicas calculadoras que han sido de importancia clave para la consolidaci´ on del moderno estado territorial. El actual estudio contribuye a esta literatura examinando la manera como las tecnolog´ ıas pol´ ıticas de nomenclatura han sido utilizadas para reconfigurar el territorio de los Estados Unidos como un espacio calculable de seguridad. Apoy´ andonos en amplia investigaci´ on de archivos y en treinta entrevistas a profundidad semiestructuradas, este estudio permiti´ o obtener una genealog´ ıa del espacio calculable, enfoc´ andose particularmente en la extensi´ on de los sistemas de nomenclatura de estilo urbano hacia comunidades rurales para ayudar en tareas de manejo de emergencia, seguridad del terru˜ no y varias otras medidas gubernamentales, como parte del proceso al que Foucault (2007) se refiere como 'urbanizaci´ on del territorio'. A manera de estudio de caso, considero la campa˜ na para reorientar las ´ areas rurales de Virginia Occidental como el modo de ilustrar los procesos sociales y pol´ ıticos que intervienen en la reconstrucci´ on del territorio en un espacio de c´ alculo codificando el paisaje con un r´ egimen espacial de inscripciones. Los resultados que aqu´ ı se presentan muestran la manera como 911 sistemas de nomenclatura han sido centrales para la reorganizaci´ on del espacio pol´ ıtico en una ´ epoca cuando los aparatos de seguridad est´ an siendo 'fortalecidos' por las aparentes maravillas de la tecnolog´ ıa geoespacial. En la medida en que tales tecnolog´ ıas a la vez est´ an implicadas en la reconfiguraci´ on de los propios espacios que representan seg´ un el cometido para el cual ellas fueron dise˜ nadas, este estudio nos llama la atenci´ on hacia el penetrante papel que juega la calculaci´ on espacial en la producci´ on de un

mundo geocodificado. Palabras clave: sistemas de respuesta de emergencia, geocodificaci´ on, gobernabilidad, seguridad, nomenclatura .

The modern state is born, I think, when governmentality became a calculated and reflected practice.

-Michel Foucault, Security, Territory, Population (2007, 165)

Calculation is therefore key to the constitution of the modern state . . . Since the seventeenth century, the predominant ontological understanding of the world has been its calculability.

-Stuart Elden, 'Missing the Point: Globalization, Deterritorialization and the Space of the World' (2005, 15-16)

That number must rule, that the imperative must be: 'count!'-who doubts this today?

-Alain Badiou, Number and Numbers (2008, 1)

O n12July1998,ataround 1:30 a.m., more than 1,000 youth took to the streets in the otherwise sleepy town of State College, Pennsylvania, and tore down street lamps, shattered the windows of businesses, damaged car windshields, and lit several bonfires in the middle of a major thoroughfare as onlookers threw beer bottles, eggs, and toilet paper from apartment balconies into the crowd below (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Scenes from the so-called 'July riot' of 1998 in State College, Pennsylvania. Source: Blair and Cole (1998). (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

After several hours, local police in riot gear created a barricade and used tear gas, pepper spray, and nightsticks to disperse the crowd, arresting a total of twenty people, over half of whom were students at Pennsylvania State University, for disorderly conduct and failure to disperse on lawful order (Blair and Cole 1998; Parfitt 1998a). In the days that followed, community leaders, police, university administrators, students, and local residents debated the ultimate causes of the 'riot' and how to prevent such events from reoccurring in the future (Parfitt 1998b). The most common explanation was the irresponsible abuse of alcohol, although a strong case can also be made that lax police enforcement, the annual July arts festival, and antistudent zoning ordinances contributed to the events that unfolded (Alt 1998). What interests me here, however, is not so much what caused this particular riot but rather how the subsequent response by local authorities, which I discuss below, powerfully illustrates the extent to which the calculative rationalities of 'number' have become entrenched in the workings of modern government.

In the aftermath of the July riot, city officials were convinced that the built environment itself was largely to blame, particularly the balconies on the numerous high-rise student apartment complexes in the downtown area (Hanson 1998; Parfitt 1998a). Consequently, one of the primary strategies of riot prevention that city authorities proposed was to require that room numbers be inscribed on all balconies in buildings that had received complaints for public disturbances (Gates 1999a, 1999b; Parfitt 1999; Koons 2000). This proposal to extend balcony numbering encountered strong opposition among apartment and condominium association representatives, who feared that the numbering of balconies would diminish the aesthetic appeal of their buildings and would therefore reduce the value of property. As the president of the Midtown Square Condominium Association, Hart Nelsen, lamented, 'I dread the thought of walking by and seeing numbers painted or hanging on the building.' Others criticized the idea of numbering balconies on the grounds of personal safety, as they felt that 'the numbers would make tenants more vulnerable to harassment.' State College Police Chief Tom King dismissed such concerns and insisted that balcony numbering was imperative to ensure public safety while enhancing everyday accountability. As King explained, 'It's also part of our goal . . . so that people walking to a movie that get beer dumped on their head would know where it came from' (Gates 1999b, n.p.). The borough council eventually approved the balcony numbering plan (Figure 2), and during a subsequent riot in July 2000, it was reported by the local press that, 'Balconies where people were naked or throwing projectiles to incite the crowd were identified by their numbers' (Bradley and Cichon 2000, n.p.).

Several things are worth noting about this particular example of balcony numbering. First, the inscription of numbers onto apartment balconies was a key strategy of spatial identification that was used as a mechanism of security to regulate the interface between 'public' and 'private' spaces. Second, this example clearly illustrates how the organization of space according to the logic of number facilitated the production of knowledge, which in turn enhanced the potential capacity for governing a population. This need not suggest that such calculative techniques always have their intended effect, nor does it preclude the possibility of resistance. In fact, what this vignette demonstrates is that the numbering of buildings is actually part of a contested political process rather than being reducible to an apolitical technicality alone. To put it more precisely, we could say that the 'technical' itself is constituted through a spatial politics of calculation and that questions of calculability are therefore central to understanding the interrelations of space, knowledge, and power. 1

I have taken the antiriot measure of balcony numbering as my chief point of departure for this article in large part because it challenges us to question the taken-for-grantedness that surrounds the mundane and seemingly apolitical practices of street addressing. It does so by employing a device that literary scholars call defamiliarization; that is, the process whereby the prosaic elements of everyday life are made to appear 'strange' or 'unfamiliar' by shifting one's frame of reference to look at a taken-for-granted phenomenon from a slightly different vantage point (Shklovsky 1990; see also Painter 2006; Agnew 2009). This initial exercise is necessary because street addressing is generally seen as a technical procedure best left to postmasters, planning professionals, and geospatial technicians. Yet, the primary aim of this study is to demonstrate that the spatial practices of street addressing-the naming of streets, numbering of buildings, and construction of street signage systems-have a larger political significance, because they have historically played an important role in the social production of the calculable spaces that make up the 'geo-coded world' (Curry 1999; Pickles 2004; Rose-Redwood 2006). To be sure, the 'world' has not been geo-coded in a singular fashion; rather, the point of a critical genealogy of spatial calculation is to highlight the specificities and contingencies of geo-coding

<!-- image -->

practices, which are invariably situated within particular historical and geographic contexts.

Although such techniques of geo-coding, conceived in a broad sense, long predate the geospatial technologies of the digital age, the latter have come to rely so extensively on standardized street address data that when the world does not immediately conform to the logic of the code, the world itself is increasingly being reconfigured into a 'machine-readable' format (Dodge and Kitchin 2005a, 2005b; Kitchin and Dodge 2011). It is for this reason that the realist distinction between

Figure 2. The numbering of balconies as an 'antiriot' measure in State College, Pennsylvania. Source: Photograph taken by author, 2003. (Color figure available online.)

spatial representation and the supposedly extradiscursive world of material objects begins to fall apart, as the digital geo-coding process has often gone hand-inhand with inscribing the logic of code into the world itself (Pickles 2004). The critical realist response is that although the abstract representations of geographic information systems (GIS) might oversimplify reality due to the constraints of digital technologies, 'we know the world is not so, we just represent it as such' (Leszczynski 2009b, 359). At first glance, this line of argument seems plausible enough, yet the problem is that it loses sight

of the various ways in which representation has the capacity to reshape the world in its own image. If it is indeed the case that 'spatial representations become 'real' in database terms in the form of numerical abstracts serialized as objects of code' (Leszczynski 2009a, 596), it is hardly a coincidence that the material spaces of the world are increasingly coming to resemble these serialized systems of numerical calculation in the era of geospatial technology. This is precisely why a genealogy of geo-coding practices must consider not only the digital ontologies of geospatial databases themselves but, more important, the points of contact between spatial representations, ontologies, and the world. 2

House numbering systems are a prime example of such a contact point, because they embed the calculative rationalities of code into the world to render it amenable to the spatial calculations of government. Although the case of balcony numbering just described was targeted specifically at the policing of university students, these calculative techniques and governmental rationalities have also informed the use of street addressing more generally as a strategy of governing populations. In fact, at the same time that the borough of State College was debating the numbering of balconies, county governments across Pennsylvania and throughout the nation were engaged in a significant campaign to readdress many rural areas by replacing the U.S. Postal Service's rural route and box numbers with 'city-style' street addresses in the name of public safety, security, and emergency management (Lucy 1995; Curry, Phillips, and Regan 2004; Curry 2005). As we shall see, this extension of the calculative techniques of government from the city to the countryside across the United States was framed chiefly in terms of security imperatives, because the computer databases in 911 emergency call centers required the code of 'locatable addresses' affixed to residences for the new Enhanced 911 emergency communication systems to work. 3 In other words, the 'world' of the countryside did not match up with the structure of the database, so the proposed solution was to remake the space of the world by embedding a new regime of spatial calculability within it so that the world would then conform to the ontology of the database.

Following the attacks of 11 September 2001 (hereinafter 9/11), the perceived need for constructing the U.S. 'homeland' as a secure and legible space led not only to the reassertion of national territory as the 'spatial extent of sovereignty' (Elden 2009) but also reinforced the ongoing project of producing calculable spaces within the territorial confines of the 'homeland'

itself. The readdressing of the countryside as a space of security was arguably one of the key political technologies employed by governmental authorities to render the interiority of the territory calculable (Curry, Phillips, and Regan 2004). Yet, the fact that these readdressing programs have been underway since the early 1980s suggests that the production of territory as a calculable space of security must be situated within a broader spatial history of political calculation.

This study contributes to and extends the emerging geographical literature on space, politics, and calculation by examining how the production of calculable space has reconfigured the apparatuses of security and subjectivities of citizenship in an age of heightened instability. I begin by providing an overview of recent scholarship on the spatial politics of calculation and the genealogies of calculable territory. In doing so, I suggest that Foucault's (2007) recently published lecture course, Security, Territory, Population offers important insights regarding the spatial mechanisms of security. Although Foucault himself suggested that 'population' replaced 'territory' as the principal object of modern governmentality, various geographers have argued that the same calculative rationalities that underpinned the government of populations also served as the basis for producing the calculable spaces of modern territory ( ´ O Tuathail 1996; Braun 2000; Elden 2007; Hannah 2009). I am generally in broad agreement with such geographical critiques of Foucault's rather narrow conception of territory. I maintain in the next section, however, that one of Foucault's key insights, the implications of which have not been fully appreciated, is that territory itself was reorganized according to the model of the 'town' from the eighteenth century to the present. To understand the political technologies of modern territory, therefore, we must pay careful attention to the ways in which the calculative techniques of the city have reshaped the spatial organization of the territory at large.

Moving beyond Foucault's own genealogical investigations, the central argument presented in this study is that the extension of street addressing systems from the city to the countryside has been one of the fundamental calculative strategies devised for reorganizing the territory into a space of security. In this article, I provide a genealogy of calculable space in the United States by tracing the spatial history of street addressing as a political technology that first emerged in the city yet was later used to reconfigure the territory more generally. To illustrate my argument, I focus particularly on the case of West Virginia, because it was the first

U.S. state to adopt rural free delivery of mail in the late nineteenth century but one of the last to replace its rural route and box numbering systems with city-style street addresses at the turn of the twenty-first century. Because we are still witnessing what Foucault (2007, 336) has called the 'urbanization of the territory,' the project of conducting a genealogy of calculable space is still very much a history of the present.

## 'Number's Despotism': Technologies of Power and the Geographies of Calculable Territory

## Space, Politics, Calculation

The interrelations of space, politics, and calculation have become a major focus of critical geographic inquiry as an increasing number of geographers have sought to trace the historical emergence of various calculative techniques as part of a critical spatial history of modern technologies of power (Braun 2000; Hannah 2000, 2009; Duncan 2002; Blomley 2003; Elden 2005, 2006, 2007; Legg 2005, 2006, 2007; Crampton and Elden 2006; Rose-Redwood 2006, 2008a; Dillon 2007; Huxley 2006, 2007, 2008; Rose-Redwood, Alderman, and Azaryahu 2010; Crampton 2011; Ettlinger 2011). Crampton and Elden (2006), for instance, pointed out that whereas much is known about the history of quantification as a method of geographical analysis, far less research has explored how numerical calculation itself has historically reshaped political practices and the geographies of everyday life. This distinction between quantitative methods in geography and the geographies of calculation is significant, because it draws attention to the way in which calculative rationalities have been used to refashion the world in their own image.

Over the course of the past two centuries, the logic of number has come to play an ever-increasing role in the conduct of social, political, and economic affairs (Hacking 1991; Rose 1991, 1999; Miller 1992, 2001; T. Porter 1994, 1995; Appadurai 1996; Scott 1998; Cohen 1999; Hamlin 1999; Mitchell 2002; Badiou 2008). So pervasive has the rule of calculability become, argued Badiou (2008, 2), that '[w]hat counts-in the sense of what is valuedis that which is counted.' One need not fully subscribe to Badiou's entire philosophy of mathematics to concur with his general assessment that everything from dominant political and economic practices to scientific and cultural representations is governed by the calculative rationalities of number, which have come to reshape the way we envision our place in the world. With more than a hint of rhetorical florish, Badiou (2008, 1) went so far as to declare that currently 'we live in the era of number's despotism.' The point of this line of critique is not to resort to a crude form of 'anti-mathematical romanticism' (Mackay 2008, viii) but, rather, as Crampton (2011, 92) put it, to interrogate 'the way that numbers and counting have become central to the way the world is understood.' Such talk of the 'despotism' of number is, without doubt, an exaggeration of sorts, yet it nevertheless highlights what we might call the 'political life' of numbers-that is, the manner in which number has been employed as a political technology that renders the world calculable as a strategy of government. 4

Scholars from various fields of study have examined the politics of number, or the calculative rationalities of political practices, all of which can be seen as contributing to what Miller and Napier (1993) have broadly termed the 'genealogies of calculation.' Drawing in large part on Foucault's later work on governmentality, much of this scholarship has reevaluated the role of statistics, census-taking, and map-making as technologies of power that developed in conjunction with the rise of the modern territorial state. The aim of such works is not so much to provide a general theory of the state but rather to examine how governmental power is exercised through the deployment of political technologies of calculation (Dean 1999; Rose 1999; Miller and Rose 2008).

Geographers have been particularly concerned with rethinking the role of space and territory in relation to the calculative techniques associated with Foucault's conception of governmentality ( ´ O Tuathail, 1996; Braun 2000; Rose-Redwood 2006; Elden 2007, 2010; Huxley 2007, 2008; Cronin 2008; Hannah 2009; Crampton 2011). The recent publication of Foucault's lecture courses has stimulated a new wave of geographical studies on the politics of calculation and the production of calculable space, with the latter generally conceived in terms of a 'genealogy of calculable territory' (Hannah 2009, 66). This focus in the geographical literature on the question of territory can, in many respects, be seen as a reaction against Foucault's argument that the chief target of modern government was 'population,' rather than territory, which has led various geographers to highlight how an entire assemblage of calculative techniques was also developed to construct 'territory' as a space of governmental intervention (Elden 2007, 2010; Hannah 2009; Crampton 2011).

Elden (2007, 578) has perhaps gone the furthest to make this argument, insisting that the 'same kinds of mechanisms that Foucault looks at in relation to population are used to understand and control territory.' He went on to argue that 'Foucault's notion of the politics of calculation is therefore crucial, but not as something which only manifests itself in population, but, rather, in territory too' (Elden 2007, 578). As part of a genealogical project on the making of modern territory, Elden (2010) maintained that we should move beyond the conventional wisdom that conceives of territory in an ahistorical fashion as merely a 'bounded space' within which the state exercises its sovereign authority. 5 Instead, he contended, we must critically interrogate the historical emergence of territory as a set of politico-economic, politico-strategic, legal, and technical practices.

Whereas much attention has been devoted to struggles over the politico-economic ownership of land and the politico-strategic control of terrain, far less work has examined the legal and technical dimensions of territory as a political technology of government. Elden's (2010) work is particularly important in this regard because it underscores the crucial role that both juridicolegal mechanisms and the calculative techniques of measurement have played in the production of modern territory. He convincingly argued that the spatial techniques of bordering and boundary making that are typically associated with territory, as well as the legal apparatuses that legitimate and authorize such practices, are dependent on a preexisting conception of space that allows for 'a calculative grasp of the material world' (Elden 2010, 809). The broader concept of calculable space , in short, is a condition of possibility that has enabled the modern notion of territory to emerge as a political category in its contemporary form.

Elden's genealogical investigation of territory, it should be noted, has not gone unchallenged. For instance, Antonsich (2011) insisted that political geographers must focus on the social dimensions of 'bounded' territorial spaces, and he argues that Elden's (2010) emphasis on the calculative techniques that produce territory simply 'reduce[s] the political to a mere technicality for measuring and surveying space' (424). This objection, however, seems to miss the point that if we look inside the black box of the 'technical,' we shall find that it is shot through with the social practices of the 'political' at every turn. Rather than conceptually distinguishing the socio-political sphere from the realm of the technical, it is more productive to consider how territory is produced through a series of 'socio-technical practices,' because, as Painter (2010, 1096) rightly argued, 'the material and technical are interwoven with the social in the production of territory' (see also Elden 2010, 2011; Strandsbjerg 2010). This is precisely why Foucault's notion of political technology is so useful, because it acknowledges that there is indeed a politics of calculation and, as numerous scholars have shown, the socio-technical production of 'calculable territory' is far more than a mere technicality; rather, it is one of the key mechanisms for asserting sovereignty and creating a space of legibility that is amenable to governing at a distance (Scott 1998; Hannah 2009; Crampton 2011).

Of course, the implementation of any governmental program of calculability is subject to the 'messy actualities of social relations' (O'Malley, Weir, and Shearing 1997, 509). As a result, the production of calculable territory can be a highly contested political process (Hannah 2009, 2010), and we must therefore be careful not to ignore 'the interstitial slippages that can occur in the application of power and the moments of instability that emerge as a result' (Rutherford 2007, 300). There is also a danger in overemphasizing the tactics of resistance and 'unfixity of rule,' however, as this might inadvertently draw attention away from the spatial permanences that are indeed produced-albeit through a never-completed, reiterative process-as well as the strategies that governmental authorities employ to secure (with variable success) the consent of those they seek to govern.

Another point of clarification is perhaps needed to highlight the interplay between state and nonstate actors in relation to the production of calculable territory. Following Scott's (1998) influential analysis of state projects of legibility, it is often assumed that projects of spatial calculation have primarily been carried out to consolidate and extend the sovereignty of the state. Yet, as we shall see, the private interests of capital also have a considerable stake in reconfiguring the interiority of the territory as a calculable space at precisely the same time that the globalizing logic of capital calls for the dissolution of territorial borders as a barrier to capital accumulation. Instead of opposing 'territorial' and 'capitalistic' logics of power as inherently contradictory (Harvey 2006, 107), this tension might be reframed by asking what specific configurations of territory have been championed by the interests of capital, to what ends, and by means of what sort of calculative techniques and political strategies? Although the interests of state power and private capital are not reducible to one another, Harvey's (2006, 107) intriguing

suggestion that the two are 'closely intertwined' deserves further consideration. The making of calculable territory is, without question, one of the signature projects of state sovereignty, but as I illustrate later, Foucault's discussion of the different spatial mechanisms of power provides a useful framework for exploring the interrelations of sovereignty and other forms of power, such as discipline and security, with respect to the production of calculable territory. 6

## Sovereignty, Discipline, Security

In his lecture course, Security, Territory, Population, Foucault (2007) distinguished three mechanisms of power-sovereignty, discipline, and security-and he suggested that each is associated with different calculative techniques of spatial organization. In schematic terms, Foucault (2007, 11) began with a preliminary assessment by proposing that 'sovereignty is exercised within the borders of a territory, discipline is exercised on the bodies of individuals, and security is exercised over the whole population.' He quickly cautioned, however, that such a characterization of the spatial strategies of power is too simplistic, as the management of spatial 'multiplicities' is central to all three mechanisms of power under consideration. Nevertheless, the question of space is taken up in different ways within each dominant regime of power, and Foucault therefore devoted much of his attention to examining precisely these differences. Although we might legitimately take issue with Foucault's rather narrow conception of territory in relation to sovereignty, I would contend that it is in his discussion of the spatial mechanisms of security that the question of territory reemerges in a more nuanced form.

Foucault (2007) opened his analysis of the mechanisms of power by arguing that the spatial problematic of modern sovereignty is the delineation of territory as a spatial diagram of political control. In this regard, the relationship between the center of sovereignty and the spatial extent of the territory within which sovereign power is exercised is of primary importance. Discipline, by contrast, operates through the structuring of space as a distribution of individuated cellular modules that are organized in a hierarchical fashion according to the logic of the 'camp.' The spatial organization of the town vis-` a-vis the territory plays a central role in Foucault's account of the spaces of sovereignty and discipline. From the perspective of sovereign power, 'the layout of the town was basically thought of in terms of the mostgeneral, overall category of the territory' (Foucault

2007, 16). Disciplinary power, on the other hand, shifts the spatial frame of reference so that 'the town is not thought of on the basis of the larger territory, but on the basis of a smaller, geometrical figure, which is a kind of architectural module' (Foucault 2007, 16). For Foucault, the paradigmatic case of such a disciplinary space is the Roman camp, or grid-plan town, which was reintroduced in Europe during the sixteenth century as the basis for constructing a 'whole series of artificial towns' that were 'built from scratch' (Foucault 2007, 15). The argument here is not that sovereign control over territory disappears with the arrival of disciplinary mechanisms of power; rather, it is to suggest that territory is no longer the primary spatial register through which the town itself is conceptualized, organized, and constructed through a series of governmental strategies.

Foucault contrasts both sovereignty and discipline with the apparatuses of security. Although modern forms of sovereignty are linked to the notion of territory and disciplinary power seeks to structure the 'distribution of elements' within a manufactured space, Foucault argued that the mechanisms of security work on an already given 'reality' to regulate a series of possible events within a 'space of circulation.' He outlined the main distinctions between these mechanisms of power by noting that, sovereignty capitalizes a territory, raising the major problem of the seat of government, whereas discipline structures a space and addresses the essential problem of a hierarchical and functional distribution of elements, and security will try to plan a milieu in terms of events or series of events or possible elements, of [a] series that will have to be regulated within a multivalent and transformable framework. The specific space of security refers then to a series of possible events; it refers to the temporal and the uncertain, which have to be inserted within a given space. (Foucault 2007, 20)

This depiction of the 'space of security' as a site of temporal uncertainty led Foucault to conclude that the 'problem of the series' is one of the central concerns that gave rise to the apparatuses of security during the eighteenth century. On the one hand, security attempts to manage an indefinite series of accumulating units (e.g., buildings, streets, markets) and, on the other hand, there is a concurrent attempt to regulate an indefinite series of mobile elements (e.g., vehicles, commodities, diseases) circulating within a given space. Foucault suggested that the governing of these 'series' depended on the production of specific calculative knowledges of

both stationary and mobile elements within a 'milieu' of spatio-temporal uncertainty.

The town and its relation to a broader space of circulation is again the focal point of Foucault's genealogy of security (Elden 2007; Legg 2011). Rather than viewing the town according to the model of the territory (sovereignty) or as an architectural module (discipline), the apparatuses of security work on the temporal series of possible occurrences within a space of probabilities. Under a regime of security, Foucault (2007) maintained, 'the town will not be conceived or planned according to a static perception that would ensure the perfection of the function there and then, but will open onto a future that is not exactly controllable, not precisely measured or measurable, and a good town plan takes into account precisely what might happen' (20, italics added). The emphasis placed on the 'urban' as a space of security does not imply that the political technologies of territory ceased to play an important role in the formation of the modern state. On the contrary, Foucault contended that the proliferation of the apparatuses of security resulted in what he referred to as the urbanization of the territory , which, during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, 'involved making . . . the entire territory, into a sort of big town; arranging things so that the territory is organized like a town, on the model of a town, and as perfectly as a town' (336).

A classic illustration of this spatial transformation, which Foucault himself did not mention, is the establishment of the U.S. Township and Range settlement system of 1785, which laid out the territory as a whole according to the model of the grid-plan town (Pattison 1957; Johnson 1976; Linklater 2002; Hubbard 2009). The calculative techniques that underpinned this process had less to do with the construction of territorial boundaries to demarcate the limits of sovereignty than they did with the production of a calculable space of numerical coordinates within a territorialized space to contend with the uncertainties of future settlement. 7 This shift away from viewing the town as a microcosm of the territory and toward the reorganization of the territory according to the logic of the town is one of Foucault's crucial insights in Security, Territory, Population , and I would argue that it is of far more than historical interest alone, because, as this study seeks to demonstrate, this same process is currently reshaping the geographies of calculation today through the production of a geo-coded world.

Although Foucault's lectures provide a useful starting point for theorizing the spatial mechanisms of power, they are also frustratingly provisional and incomplete, particularly with respect to considering the relation between the production of sovereign territory and the spaces of security. One could, for instance, extend Foucault's argument to make a more explicit case that these spatial mechanisms of power are not mutually exclusive but rather deeply interconnected. Indeed, a compelling argument can be made that the spaces of security are themselves part of the territorial strategy of state sovereignty. Alternatively, if we concede to Foucault's point that since the eighteenth century the territory has been arranged according to the model of the town, this would lead to an understanding of territory as part of an urban strategy of security that has been extended beyond the confines of the city itself. Yet, regardless of whether we emphasize the 'territorial' or the 'urban' as the primary register of spatial ordering, it is worth noting that each is dependent on a general conception of spatial calculability (Elden 2010). 8

In this sense, a genealogy of calculable territory and the spaces of security should be part of a more extensive critical spatial history of calculable space, which would explore the social production of space through the deployment of a series of calculative techniques, including the demarcation of territorial boundaries, the establishment of property regimes through cadastral mapping, and the encoding of places with addressing systems that provide the condition of possibility for the digital geocoding of everyday life. In this study, I focus particularly on the latter practice of using the calculative rationalities of number to geo-code the world through the construction of regimes of spatial inscription (RoseRedwood 2006, 2008a, 2008b; for a more general discussion of inscription devices, see Latour 1986, 1987, 1999). As a spatial practice, street addressing first arose during the eighteenth century as a political technology of government (Joyce 2003; Denis and Milliot 2004; Blumreiter 2005; Tantner 2007a, 2007b, 2009; Thale 2007; Cicchini 2008; Denis 2008; Rose-Redwood 2008a). Contrary to popular wisdom, the primary purpose of introducing house numbering systems was not solely to provide a means of spatial orientation for residents or visitors in the modern city. On the contrary, Tantner (2009, 7) convincingly demonstrated that this calculative technology emerged in the 'border areas of early modern police, military and tax administration. It aimed to give the state access to the riches and resources of every house, and to make it easier to control, tax or recruit their inhabitants, or to lodge soldiers.' Much work remains to be done if we are to provide a more detailed genealogy of this first wave of house

numbering regimes in different historico-geographical contexts. Yet, in the remainder of this study, I focus instead primarily on what might be termed the 'second wave' of street addressing campaigns to show how these practices are part of an ongoing process of establishing new spatial regimes of inscription, which continue to reshape the spaces of calculation that have become so essential to making the geo-coded world of calculable territory.

## Methods

Before delving into the historical material presented in the next section, a brief discussion of methods is in order. The research presented here on the spatial history of street addressing in the United States is the result of both extensive archival work over the past decade and the analysis of thirty semistructured, in-depth interviews that I conducted in 2008 with street addressing coordinators, GIS specialists, emergency response managers, county commissioners, postal officials, planners, private contractors, and local residents. In the selection of interview participants, I adopted a purposeful sampling strategy (Patton 2002), whereby individuals who were professionally involved in street addressing programs as well as those who had been directly affected by such programs were contacted as potential interviewees. All interview participants agreed to allow their real names to be used in the presentation of results during the consent process.

After receiving ethics approval to conduct research with human subjects from the Institutional Review Board at Texas A&amp;M University in April 2008, and funding to support the project from the Library of Congress, I sent a preliminary e-mail query to the National Emergency Number Association (NENA), because this organization has played an integral role in developing standards for designing street addressing systems to aid emergency response management in the United States (e.g., Lucy 1995). My initial query to NENA was then forwarded to various street addressing professionals across the country, many of whom had been actively involved in the early development of Enhanced 911 addressing systems in the 1980s and were still working in the field today. Because these individuals were dispersed across the United States, it was not feasible to meet face to face so I conducted a series of phone interviews instead. In addition to NENA, the Urban and Regional Information Systems Association

(URISA),anational organization for GIS professionals, has also been actively involved in establishing national address data standards. Since 1999, URISA has held an annual conference on street addressing practices, which is now cosponsored by NENA. Consequently, I conducted both phone and in-person interviews with various URISA members, including three past presidents of the association. I also selectively sampled and conducted phone interviews with emergency response professionals and addressing specialists, and engaged local residents who had been mentioned by name in historical newspaper reports about readdressing campaigns in different communities.

To narrow the scope of the study to provide a more in-depth account, I selected West Virginia as a primary case study to explore the 'messy actualities' associated with the use of street addressing as a political technology of government. The chief reason for focusing on West Virginia is that, as we shall see, the first experiment with the rural free delivery of mail in the United States occurred in Jefferson County, West Virginia, at the end of the nineteenth century, which laid the groundwork for the diffusion of rural postal addressing nationally. Moreover, at the time that I was conducting research for this study, the state was in the midst of replacing its rural route and box numbering systems with city-type street addresses to facilitate emergency response management and homeland security imperatives. It was therefore a transitional moment in the reconfiguration of calculable space in the West Virginian countryside, which offered the ideal conditions to explore the 'urbanization of the territory' by investigating the extension of the spatial mechanisms of security from the city to the 'country roads' that have become so ingrained in the American geographical imagination. 9

In October 2008, I traveled to West Virginia's capital city, Charleston, and conducted interviews with members of the West Virginia Statewide Addressing and Mapping Board as well as the director and staff at the Raleigh County 911 Emergency Operating Center. A month later, I then conducted fieldwork and on-site interviews with addressing professionals as well as local residents in Jefferson County, as it was the first county in the nation to adopt rural free delivery just over a century ago and had just recently converted its rural route numbers to city-style street addresses for the purposes of emergency response. It is worth emphasizing that the results presented in this study are context-specific, both historically and geographically, yet broader conclusions can certainly be drawn from this work.

## Spaces of Security: Street Addressing and the Urbanization of the Territory

## A Brief History of Street Addressing in the United States

Prior to the latter half of the eighteenth century, few cities and towns in North America or elsewhere had adopted the practice of numbering buildings and erecting signs at the corners of street intersections (Garrioch 1994; Rose-Redwood 2008a; Tantner 2009). By the 1790s, several cities in the United States, such as Philadelphia (1790) and New York (1793), began to follow their European counterparts in devising official house numbering plans. One of the earliest innovations was the separation of odd and even numbers on opposite sides of each street, which was first initiated in Philadelphia when a census-taker renumbered the city's buildings in conjunction with the first federal census in 1790 (Morbito 1965; Rose-Redwood 2008a). During the 1850s, city authorities in Philadelphia also devised whatcametobeknownasthe'decimal'systemofhouse numbering, where one hundred numbers were assigned to each city block to spatially regulate the shifting geographies of the urban built environment. The so-called Philadelphia system, which was widely adopted in cities throughout the United States, enabled local governmentstokeeptrack of the indefinite series of accumulating building units without completely reorganizing the sequence of house numbers every time an old building was torn down or a new one constructed. The decimal block numbering plan, and related systems, acquired their calculative power by decoupling the house number fromits initial referent (i.e., an individual building), and instead each numerical inscription would come to designate the spatial interval within which buildings would rise and fall according to the exigencies of the real estate market (Rose-Redwood 2008a; Tantner 2009).

The practice of house numbering was a calculative technique that provided a mechanism for the spatial individuation of urban households to serve a variety of governmental purposes, not the least of which was the collection of taxes, military registration, and governing the whereabouts of individuals who made up a population. Yet, the most vocal proponents of the introduction of house numbering in American cities and towns were not government authorities but rather privately financed city directory publishers, who insisted that the numbering of houses would facilitate the circulation of capital within an emerging system of cities in post-Revolutionary America. As I have illustrated in previous studies, directory publishers explicitly argued that the rationalization of urban space through the creation of house numbering systems would result in the economization of time by speeding up the potential turnover rate of capital accumulation (Rose-Redwood 2006, 2008a).

Over the course of the nineteenth century, municipal governments began to play a more active role in the creation and maintenance of street addressing systems. One incentive came from the nineteenth-century predecessor of the U.S. Postal Service, which initiated city free delivery of mail in 1863 (Henkin 2006), but the federal government had no jurisdiction over the designation of house numbers in American cities, as this was seen as a municipal responsibility. Yet, if street addressing systems were fairly well established in urban America by the beginning of the twentieth century, the nation's rural population was just starting to encounter such spaces of calculation. Throughout rural America, few, if any, houses were numbered and even if local residents knew a road by a given name, there was a good chance that this name had never been officially approved by governmental authorities. Given these circumstances, it was not uncommon to find very few road signs erected to indicate the names of country roads. This situation worked just fine for those who had acquired a detailed local knowledge of a place and its residences, but it caused considerable difficulties for outsiders.

Throughout most of the nineteenth century, rural residents across the country received their mail at the local post office, so postal officials had little need to locate individual houses in rural communities (Fuller 1955, 1959, 1964). A major change occurred in 1896, however, when the postal authorities conducted their first experiment in delivering mail directly to farmers in rural areas, which came to be known as rural free delivery (RFD). In his classic study of the history of RFD in the United States, Fuller (1964) illustrated how a growing number of farmers, as well as agricultural organizations such as the National Grange, supported the establishment of RFD and wrote letters to Congress arguing that rural Americans deserved the same level of mail service as city dwellers as a matter of social equity (see also Hecker 1920; Thorbahn and Mema 1996). After receiving many such petitions, Congress finally provided funds for an experimental system of rural delivery, and the then Postmaster General, William Wilson, chose his hometown of Charles Town in Jefferson County, West Virginia, as the test case for RFD (Figure 3).

<!-- image -->

CourtesyTheNationalRural LetterCarrier to the post office was being able to locate mailboxes, not houses. In many cases, mailboxes were placed individually along the road or together at a distance with dozens of other neighboring mailboxes.

Over time, this system of route and box numbering reframed the way in which most Americans conceptualized the rural space of the countryside, and this spatial imaginary survived largely intact for close to a century. In the 1980s, however, emergency response managers began advocating for the replacement of rural route and box numbers with city-style street addressing systems, which better suited the needs of 911 emergency dispatching centers, as urban-type addresses directed emergency personnel to the residence of an incoming 911 call rather than the location of a mailbox on a postal route. One of the driving forces behind the elimination of rural route and box numbering systems during the 1980s and 1990s was the implementation of what is generally known as Enhanced 911 (E911) emergency response systems (Athey and Stern 1998; Phillips 2003; Phillips, Regan, and Bennett 2003; Curry, Phillips, and Regan 2004; Curry 2005; Louie 2006-2007; Gabbert 2007).

By the end of the year, more than thirty other communities throughout rural America had adopted delivery services. The first attempt to offer county-wide RFD occurred in Carroll County, Maryland, in 1899, and after these early successes, RFD soon spread across the country like wildfire, with many rural communities sending requests to the Post Office Department in Washington to inquire about extending delivery (Knight 1956; Carpenter 2001). To lay out rural mail routes and provide delivery services, the post office hired rural agents, inspectors, and mail carriers to establish what Fuller (1964, 48) has called the 'RFD bureaucracy.' Each mailbox along a route was eventually assigned a number, so that an individual's postal address would consist of his or her name, rural route and box number, and finally the town and state in which he or she lived; zip codes, it should be noted, were not introduced until much later in 1963 (Abler 1970; Curry 2005). The rural route and box numbering system was designed to suit the needs of postal delivery, and in many cases it was not accompanied by the official naming of country roads, the installation of street signs, or the numbering of residential structures. What mattered

Figure 3. One of the first U.S. rural free delivery routes in Jefferson County, West Virginia, 1896. Source: Saenger (1981).

The first 911 emergency phone call was made in Haleyville, Alabama, in 1968, after AT&amp;T had announced that it would start using this three-digit number to replace the different seven-digit emergency numbers that many localities were using at the time. This basic 911 service did not provide dispatchers with any information about the caller's phone number or street address, however, so dispatchers would have to ask each caller for his or her address before sending police, fire, or medical responders. During the late 1970s, Bell Labs and Pacific Telephone began to experiment with technology that enabled basic 911 services to be 'enhanced' in Alameda County, California, and this led to the development of what is known as Automatic Number Identification (ANI) and the 'selective routing' of calls to the right public safety answering point (PSAP) for dispatch. After this initial experimentprovedsuccessful, several other cities and counties across the country began to implement E911 programs, which included not only selective routing and ANI capabilities but also Automatic Location Identification (ALI), which provided the dispatcher with the street address for each incoming 911 call, so that even if the caller hung up the phone, the dispatcher would still be able to send an emergency responder to the right location (Curry, Phillips, and Regan 2004).

One of the first fully operational E911 systems, with both ANI and ALI, was set up in Orange County, Florida, in 1980 (Berg 1985; 'Lisle Researchers Speed Emergency Calls' 1985). By that point, much of Orange County already had official street addresses, yet some areas were required to switch over from rural route and box numbers to city-style addresses for the E911 system to function. Unlike the post office, the emergency response community found rural route and box numbers to be problematic and in need of replacement with 'physical addresses,' which refers to the numbering of houses, rather than mailboxes, and the creation of official street naming and signage systems, so that individual streets and houses could be easily identified. As one emergency manager put it, 'A route and box number to an emergency officer doesn't mean anything' (as quoted in Potter 1986, 18). The need for city-style street addresses was, and still is, often framed by 911 professionals as being strictly a question of public safety, a matter of life and death, because it reduces the response time for emergency personnel. In my interview with Peirce Eichelberger, who was involved with the implementation of the original E911 system in Orange County, he noted that, 'We tend to gravitate to the public safety aspects because that's something that everybody can agree with, and it's the kind of sound byte to say, 'Hey, if it's good for 911 then it must be good for everything else.'' Eichelberger stressed the importance of city-style street addresses not only for 911 purposes but for all government activities, explaining that,

the critical thing is that if you have good addresses for 911 . . . we have good addresses for everything else that government does with their records . . . . Whether it's voter services, tax records, emergency services, code enforcement . . . virtually everything the government does is probably related to where citizens live at some place and that that location is by a location-type address that should be out in virtually all the government records that relate to that property or that person that lives at that property.

This more expansive use of 911 addresses, as well as the locational data associated with the recent introduction of wireless E911 services, has prompted some scholars to raise concerns over the potential for both governmental and commercial 'function creep,' because these new systems could increase 'the possibility of new and more sophisticated forms of technologically mediated discrimination' (Curry, Phillips, and Regan 2004, 358). I explore this question in greater detail later, but first I would like to briefly consider how the production of the countryside as a calculable space reshaped the cultural landscape of rural America.

Whenemergencyresponse managers set out to assign new addresses in rural communities, they often underestimated the emotional attachment that some people had to their existing postal addresses. The greatest resistance arose when it came to the renaming of country roads, but the shift from rural route and box numbers to city-style addresses also led some rural residents to question what they perceived as an intrusion of the city into the countryside. Consider, for instance, the following case of a Virginia farmer whose address was changed from a rural route number to a city-style street address in the early 1990s:

When he lived at Rural Route 1, Box 75B, Dinwiddie County, Va., Freeman Browning, Jr. enjoyed everything connected with his bucolic life-the isolation of his family farm, the friendship of his neighbors, even the address itself. Then the county gave Browning a new street listing-20220 Halligan Park Road. The number is too long, Browning groused. And worse, Halligan is the name of the banker who refused his grandfather a loan during the Depression. Now Browning won't answer mail sent to his new address. He's threatening to sue. He won't repaint his mailbox. While extreme, Browning's reaction is reflective of hard feelings being expressed to county officials

there and elsewhere as a small but significant change in rural culture sweeps the country. (Mayer 1994, A1)

As this example demonstrates, the modern street address is far more than solely a technical device that serves the administrative needs of government or a simple wayfinding system for the general public. Smail (2000, 37) convincingly argued, rather, that 'an address frames us as citizen-subjects,' thereby reconstituting the relation between personal identity and the social production of place. It is hardly surprising, therefore, to find that the 'citification' of rural addresses encountered resistance from those who felt threatened by this new urban regime of spatial inscriptions. In rural counties across the country, it was not uncommon for local officials to receive complaints from angry residents when they would 'discover their quaint Mayberry R.F.D. addresses turning into monstrous numbers that sound as though they should be attached to a Wal-Mart' (Mayer 1994, A1).

This transition from rural route numbers to city-style addresses, which is still an ongoing process even today, can be seen as a clear illustration of what Foucault has called the 'urbanization of the territory.' By the early 1990s, the significance of this spatial transformation was becoming increasingly apparent, with the Omaha World-Herald reporting that,

Life in the country has changed so much. And the changes keep coming. The latest might seem minor, but it cuts deep into the identity of many people. The government is taking away rural route numbers. John and Mary Smith used to live at Rural Route 2, Box 55. Thanks to computers, they now live on 20596 430th St . . . . It's just not the same. There are reasons for the change, of course. The new Enhanced 911 systems require addresses, not box numbers, and everyone wants emergency vehicles to respond quickly. But it's just not the same. Though few people may actually use those addresses in everyday life, addresses of any sort have never been popular in rural areas. (Anonymous 1993, 20)

In short, the calculative techniques and governmental strategies that were first developed in an urban milieu to organize the spaces of the city have become the standard model for spatially ordering the rest of the territory as well. As the former president of URISA, Ed Wells, maintained in an interview, addressing arose originally in cities and that gives a clue that addressing serves a problem that arises in cities. And that addresses are now being assigned farther and farther out into the countryside says that the problems that origi-

nated in the cities . . . are now found out in the countryside or that cities need to know about the countryside.

It is this process whereby urban technologies of spatial calculability are extended beyond the confines of the city limits that constitutes the urbanization of the territory through the production of calculable space.

## 'When Seconds Count, There's Safety in Numbers': Geo-Coding West Virginia One Address at a Time

At the turn of the twenty-first century, many rural communities had already embarked on the process of dismantling their rural route and box numbering systems for 911 purposes, yet the state that first adopted RFDwasoneofthe last to give up its rural routes for 911 addresses. In 2001, the West Virginia State Legislature passed Senate Bill 460, establishing the West Virginia Statewide Addressing and Mapping Board (WVSAMB) to provide the financial and technical resources enabling rural counties to replace rural route and box numbers with city-style addresses. The Board then hired a project manager (Michael Baker, Jr., Inc.), a mapping company (BAE Systems), and an addressing contractor (microDATA GIS, Inc.). The majority of the funding for this project came from Verizon, because the telecommunications company had overbilled its customers, so instead of giving back individual refunds, Verizon made an agreement with state officials to use these funds, which amounted to a total of $ 15 million, to finance the new addressing and mapping that was required to implement a statewide E911 program (WVSAMB2003). It is quite remarkable that a private corporation, rather than the state government itself, was the primary revenue source for a program to produce calculable territory, which clearly indicates just how 'closely intertwined' the territorial and capitalistic logics of power can actually be when it comes to the establishment of calculable space.

The Board's mandate is nicely encapsulated in its motto, 'When Seconds Count . . . There's Safety in Numbers! Making the Safety of West Virginia's Citizens Our #1 Priority-One Address at a Time' (Figure 4). The implication is that by reorganizing geographical space according to the logic of number, this will have the effect of 'enhancing' public safety and security by economizing the time it takes to respond to a life-or-death situation. The creation of an E911 addressing system was seen as a 'spatial fix' to counteract the temporal uncertainties associated with the

Figure 4. Safety in numbers: E911 addressing and the production of calculable space in West Virginia. Source: West Virginia Statewide Addressing and Mapping Board promotional material (2008). (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

probability of future emergencies. The goal, then, was not to design a new space from scratch but rather, as Foucault (2007, 47) suggested, to 'work within reality, by getting the components of reality to work in relation to each other.' As part of the apparatus of security, 911 street addressing works on a given set of elements within a predefined space (i.e., houses that might be the site of future emergencies within the jurisdiction of a PSAP), and it overlays on this 'reality' a regime of inscriptions that serves as a mechanism of spatial identification.

In West Virginia, the WVSAMB adopted a standard numbering interval of 10.56 feet, resulting in 1,000 addresses per mile (500 odd and even numbers on opposite sides of each road). 10 According to the first edition of the Board's West Virginia 911 Addressing Handbook , this calculative technique was essential in large part because '[t]he use of a standard interval for assigning property numbers . . . provides sufficient room to assign unused numbers to future structures built between existing ones' (WVSAMB 2003, 33). As

mentioned earlier, this strategy of designating address numbers by spatial intervals was first introduced in an urban setting during the mid-nineteenth century to provide spatial stability amidst the creative destruction of the built environment. Today, however, the same practice is being framed more explicitly as a matter of security, as 911 addresses are deemed necessary to ensure 'the protection of human life, the protection of property or the maintenance of general community security' (WVSAMB 2003, 27). It should therefore come as little surprise that the chairman of the Addressing and Mapping Board was also the director of the West Virginia Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management (WVSAMB 2005).

The conversion to 911 addresses occurred at precisely the same time that the West Virginia Division of Motor Vehicles (DMV) began implementing a federal homelandsecurity mandate that requires each applicant to provide proof of their 'physical address' to obtain a state driver's license. As the former chairman of the Addressing and Mapping Board, Craig Neidig, explained, 'Since 9/11, you have homeland security requirements, you need a physical address when you get a driver's license.' This new residency requirement was an attempt to link the individual with a physical residence rather than an untraceable P.O. box. In my interview with Joseph Seppi, an employee of Michael Baker, Jr., Inc., hestated that city-style addresses prevented people from obtaining 'falsified identification cards.' Seppi went on to maintain that with these true physical addresses, they can be verified so if somebody just concocts a false address, we can say, 'Well, that address is not in the state system.' It is not just a matter of falsifying addresses. It was a matter of-people had P.O. boxes. They did not have a situs address at their house, they would get their mail at the post office and they have a P.O. box. That, I believe, is no longer acceptable by DMV either, because anybody can go and open a P.O. box. I could go to Florida and get a P.O. box at the post office and have mail sent there. That does not mean I live in Florida. And, there is no way for them to track me down if they need to.

There are a whole series of homeland security measures that depend on the standardization of street addresses in rural communities, including the use of such addresses to create automated emergency notification systems, the delivery of vaccines in the event of a biological attack, and tracking the whereabouts of individuals within a spatially dispersed population.

The project to readdress rural areas was couched chiefly in terms of its benefits to public safety and security. 'Our whole goal,' remarked Neidig, 'is to improve emergency response [in] rural areas of the state. That's been our golden rule. That's our only objective.' This might very well have been the primary objective of the WVSAMB, but even the members and staff of the Board acknowledged that 'there are other benefits to the program.' In addition to its uses for emergency response and homeland security purposes, the 911 addressing system facilitates the collection of taxes, because, as the board member and county commissioner, Fran King, noted, 'in relation to your assessor for taxing purposes . . . it would be a lot easier to find a piece of property if it had an actual address linked to it.' Tax assessment in West Virginia, and throughout the country, typically relies on the use of parcel numbers that make up a cadastral map of property (Kain and Baigent 1992); yet, such parcel numbers are rarely posted on the property itself, making it difficult for assessors to locate specific parcels without the aid of street addresses.

The push for city-style addresses has also come from the private sector, especially the telecom companies, delivery services, and geodemographics industry (Phillips and Curry 2002; Curry, Phillips, and Regan 2004). In my interview with the director of emergency services in Raleigh County, Jack Bowden, who is also a member of the Statewide Addressing and Mapping Board, he linked this shift with the demographic growth in the countryside, suggesting that a few years ago you could have a route number, a box number. A lot of people, when we were smaller, everyone knew everybody. Times have changed. We've had some growth so Route 1, Box 45 means nothing to anybody now. Of course, society demands that, too. If you talk to UPS, Federal Express, pizza delivery or anything, you've got to have a physical address now to get deliveries . . . . So, those things-society, our commercial industry is saying we want that physical address . . . society is demanding that you have a physical address , and it's not so much that Big Brother is looking at you, it's just so much easier to use credit cards and everything else.

The designation of a physical address, in other words, opens up a property to the spaces of circulation that make up the global flow of commodities that can be delivered right to your doorstep for the right price. It is worth emphasizing, however, that the introduction of city-style addresses in rural counties was not

simply a by-product of population growth; rather, the new urban-type addressing system has itself played an active role in reconstituting the 'rural' as a space of urban calculability. As Neidig aptly put it, 'I don't think it's trying to citify the country folks, something that works in the city though, we do want to take to the country.' It is through such mundane practices of extending 911 addresses from the city to the countryside that the urbanization of the territory has incorporated newcalculable spaces within the apparatuses of security.

This process of readdressing rural areas has not gone uncontested in West Virginia. In fact, the addressing contractor that the Board hired had so much difficulty obtaining personal information from rural residents that they fell behind schedule and were eventually fired by the Board in 2005. It was noted by one staff member of the Board that 'there are a lot of people who live here in West Virginia that don't want to be found . . . . And [the addressing field teams] are greeted by a shotgun. Absolutely, we've had that problem already. We have that problem.' The addressing coordinator for Emergency Services in Raleigh County, Richard Filipek, also acknowledged, 'We've been out on streets where we've been run off from. I think they're afraid of what you will find growing there in certain places.' One of his colleagues, John Cielensky, also recalled an instance when we were putting up house numbers on each house and we got to his house and he says that he did not want us coming in that yard, did not want us changing his address. The county gave him that house number over fifty-seven years ago and that's the number he will use until the day he dies. So you just take it with a grain of salt . . . and then you just document something like that. You'll get people that do not want to change their address, and there's nothing you can do to make them.

He went on to explain that another property owner had threatened him with a machete when he was assigning new addresses. 'He'd come walking out,' noted Cielensky, hehadamacheteinthebackofhispantssticking out of his back and asked, 'how bad did he need that address?' . . . Alotofpeoplethinkthatyou're either a building inspector or the tax department. And, they think that you're gonna cost them money when you get there. So, after they figure out what you're there for, they kind of settle down. But, a lot of them come out with an attitude. That's why I don't like going out by yourself.

It is little wonder, then, that one interviewee recollected hearing a leading member of the Addressing and

Mapping Board declare at a national GIS conference in 2008 that 'addressing isn't for sissies,' thereby indicating how the performative enactment of masculinity was tied up in the implementation of the readdressing program (only two of the eleven board members were women). With respect to the question of 'settling down' angry residents, the strategy of associating new city-type addresses with emergency response, rather than, say, tax assessment, has been crucial to acquiring the consent of most rural residents, yet it also conveniently deflects attention away from the fact that such addresses will also be employed to 'enhance' the state's ability to tax, and govern, the population more generally.

The resistance that the addressing teams encountered was framed primarily in terms of the privileges of property rights and the continuities of historical tradition. For example, a resident of Marion County, Ida Starks (2007), was a vocal critic of the readdressing campaign and wrote a letter to the Times West Virginian in which she asked,

What rights are we giving up? . . . Howcananyone change the address of your property which you have owned for years and in most cases passed from one generation to another without the owner's permission? . . . Why should taxpayers who have established their homes for generations be forced to change their house numbers? . . . What about our history? This house number means something to meandmyfamily. It means stability, history of both family and community. It means that my work through the years has established my family. Have we become so communist that ownership means nothing? What will they dictate to us next? . . . I cannot accept this imposition of my rights. Surely someone knows how to fix 911 without taking away a citizens history and security. (4B)

In a follow-up interview that I conducted with her a year later, Starks elaborated on this argument by maintaining that if the address changed, the house changed, the whole homechanges. It's not my home anymore . . . . I don't want to change my number. Do you tell me I'll just have to change my number because you want it changed? There's nothing wrong with my number . . . . What I felt was my security was being taken away is because you're telling me that I have no say. That's my security. I have no say in my own property. I have no say in my own home. If you can tell me that I have to change my address and I don't have any say about it, I feel that my security-well, what else can you take from me and I have no say about? . . . I don't know what they can do about it but I'm not going to change it.

Here, the rhetoric of safety and security is turned against the new 911 addresses themselves in the name of property rights, regardless of the fact that such arguments do not carry much legal weight in court. The question of enforcement, however, poses a significant challenge to establishing a statewide addressing program. Many counties have ordinances that require residents to number their houses and use fines to ensure compliance, but in many instances, few inspectors actually enforce these rules. The system largely depends, therefore, on enrolling rural residents as active participants in the renumbering of their own houses to create calculable spaces of security in the countryside.

## 'Hidden in Plain Sight': Urbanizing the Territory in Jefferson County, West Virginia

One county in West Virginia that has been in the lead when it comes to 911 addressing is, not surprisingly, Jefferson County-the same county that initiated RFD back in 1896. Jefferson County started replacing its rural route and box numbering system with 911 addresses in 1997 and eventually passed a comprehensive E911 Addressing Ordinance in 2002. By 2004, nearly all of the rural route and box numbers in the county had been converted to city-style street addresses, the vast majority of the county's roads were given official names, and street signs were installed as well. When I interviewed the county's director of emergency communications, Jeffrey Polczynski, he reflected on these recent changes by noting that in the old days, it was the post office that gave an address, it was their mailbox number, but there was no structure's address . . . only three percent of 911 calls that came in, came in with a valid address . . . . Most of the time, it did not. It said rural route or Route 6, Box 12. We do not know where that stuff is at.

The assignment of numbers to built structures, rather than mailboxes, marked a pivotal shift in the institutional logic at work in the production of calculable space in rural America. For over a century, rural addressing had been pursued by federal authorities to establish the national infrastructure for postal communications, but the task of devising rural addressing systems has now been reframed in scalar terms as a responsibility of county government to ensure the maintenance of 'communitysecurity.' What distinguishes 911 addresses from postal numbers is that the former are part of a standardized system of numerical inscriptions that can be easily integrated into the apparatuses of security; yet, more important, this inscriptive regime is also marked out for all to see in a street signage system that is encoded into the landscape, so that the address numbers in a GIS database can be matched to street signs within a public road network.

One of the county's addressing assistants, Joy Fisher, suggested that without a physical address, rural residents would literally be 'hidden in plain sight.' Fisher had moved to Jefferson County from New Jersey in 2001, and she explained her own perplexity on moving into a house that did not have an official postal or physical address, remarking that it was really weird coming from New Jersey and then, 'What is your address?' 'We do not have an address.' . . . I mean, to have to describe to somebody an actual location such as, 'We are at the white house with the purple shutters,' you feel you just stepped back in time and they all look at you like, 'Are you for real?' At least now [with 911 addresses] you can say, 'This is where I am located at.'

This conflation of spatial legibility with temporal modernity was further emphasized when Fisher stated that 'it is wonderful to have an address to write down so that you are 'for real' . . . you feel a little more like you are a part of the twenty-first century.' Not only, then, was the rationalization of rural space seen as a means of economizing time, it was also perceived as a temporal marker that separated historical eras-demarcating the past from the future; tradition from the modern; the postal age from the age of emergency.

Although E911 addressing efforts have been several decades in the making nationwide, many of the emergency managers, addressing coordinators, and local residents that I interviewed emphasized the importance of the 9/11 terrorist attacks as a turning point in the readdressing campaign. As one local resident in Jefferson County, Kevin Breeden, nicely put it, there were roads in the county that I had been on all my life and never knew the name of it, but I knew where it took me and who lived on it and what have you. But, there was no sign on either end of it where it intersected with the other highways that would tell you what the name of the road was . . . . Now, of course, with the 9/11 and what have you, I'm pretty sure that every road up there is marked . . . it has modernized the country, if you will. 9/11 woke this country up . . . and it was in an accelerated situation where we realized we need to upgrade our defense system and our emergency systems to the point where we can respond to anything at any time anywhere in the country.

Theimplementation of 911 addressing systems has been one of the primary spatial strategies employed to 'upgrade' the apparatuses of security into the digital age by geo-coding the territory. This process has gone hand in hand with a significant change in digital geo-coding techniques in recent years-in particular, the shift from using 'address ranges' to calculate an estimated house number along a street centerline to the emerging practice of point-based geo-coding , where the address of each structure is input into geospatial databases as an individual point with a corresponding set of geographical coordinates (Goldberg, Wilson, and Knoblock 2007; Zandbergen 2008).

Ageospatial technician in the Jefferson County Addressing Office, Jessica Gormont, described how the county is now using point-based geo-coding as part of its E911 address database. 'For every single addressable structure,' she noted, 'we have a point. And it's got all the information listed that we know of for that structure; the road name, the address number, all that stuff . . . we actually do mark every single structure that we know of.' A growing number of counties throughout West Virginia, as well as in other states, have begun using this new calculative technique and, according to GIS analyst David Jackson, 'point-based geo-coding is really the future. And, it is not just in West Virginia, a lot of other governments across the U.S. and other places are going that way.' If the geographical layout of a particular place does not correspond to the logic of the geometric point, the administrators of the geocoded world have increasingly insisted that such places must be reinscribed so that they conform to the calculative rationalities of number that make up the abstract space of the geospatial database.

## Conclusion

In this article, I have attempted to provide a history of the calculative techniques associated with the extension of the apparatuses of security from the city to the countryside to demonstrate how the construction of spatial regimes of inscription has been central to the urbanization of the territory. As Foucault (2007) maintained, the aim of such a genealogical investigation is not to devise a crisp periodization of the shift from the era of sovereignty to the age of security. Rather, it is to show how juridico-legal and disciplinary mechanisms have been reconfigured by the proliferation of the mechanisms of security, which have, in turn, reshaped the geographies of calculation. More specifically, I have sought to illustrate the way in which the interiority of the territory has been governmentalized as a space of security, which is itself inseparable from the performative enactment of state sovereignty.

I have taken Foucault's account of the urbanization of the territory a step further by arguing that the calculative techniques of street addressing have been one of the principal technologies of government employed in the production of calculable space. This process of 'urbanizing' the territory might have begun in the eighteenth century, but it is still very much an ongoing set of practices that underpin the apparatuses of security today. As an inscription device, city-style addressing systems provide an anchor of spatial fixity in an attempt to regulate the temporal uncertainties associated with the problem of governing a series of possible events. On first glance, it would appear that the street address is targeted at only one dimension of the problematic of security, which Foucault has referred to as the 'indefinite series of accumulating units.' Some might argue, for instance, that the recent growth in the use of wireless communications devices, equipped with Global Positioning System (GPS) or related tracking capabilities, has rendered the traditional street address obsolete, as governing the 'indefinite series of mobile elements' has taken on greater salience. This line of argument is intriguing yet ultimately unsatisfactory, because it does not take into account the interrelations between the regulation of stationary and mobile elements.

As powerful as GPS locational devices have become, for the most part the practices of geo-coding, as well as wireless E911 efforts, continue to rely on the use of street addresses as the basis of what Curry (1998, 42) has called the 'technologies of location.' This insight was widely acknowledged by the emergency managers interviewed for this study. For example, addressing specialist Beth Ozanich, who was involved with the early development of E911 addressing systems in the 1980s and currently works in the private sector on issues related to addressing and emergency response, insisted that although the geographical coordinates of latitude and longitude might be readily understood by cartographers, such coordinates are largely meaningless to emergency responders and the general public unless they are converted into 'something that is recognizable on the ground . . . [since] Bubba don't do X/Y.' Or, as one of her colleagues, Mary Boyd, maintained, whatever technology we see deployed either in the past or in the future, you always have to have a dispatchable address for public safety . . . so, if somebody tells you wireless

[technology] diminishes the need for addressing, I would push back and say, 'Well, where do you think we are going to dispatch to?' X/Y-you cannot get a fire truck to it.

The GPS navigation systems that are used for everything from emergency response to pizza delivery only work by linking a set of geographical coordinates to an official street address. 11 Put simply, if we were to erase the numbers inscribed on the houses, then the geotechnicians of the twenty-first century would be as lost in the countryside as scientists would be in a forest without maps (see Latour 1999). Once the landscape is encoded with such a regime of inscriptions, these references can then be mobilized within the centers of calculation to enhance the security mechanisms of the modern state.

It is important to reemphasize that the production of calculable territory is by no means a seamless process that has gone uncontested by the 'target' population (e.g., Hannah 2010). On the contrary, the readdressing of the countryside has often been a politically charged project, which has been met with resistance on multiple fronts. If we only valorize such tactics of resistance, however, we might lose sight of the fact that once these new systems of spatial calculation have been established, they often become part of the taken-for-granted order of things that goes unquestioned as a 'mere technicality.' For instance, I opened this article with a vivid account of the adoption of balcony numbering as an antiriot measure in State College, Pennsylvania, to illustrate how there is a spatial politics at work even in the most seemingly 'technical' domain of street addressing. Yet, over a decade has passed since the balconies were numbered, and this regime of spatial inscriptions has now been incorporated into the everyday life of apartment residents, community members, and governmental authorities. Similarly, it is not inconceivable that once the new E911 addressing systems have been adopted in rural communities throughout West Virginia and across the country, these new spaces of calculation will eventually acquire the same aura of banality that rural route and box numbers have had for the past century.

Indeed, many individuals have already internalized the calculative logic of number and have come to expect that one of the responsibilities of state sovereignty is that it should respond quickly when they dial 911 in an emergency. As the spatial foundation of emergency response systems, 911 addresses can be used for both policing the population and for saving people's lives. It is precisely this double-edged combination of disciplinary and life-enhancing power that characterizes what Foucault (1990) has called a 'biopolitics' of the population. If we are to better understand the geographical underpinnings of governmentality, therefore, a good place to start is by exploring the genealogies of spatial calculation that have been instrumental to the making of a geo-coded world.

## Acknowledgments

I would like to thank the five anonymous referees as well as the editor of the 'Methods, Models, and GIS' section, Mei-Po Kwan, for their constructive feedback, which helped improve the overall quality of this article. I am also grateful to Stuart Elden and Warren Magnusson, as well as the students in my Graduate Seminar in Human and Social Geography at the University of Victoria, for providing useful suggestions to strengthen an earlier draft of this article, as well as those who attended presentations of this study at Simon Fraser University, the University of British Columbia, the University of Victoria, Florida State University, the Library of Congress, and the 2009 and 2010 meetings of the Association of American Geographers. Moreover, I would like to acknowledge all the interviewees who took the time to share their thoughts with me, particularly Leigh Cielensky for her generosity in hosting my visit to Charleston, West Virginia, in 2008. I also benefited from the assistance of Joni Abudaya, and Anton Tantner likewise helped draw my attention to non-Anglophone scholarship on the history of house numbering. Finally, this study would not have been possible without the financial assistance of a residential fellowship from the John W. Kluge Center at the Library of Congress.

## Notes

1. The 'political' and the 'technical' are commonly envisioned as two separate spheres of socio-spatial practice, yet this long-held assumption has been called into question by numerous geographers who have explored the politics of calculation (e.g., Crampton and Elden 2006; Rose-Redwood 2006; Hannah 2009; Painter 2010). To those who still subscribe to the conventional view, however, this latter approach is generally dismissed as an attempt to reduce the pressing issues of politics into mere technicalities (Antonsich 2011). As will be evident, this study challenges such conventional wisdom by extending recent critical geographic scholarship to demonstrate that the technical itself has a politics, on the one hand, and that contemporary political practices are inseparable from the apparatuses of spatial calculation on the other.
2. By focusing on such 'points of contact,' we can demonstrate in very concrete terms how the realm of spatial representation and the world are not as diametrically

- opposed as the proponents of critical realism would have us believe (for a summary of the critical realist position, see Sayer 2006; Leszczynski 2009a, 2009b). The realist assumes that 'for physical phenomena to be mapped with a GIS, their existence outside the 'text' must first be acknowledged for encoding to proceed' (Leszczynski 2009a, 590). Yet, this narrow conception of 'text' ignores the many instances in which textual representations are literally inscribed or encoded into the so-called real-world objects that they are said to merely represent. A classic example of this process of inscribing a signifier into its referent is the system of bar-coding generally used to keep track of commodities (Dodge and Kitchin 2005b). As a textual inscription, the barcode is not merely a discursive label attached to a preexisting material object; rather, it is through the inscription process itself that the identity of the object qua object is performatively enacted. Similarly, geographic addressing systems are a form of abstract textual representation, yet they simultaneously constitute the spatial infrastructure that 'must first be acknowledged for encoding to proceed' for many GIS applications. It is through such mundane inscriptive practices that representation and the world are intertwined in myriad ways (Latour 1986, 1987, 1999). The point here is not so much that ontology (being) is reducible to epistemology (representation) but rather acknowledging that we cannot think of one without the other.
3. For over four decades, 911 has been the universal emergency telephone number used in the United States to provide direct access to local or regional call centers for the dispatching of emergency responders. The 911 emergency response system, therefore, long precedes the terrorist attacks that occurred on 11 September 2001, commonly referred to as 9/11. It is hardly a coincidence that the attacks took place on this date, given the psychological and symbolic resonances that this string of numbers has with a 'state of emergency' in the American popular imagination. For the sake of clarity, I use the term 911 throughout this article to refer to emergency response systems and 9/11 when discussing the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001.
4. I have adapted the phrase 'political life' of numbers from Urton's (1997) study, The Social Life of Numbers: A Quechua Ontology of Numbers and Philosophy of Arithmetic. Foucault's (1988) notion of 'political technology' also nicely captures the importance of both the politics of calculation and the role of calculative techniques in the making of political space (see also Foucault 2003, 2007, 2008). A more in-depth geographic engagement with the work of philosopher Alain Badiou can be found in Dewsbury (2007) and Shaw (2010).
5. Elden has already published a book-length study on 'territory' as a key concept in contemporary political discourse entitled, Terror and Territory: The Spatial Extent of Sovereignty (2009), which will be accompanied by a more in-depth historical genealogy of territory in his forthcoming book, The Birth of Territory (Elden forthcoming). For a classic critique of the conventional notion of territory, see Agnew (1994). For a more recent genealogy of territory, see Delaney (2005), Painter (2010), and Strandsbjerg (2010).
6. The production of calculable territory involves not only the establishment of territorial borders but also a whole series of other calculative techniques that serve to 'systematize' the spatial organization of what we might call the 'interiority' of the territory (Scott 1998; Braun 2000; Duncan 2002; Olund 2002; Allen 2004; Curry, Phillips, and Regan 2004; Rose-Redwood 2006, 2008a; Hannah 2009; L. Porter 2010). These latter political techniques of calculation have historically been used to enhance the reach of the sovereign state through the systematization of socio-spatial relations; thus, questions of sovereignty remain central to understanding the production of calculable territory. It is equally important, however, to consider how state sovereignty has been transformed by the apparatuses of discipline and security while also taking into account the interplay between state and nonstate actors with respect to the production, and subversion, of calculable spaces (Rose-Redwood 2006). For an insightful analysis of the apparatuses of security in Foucault's lecture courses on governmentality and biopolitics, see Cadman (2010).
7. Ofcourse, territorial boundary-making and the establishment of calculable space within the territorial 'interior' are interrelated spatial projects, indicating how the political technologies of sovereignty and security are often intertwined in practice.
8. In certain respects, this issue can be likened to the distinction between 'seeing like a state' (Scott 1998) and 'seeing like a city' (Magnusson 2008). One of the reviewers of this article insisted that the making of calculable territory was chiefly the work of the former, whereas I think Foucault's thought-provoking notion of the 'urbanization of the territory' calls our attention to the importance of the latter by illustrating how the city has served as a model of territorial calculability. These two spatial registers, of course, need not necessarily be seen as mutually exclusive, which raises the broader question of the relation among sovereignty, governmentality, and the production of geographic scale (Raco 2003; Larner andWalters2004;BrownandKnopp2006;Heynenetal. 2007; de Larrinaga and Doucet 2010).
9. The allusion here is to John Denver's hit song, 'Take Me Home, Country Roads' (1971), which makes direct reference to the country roads of West Virginia.
10. At present, the numbering interval of 10.56 feet is the standard recommended by the Statewide Addressing and Mapping Board, but it has not been adopted universally across the state, as some counties have yet to fully implement a readdressing campaign for E911 purposes.
11. As one reviewer of this article noted, there are indeed ways to bypass street addressing systems by simply using GPS coordinates to pinpoint specific locations. This misses the point, however, that for latitude and longitude information to be of any use for daily navigation, it must be linked to a street network database.

## References

Abler, R. 1970. Zip-code areas as statistical regions. The Professional Geographer 22 (5): 270-74.

- Agnew, J. 1994. The territorial trap: The geographical assumptions of international relations theory. Review of International Political Economy 1 (1): 53-80.
- ---. 2009. Making the strange familiar: Geographical analogy in global geopolitics. Geographical Review 99 (3): 426-43.
- Allen, J. 2004. The whereabouts of power: Politics, government and space. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography 86 (1): 19-32.
- Alt, J. 1998. Now that the riot is over, it's time to look for solutions. Daily Collegian 17 July. http://www.collegian. psu.edu:8080/archive/1998/07/07-17-98tdc/07-17-98d0 7-003.asp (last accessed 13 June 2011).
- Anonymous. 1993. An address for 'over yonder.' Omaha World-Herald 7 November:20.
- Antonsich, M. 2011. Rethinking territory. Progress in Human Geography 35 (3): 422-25.
- Appadurai, A. 1996. Number in the colonial imagination. In Modernity at large: Cultural dimensions of globalization , 114-35. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Athey, S., and S. Stern. 1998. The adoption and impact of advanced emergency response services. Working Paper 6595, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
- Badiou, A. 2008. Number and numbers . Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
- Berg, E. 1985. Technology; fast thinking 911 system. New York Times 4 April:D2.
- Blair, B., and P. Cole. 1998. Thousands riot downtown. Daily Collegian 13 July. http://www.collegian.psu.edu:8080/ archive/1998/07/07-13-98tdc/07-13-98d01-011.asp (last accessed 13 June 2011).
- Blomley, N. 2003. Law, property, and the geography of violence: The frontier, the survey, and the grid. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 93 (1): 12141.
- Blumreiter, H. 2005. Die D¨ usseldorfer polizeiverordnung von 1858: Die alten und neuen hausnummern; mit einer einf¨ uhrung in die entstehung der hausnumerierung im ausgehenden 18. und beginnenden 19 [The D¨ usseldorf police regulation from 1858: Old and new house numbers; with an introduction to the creation of house numbering at the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century]. Jahrhundert (Ver¨ offentlichungenausdem Stadtarchiv D¨ usseldorf; 12). D¨ usseldorf, Germany: Stadtarchiv.
- Bradley, F., and F. Cichon. 2000. Police put quick end to riot. Daily Collegian 17 July. http://www.collegian.psu. edu:8080/archive/2000/07/07-17-00tdc/07-17-00dnews -1.asp (last accessed 13 June 2011).
- Braun, B. 2000. Producing vertical territory: Geology and governmentality in late Victorian Canada. Cultural Geographies 7 (1): 7-46.
- Brown, M., and L. Knopp. 2006. Places or polygons? Governmentality, scale, and the census in the Gay and Lesbian Atlas . Population, Space and Place 12 (4): 223-42.
- Cadman, L. 2010. How (not) to be governed: Foucault, critique, and the political. Environment and Planning D 28 (3): 539-56.
- Carpenter, D. 2001. The forging of bureaucratic autonomy: Reputations, networks, and policy innovation in executive agencies , 1862 -1928 . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Cicchini, M. 2008. La mode du num´ erotage des maisons aux XVIII e si` ecle. L'exemple de Gen` eve [The mode of numbering houses in the eighteenth century: The example of Geneva]. Paper presented at the 4 e Journ´ ees d'´ etudes Circulation et Construction des Savoirs Policiers Eeurop´ eens, 1650-1850. Construction et Circulation des Savoirs Policiers en Europe Centrale et Septentrionale, XVIII e -XIX e Si` ecle. http://irhis.recherche.univlille3.fr/dossierPDF/CIRSAP-Textes/Cicchini.pdf (last accessed 13 June 2011).
- Cohen,P.C.1999. Acalculating people: The spread of numeracy in early America . London and New York: Routledge.
- Crampton, J. 2011. Cartographic calculations of territory. Progress in Human Geography 35 (1): 92-103.
- Crampton, J., and S. Elden. 2006. Space, politics, calculation: An introduction. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 7 (5): 681-85.
- Cronin, A. 2008. Calculative spaces: Cities, market relations, and the commercial vitalism of the outdoor advertising industry. Environment and Planning A 40 (11): 2734-50.
- Curry, M. 1998. Digital places: Living with geographic information technologies . London and New York: Routledge.
- ---. 1999. On the possibility of democracy in a geocoded world. Social Science Computer Review 17 (1): 10-15.
- ---. 2005. Toward a geography of a world without maps: Lessons from Ptolemy and postal codes. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 95 (3): 680-91.
- Curry, M., D. Phillips, and P. Regan. 2004. Emergency response systems and the creeping legibility of people and places. The Information Society 20 (5): 357-69.
- Dean, M. 1999. Governmentality: Power and rule in modern society . London: Sage.
- Delaney, D. 2005. Territory: A short introduction . Malden, MA: Blackwell.
- de Larrinaga, M., and M. Doucet, eds. 2010. Security and global governmentality: Globalization, governance and the state . London and New York: Routledge.
- Denis, V. 2008. Une histoire de l'identit´ e: France, 1715-1815 [A history of identity: France, 1715-1815]. Seyssel, France: Champ Vallon.
- Denis, V., and V. Milliot. 2004. Police et identification dans la France des Lumi` eres [Police and identification in France of the Enlightenment]. Gen` eses 54:4-27.
- Dewsbury, J. 2007. Unthinking subjects: Alain Badiou and the event of thought in thinking politics. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 32 (4): 443-59.
- Dillon, M. 2007. Governing through contingency: The security of biopolitical governance. Political Geography 26 (1): 41-47.
- Dodge, M., and R. Kitchin. 2005a. Code and the transduction of space. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 95 (1): 162-80.
- ---. 2005b. Codes of life: Identification codes and the machine-readable world. Environment and Planning D 23 (6): 851-81.
- Duncan, J. 2002. Embodying colonialism? Domination and resistance in 19th century Ceylonese coffee plantations. Journal of Historical Geography 28 (3): 317-38.

- Elden, S. 2005. Missing the point: Globalization, deterritorialization and the space of the world. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 30 (1): 8-19.
- ---. 2006. Speaking against number: Heidegger, language and the politics of calculation . Edinburgh, UK: Edinburgh University Press.
- ---.2007. Governmentality, calculation, territory. Environment and Planning D 25 (3): 562-80.
- ---. 2009. Terror and territory: The spatial extent of sovereignty . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. ---.2010. Land, terrain, territory. Progress in Human Geography 34 (6): 799-817.
- ---. 2011. Response to Antonsich: The role of history. Progress in Human Geography 35 (3): 426-29.

---. Forthcoming.

The birth of territory

.

- Ettlinger, N. 2011. Governmentality as epistemology. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 101 (3): 537-60.
- Foucault, M. 1988. Technologies of the self: A seminar with Michel Foucault , ed. L. Martin, H. Gutman, and P. Hutton. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
- ---. 1990. The history of sexuality: An introduction . Vol. 1. New York: Vintage Books.
- ---. 2003. Society must be defended: Lectures at the Coll` ege de France , 1975 -76 . New York: Picador.
- ---. 2007. Security, territory, population: Lectures at the Coll` ege de France , 1977 -78 . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
- ---. 2008. The birth of biopolitics: Lectures at the Coll` ege de France , 1978 -79 . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Fuller, W. 1955. Good roads and rural free delivery of mail. The Mississippi Valley Historical Review 42 (1): 67-83.
- ---. 1959. The south and the rural free delivery of mail. Journal of Southern History 25 (4): 499-521.
- ---. 1964. RFD: The changing face of rural America . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- Gabbert, L. 2007. Distanciation and the recontextualization of space: Finding one's way in a small western community. Journal of American Folklore 120 (476): 178-203.
- Garrioch, D. 1994. House names, shop signs and social organization in Western European cities, 1500-1900. Urban History 21 (1): 20-48.
- Gates, A. 1999a. Borough council to hear input on balcony numbers. Daily Collegian 19 January. http://www. collegian.psu.edu:8080/archive/1999/01/01-19-99tdc/ 01-19-99dnews-3.asp (last accessed 13 June 2011).
- ---. 1999b. Council delays vote, plans meeting to discuss numbering balconies. Daily Collegian 20 January. http://www.collegian.psu.edu:8080/archive/1999/01/0120-99tdc/01-20-99dnews-3.asp (last accessed 13 June 2011).
- Goldberg, D., J. Wilson, and C. Knoblock. 2007. From text to geographic coordinates: The current state of geo-coding. URISA Journal 19 (1): 33-46.
- Hacking, I. 1991. How should we do the history of statistics? In The Foucault effect: Studies in governmentality , ed. G. Burchell, C. Gordon, and P. Miller, 181-95. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Hamlin, F. 1999. Numbers in placenames. Names 47 (3): 233-42.
- Hannah, M. 2000. Governmentality and the mastery of territory in nineteenth-century America . New York: Cambridge University Press.
- ---. 2009. Calculable territory and the West German census boycott movements of the 1980s. Political Geography 28 (1): 66-75.
- ---. 2010. Dark territory in the information age: Learning from the West German census controversies of the 1980s . Surrey, UK: Ashgate.
- Hanson, R. 1998. Under one roof: Council members suggest balconies add to rowdiness. Daily Collegian 20 July. http://www.collegian.psu.edu:8080/archive/1998/07/0720-98tdc/07-20-98d01-004.asp (last accessed 13 June 2011).
- Harvey, D. 2006. Spaces of global capitalism: Towards a theory of uneven geographical development . London: Verso.
- Hecker, L. 1920. The history of the rural free delivery in the United States. Master's thesis, Faculty of the Graduate College of the State University of Iowa.
- Henkin, D. 2006. The postal age: The emergence of modern communications in nineteenth-century America . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Heynen, N., J. McCarthy, S. Prudham, and P. Robbins, eds. 2007. Neoliberal environments: False promises and unnatural consequences . London and New York: Routledge.
- Hubbard, B. 2009. American boundaries: The nation, the states, the rectangular survey . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Huxley, M. 2006. Spatial rationalities: Order, environment, evolution and government. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 7 (5): 771-87.
- ---. 2007. Geographies of governmentality. In Space, knowledge, and power: Foucault and geography , ed. J. Crampton and S. Elden, 185-204. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
- ---. 2008.Spaceandgovernment: Governmentality and geography. Geography Compass 2 (5): 1635-58.
- Johnson, H. B. 1976. Order upon the land: The U.S. rectangular land survey and the upper Mississippi country . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Joyce, P. 2003. The rule of freedom: Liberalism and the modern city . London: Verso.
- Kain, R., and E. Baigent. 1992. The cadastral map in the service of the state: A history of property mapping . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Kitchin, R., and M. Dodge. 2011. Code/space: Software and everyday life . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Knight, H. 1956. Rural free delivery beginnings in Carroll County. Bulletin of the Historical Society of Carroll County, Maryland November:3-19.
- Koons, C. 2000. Council may increase balcony identification. Daily Collegian 11 April. http://www. collegian.psu.edu:8080/archive/2000/04/04-11-00tdc/ 04-11-00dnews-3.asp (last accessed 13 June 2011).
- Larner, W., and W. Walters, eds. 2004. Global governmentality: Governing international spaces . London and New York: Routledge.
- Latour, B. 1986. Visualization and cognition: Thinking with eyes and hands. Knowledge and Society: Studies in the Sociology of Culture Past and Present 6:1-40.
- ---. 1987. Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- ---. 1999. Pandora's hope: Essays on the reality of science studies . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

- Legg, S. 2005. Foucault's population geographies: Classifications, biopolitics and governmental spaces. Population, Space and Place 11 (3): 137-56.
- ---. 2006.Governmentality,congestion,andcalculation in colonial Delhi. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 7 (5): 709-29.
- ---. 2007. Spaces of colonialism: Delhi's urban governmentalities. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
- ---. 2011. Security, territory, and colonial populations: Town and empire in Foucault's 1978 lecture course. In Postcolonial spaces: The politics of place in contemporary culture , ed. A. Teverson and S. Upstone, 146-63. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Leszczynski, A. 2009a. Poststructuralism and GIS: Is there a 'disconnect'? Environment and Planning D 27 (4): 581-602.
- ---. 2009b. Quantitative limits to qualitative engagements: GIS, its critics, and the philosophical divide. The Professional Geographer 61 (3): 350-65.
- Linklater, A. 2002. Measuring America: How an untamed wilderness shaped the United States and fulfilled the promise of democracy . New York: Walker &amp; Co.
- Lisle researchers speed emergency calls. 1985. Chicago Tribune 25 September:4D.
- Louie, A. 2006-2007. Imposing geographical 'locateability' for voice over Internet protocol. Perspectives on PostConflict Constitutionalism 51 (3): 656-87.
- Lucy, W. 1995. Addressing systems: A training guide for 911 . Coshocton, OH: National Emergency Number Association.
- Mackay, R. 2008. Translator's preface. In Numbers and number , ed. A. Badiou, vii-x. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
- Magnusson, W. 2008. Seeing like a state, seeing like a city. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Canadian Political Science Association, Vancouver, BC.
- Mayer, C. 1994. 911 comes to town. Philadelphia Inquirer 6 January:A1.
- Miller, P. 1992. Accounting and objectivity: The invention of calculating selves and calculable spaces. Annals of Scholarship 9:61-86.
- ---. 2001.Governingbynumbers:Whycalculativepractices matter. Social Research 68 (2): 379-96.
- Miller, P., and C. Napier. 1993. Genealogies of calculation. Accounting, Organizations and Society 18 (7-8): 631-47.
- Miller, P., and N. Rose. 2008. Governing the present . Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
- Mitchell, T. 2002. Rule of experts: Egypt, techno-politics, modernity . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Morbito, J. 1965. Physical and social implications of street naming and house numbering systems in today's urban environment. Unpublished master's thesis, School of Urban Planning and Landscape Architecture, Michigan State University, Ann Arbor, MI.
- Olund, E. 2002. From savage space to governable space: The extension of United States judicial sovereignty over Indian Country in the nineteenth century. Cultural Geographies 9 (2): 129-57.
- O'Malley, P., L. Weir, and C. Shearing. 1997. Governmentality, criticism, politics. Economy and Society 26 (4): 501-17.
- ´ OTuathail, G. 1996. Critical geopolitics: The politics of writing global space . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Painter, J. 2006. Prosaic geographies of stateness. Political Geography 25 (7): 752-74.
- ---. 2010. Rethinking territory. Antipode 42 (5): 1090-1118.
- Parfitt, M. 1998a. Officials decide courses of action. Daily Collegian 14 July. http://www.collegian.psu.edu:8080/ archive/1998/07/07-14-98tdc/07-14-98d01-007.asp (last accessed 13 June 2011).
- ---. 1998b. Town seeking riot solutions. Daily Collegian 16 July. http://www.collegian.psu.edu:8080/archive/ 1998/07/07-16-98tdc/07-16-98d01-008.asp (last accessed 13 June 2011).
- ---. 1999. One year later, many look back at the riot. Daily Collegian 12 July. http://www.collegian.psu.edu: 8080/archive/1999/07/07-12-99tdc/07-12-99dnews-2. asp (last accessed 13 June 2011).
- Pattison, W. D. 1957. Beginnings of the American rectangular land survey system, 1784-1800. Research Paper No. 50, Department of Geography, University of Chicago.
- Patton, M. 2002. Qualitative research and evaluative methods . 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
- Phillips, D. 2003. Beyond privacy: Confronting locational surveillance in wireless communications. Communication Law and Policy 8 (1): 1-23.
- Phillips, D., and M. Curry. 2002. Privacy and the phenetic urge: Geodemographics and the changing spatiality of local practice. In Surveillance as social sorting: Privacy, risk, and automated discrimination , ed. D. Lyon, 137-52. London and New York: Routledge.
- Phillips, D., P. Regan, and C. Bennett. 2003. Emergent locations: Implementing wireless 911 in Texas, Virginia, and Ontario. In Rethinking rights and regulations to new communications technologies , ed. L. Cranor and S. Wildman, 335-65. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Pickles, J. 2004. A history of spaces: Cartographic reason, mapping and the geo-coded world . London and New York: Routledge.
- Porter, L. 2010. Unlearning the colonial cultures of planning . London: Ashgate.
- Porter, T. 1994. Making things quantitative. Science in Context 7 (3): 389-407.
- ---. 1995. Trust in numbers: The pursuit of objectivity in science and public life . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Potter, B. 1986. Help is on the way for address woes. Richmond Times-Dispatch 17 April:18.
- Raco, M. 2003. Governmentality, subject-building, and the discourses and practices of devolution in the UK. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 28 (1): 7595.
- Rose, N. 1991. Governing by numbers: Figuring out democracy. Accounting, Organizations and Society 16 (7): 673-92.
- ---. 1999. Powers of freedom: Reframing political thought . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Rose-Redwood, R. 2006. Governmentality, geography, and the geo-coded world. Progress in Human Geography 30 (4): 469-86.
- ---. 2008a. Indexing the great ledger of the community: Urban house numbering, city directories, and the production of spatial legibility. Journal of Historical Geography 34 (2): 286-310.

- ---. 2008b. 'Sixth Avenue is now a memory': Regimes of spatial inscription and the performative limits of the official city-text. Political Geography 27 (8): 875-94.
- Rose-Redwood, R., D. Alderman, and M. Azaryahu. 2010. Geographies of toponymic inscription: New directions in critical place-name studies. Progress in Human Geography 34 (4): 453-70.
- Rutherford, S. 2007. Green governmentality: Insights and opportunities in the study of nature's rule. Progress in Human Geography 31 (3): 291-307.
- Saenger, R. 1981. Rural free delivery celebrates 85 years of love-in-action. The National Rural Letter Carrier 53 (36): 618-30.
- Sayer, A. 2006. Realism as a basis for knowing the world. In Approaches to human geography , ed. S. Aitken and G. Valentine, 98-106. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
- Scott, J. 1998. Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Shaw, I. 2010. Sites, truths and the logics of worlds: Alain Badiou and human geography. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 35 (3): 431-42.
- Shklovsky, V. 1990. Theory of prose . Normal, IL: Dalkey Archive Press.
- Smail, D. 2000. Imaginary cartographies: Possession and identity in late medieval Marseille . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Starks, I. 2007. Unanswered questions about addresses. The Times West Virginian 25 March:4B.
- Strandsbjerg, J. 2010. Territory, globalization and international relations: The cartographic reality of space . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Tantner, A. 2007a. Die Hausnummer: Eine geschichte von ordnung und unordnung [The house number: A story of order and disorder]. Marburg, Germany: Jonas Verlag.
- ---. 2007b. Ordnung der h¨ auser, beschreibung der seelen: Hausnummerierung und seelenkonskription in der Habsburgermonarchie [Order of houses, description of souls: House numbering and the 'conscription of souls' in the Hapsburg Monarchy]. Innsbruck, Austria: Studienverlag.
- ---. 2009. Addressing the houses: The introduction of house numbering in Europe. Histoire &amp; Mesure 24 (2): 7-30.
- Thale, C. 2007. Changing addresses: Social conflict, civic culture, and the politics of house numbering reform in Milwaukee, 1913-1931. Journal of Historical Geography 33 (1): 125-43.
- Thorbahn, M., and G. Mema. 1996. 100 years of Americana: Rural free delivery celebrates a milestone. Postal Life 28 (5): 7-9.
- Urton, G. 1997. The social life of numbers: A Quechua ontology of numbers and philosophy of arithmetic . Austin: University of Texas Press.
- West Virginia Statewide Addressing and Mapping Board. 2003. West Virginia 911 addressing handbook . Charleston, WV: WVSAMB.
- ---.2005.WestVirginiaStatewide Addressing and Mapping Board. http://www.addressingwv.org (last accessed 24 July 2010).
- Zandbergen, P. 2008. A comparison of address point, parcel and street geo-coding techniques. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (3): 214-32.

Correspondence: Department of Geography, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada, e-mail: redwood@uvic.ca.