## Articulations of Place, Poverty, and Race: Dumping Grounds and Unseen Grounds in the Rural American Northwest

Victoria Lawson, ∗ Lucy Jarosz, ∗ and Anne Bonds †

∗ Department of Geography, University of Washington † Department of Geography, University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee

This project extends poverty research by addressing the lack of knowledge about place and race differences in poverty processes (Blank 2005). Rural places experience a range of modes of articulation within the global division of rural labor and we observe three distinct modes of articulation in the American Northwest: 'playgrounds,' 'dumping grounds,' and 'unseen grounds.' We attend to the recursive relations between political-economic restructuring and the discursive production of social difference across class and race lines. Poverty is produced in the reciprocal relations among local historical, ecological, and social processes and the articulation of those places with new rounds of capital accumulation under neoliberal restructuring. Our empirical investigation focuses on white and Latino poverty across nonmetropolitan counties of the American Northwest (Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana). We first map county-level patterns of white and Latino poverty in relation to county-level economic restructuring during the 1990s across the region. We then employ in-depth comparative case study research to explore the intersections of specific forms of neoliberal restructuring with place-based historical, ecological, and social processes to understand rural white and Latino poverty in the region. Key Words: American Northwest, modes of articulation, race, rural poverty.

通过分析对贫穷进程中地点和种族差异的缺乏认识（参考文献Blank2005)，本项目扩展了贫困问题的研究。在全球农 村分工的范围内，农村地区经历着多种不同的表述模式，我们观察到美国西北部地区具有三个不同的表述模式："游乐场，" "倾销地，"和"隐形地。"我们注意到政治经济转型和由此推论而产生的阶级和种族社会差异之间的递归关系。贫困是 产生于当地的历史、生态和社会进程之间的交互关系之中，并且是该地区新自由主义的改革背景下新一轮资本积累的一 种表述。我们的实证调查重点是美国西北部（华盛顿州，俄勒冈州，爱达荷州，蒙大拿州）乡村县级白人和拉美裔的贫 困状况。首先，我们绘制了白人和拉美裔贫困状况的县级模式地图，以此和该地区20世纪90年代县级的经济转型模式 建立联系。随后，为了解该地区农村白人和拉美裔的贫困情况，我们利用了深入化的个例比较研究，以此探讨新自由主 义改革的具体形式和地方历史、生态和社会进程之间的交叉关系。关键字：美国西北，表述模式，种族，农村贫困。

Este proyecto ampl´ ıa el campo de acci´ on del estudio sobre la pobreza al tomar en cuenta como tema de investigaci´ on la falta de conocimiento sobre lugar y las diferencias por raza en los procesos de pobreza (Blank 2005). Los lugares rurales est´ an experimentando una magnitud de modos de articulaci´ on dentro de la divisi´ on global del trabajo rural y nosotros observamos tres maneras distintas de articulaci´ on en el Noroeste Americano: 'campos de juego,' 'botaderos de basura,' y 'campos ocultos.' Tomamos cuenta de las relaciones recurrentes entre la reestructuraci´ on pol´ ıtico-econ´ omica y la producci´ on discursiva de la diferencia social al trav´ es de las l´ ıneas de clase y raza. La pobreza es producida en las relaciones rec´ ıprocas entre los procesos hist´ oricos, ecol´ ogicos y sociales locales, y la articulaci´ on de aquellos lugares con nuevas rondas de acumulaci´ on de capital bajo reestructuraci´ on neoliberal. Nuestra investigaci´ on emp´ ırica se enfoca sobre pobreza blanca y latina en el ´ ambito de condados no metropolitanos del Noroeste Americano (Washington, Oreg´ on, Idaho, Montana). Primero cartografiamos a nivel de condado los patrones de pobreza blanca y latina, en relaci´ on con la reestructuraci´ on econ´ omica de la regi´ on a nivel de condado, durante los a˜ nos 1990. Luego empleamos investigaci´ on detallada en estudios de caso de manera comparada para explorar las intersecciones de formas espec´ ıficas de reestructuraci´ on neoliberal, con procesos hist´ oricos, ecol´ ogicos y sociales con base en lugar, para comprender la pobreza que afecta a blancos y latinos en la regi´ on. Palabras clave : Noroeste Americano, modos de articulaci´ on, raza, pobreza rural .

P overty researchers too often focus on people, to the exclusion of the places where poverty is located (O'Connor 2001; Blank 2005). Here we focus on neglected but deep pockets of persistent rural poverty across the American Northwest. We investigate how the historical and ecological geographies of particular places explain both their articulation with the hypercompetitive U.S. economy and the place-specific (re)production of race and poverty. 1 Our project extends poverty research through attention to the recursive relations between political and economic restructuring and the discursive production of social difference as they work out in place.

We investigate how neoliberal market logics and governmental practices are reworking the global division of rural labor and the poverty effects of these articulations in the American Northwest. Neoliberalism refers to practices that promote market triumphalism and liberal individualism via deregulated markets and unrestricted competition, alongside the attenuation of public welfare expenditures (Goode and Maskovsky 2001; Peck 2001; Harvey 2003). Research on the ways neoliberal processes are working out in rural places is extremely timely because ten years after welfare reform in the United States there is little research on persistent pockets of rural poverty and its racial configurations (Milbourne 2004).

Contemporary landscapes of the American Northwest are being reworked through the shift from extractive resource and agrarian economies to the service sector (Lyson and Falk 1993; Nord 1994; B. A. Brown 1995; Mitchell 1998). This shift is coupled with the arrival of urban migrants and attendant changes to rural communities as wealthier populations bid up land and housing prices and work to change public land use. The result has been rising poverty and inequality in recent decades. Barrett and Power (2001) reported a trend that resulted in average incomes of the richest fifth of families in the Mountain West being ten times greater than incomes for the poorest fifth by 1996. Furthermore, since the 1990s population growth and in-migration (of wealthy whites and low-income Latinos) has increased very rapidly in rural areas. Numerous factors contribute to this influx, including issues of quality of life, the rise of telecommuting, urban flight, and economic restructuring (Rudzitis 1993; Beyers and Nelson 2000). These dynamics have created a paradox as Rasker (1998, 63) poses it: '[W]hy, for example is the poverty rate in Eton County, Idaho and Ravalli County, Montana increasing in spite of a boom in population and aggregate economic activity?' This unresolved contradiction between aggregate economic growth and poverty, especially in cases where the poverty rate increased in the fast-growing and seemingly prosperous communities, is central to our project. These local geographies and implications of poverty dynamics have not been conclusively understood (Power 1996).

Of course these political economic shifts in the American Northwest do not operate under a universal and singular neoliberal logic from which we simply read off patterns of racialized poverty. Rather, the very ways in which rural places are articulated with neoliberal restructuring are shaped by historical and ecological geographies that produce race and poverty (Pulido 2000; Glasmeier 2002). As Pulido (2000, 16) argued, places 'embody generations of socio-spatial relations.' We take seriously the ways in which localized poverty is produced through intersections of class and race processes, leading to distinct patterns of marginalization for particular social groups in their engagements with rural restructuring. Bringing materialist and discursive analysis together, we present a geographical theorization of place-poverty relations and analyze how localized productions of race and poverty are linked with the articulation of places with new rounds of capital accumulation and neoliberal restructuring (Massey 1994; Pulido 2000; Epp and Whitson 2001).

## Rural Poverty as Articulations of Capital and Meaning

More attention to the role of 'place' on poverty and antipoverty policies is long overdue. (Blank 2005, 459)

Despite decades of research on poverty in the United States, place-poverty connections continue to be poorly understood. Blank, just quoted, argues that we lack a robust understanding of both the role of place in contributing to poverty and spatial variations in poverty processes.

Sociocultural theories of poverty have focused on people and explain poverty as principally the result of behavioral, psychological, and cultural traits among the poor themselves (Fitchen 1981). This interpretation was taken up in social policy circles during the Reagan years in the mantra that people choose to be poor and are empowered to do so by the welfare state (Gallaway and Vedder 1985; Watkins 1993). Structural approaches to poverty call this position 'blaming the victim' and point instead to the primary importance of socioeconomic and institutional structures that explain poverty. These structures include uneven development

under capitalism, which produces economic stagnation and low wages for some people and places (W. J. Wilson 1987; Jones and Kodras 1990; Epp and Whitson 2001); social discrimination such as racism and sexism (Fitchen 1981; Goode and Maskovsky 2001; O'Connor, 2001); and ineffective governmental institutions and policies (Ryan 1974; Schwarz and Volgy 1992).

William Julius Wilson was an early critic of work focused exclusively on the behavioral problems of the poor (W. J. Wilson 1987). He argued for a blended approach that took into account both cultural behaviors of the urban underclass and the ways in which capitalist restructuring and recession, including the suburbanization of the black middle class, had reshaped places. He theorized that place-specific inner-city poverty persists because of joblessness and deteriorating neighborhoods affected by unemployment and neglect. Wilson's focus on inner-city places links economic restructuring and job loss during the 1980s with persistent and deepening poverty among African Americans. His emphasis on social, economic, and institutional connections is an important precursor to our argument for situating political-economy research in its historical, ecological, and cultural context.

Structural research on rural poverty focuses on how changes in agrarian economies and environments due to colonization and uneven capitalist development rework places by changing social relations and land use practices (Watts 1983; Goodman and Redclift 1991; Goodman and Watts 1997; Jarosz and Qazi 2000). This research focuses on how material forces reorganize class fragments and how their interests articulate with other social groups fractured by class, gender, race, and so on (Marsden, Lowe, and Whatmore 1990; Sachs 1996). Structural research breaks with the emphasis on poverty as an attribute of people themselves and instead conceptualizes poverty as a relational process, produced through power differences between social classes, gender, and race that take on particular forms in specific places.

The locality research of the 1990s also contributes to our analysis of poverty as produced through place-based social relations of power, privilege, and difference (even though poverty was not a central focus of their work). Locality studies focused on how economic restructuring and capitalist development were linked to local labor markets and the particularities of places as well as to dynamic international divisions of labor (Cooke 1989; Massey 1991). These analyses emphasized the importance of multiscalar inquiry, from the global to the microlevel of the household and individual; however, locality studies did not fully theorize the importance of cultural politics, that 'domain in which meanings are constructed and negotiated, where relations of dominance and subordination are defined and contested' in shaping local economic shifts (Jackson 1991, 219; Pratt 1991). We build from the insights of structural approaches to poverty to examine rural places that were generally ignored in locality research as well as in much contemporary research on globalization (Jackson 1991; Woods 2007).

Social difference is not produced solely by political and economic restructuring but also by the operation of cultural and ideological processes. Poverty research has much to learn from cultural studies that theorize social difference as emerging from processes of discourse and representation that operate in relation with capitalist restructuring (Pred and Watts 1994; Schram 2000; Katz 2004; D. Wilson 2005). Empirical research by Gibson (1996) and Jarosz and Lawson (2002) uncovered the ways in which rural poor whites are represented as trashy, lazy, and resistant to change and traces how these labels serve to position the poor and to blame their poverty on themselves. Watkins (1993) linked pejorative representations of the poor to political-economic shifts in the U.S. economy in the late twentieth century, arguing that as the United States moves toward a transnational service economy based on information technologies and accelerating consumption, rural working-class folks are increasingly constructed as obsolete. He argued that class is being rearticulated in terms of consumption and style differences, and that through this process the myth of class position as one of choice emerges. This shift in the cultural politics of class simultaneously reassures the middle classes that they are different from the poor and so obscures the material processes of privilege and economic restructuring that produce the harsh realities of poverty. Anxieties about the potential for future upward social mobility brought on by rapid restructuring, such as government disinvestments in the social sphere, offshoring of production, and increasing competition from emerging economies emerge in discourses of 'white trash,' 'criminal minorities,' and 'rednecks.' These popular culture representations of poor rural folk focus on 'class as a lifestyle' and so actively obscure the underlying political and economic processes of changing opportunities and displacements that actually marginalize people and places.

Similarly, Schram's (2000) work demonstrates how neoliberal political and economic agendas are intimately linked with the culture wars of the mid-1990s in the United States. He traces the ways in which

particular representations of welfare recipients bolster neoliberal politics by implicitly constructing the contractual citizen in contrast with the explicit marking of the 'undeserving welfare queen' and the 'welfare dependent.' As with Watkins, Schram's work focuses on the national scene, offering a broad theorization of the cultural politics of poverty, but not focusing on rural processes or spatial variations. Duncan's (1999) comparative ethnographic study of New England, Appalachia, and the Mississippi Delta focused on rural places to link economic restructuring and racism to persistent poverty. She examined how culture and class difference are anchored in forms of economic organization stretching back a century or more. At the same time she traced the ways in which poverty and class difference are actively produced by professionals, business owners, and government workers, among others, who hold themselves apart from the poor whom they identify as 'lazy and deviant.' The poor are represented as taking advantage of charity (rather than working), dropping out of school, and abusing alcohol or drugs. Her work moves beyond the national focus of the preceding studies and provides insights into how local histories of economic and cultural organizations combine in rural places to shape poverty; however, her work focuses less on how these local processes are linked to broader shifts in political and economic forces.

We theorize place-poverty connections by linking political and economic restructuring with the social production of difference in particular places. Places are constellations of political, economic, social, and cultural processes and also are linked with divisions of labor and political and cultural projects that extend beyond place boundaries (Massey 2005). We theorize this linkage as articulation (from Hall 1988 and Hart 2007), drawing on Gramsci to frame articulation as 'historically and geographically specific but interconnected processes, material conditions, forms of power and processes of subject formation' (Hart 2007, 91). Our concept of articulation links two constitutive processes of racialized impoverishment: first, the joining together in places of elements such as capital, resources, social provisions, communities, and globalized markets and second, the production of meanings leading to historically and geographically specific constructions of social difference (Hall 1988; Hart 2002). Articulation captures the dialectical relations between places and particular forms of capital accumulation and their inseparability from social and cultural meanings and practices of race difference (and indeed other axes of difference not the explicit focus of our study). Articulation as a concept emphasizes that specific instances of racialized poverty are not to be understood as simply place uniqueness but are nonetheless fundamentally spatial. Place-specific instances of poverty are produced in the articulation of processes occurring in multiple sites simultaneously (such as national or regional governments, globalized markets, media, local knowledge production, etc.) and in the way these combine in specific geohistorical contexts to construct territorial power relations that reproduce race and poverty formations.

Wetracetheseprocesses of articulation in rural counties of the American Northwest. These rural counties are articulated with the global division of rural labor in a range of ways. In Western Canada, Epp and Whitson (2001, xv) argued that rural places are increasingly articulated with capitalist restructuring as either 'playgrounds or dumping grounds.' We extend their argument by arguing that neoliberal restructuring is producing three distinct modes of articulation in the American Northwest: 'playgrounds,' 'dumping grounds,' and 'unseen grounds.' We argue that these forms of articulation are made possible through locally specific expressions of meaning: historically embedded cultural constructions of race and class (equally salient are gender, sexuality, inter alia, but we focus on race and class difference). Specifically, we trace the ways in which race and class hierarchies are exercised within our case study counties to shape new forms of articulation with globalized capital. In so doing, we move beyond broad claims about neoliberal restructuring to examine concrete practices that reproduce and rework meanings about, and experiences of, marginalized people and places.

We theorize poverty as actively produced in the articulation of social difference, the practices of social groups, and material historical and ecological processes as these are recursively related with new rounds of capital accumulation under neoliberal restructuring (Massey 1994; Pulido 2000; Epp and Whitson 2001; Hart 2007). Investigating these propositions requires case study research on persistently poor rural places to understand how this complex of forces works together. We begin by analyzing geographies of race and poverty across the American Northwest and selecting high-poverty rural counties for in-depth analysis.

## Geographies of White and Latino Poverty in the American Northwest

Researchers know little about race and poverty in the American Northwest. Prior research has identified

the core regions of white and Latino rural poverty as the Texas-Mexico border, parts of Arizona, New Mexico, California, South Dakota, and central Appalachia (Rochin 1995; Shaw 1996). With the exception of Appalachia, rural poverty is often racialized as non-white and is regionalized, centering on African Americans in the South, Hispanics in the Southwest, and Native American populations elsewhere (Billings and Blee 2000). Popular culture representations of the 'new West' frequently emphasize quality of life, spectacular scenery, and the in-migration of middle-class or wealthy urbanites to boomtowns (Limerick 1987; White 1996; Egan 1998); however, Glasmeier (2002) noted in her county-level of study of U.S. poverty over the last three decades a deepening of poverty in rural counties-most notably in the West and Southwest. We trace patterns of persistent rural poverty in the American Northwest with two empirical questions: How are patterns of racialized rural poverty being (re)constituted across the American Northwest in recent decades? 2 How do patterns of white and Latino poverty construct and also position places within a global division of labor under contemporary neoliberal restructuring?

Across rural counties of the American Northwest, whites, Latinos, and Native Americans are the most numerous populations. Our focus here is on the relationships between political and economic change and racialized poverty. We find that although the percentages of whites in poverty are relatively low, the sheer numbers of poor whites make them an important target of study. Further, rapidly growing Latino populations, their high levels of poverty, and the dearth of research on Latino poverty in the Northwest motivate our work. The depth and entrenched nature of Native American poverty in the West also raises important questions about geographies of race and poverty but is beyond the scope of this study.

Within the region, the landscapes of white and Latino populations are quite different. 3 Whites make up the vast majority of nonmetropolitan county populations (above 85 percent in 2000; Appendix A) and Latinos are approximately 8 percent of county populations overall. Although their numbers remain below national state averages of 13 percent, Latino populations have grown threefold in the last twenty-five years (Kandel and Cromartie 2004). There are important differences in poverty patterns for rural whites and Latinos across the region, with whites having the lowest poverty rates at 12.5 percent in 2000, above the national average of 10.4 percent (Jolliffe 2002; see Appendix B).

As Figure 1 illustrates, high white poverty counties persist in eastern Montana and northeastern Washington from the 1990s. Latinos, by contrast, have the highest poverty rates, averaging 27 percent in 2000 (vying with Native American populations at 25 percent in 2000). Patterns of Latino poverty are markedly different than those of whites, with high Latino poverty in eastern Washington and southern Idaho, where Latino poverty deepens by 2000 (Figure 2).

## Rural Economies of the Northwest

How then are these patterns of white and Latino poverty related to different county economies? To provide a descriptive picture of county economies, we employ cluster analysis for 1990 and 2000, using the U.S. Department of Commerce's Regional Economic Information System. Cluster analysis is useful as an exploratory first step in capturing county economic mixes of major economic activities-farming, manufacturing, retail, services, and government. We cluster on location quotients (LQs) for employment in each activity across all 150 nonmetropolitan counties. 4 These LQs measure each county's employment specialization in each sector compared with the American Northwest as a whole. We then conducted a K-means cluster analysis of the LQs for all 150 nonmetropolitan counties on all five sectors. 5

This analysis produced five distinct clusters in 1990 and four in 2000 (the government cluster falls away in 2000), differentiated by the relative importance of employment in each economic sector. As Table 1 summarizes (Appendix C provides average LQs by cluster), twenty-four counties clustered as strong farming with well above the region's average employment in farming (average LQs of 4.4 in 2000 and 4.2 for twentyone counties in 1990) and well below regional averages employed in manufacturing, retail, and services. Our second cluster, moderate farming, has more than forty counties in 2000, where farming remains the most

Table 1. Economic specialization clusters by employment for 1990 and 2000 ( n in parentheses)

| Typology basis                                                             | 1900                                                                                          | 2000                                                                          |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Employment in agriculture, manufacturing, services, retail, and government | Strong farming (21) Moderate farming (41) Transitioning (33) Diversified (41) Government (14) | Strong farming (24) Moderate farming (44) Transitioning (41) Diversified (41) |

Sources: Regional Economic Analysis (1990, 2000).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

important activity, but manufacturing, retail, and services are closer to regional averages. Our third cluster, transitioning, includes more than forty counties in 2000, with relatively less employment in farming than the previous two groups and above the regional average in manufacturing. The fourth cluster, diversified,

Figure 1. White poverty in the American Northwest, nonmetropolitan counties.

includes forty-one counties, because farming work is unimportant and retail and services are the dominant employers. Strong farming counties are found primarily in eastern Montana and southern Idaho. Moderate farming counties are widespread across large portions of Montana, southern Idaho, southern Oregon, and

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

central Washington. Diversified counties appear in a solid band along the coast and in northern Idaho and Montana and correspond closely with tourist and recreational spaces of the coast, national parks, and forests. Counties that are transitioning away from farming are scattered throughout the region (see Appendix D for maps of 1990 and 2000).

Figure 2. Latino poverty in the American Northwest, nonmetropolitan counties.

## Linking Racialized Poverty and County Economies

Here we select our case study counties, based on the relationship between county economic base (clusters) and persistent white or Latino poverty. We crosstabulate average poverty rates by economic cluster first for whites, and then Latinos, in Tables 2 and 3.

Table 2. Average white poverty rates by employment cluster: 1990 and 2000

| Economic base by employment, 1990   |      | Economic base by employment, 2000   |      |
|-------------------------------------|------|-------------------------------------|------|
| Strong farming (21)                 | 16.6 | Strong farming (24)                 | 15.6 |
| Moderate farming (41)               | 14.5 | Moderate farming (44)               | 12.6 |
| Transitioning (33)                  | 13.4 | Transitioning (41)                  | 12.8 |
| Diversified (41)                    | 13.4 | Diversified (41)                    | 12.8 |
| Government (14)                     | 13.4 |                                     |      |

Sources: Authors' calculations, U.S. Census (1990) SF 4 for Non-Hispanic Whites, Tables PB1, PB3, PB65A, PB66, PB100211-P1002216; U.S. Cen- sus (2000) SF3, Tables P152I, P153I, P159I.

White Poverty. White poverty is deepest in strong farming counties. Regional nonmetropolitan white poverty rates average 12.6 percent in 2000 (14 percent in 1990; see Appendix B), making white poverty rates of 16 percent seen in Table 2 quite notable. We selected Hooper and Warren counties in eastern Montana as our case studies to interrogate this relationship, because these counties exhibit high white poverty and are strong farming counties. 6

Latino poverty. Latino poverty is deepest in moderate farming and transitioning counties. Regional county averages are 27 percent in 2000 (28 percent in 1990) and these high levels of poverty are relatively similar to the national picture. We investigate these relationships in southern Idaho in Rivers County because of its shifting mix of agriculture, manufacturing, and services activities along with high Latino poverty rates. 7

This exploratory analysis describes who is poor and where, but it also raises questions about why we see these patterns. We answer these questions through in-depth case study research in conversation with theorizations about the production of rural poverty. This case study approach is explicitly designed to draw out the connections among material histories, discourses, and political

Table 3. Average Latino poverty rates by employment cluster: 1990 and 2000

| Economic base by employment, 1990   |       | Economic base by employment, 2000   |       |
|-------------------------------------|-------|-------------------------------------|-------|
| Strong farming (21)                 | 22.08 | Strong farming (24)                 | 24.58 |
| Moderate farming (41)               | 28.2  | Moderate farming (41)               | 28.4  |
| Transitioning (33)                  | 29.03 | Transitioning (41)                  | 26.35 |
| Diversified (41)                    | 27.05 | Diversified (41)                    | 26.69 |
| Government (41)                     | 28.63 |                                     |       |

Sources: Authors' calculations, U.S. Census (1990), Tables P010 and P120; U.S. Census (2000) SF3, Tables P7 and P159H.

and economic forces as they work together in places. We model our approach on numerous prior studies in the United States that analyze rural poverty in place to understand how local histories, social structures, and local meanings combine to shape the ways in which communities respond to economic change (Deavers and Hoppe 1992; Oberhauser 1995; Scott 1995; Ramsay 1996; Cloke 1997; Billings, Norman, and Ledford 1999).

Our comparative case study approach teases out causes of racialized poverty by combining archival research and interview- and observation-based fieldwork. We drew a stratified purposive sample of interviewees who were in county or community leadership including county commissioners, mayors, social service providers, religious leaders, business owners, realtors, and farmers or ranchers. 8 We report in depth on three case studies here (twenty-one interviews), drawing from our broader project, which involved in-depth research in eight counties for a total of fifty-eight interviews across the American Northwest. Through the course of this project we reached a saturation point in our data collection in the methodological sense of no longer hearing new information in additional interviews with similarly positioned respondents (Creswell 1998; Hess-Biber and Leavy 2006).

In keeping with our theorization of poverty as a relational process, we study up and focus on privileged actors who are directly implicated in processes of impoverishment within these high-poverty counties. We focus on the ways in which the representational practices of white county leaders reproduce or challenge both material conditions and popular narratives that contribute to impoverishment. We do so because these leaders design and implement policy and they are also influential cultural brokers as politicians, religious leaders, and employers. Their understandings of poverty and the poor circulate powerfully in the community and also translate into material consequences in terms of who obtains jobs, the extent of local social service provision, and priorities for spending local tax revenues. Following Watkins (1993), Schram (2000), and Duncan (1999), weinvestigate how community leaders express a neoliberal worldview anchored in moralistic narratives of the responsible, hard-working, independent citizen. Here we investigate the repertoire of representations of the poor and poverty; the ways they are rooted in mythologies of race, class, and place; and how they serve (inadvertently or otherwise) to construct a regime of truth that invigorates economic development policies that are reproducing poverty. These interviews also probed

leaders' knowledge of political and economic change in their communities.

## Intersections of Neoliberal Restructuring and Place, Social Difference, and Poverty

Wetheorize racialized poverty as emerging in the articulation of rural places with economic restructuring, coupled with the practices and discourses of white leaders in these counties. Here we briefly lay out the political and economic forces shaping the global division of rural labor in which our case studies are embedded. We then frame our analysis of the interview data in terms of the specific articulations of our case studies with new rounds of capital accumulation: playgrounds, dumping grounds, and unseen grounds.

Rural economies of the American Northwest are shifting from extractive resource and agrarian economies toward tourism, services, and retailing (Lyson and Falk 1993; Nord 1994; B. A. Brown 1995; Mitchell 1998). Rural places are vulnerable to restructuring because of their reliance on market sectors that are easily outsourced (e.g., food processing) and because of increased imports of cheap crops and resources driven by federal commitments to international trade agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)andCentral America Free Trade Agreement (Epp and Whitson 2001; Milbourne 2004). These shifts are also fueled by regional processes such as exhaustion of finite resources, changing environmental attitudes coupled with rural gentrification, and a reduced availability of public lands for grazing or logging (Lawson, Jarosz, and Bonds 2008). This complex of forces has lowered the demand for labor in extractive industries that have been the mainstay of livelihoods for decades (Rasker and Alexander 1997; Nelson and Beyers 1998).

Federal and state political contexts are also shifting in ways that are intensifying rural poverty (Epp and Whitson 2001; Milbourne 2004). State and local governments are dealing with changing tax bases, the devolution of formerly federal community development dollars, and retrenchments in social service provision under welfare reform (Jones and Kodras 1990; Lobao and Schulman 1991; Schwarz and Volgy 1992; Goode and Maskovsky 2001). The resultant deregulated, decentralized, and hypercompetitive environment pits county and city leaders against one another in competition for new investments to compensate for these economic and political shifts (elaborated in Lawson,

Jarosz, and Bonds 2008). Within this dynamic milieu, rural counties are articulated with global divisions of rural labor in the ways we discuss next: as playgrounds, dumping grounds, and unseen grounds.

Although our empirical focus compares counties within this rubric, we are not arguing for rigid typologies of spaces, nor that articulation produces only these forms, nor that they only occur at the county scale. Indeed, forms of articulation might look different for cities, or in other regions, and these forms could express at various spatial scales. Here we report on our countylevel analysis to illustrate how processes that mobilize social relations of difference are articulated with political and economic forces to produce racialized poverty; in doing so we focus our analysis on persistently poor rural counties that emerged in our work as dumping grounds and unseen grounds.

## Playgrounds in the Global Division of Rural Labor

Some rural communities engage with, and successfully compete under, neoliberal restructuring as 'playgrounds' for the middle and wealthy classes by attracting new investments in tourism, gentrification, lone-eagle entrepreneurs, or a combination thereof (Nelson and Beyers 1998; Ghose 2004; Lawson et al. forthcoming); however, this process is highly dependent on the attractiveness of both natural amenities and communities. Since 1990, many high-amenity rural counties have attracted large numbers of entrepreneurial and creative thinking occupations, such as engineers, scientists, artists, inventors, and designers. Places that attract these creative workers are exhibiting higher rates of economic and employment growth than are other rural places (Economic Research Service 2007). McGranahan and Wojan (2007, 2) suggested this as an explicit strategy for rural development arguing that 'chasing talent is a viable alternative for sparking local growth.' Perhaps unsurprisingly then in the American Northwest, the counties that emerged as 'diversified' in our quantitative analysis, are located in high-amenity areas along the Pacific coast and the Cascades and Rocky Mountains (see Appendix C). These places do not exhibit high white or Latino poverty.

By contrast, counties lacking such amenities have very different articulations with neoliberal restructuring and globalization. The places with high poverty in our county typology emerge not as playgrounds but as dumping grounds or unseen grounds. In each case, these counties exhibit localized geographies of race and poverty.

## Dumping Grounds in the Global Division of Rural Labor

Dumping ground counties are part of the global division of rural labor theorized by Epp and Whitson (2001), wherein disadvantaged rural regions become weak players in new rounds of corporate consolidation in farming and resource extraction. In these remote and less attractive places, leaders are obliged to loosen environmental, zoning, and labor standards to lure new investments such as hog farms, prisons, food processing plants, and corporate dairies-hence the epithet 'dumping ground' (Castle 1995; Ramsey and Everitt 2001; Bonds 2008). This economic environment encourages a race to the bottom where rural leaders compete with each other for investments by implementing pro-growth economic policies. These dynamics mean that communities often take whatever investments come along, weakening workers' abilities to bargain for living wages (Belzer and Kroll 1986; Eggers and Massey 1991).

In southern Idaho we found counties where the shift from historically strong agriculture is underway (moderate farming and transitioning in our typology; see Figure 2 and Appendix C). We selected Rivers County, Idaho, for in-depth fieldwork because it is a transitioning county with a Latino poverty rate of 31 percent (in 2000). Rivers has few amenity attractions and the southern part of the county is remote and inaccessible. Over the last decade and a half, Rivers has been buffeted by global and regional political and economic shifts and is dealing with the hypercompetitive economic environment described earlier. Rivers exemplifies our dumping ground theorization of articulation.

Rivers is designated as a Federal Labor Surplus Area of the U.S. government. Its major employers are health services, food processing, retail, and city and county government. The county is heavily dependent on the food processing industry that has seasonal employment and frequent layoffs. In the last fifteen years, the county has experienced a decline in key crops such as potatoes linked to the closure of a major food processing company that moved its manufacturing to Canada. As a result, between 1992 and 2002 the acreage in potato production declined by 10 percent (U.S. Department of Agriculture [USDA] Agricultural Census); the number of farms declined by 13 percent, and the amount of land in farms increased by 13 percent, indicating a gradual farm consolidation. One mayor explained that not only have potatoes declined, but free trade regimes will irreparably change agriculture more broadly:

[W]e're not only losing potatoes, but the sugar beet industry is really in trouble. And this new Central American treaty probably is the end of the sugar industry in the United States, whether it be today or next year, or two years or five years. That, you know, the only thing that has kept the sugar industry alive is the government subsidies in sugar. (personal interview, 17 August 2005)

Rivers is reinventing its economy, recently attracting a Wal-Mart supercenter, large dairies, hog farms, and more food processing. A local mayor explained,

I have seen coming across my desk several proposals for dairies to be built in this area. Our county commissioners have taken a very active step in making it easy, or easier for dairies to go in. Around Boise, they want the dairies out. People don't want to see them or smell them. (personal interview, 16 August 2005)

It is in this sense a dumping ground, a place actively searching for any, even undesirable, investments to keep their economy viable in the context of intense global competition and reduced government supports for distressed communities. County leaders in Rivers are working to remain connected with footloose capital through an active process of articulation: selling their county as a viable place for particular investments. In the County Commissioner's words, they must 'play the game with the real economic development' (personal interview, 17 August 2005) and so they raised $70,000 from local businesses and 'aggressively got a really experienced economic development person' (personal interview, 17 August 2005) in hopes of more successfully competing with other places. Despite deep poverty and immediate need for social services, county political and business leaders invested in this staffer because, what we needed was somebody like we have now that has enough business experience to know that the soft issues are the things that tip a scale one way or the other. Financial issues, the real hard issues, what's the cost of doing business-that's what brings people in. (County Commissioner, personal interview, 17 August 2005)

To remake their economy, leaders are actively recruiting new investments in large corporate dairies, cheese processing, wind farms, ethanol processing, and pig farms (Dayley 2003). One way they compete is by substantially expediting the permitting process according to a County Commissioner:

Right now we can offer them a permitting process that takes about 60 to 90 days . . . . In California that's two years. So we have had some people come from California to put in dairies here. We have one cheese plant, of course

that's being built . . . we have another one that's looked, that's a coop dairy, so they're up here talking to them and that's the biggest thing that we have to offer. And we have the land, we have the water. (personal interview, 17 August 2005)

This process of streamlining regulations is an acknowledgmentthatcountyleadersmustcutcornerstobecompetitive against more attractive or accessible places as in California. A local mayor explained that the county is also rezoning to set up confined animal feeding operations:

Right now it's set that you can have five animals per acre. Well, we're setting it up in areas where you can put more than that. So if they want to put a 10,000 head dairy you don't have to have so many square miles. (personal interview, 17 August 2005)

This downward harmonization of rural regulations, water supplies, landscapes, and jobs appears to local leaders as the only alternative. A commissioner explained to us that they must build their economy from the bottom up, bringing in low-wage jobs in the hopes that economic growth will eventually bring in better jobs and livelihoods.

[Y]ou know, I argued all along that we build an economy from the top down. Unfortunately, you build it from the bottom up. People say well, we don't want those jobs, they don't pay anything. They pay the herdsmen quite a bit, pay the veterinarians a lot of money, pay the mechanics . . . and that gives you that whole base here that's going to eventually mean that you need to have a dentist, you need another doctor, another-from this you end up with the money springing out of the professional hierarchy. (personal interview, 17 August 2005)

This scenario contrasts starkly with conclusions reached by McGranahan and Wojan (2007), who found that counties with more workers in high-end creative occupations experience substantially faster employment growth. Counties that lack amenities and accessibility are obliged to come at the problem the opposite way, attracting low-wage jobs in undesirable industries. This approach then reproduces poverty and unattractive economic activities that militate against these places becoming playgrounds in the future.

How then, does Rivers's reinvention as a dumping ground rely on and reproduce high Latino poverty? Our discussion thus far has focused on county economies in crisis, local governments struggling under hypercompetitive globalization, free trade, and federal defunding. Under these conditions, some county economies are reorganizing themselves in ways that are predicated on historical articulations of exploitation, racism, and unequal power between Latinos and whites. Rivers is reinvigorating the integral ways in which racism has structured social relations of difference and strategies of capitalism in this particular place. In the restructuring process, racist productions of difference reorganize economic and political relations within the county in ways that make possible new forms of articulation with globalized capital (Gilmore 2002). First, the historical development of the Snake River Plain economy (where Rivers is located), coupled with federal immigration policies, secures a supply of low-wage Latino farm workers. Second, the political power of farmers vis-` a-vis mobile Latino workers consolidates both their poverty and the power of white farmers and land owners in the area. Third, as Latinos settle out into communities, they face discrimination in work and access to services that reinscribes their poverty.

The first large wave of Mexican workers began coming to the Snake River Plain during the 1942-1964 Bracero Program (McGlade 2002). They came for work, drawn to labor shortages in irrigated agriculture and also by labor-intensive crops such as potatoes and sugar beets that require significant hand labor. Their arrival provided abundant low-cost farm labor, which was a key component of the success of these crops, and encouraged farmers to expand acreage under crops that require more, rather than less, labor (McGlade 2002). 9 This economic success depended on Latino workers who came to the county despite low farm wages and the lack of a state minimum wage. This strategy of agricultural accumulation rests on renovation of a historical exercise of state power. Specifically, the county is using what were World War II prisoner-of-war camps as farm labor camps so that farmers along the Snake River Plain can attract workers to cheap housing, still partially funded by the federal government (USDA). These labor camps are the centerpiece of the farmers' strategy for obtaining a seasonal labor supply despite the fact that wages are higher in the neighboring states of Oregon and Washington, as explained by a labor camp director:

Ourbaserate is six dollars an hour. And, um, we are finding that with Oregon and Washington have a state minimum wages that's higher, you know, we are really having to compete. (personal interview, 17 August 2005)

This system consolidates the political power of farmers vis-` a-vis workers by producing a mobile, low-wage work force. Latinos may only reside in the camps while

they are working, and this system denies them the political influence that would come from long-term residence. The camp in Moonville directly employs and pays the workers on behalf of the farmers and so Latinos' rights to reside are closely regulated. This situation constructs the workers as mobile, as they may only reside in this housing while working at less than minimum wages. Accordingly, there are relatively few long-term resident Latinos who have been able to effectively organize a political voice for change. As the labor camp director told us,

If there were more workers here, I think you'd see some more state minimum wage activity. You know, Oregon and Washington probably have twice as many as Idaho does. (personal interview, 18 August 2005)

In the 1940s these prisoner-of-war camps signified, and also actually produced, 'civil and quasi-social death' by disempowering prisoners of war (Gilmore 2002, 19) and those power relations and spaces have been reconstituted in a new crisis to enact new racist practices of containment and difference that disempower Latino workers and their families (see also R. Wilson forthcoming, on Latino farm workers residing in a former Japanese internment camp in the Klamath project of southern Oregon).

Deep Latino poverty in Rivers also emerges from labor market discrimination in the context of histories of white privilege and Latino subordination (Pulido 2000; Wilmsen 2007). Latinos are constructed as the working poor, clustered in seasonal agricultural work, food processing, construction, and services, and many are either undocumented or mobile and cannot challenge low wages. Their very presence in low-wage work, and assumptions that they are undocumented, reproduces their marginal position in the county. Despite the fact that the labor camp director must have documentation from camp residents, he nonetheless assumes many are undocumented. As he explained, 'We would probably have a lot of trouble trying to find workers to, that were legal, to do the job. Not that many people want to do this job [farmwork]' (personal interview, 17 August 2005).

In this sense, Latino poverty emerges not only from the articulation of Rivers with globalized capital accumulation but also from the production of meanings about certain people in this place. The 'low-wage Latino worker' emerges from the social production of meanings about race and class difference and these constructions continue to reproduce the dumping ground economy because investors are attracted by minimal regulation and low costs for doing business.

Local whites control social and community institutions and government and there exists relatively little political or economic support for Latinos in Rivers. We spoke with a Latino city councilman who came to Rivers as the child of migrant workers in the 1960s about his experiences of discrimination:

I talked to my father about [running for office] . . . . I said, 'Dad, one thing I'm worried about is I'm a Hispanic,' and this has been an area, you know, growing up as a young child it was tough to grow up in. It was. There was a lot of good people here that helped but there was also some that were very mean. Very mean spirited towards us. Just because I didn't speak the best English or I had a different color of skin. I mean, just because I wasn't, no offense, blonde hair and blue eyed . . . . And it's tough when you're one of the first ones to ever break through and get in and you look at what happens, what does occur. Until you have been, like I said, you can't judge the masses by a few, but there were those few who made life tough. They were very bigoted, they were very cold. (personal interview, 16 August 2005)

Poor Latinos are doubly challenged under welfare reform and neoliberal retrenchments in social services. In their struggle to compete with one another, state and local governments have given tax breaks to businesses to encourage investment and have cut social services. In this already difficult hypercompetitive context, the 1996 welfare reform act shifted responsibility for social provisions to state and local governments and in Idaho this has placed deep burdens on already stressed county budgets. Rivers is reeling from declining tax revenues and as one of the poorer counties in the state, it has no locally controlled public funds for hunger, shelter, or other forms of social assistance (Lawson, Jarosz, and Bonds 2008). Local power relations of class, nationality, and race work together to marginalize Latinos by constructing them as inferior outsiders who usurp white entitlements by trading on their racialized identities (Wilmsen 2007). The recent growth of many Latino communities in the Northwest has heightened tensions with whites over inadequately funded and sorely needed social services. Whites resent Latinos accessing government programs, invoking histories of white settlement and entitlement (Lawson, Jarosz, and Bonds 2008). Practically, those without papers are prevented from accessing government benefits, but effectively, all Latinos are marked and resented (Effland and Kassel 1996; De la Rosa 2000; Kandel and Cromartie 2004).

Recent layoffs and economic insecurity have intensified tensions between whites and Latinos. Many whites who were employed in well-paid positions at the recently closed food processing facility have been unable to find comparable job opportunities. As one worker told us,

[T]here is assistance if you are Hispanic, you can get assistance from Health and Welfare, and you can get it from the Migrant Council. Like my sister (a white woman) she can't get food stamps or nothing. (personal interview, 18 August 2005)

This combination of economic restructuring and policy devolution translates into hardships and tensions that reinscribe class and race differences, deepening white resentment and discrimination against Latinos and in turn reducing their opportunities for moving out of poverty.

As the Rivers economy is transformed by neoliberal economicandsocial policy restructuring, county leaders build their economy from the bottom up, selling their steady supply of low-wage labor, abundant irrigation and land, and quick permitting for megadairies and hog farms as they compete with other places. Local leaders use the language of competitiveness and cheap labor to attract investors and in the process reproduce low-wage jobs into the future. As this case study of a dumping ground illustrates, rural poverty does not necessarily result from being left out of the neoliberal project; rather, it can result from being incorporated in particular ways that recursively (re)produce racialized poverty in transitioning economies.

## Unseen Grounds in the Global Division of Rural Labor

Athird mode of articulation of rural places with neoliberal restructuring emerges in our research: unseen grounds. Unseen grounds are economically and politically constructed as 'off the grid,' literally bypassed by globalized circuits of capital or wealthy, educated inmigrants. Unseen grounds are excluded from circuits of capital in ways that limit options for these places and deepen poverty. Unseen grounds have economies still reliant on historically important activities, such as ranching, railroads, and mining, despite the fact that they are barely viable. Such places have some combination of remoteness from current capital circuits, fragile ecologies, out-migration, and little political power. In contrast to either playgrounds or dumping grounds, we argue that unseen grounds have struggled and failed to draw new investments as the viability of existing economic activities dwindles. In different ways than either Rivers or the playgrounds, the historical geographies of unseen grounds link these places to prior rounds of colonization and capital accumulation in ways that now serve to disarticulate them from contemporary flows of investment and settlement.

Our quantitative analysis indicates that eastern Montana has a group of counties dominated by ranching and extractive activities (see Figure 1 and Appendix C 'strong farming') and high white poverty rates. We draw on fieldwork in Hooper and Warren, two adjacent strong farming counties with white poverty rates of 19 percent and 26 percent, respectively (the regional average is 12.9 percent). We analyze this deep white poverty by examining the intersections of historical, social, and ecological geographies with the position of these places as unseen grounds in the global division of rural labor. We discuss these counties together because they have very similar profiles, with a total of less than 6,000 people in 2006 and economies dominated by dry land ranching, coal mining, and assorted services (Hooper has 21 percent and Warren 42 percent in ranching and mining, Hooper has 37 percent in services, and Warren has 31 percent in services in 2000; U.S. Census 2000).

Being 'unseen' is not a primordial state in eastern Montana. Rather, at the turn of the twentieth century, the region was actively linked to the broader economy. Hooper County was homesteaded around 1903, followed by the arrival of the Milwaukee Railroad Company in 1907 and the creation of the Republic Coal Company (Graetz and Graetz 2003). Warren was formed out of the western portion of Hooper in 1920. The early twentieth century was a boom period for the region, as open range ended and white settlers were lured in droves by explicit government policies such as the Enlarged Homestead Act of 1909 to farm and to work railroads and mines. The federal government's effort to provide 'free land' in the West was linked to U.S. economic fortunes more broadly but also to colonialist and nationalist impulses to 'tame' the West. Homestead policies provided opportunities for eastern industrial workers and an escape valve for declining sectors of the eastern economy (K. Toole 1957). Coupled with these opportunities, the railroad companies (Great Northern, Northern Pacific, Milwaukee) worked hard to colonize eastern Montana to build settlements and commerce to support their investments.

The deep white poverty of these counties today is shaped both by the abandonment of these places by capital under contemporary globalization and also by

histories of colonization and Native American oppression (D. Brown 1970). The whiteness of poverty in much of eastern Montana, and specifically in Hooper and Warren, results from the exercise of racialized power at the turn of the century, which cleared the counties for white settlement and concentrated deep Native American poverty in reservations elsewhere in eastern Montana.

After the 1920s, the early rush of settlers dwindled as the natural-resource-based economy faltered due to drought and distance from commercial centers (Wyckoff 2006). By 1925, the Milwaukee Railroad Company failed, and from that time forward, trains from other companies have only run sporadically on these lines. By the 1930s eastern Montana began its decline as capital disinvested and as ranching and mining struggled. Historically and now, investors and political influence have come from outside the region, and have shaped its destiny: 'The land-what was on it and in it-was given over to others. Distance meant cost, cost meant capital, capital meant absentee ownership, absentee ownership meant absentee control, and absentee control meant operation in the essential interest of outsiders with local interests a very secondary consideration' (R. Toole 1959, 249).

Struggles for economic viability and political voice persist. Hooper and Warren counties are today experiencing the economic decline that Wyckoff (2006, 14) referred to as '[Montana's] bi-polar landscape of the early twenty-first century, a setting in which economic decline is intimately juxtaposed with economic growth.' The growth of high-amenity areas in western Montana stands in stark contrast to the contemporary remoteness and stagnation of eastern counties that have been left out of contemporary rounds of capital accumulation. The interstate runs through Fritown to the south, and as Montana's largest city, Fritown easily outcompetes local businesses. A job services staffer who works with businesses to recruit workers in Hooper and Warren counties describes the area as

'challenge city.' It really is because there isn't a lot there and it isn't on a major . . . road to go anywhere. It's not where you can stop and at least maybe capture some of the business coming through. (personal interview, 15 August 2005)

A county commissioner explained that more county residents work in Fritown and that 'People who work in Fritown, buy in Fritown . . . I'd say we've lost eight businesses last year' (personal interview, 14 September 2006). These counties have been bypassed by people and investments and are the unseen grounds of the new global division of rural labor.

Large-scale agricultural investors have also shied away from the fragile ecological conditions of these eastern Montana counties that are characterized by dry land grain and ranching. Yields and incomes remain low, and ranches operate primarily on family labor of long-term white residents with little demand for Latino migrant labor. In addition, Hooper and Warren counties are suffering under years of extreme drought. The Hooper River is flowing well below normal in recent years (Thackeray 2002), which is threatening the viability of fragile dry ranching operations along the river's course. In 2004, the Department of Agriculture allowed livestock grazing on Conservation Reserve lands in an effort to keep ranchers in business for another year (Associated Press 2004). We asked a local community development advocate and long-term resident about the future of ranching and farming:

The only thing that's gonna change in agriculture is the technology, things that increase production, so there's less people workin' it, or some new product line, you know, ethanol . . . but overall, everything that's farmed, is farmed. Every bit of water that can go to farming is there. That isn't gonna change. (personal interview, 15 September 2006)

Adding to ecological stresses on the ranching economy, and contributing to high white poverty levels, federal free trade policies link these unseen grounds to global restructuring. Dry land farmers and ranchers are struggling under strong competition from imported wheat and beef under NAFTA. Ranchers who organized through the Montana-based Ranchers-Cattlemen Action Legal Foundation say that Canadian and Mexican beef import practices even violate NAFTA. They charge that both countries are dumping cattle into the United States at prices below production costs, undercutting thousands of American cattle producers ('Blockade halts farm trucks' 1998). A rancher in Hooper explained that for small family ranches the drought and low market prices for cattle are causing enormous suffering:

In my own case, I have a small ranch, about five sections, but every day is a struggle of how do I make ends meet on this place? And here, I have an asset that's worth a huge amount of money, and yet I have no cash in my pocket whatsoever and it's just like, why don't I just sell it and enjoy my life? (personal interview, 14 September 2006)

These counties are unseen grounds in part because their economies are built on politically unpopular and environmentally unsustainable activities. For example,

the bituminous coal mine in the Buffalo Mountains of Hooper County that began at the turn of the century was abandoned in 1957 and lay dormant until 1991. In 1998, the mine was again closed, when the state revoked its mining permit due to environmental violations. In 2004 the state reissued the permit and mining began again, only to then lay off fifty of the mine's sixty-two workers in March 2007 (Falstad 2007). The mayor of Riverside, the largest town in Hooper County, does not dare hope that the mine and railroad will reopen, he told the local paper: '[W]e've heard this so many times that the mine is going to take off in two months. The railroad is going to take off in two months . . . . Its like Chicken Little. After a while, you stop believing it' (Falstad 2007, 5). A regional development coordinator explained to us that local leadership has not been forward-looking, noting that environmental laws and climate change politics threaten their current strategy for economic development:

You know, when this coal mine was first proposed, this started in 1988, in this particular go around. And, um, just the changes in what's being demanded now, is huge. California, within the last year, passed a law that says 'we will not buy power that is not generated at least this clean.' Using this technology to build a power plant, there's plant that's just about permitted up by the Great Falls, that right nowis in danger of not happening because they are not going to meet the law. These guys in their proposals as they're trying to create money to develop this, have resisted that new [clean air politics] until California. (personal interview, 16 September 2006)

County leadership is now backing a proposal to develop a coal-to-liquids, clean coal-fired power plant in Hooper County that may be funded by a New York investment company; however, over recent years a number of financial deals have been put together, only to fail because of the myriad difficulties of remoteness, weak infrastructure, and competition in global and national energy markets. Nonetheless, all economic development eggs remain in this one basket, even as layoffs escalate. Local welfare office staff describe community attitudes of disillusionment and desperation:

The community attitude is . . . when it gets here we will believe it . . . the coal mine . . . the power plant you know, there has been headline after headline of all these wonderful economic improvements that are going to be right here in this community, and nothing has materialized. (personal interview, 16 September 2006)

In our discussion of Hooper and Warren counties, we have traced ways in which the disarticulation of these unseen grounds with broader circuits of capital helps us understand the depth of poverty. We asked social service providers how their work had changed in recent years and they explained:

In Hooper County . . . our coal mine out here, I mean it is, it goes good for a while, like right now, its kinda pretty well shut down . . . unskilled staff [were] laid off at the hospital also, within the last two months, um, and . . . the cookie factory, there were some layoffs there, so I mean just locally have been some very severe layoffs as far as impacting the communityfinancially. (personal interview, 16 September 2006)

Similarly, a long-term resident explained the presence of poverty:

A starting teacher here is $25,000 . . . . That's below the poverty rate! . . . So you have that $25,000, and maybe it's, you've got a wife that can't work because she's raising the family . . . and then you take some guys who have no educational training . . . andthey're making $8.00 an hour. And then, and then the only jobs around, unless you've got a primo job like mine, is somebody working at Conoco, they're making $6.00 an hour. Take that average down, and all of a sudden we're at the poverty level. Because we just don't have anything . . . there's nothing to create wealth. (personal interview, 16 September 2006)

As this resident makes clear, not all people experience economic hardships similarly. Even within unseen grounds, social relations of class difference perpetuate poverty for some. In contrast to Rivers, in Hooper and Warren the population in poverty is white. Disarticulation from economic restructuring helps us understand poverty, but it tells us nothing about these different racialized patterns of poverty. White poverty is produced here in the reciprocal relations between political and economic forces and local histories of social relations; in this case, histories of colonization and Native American containment and white class power differences among those living in unseen grounds. These class differences are produced not only through economic decline and government defunding but also through the active production of meanings about the poor and poverty.

Poor whites are devalued relative to those more privileged through the active construction of discourses that (mis)represent the poor. In the absence of a poor 'other' who is visibly different from mainstream white society, the poor are culturally constructed as unwilling to work, as choosing to be 'welfare cyclers' or as stigmatized by their very poverty (Jarosz and Lawson 2002; Lawson, Jarosz, and Bonds 2008). In our interviews we

found strong resonance between local understandings of the poor and widespread expressions of personal responsibility discourses that infuse neoliberal reforms. Specifically, the poor are blamed for their own poverty and for not working hard enough to escape it (Schram 2000; England 2008). In these small communities, the poor are known by name or reputation and they are stigmatized-even by their very use of public assistance. For example, a case worker in the local public assistance office explained,

Our people have so many barriers . . . whether you know, reputation, or something has happened that the employer is not . . . . So, if you work for one place of employment and you do something wrong, or you leave or you quit, um, that reputation will follow you because it's a small community and people know then that you are not a good employee and they will not hire you and they will not even give you a chance. (personal interview, 16 September 2006)

These stigmas completely ignore the ways in which a lack of income and a support structure produce their perceived unreliability. As we discussed with public assistance staffers, someone might miss work because he or she is sick, has an unreliable vehicle, or has to leave work because of a lack of child care:

Childcare slots in this county are very slim, very, very slim . . . if they know you receive child care assistance, you might not be given as high a priority as a private pay person, and then, if they know who you are, chances of getting into a particular day care may not be good. (personal interview, 16 September 2006)

These representations ostracize the poor, rendering them flawed, rather than either the failing economy or social relations of class difference playing a role. At the same time, marking the poor as different separates poor whites from the rest of the community and in the process allays white anxiety about the risk that they too might experience economic vulnerability (Pancake 1998; Jarosz and Lawson 2002). If these representations can portray the white poor as different, then more privileged people can construct themselves as not at risk; however, these very constructions of county residents militate against attracting new investments and rejuvenating these unseen grounds.

We also heard white poverty framed as a 'lifestyle choice' rather than as the operation of unequal political and economic processes producing inequality. For example, the public assistance office staff talked about how people take advantage of the various social programs:

They, you know, go in for rental assistance, fuel assistance, food stamps, the ones that have kids they go in for TANF 10 cash, some of them have it figured out that if they get, if they say yes we'll do what we are supposed to do for TANF cash, they'll get that benefit for a month and they won't bother doing their stuff . . . . They've got it figured out how to do that [snort]. (personal interview, 16 September 2006)

The staff referred to some benefit recipients as 'cyclers' who try to work the system but who dropped off the rolls after welfare reform.

I remember when we first started, when TANF first started, we had a lot of them, but they never had to do a darn thing for it . . . . [But now] because of the work requirements and this is what it involves, and you know, basically it is too much work. (personal interview, 16 September 2006)

The implication here is that people actually choose to be on assistance, that they have some other option, and they cycled on when it was easy. Now that the system is more demanding, they are viewed as choosing not to do the work. This interpretation of people not taking personal responsibility is strikingly resilient given that the staff members are extremely familiar with these recipients and are also aware of the deep economic crisis facing the county.

Similarly, a regional development coordinator talked about outside perceptions of Riverside, the largest city in Hooper County, as a 'dump.' He blames this problem on a lack of community effort rather than on broader political and economic forces. The rhetoric of personal responsibility for a failing community is strong:

Other people say 'I don't go to [Riverside], that place is a dump!' You know, the lifestyle is great, but the place is a dump. You can't find a neighborhood that's nice without some dump in it . . . . You know we beat on people around here . . . cause our lack of community and we're so used to kind of mediocre-looking ways of doing things we just accept and we just kind of go but all the time we don't think of cleaning up. (personal interview, 15 September 2006)

The implication here is that Riverside is in decline because of a lack of community effort, rather than longterm economic crisis. Again, we see more privileged whites arguing that poor housing quality and lack of infrastructure are a result of deficiencies in how the locals behave. This disregards the disadvantaged position of these counties in a global rural division of labor and the concomitant lack of jobs, income, and tax base in the community and reinscribes a negative image of this place that contributes to its position as unseen grounds.

These narratives of white class difference are, however, contradictory. Narratives about the poor differ in this all-white community from what we heard in places with high Latino poverty, like Rivers. We asked the welfare office staffers whether local ranchers access public assistance and were told that was very rare. This led to a framing of poor ranchers as proud and self-reliant, representations that were much less common in places with high Latino poverty:

We probably got a lot of older folks that fit into our programs but they are a little too proud to . . . there is a stigma about coming in here . . . you know, they're still you know, sometimes referred to as 'those people' . . . and they are not. They're our friends and our neighbors and they could be our mother and our brother and our grandmother and you know, they are us. (personal interview, 16 September 2006)

At this point, the interviewee choked up. The communityis unified by its whiteness and efforts to construct class difference are fraught and struggled over-even as they persist. We found that many residents understand local poverty as linked with job loss, low-wage work, andcompetitionfromotherplacesforinvestments, consumers, and jobs. Community leaders understand that white poverty in Hooper and Warren is produced by the marginal position of these counties in global capital circuits. At the same time, more privileged whites still must reconcile class difference and in the process, the poor are stigmatized and blamed for making bad choices that are contributing to community decline. Ironically, this very process of stigmatization perpetuates class divisions and discourages cross-class solidarity in building community infrastructures, ensuring that these communities remain on unseen grounds.

## Conclusions

Our research extends poverty studies by focusing attention on place-poverty connections to reveal how racialized poverty is (re)produced in the recursive intermingling of local historical, ecological, and social processes combined with the articulation of rural places with new rounds of capital accumulation under neoliberal restructuring. We draw on Hall's (1988) and Hart's (2007) concepts of articulation to link together two constitutive processes of racialized impoverishment: first the linking in places of elements such as capital, communities, social provisions, and globalized markets; and second, the production of meanings that produce social difference. We draw on this concept of articu- lation to theorize the connections between race and poverty as it emerges in particular conditions of existence that are open to rearticulation (Hall 1985). Drawing from this insight, our work is not simply predictive of all rural county forms or of all processes that racialize and marginalize certain subjects. Further, it is possible that within a county (and at other spatial scales) there can be elements of playgrounds, dumping grounds, and unseen grounds simultaneously present. We do not intend to construct a rigid typology of spaces; rather, our goal is to identify processes that mobilize social relations of difference and articulations with political and economy forces in ways that combine to produce racialized poverty in particular places.

We began this work to untangle the geographies of white and Latino poverty across the rural American Northwest. Our theoretical engagement with articulation is mobilized through the examination of concrete histories and places. Our case study counties are part of a broader division of rural labor with distinct modes of articulation with global capital: as playgrounds, dumping grounds, or unseen grounds and with distinct local articulations (or productions) of social difference along class and race lines. In eastern Montana, we demonstrate how the disarticulation of the unseen grounds of Hooper and Warren counties with broader circuits of capital coupled with histories of colonization and indigenous containment explain historically persistent white poverty. In Rivers County in Idaho, a dumping ground economy, we reveal the strategies employed by local leaders seeking to attract investments by reducing regulations and touting the presence of cheap land, water, and labor. These strategies for economic development in Rivers serve to heighten tensions between whites and Latinos because of the scarcity of living-wage jobs and social service provisions that contribute to the deepening of poverty. In short, we argue that the restructuring of economies and governance in this region are predicated on historical systems of exploitation and unequal power between social classes and between Latinos and whites that make specific economic strategies viable in these places.

In some sense, our work treads depressingly familiar ground in revealing practices and discourses of discrimination and exclusion in employment, access to services, and political power that are intensified under wrenching economic restructuring. We trace how neoliberal market logics and governmental practices are reworking the global rural division of labor and the poverty effects of these articulations of capital and meaning. Our work also advances understanding

in several new ways, however. First we trace how in small rural communities these processes of othering the poor are racialized. We find that the kinds of poverty narratives that emerge in rural places are inflected by the racial makeup of specific places-these narratives differ for high Latino and high white poverty places. Beyond this focus on local narratives and practices that reproduce rural poverty, we contribute by illuminating the reciprocal articulations of economic restructuring with the particular ways that rural poor are scripted. We trace how particular race and class discourses enable and interrelate with specific histories and strategies of economic development. In Rivers, Latinos are constructed as cheap, mobile workers who are not entitled to social services and this very construction becomes an asset for the county in efforts to attract new investments and to justify the county's focus on economic development rather than social provisions. In Hooper and Warren, the white poor (whiteness is also a racialized position) are viewed as making poor lifestyle choices or as cyclers and scroungers. Their poverty becomes part of narratives about why these places are unseen grounds. White poor are explained as a hindrance to improving unseen grounds and as making inappropriate lifestyle choices that community leaders describe as deepening the poverty of those rural counties.

We argue that poverty research must take seriously the intersections between powerful political and economic forces and the particular constellation of histories, ecologies, and power relations that shape the ways people in places (re)make broader processes (Massey 1994; Hart 2002). We extend research on rural poverty by revealing that neoliberal restructuring is producing three distinct modes of articulation in the Northwest: playgrounds, dumping grounds, and unseen grounds. Second, we insist on the importance of analyzing the ways in which localized productions of racialized poverty are materially and discursively constituted through reciprocal relations with these different modes of articulation in the American Northwest. We demonstrate the value of employing comparative case study research to understand the articulations of racialized poverty in rural America. We employ this approach to tease out the interplay between economic and political processes that frame broad conditions of restructuring and the ways meanings and power relations are remade on the ground: refracted through race and class difference in ways that alter the meanings and valuations of rural places and the people living there.

Finally, our research demonstrates that poverty is not exclusively an economic process, nor is it merely an expression of the uniqueness of places. These articulations are inherently geographical and place-specific poverty processes can be understood through a systematic analysis of how economic shifts, cultural productions of difference, and practices of exclusion operate in the production of poor subjects through the reciprocal operation of processes working across place and scale.

## Acknowledgments

This research was conducted under National Science Foundation Grant No. BCS 0136703. That support is greatly appreciated. The authors are most grateful to our research participants, without whom this project would not have been possible. The authors also benefited greatly from comments during presentations of this article at the University of Oregon, Dartmouth University, and the University of Washington. Those audiences provided brilliant feedback. We are also indebted to our reviewers and editor for their valuable feedback, which made this article stronger. The authors also thank Jen Devine, Tara Olson, Amanda Stafford, Todd Faubion, Ryan Burns, and Charu Verma for their invaluable research assistance. To protect the confidentiality of our participants, we have changed the names of our case study counties and towns.

## Notes

1. We view both race and poverty as produced through material social relations and the discursive construction of difference.
2. Our focus on poverty is limited here to material deprivation as measured by the federal poverty measure in the United States. We recognize the long history of intellectual debate over the nature of poverty and recent work on the broader concepts of relative deprivation and social exclusion (Townsend 1987; Percy-Smith 2000; Milbourne 2004). The empirical work we report here employs official poverty statistics as a starting point for our larger project that raises broader questions about the nature and causes of poverty.
3. Poverty is the percentage of people below the federal poverty measure, which we employ for consistency across space and time. We recognize that this underestimates lived poverty because many service providers qualify people for assistance at 150 percent of the federal thresholds. Our white and Latino racial categories also utilize U.S. Census data wherein race reflects self-identification. Because we draw on Census data from two decadal series, we had to account for significant shifts in racial classification from 1990 and 2000. According to the Census Bureau, the data on race in 2000 are not precisely comparable to those collected in previous censuses. In 2000, respondents could select more than one category for race (Rodriguez 2000). This resulted in the expansion

- of racial classifications provided in Census tables and a more complicated distinguishing of racial categories.
4. We initially intended to use more disaggregated categories, but due to confidentiality concerns, there was too much missing data at the county level.
5. Wealsorantheanalysisusing Ward's hierarchical cluster method on the earnings typology for 2000, which produced very similar results validating our use of K-means cluster analysis.
6. We have changed the names of our case study counties and cities to protect the confidentiality of our respondents.
7. We should note that Latino farm workers are undoubtedly undercounted by the census data. First, the census is taken during the winter when many farm workers are not employed. Second, many farm workers are undocumented and so are not reported in census data.
8. Purposive sampling, also known as judgment sampling, involves selecting respondents based on their specific characteristics and their substantive experience related to the research question (Patton, 1990; Hess-Biber and Leavy 2006).
9. According to the National Agricultural Workers' Survey (U.S. Department of Labor 2000), throughout the 1990s farm worker wages have lost ground relative to those who work in the private nonfarm sector. 'Adjusted for inflation the average real hourly wage of farm workers (in 1998 dollars) has dropped from $6.89 to $6.18. Consequently, farm workers have lost 11 percent of their purchasing power over the last decade' (U.S. Department of Labor 2000, vii).
10. TANF is Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. It is a federal block grant to states and counties created as part of welfare reform legislation in 1996, replacing Aid to Families with Dependent Children, a federal social welfare program aimed at improving the lives of poor children.

## References

- Associated Press. 2004. U.S. open restricted land to grazing in drought. Billings Gazette 24 June. http://billingsgazette. com/news/state-and-regional/montana/article d76e4135d144-5d7c-bd29-2ab8e921ffde.html (last accessed 12 May 2010).
- Barrett, R., and T. Power. 2001. Post-cowboy economics: Pay and prosperity in the New American West. Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Belzer, D., and C. Kroll. 1986. New jobs for the timber region: Economic diversification for northern California. Berkeley: Institute of Governmental Studies, University of California, Berkeley.
- Beyers, W. B., and P. B. Nelson. 2000. Contemporary developmentforces in the nonmetroplitan West: New insights from rapidly growing communities. Journal of Rural Studies 16 (4): 459-74.
- Billings, D. B., and K. Blee. 2000. The road to poverty: The making of wealth and hardship in Appalachia. New York: Cambridge University Press.
- Billings, D. B., G. Norman, and K. Ledford, eds. 1999. Confronting Appalachian stereotypes. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.
- Blank, R. 2005. Poverty, policy and place: How poverty and policies to alleviate poverty are shaped by local characteristics. Regional Science Review 28 (4): 441-64.
- Blockade halts farm trucks from Canada at the border. 1998. Seattle Post-Intelligencer 22 September:A3.
- Bonds, A. 2008. The politics of prisons, poverty and neoliberal restructuring in the rural American Northwest. Doctoral dissertation, Department of Geography, University of Washington, Seattle.
- Brown, B. A. 1995. In timber country: Working people's stories of environmental conflict and urban flight. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
- Brown, D. 1970. Bury my heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian history of the American West. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
- Castle, E. N., ed. 1995. The changing American countryside: Rural people and places. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
- Cloke, P. 1997. Poor country: Marginalisation, poverty and rurality. In Contested countryside cultures, ed. P. Cloke and J. Little, 252-71. London and New York: Routledge.
- Cooke, P. 1989. Localities. London: Unwin Hyman.
- Creswell, J. 1998. Qualitative inquiry and research design. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
- Dayley, L. 2003. Economic ups and downs. South Idaho Press 14 March.
- Deavers, K., and R. Hoppe. 1992. Overview of the rural poor in the 1980s. In Rural poverty in America, ed. C. M. Duncan, 3-20. New York: Auburn House.
- De la Rosa, M . R. 2000. An analysis of Latino poverty and a plan of action. Journal of Poverty 4 (1): 27-62.
- Duncan, C. M. 1999. Worlds apart: Why poverty persists in rural America. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Economic Research Service. 2007. Rural America at a glance: 2007 edition. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture.
- Effland, A., and K. Kassel. 1996. Hispanics in rural America: Theinfluence of immigration and language on economic well-being. In Rural minorities in rural areas: Progress and stagnation, 1980 -1990 , ed. L. L. Swanson, 87-99. Washington, DC: Economic Research Service, USDA. http:// www.ers.usda.gov/publications/aer731/aer731h.pdf (last accessed on 28 May 2008).
- Egan, T. 1998. Lasso the wind: Away to the new West. New York: Knopf.
- Eggers, M. L., and D. S. Massey. 1991. The structural determinants of urban poverty: A comparison of whites, blacks, and Hispanics. Social Science Research 20 (3): 21755.
- England, K. 2008. Welfare provision, welfare reform, welfare mothers. In Handbook of political geography, ed. K. Cox, M. Low, and J. Robinson, 141-53. London: Sage.
- Epp, R., and D. Whitson, eds. 2001. Writing off the rural West: Globalization, governments, and the transformation of rural communities. Edmonton, Canada: University of Alberta Press.
- Falstad, J. 2007. Upsteady optimism: Layoffs at Bull Mountain in the latest string of troubles. Billings Gazette 4 March. http://billingsgazette.com/news/state-andregional / montana / image 43aacd42-cceb-558e-a8f567e88561a25c.html (last accessed 12 May 2010).
- Fitchen, J. M. 1981. Poverty in rural America. Boulder, CO: Westview.

- Gallaway, L., and R. Vedder. 1985. Suffer the little children: The true casualties of the war on poverty. Economic Committee, U.S. Congress War on Poverty: Victory of Defeat, Hearing before the Subcommittee on Monetary and Fiscal Policy, 20 June 1985.
- Ghose,R.2004.Bigskyorbigsprawl?Ruralgentrification and the changing cultural landscape of Missoula, Montana. Urban Geography 25 (6): 528-49.
- Gibson, J. 1996. The social construction of whiteness in Shellcracker Haven, Florida. HumanOrganization 55(4): 379-89.
- Gilmore, R. W. 2002. Fatal couplings of power and difference: Notes on racism and geography. The Professional Geographer 54 (1): 15-24.
- Glasmeier, A. K. 2002. One nation, pulling apart: The basis of persistent poverty in the USA. Progress in Human Geography 26 (2): 155-73.
- Goode, J., and J. Maskovsky, eds. 2001. New poverty studies. New York: New York University Press.
- Goodman, D., and M. Redclift. 1991. Refashioning nature. London and New York: Routledge.
- Goodman, D., and M. Watts. 1997. Globalising food. London and New York: Routledge.
- Graetz, R., and S. Graetz. 2003. Rollin' down the musselshell. Billings Gazette 1 November. http://www.billingsgazette. com/news/features/magazine/article 83c09652-c3f255f4-937d-5ac44252a50e.html (last accessed 12 May 2010).
- Hall, S. 1985. Signification, representation, ideology: Althusser and the post-structuralist debates. Critical Studies in Mass Communication 2:91-114.
- ---. 1988. The hard road to renewal: Thatcherism and the crisis of the left. London: Verso.
- Hart, G. 2002. Disabling globalization: Places of power in post-apartheid South Africa. Berkeley: University of Californian Press.
- ---. 2007. Changing concepts of articulation: The political stakes in South Africa today. Review of African Political Economy 111:85-101.
- Harvey, D. 2003. The new imperialism. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Hess-Biber, S., and P. Leavy. 2006. The practice of qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
- Jackson, P. 1991. Mapping meanings: A cultural critique of locality studies. Environment and Planning A 23: 215-28.
- Jarosz, L., and V. Lawson. 2002. 'Sophisticated people versus rednecks': Economic restructuring and class difference in America's West. Antipode 35 (4): 823-28.
- Jarosz, L., and J. Qazi. 2000. The geography of Washington's world apple: Global expressions in a local landscape. Journal of Rural Studies 16 (1): 1-11.
- Jolliffe, D. 2002. Rural poverty at record low in 2000. Rural America 17 (4): 74-77.
- Jones, J. P., and J. E. Kodras. 1990. Restructured regions and families: The feminization of poverty in the United States. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 80 (2): 163-83.
- Kandel, W., and J. Cromartie. 2004. New patterns of Hispanic settlement in rural America. ERS Research Brief, USDA Economic Research Service, Washington, DC.
- Katz, C. 2004. Growing up global: Economic restructuring and children's everyday lives. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Lawson, V., L. Jarosz, and A. Bonds. 2008. Building economies from the bottom up: (Mis)representations of poverty in the rural American Northwest. Social and Cultural Geography 9 (7): 737-53.
- Lawson, V., L. Jarosz, M. Reitman, and A. Bonds. Forthcoming. Reinterpreting geographies of poverty and inequality in the American Northwest. In Rural gentrification, ed. M. Phillips. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
- Limerick, P. 1987. The legacy of conquest: The unbroken past of the American West. New York: Norton.
- Lobao, L. M., and M. D. Schulman. 1991. Farming patterns, rural restructuring, and poverty: A comparative regional analysis. Rural Sociology 56 (4): 565-602.
- Lyson, T., and W. Falk, eds. 1993. Forgotten places: Uneven development in rural America. Lawrence: University of Kansas Press.
- Marsden, T., P. Lowe, and S. Whatmore. 1990. Rural restructuring: Global processes and their responses. London: David Fulton.
- Massey, D. 1991. The political place of locality studies. Environment and Planning A 23:267-81.
- ---.1994. Space, place and gender. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- ---.2005. For space. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
- McGlade, M. 2002. Mexican farm labor networks and population increase in the Pacific Northwest. Yearbook of the Association of Pacific Coast Geographers 64:28-54.
- McGranahan, D., and T. Wojan. 2007. The creative class: A key to rural growth. Amber Waves. USDA Economic Research Service. www.ers.usda.gov/Amber Waves/Apri107/Features/Creative.htm (last accessed 10 October 2007).
- Milbourne, P. 2004. Rural poverty: Marginalization and exclusion in Britain and the United States. London and New York: Routledge.
- Mitchell, D. 1998. Writing the western: New Western history's encounter with landscape. Ecumene 5 (1): 7-29.
- Nelson, P. B., and W. Beyers. 1998. Using economic base models to explain new trends in rural income. Growth and Change 29:321-24.
- Nord, M. 1994. Natural resources and persistent rural poverty: In search of the nexus. Society and Natural Resources 7 (3): 205-20.
- Oberhauser, A. M. 1995. Towards a gendered regional geography: Women and work in rural Appalachia. Growth and Change 26 (2): 217-44.
- O'Connor, A. 2001. Poverty knowledge: Social science, social policy, and the poor in twentieth century U.S. history. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Pancake, A. 1998. Past (im)perfect and the present progressive: Time in American's class conciousness. Unpublished PhD dissertation, Department of English, University of Washington, Seattle.
- Patton, M. 1990. Qualitative evaluation and research methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
- Peck, J. 2001. Workfare states. New York: Guilford.
- Percy-Smith, J. 2000. Policy responses to social exclusion: Towards inclusion? Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.

- Power, T. M. 1996. Lost landscapes and failed economies. Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Pratt, A. C. 1991. Discourses of locality. Environment and Planning A 23:257-66.
- Pred, A., and M. Watts. 1994. Reworking modernity: Capitalisms and symbolic miscontent. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Pulido, L. 2000. Rethinking environmental racism: White privilege and urban development in Southern California. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 90 (1): 12-40.
- Ramsay, M. 1996. Community, culture and economic development. Albany: State University Press of New York.
- Ramsey, D., and J. Everitt. 2001. Post-Crow farming in Manitoba: An analysis of the wheat and hog sectors. In Writing off the rural West: Globalization, governments, and the transformation of rural communities, ed. R. Epp and D. Whitson, 3-20. Edmonton, Canada: University of Alberta Press.
- Rasker, R. 1998. The new challenge: People, commerce, and the environment in the Yellowstone to Yukon Region. Bozeman, MT: The Wilderness Society.
- Rasker, R., and B. Alexander. 1997. Thenewchallenge: People, commerce and the environment in the Yellowstone to Yukon Region. Washington, DC: The Wilderness Society.
- Regional Economic Information System. 1990. Table CA2 total full-time and part-time employment by SIC industry. Washington, DC: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce. http://www.bea.gov/regional/reis/action.cfm (last accessed 12 May 2010).
- ---. 2000. Table CA2 total full-time and part-time employment by SIC industry. Washington, DC: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce. http://www.bea.gov/regional/reis/action.cfm (last accessed 12 May 2010).
- Rochin, R. I. 1995. Rural Latinos: Evolving conditions and issues. In The changing countryside, ed. E. N. Castle, 286302. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas State.
- Rodriguez, C. 2000. Changing race: Latinos, the Census, and the history of ethnicity in the United States. NewYork: New York University Press.
- Rudzitis, G. 1993. Nonmetropolitan geography: Migration, sense of place, and the American West. Urban Geography 14:574-85.
- Ryan, W. 1974. Blaming the victim: Ideology serves the establishment. In The poverty establishment, ed. P. Roby, 171-79. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
- Sachs, C. 1996. Gendered fields: Rural women, agriculture and environment. Boulder, CO: Westview.
- Schram, S. 2000. After welfare: The culture of postindustrial social policy. New York: New York University Press.
- Schwarz, J. E., and T. J. Volgy. 1992. The forgotten Americans. New York: Norton.
- Scott, S. L. 1995. Twosides to everything: The cultural construction of class consciousness in Harlan County, Kentucky. Albany: State University of New York Press.
- Shaw, W. 1996. The geography of United States poverty. London: Garland.
- Thackeray, L. 2002. Central Montana gets more bad drought news. Billings Gazette 1 August. http://billingsgazette. com / news / local / article cef8ba8a-e372-5c04-aca7e79f769aeaee.html (last accessed 12 May 2010).
- Toole, K. 1957. Montana: An uncommon land. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
- Toole, R. 1959. Montana: An uncommon land . Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
- Townsend, P. 1987. Deprivation. Journal of Social Policy 16 (2): 125-46.
- U.S. Census Bureau. 1990. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau. http://factfinder.census.gov/ (last accessed 12 May 2010).
- ---. Census Bureau. 2000. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau. http://factfinder.census.gov/ (last accessed 12 May 2010).
- U.S. Department of Labor. 2000. Findings from the National Agricultural Workers Survey (NAWS) 1997-1998: A demographic and employment profile of United States farmworkers. Research Report No. 8, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy, Office of Program Economics, Washington, DC.
- Watkins, E. 1993. Throwaways: Work, culture, and consumer education. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Watts, M. 1983. Silent violence: Food, famine and peasantry in northern Nigeria. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- White, R. 1996. 'Are you an environmentalist or do you work for a living?' In Uncommon ground, ed. W. Cronon, 17185. New York: Norton.
- Wilmsen, C. 2007. Maintaining the environmental-racial order in northern New Mexico. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 25:236-57.
- Wilson, D. 2005. Inventing black on black violence: Discourse, space and representation. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
- Wilson, R. Forthcoming. Landscapes of promise and betrayal: Reclamation, homesteading, and Japanese American incarceration. Annals of the Association of American Geographers.
- Wilson, W. J. 1987. The truly disadvantaged: The inner city, the underclass, and public policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Woods, M. 2007. Engaging the global countryside: Globalization, hybridity and the reconstitution of rural places. Progress in Human Geography 31 (4): 485507.
- Wyckoff, W. 2006. On the road again: Montana's changing landscape. Seattle: University of Washington Press.

Appendix A. Percentage of total population by race/ethnicity in nonmetro counties, 1990 and 2000

|                                    | %       | %       |
|------------------------------------|---------|---------|
| State and group                    | 1990    | 2000    |
| Idaho                              |         |         |
| Whites                             | 92 . 78 | 88 . 20 |
| Latinos                            | 4 . 97  | 8 . 40  |
| American Indians and Alaska Native | 1 . 42  | 1 . 49  |
| Blacks                             | 0 . 21  | 0 . 20  |
| Montana                            |         |         |
| Whites                             | 94 . 10 | 89 . 84 |
| Latinos                            | 1 . 04  | 1 . 38  |
| American Indians and Alaska Native | 6 . 38  | 7 . 09  |
| Blacks                             | 0 . 07  | 0 . 13  |
| Oregon                             |         |         |
| Whites                             | 96 . 91 | 87 . 36 |
| Latinos                            | 4 . 43  | 7 . 38  |
| American Indians and Alaska Native | 2 . 05  | 2 . 19  |
| Blacks                             | 0 . 22  | 0 . 28  |
| Washington                         |         |         |
| Whites                             | 90 . 53 | 85 . 28 |
| Latinos                            | 6 . 06  | 8 . 40  |
| American Indians and Alaska Native | 2 . 59  | 2 . 92  |
| Blacks                             | 0 . 36  | 2 . 65  |
| Regional average                   |         |         |
| Whites                             | 93 . 58 | 87 . 67 |
| Latinos                            | 4 . 13  | 6 . 39  |
| American Indians and Alaska Native | 3 . 11  | 3 . 42  |
| Blacks                             | 0 . 21  | 0 . 81  |

Source: U.S. Census (2000) Tables P6, P7; U.S. Census (1990) Tables P119, P120.

Appendix B. Nonmetropolitan poverty rates by state and region, 1990 and 2000

|                                    | %       | %       |
|------------------------------------|---------|---------|
| State and group                    | 1990    | 2000    |
| Idaho                              |         |         |
| Whites                             | 13 . 21 | 10 . 66 |
| Latinos                            | 27 . 15 | 26 . 08 |
| American Indians and Alaska Native | 28 . 65 | 23 . 79 |
| Blacks                             | 19 . 94 | 17 . 68 |
| Montana                            |         |         |
| Whites                             | 15 . 66 | 14 . 94 |
| Latinos                            | 25 . 45 | 25 . 09 |
| American Indians and Alaska Native | 33 . 32 | 28 . 70 |
| Blacks                             | 16 . 78 | 21 . 23 |
| Oregon                             |         |         |
| Whites                             | 13 . 05 | 11 . 83 |
| Latinos                            | 27 . 35 | 29 . 23 |
| American Indians and Alaska Native | 26 . 79 | 22 . 60 |
| Blacks                             | 21 . 77 | 17 . 11 |
| Washington                         |         |         |
| Whites                             | 13 . 63 | 12 . 78 |
| Latinos                            | 30 . 92 | 28 . 71 |
| American Indians and Alaska Native | 34 . 03 | 26 . 33 |
| Blacks                             | 19 . 59 | 24 . 84 |
| Regional average                   |         |         |
| Whites                             | 13 . 89 | 12 . 55 |
| Latinos                            | 27 . 72 | 27 . 28 |
| American Indians and Alaska Native | 30 . 70 | 25 . 36 |
| Blacks                             | 19 . 52 | 20 . 22 |

Source: U.S. Census (2000) Tables P7 and P159H, P1591; U.S. Census (1990) Tables P008, P012, P119, P120.

Appendix C. Mean location quotients for clusters

| Employment 2000        | Employment 2000   | Employment 2000   | Employment 2000   | Employment 2000   | Employment 2000   | Employment 2000   |
|------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
|                        | n                 | Farming           | Manufacturing     | Retail            | Service           | Government        |
| Strong farming         | 24                | 4.44              | 0.28              | 0.68              | 0.50              | 1.23              |
| Moderate farming       | 44                | 2.43              | 0.76              | 0.82              | 0.76              | 1.05              |
| Transitioning          | 41                | 1.23              | 1.17              | 0.86              | 0.92              | 1.21              |
| Diversified            | 41                | 0.43              | 0.86              | 1.09              | l.18              | 0.99              |
| Total/regional average | 150               | 1.88              | 0.89              | 0.88              | 0.89              | 1.10              |
| Employment 1990        | Employment 1990   | Employment 1990   | Employment 1990   | Employment 1990   | Employment 1990   | Employment 1990   |
| Strong farming         | 21                | 4.2               | 0.14              | 0.65              | 0.56              | 1.17              |
| Moderate farming       | 41                | 2.41              | 0.48              | 0.83              | 0.79              | 1.06              |
| Transitioning          | 33                | 1.41              | 1.48              | 0.79              | 0.78              | 1.09              |
| Diversified            | 41                | 0.47              | 1.05              | 1.09              | 1.15              | 0.95              |
| Government             | 14                | 0.85              | 0.31              | 0.98              | 1.02              | 1.64              |
| Total/regional average | 150               | 1.76              | 0.82              | 0.88              | 0.88              | 1.11              |

Source: Regional Economic Analysis data: Table CA25 (1990, 2000).

Appendix D . Economic specialization by earnings, nonmetropolitan counties.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Correspondence: Department of Geography, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, e-mail: lawson@uw.edu (Lawson); jarosz@uw.edu (Jarosz); Department of Geography, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, P.O. Box 413, Milwaukee, WI 53201, e-mail: bondsa@uwm.edu (Bonds).

Copyright of Annals of the Association of American Geographers is the property of Taylor &amp; Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.