## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Contesting Moral Capital in the Economy of Expectations of an Extractive Frontier

Wolfram H. Dressler

To cite this article: Wolfram H. Dressler (2017): Contesting Moral Capital in the Economy of Expectations of an Extractive Frontier, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2016.1261684

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2016.1261684

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 10 Feb 2017.

- [x] Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 4

View related articles

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

## Contesting Moral Capital in the Economy of Expectations of an Extractive Frontier

Wolfram H. Dressler

School of Geography, University of Melbourne

In Southeast Asia, actors in civil society have negotiated new social and economic realities at the conjuncture of intensifying governance and commodity production in frontier areas. As these spaces intersect, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and their allies have reflected on the legitimacy of their interventions in terms of how local farmers view contrasting benefits relative to the changing expectations and promises emerging at the nexus of governance and commodity production. This article explores how a long-standing NGO network on Palawan Island, the Philippines, has drawn on its moral capital and legitimacy in forging a grassroots consortium that has implemented the carbon governance mechanism, REDD C , in a changing rural economy of expectations-one that is contested and differentiated based on its offerings and aspirations. I argue that as the NGO consortium CODEREDDtried to reframe REDD C as a means of supporting indigenous livelihoods and climate change mitigation, it has placed its integrity and leverage at risk, as other indigenous farmers have rejected the claims and promises of the NGO REDD C platform. I focus on a case where the NGO consortium's efforts to reframe REDD C in terms of indigenous, propoor discourse progresses well in some quarters, aligning with anti-oil palm social movements, but fails to meet the growing aspirations of former indigenous allies who question the consortium in favor of investing in oil palm on ancestral lands. I conclude by suggesting that as NGOs adjust their political objectives by adopting market-based governance, they could lose leverage in negotiating the impact of lucrative commodity booms. Key Words: Extractivism, local expectations, market-based governance, the Philippines.

东 南 亚 公 民 社 会 中 的 行 动 者 , 已 在 前 沿 地 区 加剧 的 治 理 及 商 品 生 产 的 遇 合 中 , 协 商 崭 新 的 社 会 与 经 济 现 实 。 在 这 些 空 间 交 错 之中 , 非 政 府 组织 (NGOs) 及 其 伙伴 , 在地 方 农 民 如 何 在 治 理 与 商 品 生 产 的 连 结 中 看 待 与 正 在 改 变 的 期 待 及 承 诺 有 关 的 矛 盾 利 益 方 面 , 反 思 其 介 入 的 正 当 性 。 本 文 探 讨 一个 在 菲 律 宾 巴 拉 望 岛 存 在 已 久 的 NGO 网 络 , 如 何 运 用 其 道 德 资 本 与 正 当 性 , 打 造 在 改 变 中 的 乡 村 经 济 期 待 中 实 施 REDD 碳 治 理 机 制 的 草 根 联 盟 --并 根 据 其 提 议 与 志 向 而 受 到 争 夺 与 差 异 化 。 我 主 张 , 当 NGO 联 盟 CODE REDD 试 图 将 REDD 再 架构 为 支 持 在地 生 计 与 缓 和 气 候 变 迁 的 方 法 时 , 由 于 其 他 在地 农 民 已 拒 绝 NGO REDD 平 台 的 宣 称 及 承 诺 , 故 让 自 身 的 正 直 与 影 响 力 受 到 挑 战 。 我 聚 焦 NGO 联 盟 试 图 以 在地 和 支 持 贫 穷 的 论 述 重 新 架构 REDD 在 部 分 地 区 进 展 良 好 、 并 与 反 油 棕 榈 社 会 运 动 结 盟 , 但 却 无 法 满 足质 疑 该 联 盟 并 偏 好 在 祖 先 土地 上 投 资 油 棕 的 早 期 在地 联 盟 成 长 中 的 期 待 之 案 例 。 我 于 结 论 中主 张 , NGOs 透 过 採 取 以 市 场 为 导 向 的 治 理 来 调 整 其 政 治 目 标 时 , 它 们 可 能 会 在 协 商 有 利 可 图 的 商 品 热 潮 影 响 中 失 去 槓 杆 影 响 力 。 关 键 词 ： 榨 取 主义 , 地 方 期 待 , 以 市 场 为 导 向 的 治 理 , 菲 律 宾 。

En el Sudeste Asi  atico, los actores de la sociedad civil han negociado nuevas realidades sociales y econ  omicas aprovechando la coyuntura de una gobernanza y producci  on de mercader  ıas intensificadas en  areas de frontera En cuanto estos espacios se intersectan, las organizaciones no gubernamentales (ONGs) y sus aliados han reflexionado sobre la legitimidad de sus intervenciones, en t  erminos de c  omo ven los agricultores locales los beneficios contrastados, relativos a cambiantes expectativas y promesas que surgen en la conexi  on de gobernanza y producci  on de mercader  ıas. Este art  ıculo explora el modo como una red de vieja data de ONGs en la Isla de Palawan, Filipinas, se ha apoyado en su capital moral y legitimidad para edificar un consorcio raizal que ha implementado el mecanismo de la gobernanza del carbono, REDD C , en una econom  ıa rural de cambiantes expectativas--uno que es disputado y diferenciado con base en sus ofertas y aspiraciones. Sostengo que en la medida en que el consorcio ONG CODE REDD trat  o de reformular el REDD C , como medio para contribuir a los sistemas de supervivencia ind  ıgena y a la mitigaci  on del cambio clim  atico, ha colocado en riesgo su integridad y ventaja, ya que otros agricultores ind  ıgenas han rechazado las pretensiones y promesas de la plataforma ONG REDD C . Me concentro en un caso donde los esfuerzos del consorcio ONG para replantear el REDD C , en t  erminos de un discurso ind  ıgena en favor de los pobres, progresa bien en algunos sectores, ali  andose con movimientos sociales en contra de la palma de aceite, aunque falla en abocar las crecientes aspiraciones de antiguos aliados ind  ıgenas quienes cuestionan el consorcio en favor de invertir en palma de aceite en tierras ancestrales. Concluyo sugiriendo que si las ONGs ajustan sus objetivos pol  ıticos adoptando una gobernanza basada en mercado, podr  ıan perder las ventajas que tienen para negociar el impacto de las bonanzas en las mercader  ıas lucrativas. Palabras clave: extractivismo, expectativas locales, gobernanza basada en mercado, Filipinas.

I n Southeast Asia, the role and legitimacy of civil society has been challenged in the context of new environmental governance regimes overlapping with deepening commodity production in contested frontiers (Tsing 2003; Barney 2009; Li 2014). In an era of declining donor aid and deregulation (Malhotra 2000), nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) have negotiated new objectives in line with intensifying local aspirations that emerge at the intersection of commodity production and governance (S. Singh 2012). In these interstitial spaces, NGOs and their allies have reflected on the legitimacy of their advocacy and interventions in terms of how local farmers view the contrasting benefits being promised from shifting governance and commodity production regimes. In various countries, NGOs have mounted difficult campaigns as their advocacy for indigenous tenure and livelihood is complicated by politically and economically contested partnerships between indigenous leaders, their own people, and extractive industries (B € uscher and Davidov 2013)-political alliances that reconfigure as contrasting identities, values, and authority become entangled and realigned for strategic interests and outcomes (Horowitz 2012).

The political objectives of transnational NGO campaigns-and their motives in deploying assumptions and symbolic images of indigenous peoples for specific goals (Conklin and Graham 1995; de la Cade ~ na and Starn 2007)-are increasingly challenged in the context of intensifying agrarian change defined by associated land grabs, deforestation, commodity production, and the governmental politics that legitimize extractivism (McCarthy, Vel, and Suraya 2012; Gururani and Vandergeest 2014). At the governance and extraction nexus, NGOs now face difficult decisions about how to exercise campaigns with the sustained moral legitimacy from an earlier era (Bryant 2005), as local people weigh livelihood options between the oft-intangible benefits of governance and the seemingly tangible benefits of extractivism. The moral authority of NGOs 'doing good' is now subject to question as extractive industries forge new commodity spaces (Tsing 2003; Moore 2009).

This article explores how NGOs renegotiate the legitimacy and morality of their advocacy for indigenous rights and sustainability as corporations draw on counterdiscourses and movements to pull community members toward extractive benefits. In the realm of civil society engagement, the late 1980s and 1990s saw NGOs leverage their moral position by engaging in projects that offered tangible material benefits, often through direct livelihood interventions (Dressler et al. 2010). The moral basis of such interventions reflected NGO beliefs of right and wrong and how they tried aligning these with their audiences' (farmers', etc.) views about civil society actions relative to societal norms (Cook 1999; Bryant 2005). As I show, past NGO morality and legitimacy is challenged today. In the last decade, NGOs have drawn on the apparent virtues and benefits of governance processes based in the perceived financial values of nature that are speculative and future oriented (e.g., payment for ecosystem services [PES]). 1 With NGO support, global governance has now brought nature into the financial realm where the selling of perceived benefits and success goes hand in hand with 'capitalizing (on) nature' (B € uscher, Dressler, and Fletcher 2014). Today, NGO promises center on the economic possibilities of conserving a parceled nature that involves tapping 'natural capital' (e.g., carbon) to finance local livelihoods and programs (Sullivan 2009, 2013). In doing so, donors and NGOs govern rural spaces by framing nature's added value in terms of promises and hopes that could embolden local aspirations for modernity. As Li (2014) noted, 'Frontiers are not only characterized by lack. They are simultaneously coveted places, envisaged by various actors as sites of potential' (13). This, then, reflects an emerging economy of expectations 2 : a process whereby NGO interventions (e.g., workshops, consultations, etc.) promote new opportunities and capabilities that stoke new 'imaginings, expectations and visions' that shape the future potential of conservation outcomes locally (Borup et al. 2006, 285-86).

I examine how and why these social spaces are characterized by new modes of exchange, hopes, and aspirations by indigenous peoples who see ancestral lands as 'enclaves of potential' (Nyiri 2012). In these sites, governance invokes and elevates potential locally with ideas promising future-oriented market exchange to resource users in rural settings. In the process, market-based approaches facilitate social exchanges that convey abstract promises in ways that are translated and perceived to be locally legitimate and desirable, thereby heightening indigenous expectations of progress (Brown and Michael 2003; West 2009). As I show, however, the NGO morality, legitimacy, and beliefs underlying these newer interventions yielding hope and desire are contingent on, and unsettled by, the politics of conjuncture: where historical conditions

Figure 1. Palawan, the Philippines. Source : Cartography, School of Geography, University of Melbourne.

<!-- image -->

and events converge with others to shape present-day situations and circumstances (Li 2014).

I argue that today these politics of conjuncture reflect NGO advocacy, local promises, and elite extractivism reinforcing locally contested expectations for a better future wherein intangible governance misaligns with livelihoods influenced by extractive draw. I explore the sociopolitical outcomes of social movements and governance interventions on the frontier island of Palawan, the Philippines (see Figure 1), generating a localized economy of expectation that involves NGOs drawing on REDD C 3 (Reduced Emissions from Environmental Degradation and Deforestation plus) to offer noncarbon livelihood benefits (and possibly carbon finance) in the same spaces where extractivism promotes tangible livelihoods through material counternarratives-unsettling civil society's notion of indigenous peoples 4 as ecological ally and defense against extractivism (Li 2010). 5 The case involves a long-standing NGO network on Palawan drawing on its moral capital and legitimacy in forging grassroots social movements against mining and palm oil development while also implementing REDD C as a new consortium, CODE REDD. I show how NGO efforts to frame REDD C as a morally legitimate intervention with future benefits is contested by other NGOs and former indigenous allies who now broker oil palm expansion on ancestral domains and seduce fellow farmers into the potential of extractivism. I suggest that as NGOs pursue such speculative governance, they could lose moral traction in their efforts to contain boom crop production.

## Methods

The research methods for this article consist of thirty-two in-depth key informant interviews, participant observation, and document analysis. In 2014 and 2015, I interviewed NGO representatives (six), Barangay officials (six), tribal leaders (three), leaders of palm oil cooperatives (five), palm oil laborers (ten), and various activists (two) involved in campaigns against extractive industries on Palawan. Most interviews were two to three hours long and the sample was purposeful, involving referrals by knowledgeable others. Most interviews were conducted in Tagalog in the case area of Biluan, southern Palawan, in the town proper and lowland, coastal sitios (villages). With the exception of major public figures, all respondent names and locations were given pseudonyms.

## NGOMorality in the Economy of Expectations

The late 1980s and 1990s were good to NGOs in many Southeast Asian countries emerging from dictatorial rule. Central governments decentralized, state agencies were democratizing, and few did it alone.

After decades of top-down autocratic rule, when the ethos of punish and discipline dominated, governments looked to those who resisted, or in some cases overthrew them, for renewed legitimacy and moral authority (Clarke 1998). In countries such as Indonesia, Thailand, and particularly the Philippines, NGOs emerged as de facto agents of the state, partnering up or taking on state roles and responsibilities (Glassman, Park, and Choi 2008). At the time, NGOs were equated with the lofty goals of good governance, transparency, and accountability in a sea of corrupt state officials (Mercer 2002). As NGOs pursued various activities including small-scale development and community organization, their objectives, motives, and interventions in achieving these goals varied across landscapes (Korten 1987). Although NGO-state partnerships were forged, the former remained critical of state and private-sector actions (Bryant 2001).

During the 1990s, NGOs were upheld as having the trust and moral authority to support indigenous peoples' rights to land and livelihood (Hilhorst 2000). They were considered to be closest to the people, aware of local needs and concerns, and able to fulfill rural support programs. NGOs emerged as sociopolitical brokers; many influenced the meanings around resource access and use and organized others around the potential outcomes of interventions (Bryant 2002, 2005). NGOs now found themselves negotiating their new role of mediating state-society relations, often contending with the reversal of roles and responsibility, and maintaining moral ground in terms of new promises and hope, locally (Korten 1987; Fisher 1997). In conservation and development, NGOs tried to translate project goals into outcomes that aligned with changing local needs and expectations. In doing so, actors in civil society invariably negotiated historically situated political economic contestations that articulated with their positions of power, authority, and control, further informing discourses, rhetoric, and representations of indigenous peoples and the environment (Brosius 1999; Tsing 1999; Forsyth and Walker 2008). Translocal movements and place-based conflicts thus coemerged as variously situated actors came to struggle over the contrasting, yet entangled symbolic meaning of indigeneity (being native), appropriate livelihood (traditional vs. capitalist extractive), and sustainability (how nature should be used; Brosius 1999; Li 2000; Merlan 2009). Such strategic play continues.

In this context, NGO survival depended on the ability to cultivate virtuous and moral reputations, which, although buoyed with success, often preceded their actions in terms of possible outcomes and positive change (Bryant 2005). The political culture of NGOs was often upheld and conveyed as having integrity and virtue, where cultivating good records and reputations (Hilhorst 2000) depended on whether the recipients (or audience) of a given intervention perceived it as positive and aligned with their aspirations (Cook 1999; Bryant 2005). As Bryant (2005) noted, 'Like reputation, a socially constructed 'good' is dependent on the perceptions of others' (41) and how these align with local needs, concerns, and future hopes. Morality was thus assigned by and held in the eye of the beholder: local recipients, other NGOs, and the state (Cook 1999). NGOs worked as moral entrepreneurs; they aimed to deliver but also capture good, virtuous intent and outcomes for strategic ends-the basis of moral capital (Bryant 2005). In this sense, NGOmoral interventions were as much tangibly valuable and empowering for local people as they were bundled with promises and future opportunities otherwise unavailable (Bryant 2005).

The prospect of generating moral capital often involved working sociopolitical networks within and between various nonstate and state organizations. The strengths of the social relationships underpinning these networks and the ability to garner moral capital depended on how well NGOs could navigate the expectations and discourses of the norms and conduct presupposed in these networks-the ability to do so defined the legitimacy of interventions and deliverables (Bryant 2005). Conveying and maintaining the legitimacy of NGO interventions was further influenced by how well they could represent people's interests, the extent to which their objectives aligned with identity politics, and the types of benefits on offer, locally (Horowitz 2009). Ultimately, the prospect of garnering or losing legitimacy was entangled with contrasting moral positions and evaluations of what constituted fair and just interventions (e.g., Communitybased Natural Resources Management [CBNRM]) and the responsibilities by which NGOs and rural recipients should abide (Kull 2002). In practice, the legitimacy of moral capital involved NGOs and local leaders reproducing the rhetoric of hope and promise through governance interventions and anticipated outcomes in things such as 'tenurial security' and 'sustainable livelihoods' (Dressler et al. 2010). These interventions reinforced local expectations concerning claims made about the importance of an issue or outcome, where the hopes invested depended on the

meaning and value assigned to the issue, particularly the potential material outcomes (Ahmed 2010). 6 In doing so, however, NGOs worked less toward simply improving a collective moral good and promised future than exercising varied motives that were discursively produced through donor pressures, their own objectives, and local political economy (Mitlin, Hickey, and Bebbington 2007). In earlier decades, they did so in fairly tangible ways.

## Declining Funds, Market-Based Initiatives, and the Economy of Expectations

The prospect of NGOs sustaining their program agendas and cultivating moral capital as in earlier decades (1980-1990s) soon changed for the worse. As Southeast Asian countries began deregulating, donor funding was slashed and, in some cases, national economies attained lower middle-income status. These events drove cuts to donor funding (Bello et al. 2004). In turn, many NGOs faced declining domestic funds and scrambled for scarcer, competitive global funding (Malhotra 2000).

In the late 1990s, the number of public-private partnerships grew dramatically, relying on ideals and funding streams from new global governance initiatives and private-sector finance heavily promoting market-oriented governance solutions (Sullivan 2009, 2013). In much of Southeast Asia, cash-strapped domestic NGOs began contemplating funding with market-based mechanisms as wealthier big international NGOs (BINGOs) 7 assertively promoted such approaches as central to their policies and programs (Chapin 2004; Igoe and Brockington 2007; B € uscher, Dressler, and Fletcher 2014). Such market-based conservation schemes aimed to assign monetary values to nature and its services-the basis of natural capitalthat would somehow be harnessed to finance program interventions and incentivize local forest stewardship (Sullivan 2013). Such interventions almost always included local performance-based incentive schemes and compensation for lost income-generating opportunities due to livelihood substitutions and sanctions for environmental transgressions (Dressler and Roth 2011). Yet, although these schemes reflect payment for services, they manifest as bundles of promises through situated social exchanges that reinforce local hopes and expectations of what is to come.

Regionally, global governance schemes and bilateral aid have now established market-based mechanisms

(e.g., PES and REDD C ) as the most efficient and effective means to assign money to the "true" value of nature (B € uscher, Dressler, and Fletcher 2014). In tapping this value, ostensibly programs and projects should be self-financing and offer local farmers incentives that compel them to adopt more sustainable practices ultimately rewarded in cash payments (e.g., payments for environmental services, carbon credits, etc.). No longer solely the domain of BINGOs, grassroots NGOs have now combined their regular efforts of generating moral capital with the potential of market-based interventions and their local multiplier effects. With a new moral license to operate, NGOs (the state and corporations) have also started to work through social safeguard mechanisms, such as Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC), 8 to strengthen social equity in market-based governance such as REDD C (and extractivism). FPIC requires consent from indigenous peoples prior to actions that affect their rights to land and forest resources, particularly to ensure customary rights to future forest carbon benefits (Mahanty and McDermott 2013). Once secured, such certification mechanisms grease the wheels by which NGOs induct local communities into market-based governance but often with highly ambiguous and contested local outcomes (Franco 2014). 9 In these spaces, local farmers are enrolled in schemes to harness nature's added economic value and given futureoriented promises with anticipated positive returns but usually with delayed, intangible outcomes relative to surging neoliberal extractivism.

## Elaborating on Economies of Expectations

Increasingly, NGOs are entangled with transnational governance dynamics that are composed of beliefs, ideals, and practices that offer future-oriented hope and potential locally-but a potential hope that is now less intangible, often bypasses local realities, and sits beyond local material expectations. Specifically, ideas and beliefs that underscore governance interventions, particularly objects and outcomes, already have positive and desirable attributes assigned to them well before implementation. After implementation, the positive elements of governance unravel and are invoked locally with promises and expectations (Ahmed 2010). Among varied NGOs, these governance programs and interventions are celebrated with the language of success and expectation that generates acceptance and legitimacy among them and resource users. In such instances, the coproduction of

expectation is mutually constitutive such that the promise of something materializing builds a sense of obligation among all actors involved (Ahmed 2010).

Among local farmers, however, economies of expectation can manifest in a deeply problematic manner. Project interventions can gradually set expectations and aspirations that can produce unqualified hopes in ideas and outcomes. In most cases as expectations and aspirations are stoked, the promises of interventions are neither fully understood nor realized. Even when understood, the time lag of tangible outcomes is often well beyond the daily, shortterm, and future planning of rural households who aspire for substantive improvements sooner rather than later. Today, inculcating a sense of hope among locals through market-based interventions sits beyond the immediacy of local realities, needs, and expectations in frontier Southeast Asia, particularly on Palawan Island, the Philippines.

## Philippine Civil Society and NGOs

Philippine NGOs have often been upheld as a virtual force for strengthening civil society and democratic reform in the country. Social movements have punctuated the nation's history, effectively bypassing political elites and state control (Clarke 1998). Although NGOs had long engaged state officials and local communities, Marcos's dictatorship (1965-1986) had NGOs forging grassroots community movements that resisted elite control over the political system for personal and familial gain (Clarke 1998; McCoy 2002). As Marcos crushed civic organization and political unrest, NGOs and people's organizations (POs) expanded through covert sociopolitical networks with other groups, forming diverse coalitions to resist state control and subordination (Constantino-David 1998). In time, this collective resistance culminated in the People Power revolution ousting Marcos in 1986.

Under the post-Marcos Aquino administration, new political and policy spaces supported the growth and participation of NGOs in Philippine society (Brillantes 1994; Mercer 2002). The changing sentiment and policies of development agencies toward good governance and people-centered programs directed NGO growth, their objectives, and their networked relationships in the country (Brillantes 1994; Putzel 1998). With the amended Philippine Constitution of 1987 supporting the involvement of civil society in governance and development, the legitimacy of

NGOs as government partners in democratization and rural development grew significantly (Clarke 1998). As a constitutional extension, the Local Government Code of 1992 facilitated the decentralization of the political process and provisions for the participation of NGOs and POs, further formalizing state-civil society partnerships (Eaton 2003). NGOs drew on these policy structures to lobby political elites to amend policies in line with varied public concerns (Silliman and Noble 1998), including but not limited to urban poverty, gender equality, indigenous rights, and forest conservation (Putzel 1998). Thus, Philippine NGOs brought 'to the public agenda issues hereto ignored or repressed' (Silliman and Noble 1998, 292). By 1999, the country hosted more than 60,000 NGOs compared to 27,100 in 1986 (Parks 2008).

## Funding Decline and the (Green) Economy of Expectations

In the late 1990s, however, a decline in NGO funding and appreciation in various sectors saw civil society activities shift strategically. Under the oligarchic state of then-President Gloria Macapacal Arroyo, the intensification of (extractivist) neoliberalism and sense of NGO overfunding saw Leftist organizations being vilified and hollowed out (Bello et al. 2004; J. Singh and Camba 2016). Indeed, being declared a middle-income country at the time prompted many major donors to leave, with 'signs of tapering off in 1998 and 1999, as donor priorities began to shift and foreign aid budgets fell' (Parks 2008, 44). In the early to mid-1990s, aid commitments from major donor countries dropped from US$2.7 billion in 1990 to US$1.4 billion in 1996 (Aldaba et al. 2000). Crucially, grants from bilaterals decreased significantly from $296.5 million to only $165.9 million over the same period. Domestic NGOs suffered significantly, with 50 percent to 95 percent of their annual budgets coming from grants (Aldaba et al. 2000, 675).

With the events of 11 September 2001, aid declined rapidly, forcing donors such as the Ford Foundation to leave the country, cutting core funding from more than 200 local NGOs (Parks 2008). There were few, if any, domestic donors to take the place of funding organizations such as the Ford Foundation. Despite sustained national growth, NGOs failed to find proportional levels of funding in the country (Parks 2008). These pressures meant that NGOs soon tapped limited but increasingly prevalent sources of funding: market-

based schemes in conservation and development (Novellino and Dressler 2009).

In time, grassroots NGOs have found themselves negotiating the rhetoric and practice of market-based governance in the so-called emerging green economy. Against a backdrop of intensifying mineral exploitation due to deregulation, the Aquino government unleashed a National Development Plan (NDP: 20112016), with green economy policies and investments ranging from value-added agroforestry and state funded regreening to expansive biofuel production in rural landscapes (Montefrio and Dressler 2016). As part of the state's 'climate-smart' investments, governance platforms in the likes of PES and REDD C emerged to finance climate change mitigation and adaptation at the local level amidst expanding mining and biofuel production in frontier spaces.

These transnational governance programs involved market-based mechanisms that aimed to add value to natural resources that local users would tap to overcome the opportunity costs of moving to 'greener' livelihoods. In the case of NGO REDD C on Palawan, however, market-oriented interventions would become the new, limiting choice in the economy of expectations as commodity production deepened in the hinterlands.

## The Politics of Conjuncture: Extraction, Moral Capital, and the Economy of Expectations

I show next how old NGO allies established the consortium, CODE REDD, to reformulate REDD C with progressive ideals and policies that once better generated records, reputations, and moral authority. Building on long-standing networks, the consortium involved domestic NGOs such as the Environmental Legal Assistance Centre (ELAC), the Palawan NGO Network Incorporated (PNNI), and NATRIPAL (the Federation of Indigenous Peoples of Palawan) and international groups such as Fauna and Flora International (FFI). The case describes how attempts at grounding REDD C became difficult due to the political conjuncture of three related events: the intangible promises of the REDD C intervention, former indigenous allies boycotting REDD C due to earlier miningrelated fallout, and the tangible draw of planting oil palm on ancestral lands NGOs once defended. The consortium's difficulty in persuading the pro-palm oil indigenous leaders to adopt REDD C was determined long ago by another extractive industry-the Biluan Nickel Corporation (BNC)-paying communities to align with them politically and by promoting tangible livelihood benefits. This historical mining moment thus nudged along the conjuncture of REDD C and oil palm production, and the disjuncture between NGO advocacy and the indigenous turn to oil palm. Against local histories, then, global capital investments in REDD C and mining activities informed how and why each group adopted different campaigns and countercampaigns that drew on moral discourses and associated expectations.

## From Mining to Palm Oil to REDD C : Weighing Promises, Expectations, and Counter Discourses

Long before the advent of REDD C and palm oil on Palawan, members of the NGO consortium currently working on REDD C were busy with an antimining campaign from the provincial to international level. With the passage of the Mining Act in 1995, the Philippine government opened the door to major foreign investment, ownership, and expansion of mining in the country (J. Singh and Camba 2016). Recent tariff liberalization, however, facilitated such investments and fast-tracked the permitting of mining (Bello et al. 2004). In 2004, 350 mining applications were approved on Palawan alone (Rasch 2013).

Most mines overlapped with indigenous lands in the forested uplands. In some quarters, this necessitated formal consultation concerning the cobenefits and compensation going to those indigenous peoples negatively affected by extraction. With the ratifying of the Indigenous Peoples Rights Act (IPRA) in 1997, indigenous peoples worked with the NGO consortium and the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) to establish (certificates of) ancestral domains as titled holdings (CADTs). In establishing these claims, indigenous peoples had to demonstrate indigeneity through connectedness to land through occupancy, use, and cultural practice over time. Those indigenous communities with CADTs-as governed by state-sanctioned tribal councils-ostensibly held de jure tenurial rights and claims over land and forest resources, requiring that mining and other extractive companies engage in FPIC and possibly offer local financial compensation. In many respects, the legal basis of IPRA gave indigenous CADT holders (i.e., tribal chiefs and their council) the platform to draw on identity politics and recognition to influence

corporations in providing benefits. In Palawan, the paying out of benefits ultimately meant lubing up elite indigenous brokers and greasing the wheels of extraction.

Several contrasting narratives developed and transformed in relation to mining to inform the discourse and practice of REDD C and palm oil in Biluan today. Espoused by companies as green mining with corporate social responsibility, the NGO consortium stepped up campaigns against the sustainable mining narrative (Rasch 2013). In time, the antimining movement involved long-standing Palawan NGOs-including the ELAC, PNNI, and NATRIPAL-and those at the national level-from Friends of the Earth to the World Wildlife Fund-in interfaith protests and a major petition to establish an island-wide moratorium on mining. In contrast to NGOs from Manila, Palawan-based NGOs had few problems progressing with the moratorium and other interventions because of long-standing solidarity networks established since their university days and when they first converged on Palawan in the early 1990s. Yet a major and more assertive thrust behind this campaign was the Ancestral Domain Land Watch (ALDAW) initiative, which monitored the expansion of extractive industries (soon to include palm oil) on indigenous territories. Established by a charismatic foreign anthropologist, local activists, NGOs, and indigenous counterparts, ALDAW made savvy use of online media (Facebook, Vimeo) to document and broadcast local indigenous narratives, with emotional voice-overs imbued with sentiments of stewardship and vulnerability, about mining toxicity and its impact on health and livelihood (see, e.g., https://vimeo.com/11491685). With the gunning down of prominent antimining activist and journalist Doc Gerry Ortega in 2011 in Puerto Princesa City, Palawan's capital, and intensifying national media coverage via Gina Lopez (friend of Gerry Ortega) of ABS-CBN, the campaign was elevated to the national and international levels. That consolidated and valorized a narrative of conserving ecology and indigenous peoples in nature. In 2008, the campaign culminated in a successful twenty-five-year moratorium on small-scale mining on the island (although not curbing mining per se).

## Confronting Moral Capital and Legitimacy in Civil Society

In time, however, the legitimacy of NGO moral capital in the antimining social movement was challenged by former indigenous allies (once part of

NATRIPAL) embracing mining on their ancestral lands due to the promised benefits of royalties. Biluan's place-based politics were thus strongly shaped at the conjuncture of historical and contemporary political economic changes.

In Barangay Biluan in Quezon, southern Palawan, the BNC set up shop some time ago with operations overlapping with Tagbanua ancestral lands. In 2007, BNC granted the Tagbanua of Biluan, organized under the Biluan Bantuan Tagbanua Association (BBTA), a royalty check of 15.4 million pesos ( » US$400,000) to the chairperson and broker, Manong Rodrigo Villomar and the Association. Apparently, BNC would only release the funds to the Tagbanua community after they had organized BBTA. In turn, BBTA set up an advisory board to supposedly ensure that the money was spent in ways that benefited the entire community with tangible livelihood support ('BNC Turns Over' 2014). Yet Rodrigo Villomar was not only chief but also did 'double duty' as Barangay Captain of Biluan and chairperson of BBTA, thus ensuring that he was the main signatory on the royalty check. No sooner had the funds been deposited in the newly opened bank account did accusations mount from other (member and nonmember) Tagbanua alleging misuse of the funds by BBTA leaders. Supposedly 1 million pesos had been withdrawn to purchase 14,000 dwarf coconut seedlings. The seedlings were to be planted on the lands of a wealthier politician and farmer involved with Villomar's cronies in establishing their own mining corporation (without consulting other BBTA members) called the West Coast Palawan Mining Corporation (WCMC; Formoso 2008). The WCPMC allegedly used several million pesos to establish and register the WCPMC on the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC). In response to these accusations, then mayor of Quezon and the vice governor at the time confronted BBTA board members to suggest that their leadership should be recalled with a new election. Community divisions grew. As accusations flew, the BBTA split into two rival camps: a pro-BBTA, promining camp and an antiBBTA, less mining-oriented camp. It was these sentiments that would eventually converge with and influence the promises and expectations of REDD C and oil palm implementation.

By now those NGOs involved in the antimining movement knew that they had lost one of their own indigenous brothers, especially NATRIPAL, where Rodrigo was once an executive member. Politically

prominent, affable, and charismatic to some, Rodrigo dug in his political heels. Drawing on familiar indigenous rights discourse and aspirations during a recent interview, he claimed that it was with his initiative that the CADT would ensure that mining would not encroach on ancestral lands:

I was one of the presidents of NATRIPAL who helped . . . establish this Ancestral Domain. Understanding the importance of our ancestral domain, we argued that it could stop the destruction from the mining activities. We were the ones who fought against the mining before it entered here. (Interview, 17 September 2012)

Moreover, the Biluan Tagbanua could use the CADT as leverage to be 'justifiably' paid out for living next to the mine and having their livelihoods 'destroyed' by the nickel extraction overlapping their domain claim-the very CADT Rodrigo had established with NATRIPAL. In receiving the funds, however, Rodrigo clearly aligned himself with the BNC's mining activities. In time, despite the persistence of his indigenous rights rhetoric, he distanced himself from those NGOs that now challenged him on moral grounds for aligning with extractivism.

## ANewPolitical Conjuncture: Mining to Oil Palm and REDD C

In the heat of the antimining campaign, NGOs were astonished by the pace and scale at which oil palm had grown from the southern to middle sections of the island. In this instance, against a backdrop of mining's influence on local communities and environment, the same NGOs followed similar moral strategies to forge ahead with a parallel social movement against palm oil expansion. The ultimate goal was to establish a definitive moratorium on this once uncommon foreign crop while also attempting to adopt and implement REDD C . In the case of Biluan, however, the precedent that mining had established locally would continue with the same Tagbanua elites now championing oil palm and resisting REDD C with others.

## Enter Oil Palm

Since then-President Macapagal Arroyo's signing of the Biofuel Act in 2006 and medium-term development plans aiming to develop millions of hectares of high-value cash crops, the most recent, outgoing

President Aquino, Jr. continued to promote the financing of boom crop production to replicate production in Malaysia, Indonesia, and Thailand (Larsen, Dimaano, and Pido 2014). At roughly the same time, former Governor Joel T. Reyes-a former fugitive now facing charges for ordering the murder of antimining activist Doc Gerry Ortega-had the Provincial Government soliciting national and international investments in oil palm.

In 2004, the Provincial Government created the Palawan Palm Oil Industry Development Council (PPOIDC) to promote the expansion of the industry. In time, the Palawan Palm and Vegetable Oil Mills, Inc. (PPVOMI), and its sister company, Agumil Philippines, Inc. (AGPI), established initial oil palm development on the island. 10 The first oil palm seedlings were planted in 2007 and then harvested in 2011; the initial 3,591 ha planted were to expand beyond 15,469 ha (Larsen, Dimaano, and Pido 2014). Government officials and other actors actively promoted oil palm as a lucrative venture that could be justifiably expanded on lands branded as vacant, idle, and unproductive, even though they were long used by indigenous uplanders (Montefrio and Dressler 2016).

Located in Brooke's Point, the PPVOMI controlled the land on which oil palm milling takes place and had also established a nursery. AGPI facilitated access to land for cultivation through lease agreements or contract arrangements through outgrower schemes. Although some farmers planting oil palm from AGPI were agrarian reform beneficiaries under certificates of land ownership awards (CLOA; where the CLOA serves as loan collateral), contracts were also established between farming communities and the AGPI by establishing cooperatives or farmers themselves who were supported by wealthier, independent landowners. The membership base of the more than fourteen cooperatives consisted of migrant settlers who managed a labor force usually composed of poor (titleless and often) landless indigenous peoples. Moreover, under production, technical, and marketing agreements (PTMAs) with AGPI, under contract, cooperatives were compelled to ask their members to sign off their land for production (and collateral for the loan financier, the Land Bank of the Philippines [LBP]) as well as to provide 'low-cost' indigenous labor. As part of the loan agreements, AGPI provided capital and technical expertise to facilitate production (Larsen, Dimaano, and Pido 2014). These contracts remain inherently uneven. 11

In the process of AGPI facilitating palm oil expansion, more and more outgrower schemes literally took root inside and around ancestral domain claims (Colchester and Chao 2011). In these instances, shadowy middlemen or agents created seemingly instant cooperatives (also called associations) to facilitate uneven PTMA agreements with tribal leaders without conducting FPIC. As a result, indigenous farmers invariably relinquished their usufruct land holdings by signing off on lands for oil palm production under pressure from more powerful individuals (local chiefs and politicians), effectively becoming landless. At last count, there were 150 ha of oil palm in CADT areas (Larsen, Dimaano, and Pido 2014)-often the same areas slated for REDD C .

## Anti-Oil Palm Social Movement Rises

In response to the significant losses incurred by cooperatives, contract manipulation, human rights abuses, and environmental destruction, several NGOs tried filing lawsuits against AGPI; however, due to financial costs and complex administrative procedures, no legal action was taken (Larsen, Dimaano, and Pido 2014). Moreover, the cooperatives made repeat submissions to the board of AGPI to request changes in the current contractual rules between cooperatives and the company. The cases filed were of no consequence to AGPI managers. Cooperatives also filed complaints to the provisional board and submitted requests for assistance from the Cooperative Development Authority and the Department of Agricultural Reform (Larsen, Dimaano, and Pido 2014). In time, however, these pressures and those from below led to basic contract amendments that lowered interest and management fee charges in some cases.

Working with ALDAW, some indigenous communities took the campaign to new heights. They filed complaints with sworn affidavits to the provincial government citing evidence from rural research by the NGOs that oil palm was encroaching on their ancestral domains (Colchester and Chao 2011). In doing so, indigenous communities and ALDAW filed complaints with the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP) that AGPI neglected to engage in FPIC before cultivating oil palm in or near domain claims (ALDAW 2013a). Moreover, the cooperatives soon established themselves as the Association of Oil Palm Growers in Southern Palawan to file resolutions and request support from the provincial government. Concurrently, NGOs established the Working Group on Oil Palm Concerns to call for a moratorium on oil palm expansion, particularly near or within CADTs.

ALDAW soon scaled up the local campaign to the provincial, national, and international levels. In 2013, ALDAW produced detailed ground-truthed reports and accompanying Vimeo broadcasts of AGPI land rights violations, human rights abuses on ancestral lands, and the destruction of old-growth forest in core zones (ALDAW 2013b). With evidence in hand, they submitted a formal letter to then-president of the Philippines, Benigno Aquino III, calling for an investigation into alleged human rights abuses by oil palm companies on indigenous lands and a nationwide moratorium on expansion. In 2014, ALDAW then began organizing farmers across communities in southern Palawan who had been negatively affected by oil palm or simply did not wish for it, as members of the Coalition Against Land Grabbing (CALG). Under ALDAW's guidance, CALG worked to establish a province-wide moratorium on oil palm expansion. The preparation involved organizing indigenous peoples, meetings between cooperatives and smallholders across seven municipalities to develop common advocacy strategies, and handing over the signed petition to the vice governor. Finally, ALDAW then worked with the international NGO, Rainforest Rescue, to establish a major online petition of 100,000 signatures to support the moratorium. ALDAW turned to foreign indigenous rights and environmental NGOs, concerned international and national practitioners, and academics to send strong letters of complaint to government officials charged with managing land and oil palm expansion on Palawan.

The broader outcomes from the anti-palm oil movement have been partial and incomplete: The DENR only reflected on the need to take inventory of the extent of palm oil and the AGPI accepted that it had made 'mistakes' in acquiring land, planning errors that the AGPI and DENR thought could be resolved by using the correct tenurial instrument (Larsen, Dimaano, and Pido 2014). Few substantive legal changes unfolded on the ground.

## ATerminal Conjuncture? Palm Oil, REDD C , and the Economy of Expectations

Just as palm oil was consuming thousands of hectares of forest on Palawan, the same group of NGOs in the anti-palm oil struggle adopted the market-based climate change mitigation mechanism, REDD C ,

under the banner of the green economy. New partners included the Non-Timber Forest Products Exchange Program (NTFP-EP), a regional NGO, and the international NGOs Fauna and Flora International and Conservation International, among others.

Needing a new funding base and policy instrument to curb the incursion of oil palm and mining and secure lands for indigenous peoples-in addition to paying rent and staff salary-NGOs decided that adopting REDD C might be a useful tool to achieve this. Working with academics and national branches of BINGOs, these domestic NGOs 12 initially aimed to bypass major state involvement-citing limited efficiency and accountability-and drafted and submitted two key documents: the Readiness Preparedness Plans (RRP) to the World Bank's Forest Carbon Partnership Facility and the Philippine National REDD Plus Strategy (PNRPS) in 2009 (UN REDD approved in 20102011). Only after drafting the PNRPS were there coordinated preplanning initiatives with the DENR, the Forest Management Bureau, and a consortium of REDD partners.

The NGO consortium emerged as the well-crafted grassroots initiative CODE REDD, or Community Development through REDD C , which attempted to reformulate the governance initiative in line with their long-standing moral capital and legitimacy. The Consortium saw REDD C as a 'potential funding scheme for forest conservation' and 'to strengthen the voice of indigenous groups, forest-based communities and civil society in the Philippines . . . in the REDD plus discourse and in the UNFCCC discussions' (CODE REDD 2011, 4). Yet the Consortium's adoption of REDD C came with heightened political sensitivity because, on hearing of the initiative at an Indigenous Peoples' Gathering on Climate Change, in 2010 a collective of indigenous Lumad from Mindanao published a manifesto declaring REDD C deceptive. The manifesto prompted a lead NGO from CODE REDD to respond in 'Minda-News' in attempt to allay fears and misconceptions about REDD C (Baconcgo 2010). 13 Apparently other NGOs also had issues with REDD C . As one consortium NGO staff member noted:

We were also frustrated. We received criticism from other more leftist NGOs who used big 'motherhood statements' suggesting we were 'commodifying nature' . . . and that REDD C was more of a money grab than for climate change mitigation.

The contested character of REDD C continued with a troubled FPIC process unfolding with BBTA, the

Palawan Council for Sustainable Development (PCSDS), and, ultimately (for approval), the NCIP.

Undeterred, the Consortium went ahead with its plans. At a practical level, the CODE REDD consortium initially aimed to establish a 50,000 ha REDD C pilot project across select sites in the Victoria-Anepahan mountain range of southern Palawan-an area overlapping with both mining and palm oil, particularly Rodrigo's land in Biluan (PNRPS 2010). Different consortium NGOs had contrasting functions in executing the readiness program. NATRIPAL was charged with connecting farmers with so-called forest governance bodies, establishing FPIC, and developing carbon-neutral livelihood activities with the NGO IDEAS (PNRPS 2010). It was hoped that Pala'wan and Tagbanua forest users might be sufficiently trained by NGOs to engage in forest governance and draw on noncarbon livelihood cobenefits. These investments were the eventual basis for sustainable carbon financing schemes.

NGO activities during the readiness phase soon intensified the economy of expectations. Although carbon financing and payments were still in the design stages, 'livelihood cobenefits' for sustainable farming were being rolled out with a focus on noncarbon benefits such as water supply systems, sustainable enterprises based on agroforestry and nontimber forest products (NTFP) value-adding, and cash cropping with economic tree crops (e.g., rubber, jack fruit, and mango). Most livelihood enhancement and development schemes thus reflected initial promises for eventual payment schemes.

The Quezon barangays of Biluan and Bantuan were main target areas due to upland forests being sufficiently degraded and needing reforestation, particularly because of mining and palm oil expansion (see Figure 2). Achieving this objective prompted the consortium to propose delineating more than 20,711 ha as CADT (in addition to existing CADTs) within which REDD C would unfold. How exactly would Biluan farmers respond to REDD C , though, amidst the contested expectations emerging from histories of mining and now palm oil?

## Contesting Moral Capital in an Extractive Frontier

The day came when the same NGOs who spearheaded the social movements against mining and palm oil would meet their indigenous brethren with whom they once worked in delineating the CADT in Biluan. It was at the start of REDD C orientations

Figure 2. Biluan case location. Source : Cartography, School of Geography, University of Melbourne.

<!-- image -->

that NATRIPAL first revisited and tried to involve Rodrigo Villomar in Biluan but only after the protracted struggle about mining and the CADT. As a staff member of NATRIPAL stated:

We tried to get them involved . . . we tried consultations with the leaders in the Quezon area . . . but they felt threatened by REDD C because of already starting with the mining activities. They first endorsed the project, but later on they withdrew their endorsement. Before the Biluan Tagbanua were already NATRIPAL members . . . we helped them establish the CADC and then they got the title, for the CADT. After all this, they went into mining. So we then dropped them from our Board members and our overall vision and mission. We're more into forest protection and not into destroying our forests . . .

We already had a presence in the Biluan area before the mine came and REDD C was introduced. We began in Biluan with an 'information and dissemination' campaign and then FPIC with the NCIP. But there were already divisions in the community, and the mining stopped them from accepting REDD C .

Another NGO staff member suggested similarly that the original members of BBTA rejected being further involved in REDD C . He noted:

They stopped because they believed that REDD C was a threat to their business and, because money matters, they stayed firm. . . . It's the mining communities who rejected REDD C . Apparently, they used their money to convince local communities to reject REDD.

Taking advantage of his political capital, wealth, and persuasion, Rodrigo had up until recently maintained his status as Barangay Captain and Chief to define the development of land in 'his' community's CADT by rejecting REDD C and soon aligning with the boom crop trajectory, well after the initial coup of securing mining royalties years prior. Approached by NATRIPAL to gauge levels of interest in REDD C , according to him, the very first consultation process unfolded as follows:

They told us about this program and they asked us to fill out an application for REDD C as a CADT holder. We were waiting but they didn't call us again. But the problem emerged when other NGOs entered the area and never called on us again. They provided for the other people; they organized the other group, without our knowledge. So when they finalized the orientation, many of our indigenous leaders didn't have enough information about it. That's why we refused to join REDD C .

NATRIPAL was the main group who organized Tagbanua groups in every sitio for orientation; they failed to contact the NCIP, the Barangay officials, and us especially, as the official indigenous community leaders. One NGO said, 'No need to go to the Barangay leaders, no need to have Indigenous leaders, what we're doing is for the good, after we identify a local official, they will be the one who can manage it and be the representative of the carbon trading for REDD C .'

And those Tagbanua who were part of the orientation didn't understand and only got misinformation about REDD C .

In effect, NATRIPAL had initially gone to Rodrigo's BBTA group, but by remembering them as promining, being anti-NGO, and antagonistic toward their ideas, they decided that they could instead work through the parallel Tagbanua leadership structure that had earlier fallen out with BBTA (over mining royalties) and so better aligned with their moral capital, in a strategic sense. This second group thus had sustained good relations with NATRIPAL and the remaining members of CODE REDD. In the process, NATRIPAL engaged in a slightly more localized but official orientation that bypassed the CADT leadership and, by association, the Barangay Council governed by Villomar and his family. NATRIPAL tried holding moral ground.

In addition to supposedly giving his people misinformation about REDD C and confusing them, Rodrigo cited that NATRIPAL was not entitled to implement the project anyway without sustained attendance of NCIP officials and PCSDS clearance. Neither agency, he alleged, had vetted the initial stages of the process. He noted that NATRIPAL had effectively organized the other Tagbanua group into accepting REDD C but that this group (its tribal structure and the entire process) was illegitimate.

According to Rodrigo, few understood what REDD C was about and that, at the time, there was considerably more interest in planting oil palm (and the mine) anyway, despite the campaigns against the crop; that is, he and his tribal council believed that much of short fallow swiddens (and forested areas) would be put to better economic use if planted for palm oil. Interviews with select farmers in the area suggest that this was the case. As one Biluan farmer noted:

We do not have much experience about REDD C ; I cannot explain it very well. The NGOs promoted it to us by

saying they would help us with land titling, but it did not happen . . . they said the cutting of trees must be controlled . . . or the weather will be hot. The NGOs used to help us with every program, but not any more because of the mine . . . but some need to work in the mine, so they can send their kids to school.

In this context, a few years later, Rodrigo and his comrades took it upon themselves to establish their own Palm Oil Growers' Association (i.e., cooperative) to enter into a contractual lease with Agumill and the LBP. For LBP to release the loan for the Association's capital layout, local CADT members supposedly had to sign off on usufruct land holdings as collateral for release of the loan. With their farmers buying in and organized, the Tagbanua Biluan clan allegedly facilitated the clearing of dozens of hectares of old-growth forest to be planted with palm oil (see Figure 2).

In clearing the land, the argument held, oil palm would bring in more money than the actual standing forest (desirable for REDD C ) and somehow restrict the mine's expansion, with benefits accruing to cooperative members (i.e., Rodrigo's extended family). Again drawing on the same indigenous rights discourse as NATRIPAL, he noted that:

Once we have the palm oil planted in our CADT the mine cannot touch our lands anymore. The mine doesn't like the plantation because it overlaps with their claims that they want to expand on. The palm oil plantation is better than the mine because it doesn't remove original trees.

In this quote, by suggesting that oil palm will impede the mine's expansion, Rodrigo gave justification and assigned legitimacy to the plantation in the CADT. Planting oil palm would apparently stop the mine from encroaching on ancestral lands and yield even more tangible livelihood benefits than the future benefits of REDD C and, by extension, hold greater local legitimacy than CODE REDD.

Rodrigo's rhetoric contrasted with local perspectives, however. Those farmers who now worked the oil palm (on formerly their own lands) in the CADT governed by Rodrigo suggested that he and others allegedly assisted and worked with hired labor to clear over 60 ha of mature forest (for 'durable' timber). As one farmer noted:

Yes, they cleared virgin forest, sometimes by chainsaw. They continued for a while but they stopped because they were fined by the DENR, P18 million for cutting about 60 hectares . . . it's really virgin forest . . . they got inside to cut and sell the lumber.

On site, the workers cut and sold high-value trees, with funds allegedly going back to Rodrigo's inner circle. Moreover, after signing over their usufruct plots to Rodrigo's Association as loan collateral for the LBP, the former swidden farmers of the CADT now labored for P150 (US$3) a day weeding and harvesting fresh fruit bundles from the palms to repay the former's debt (associated with their own land).

Not only had these farmers relinquished their control over land but they also labored to repay the Association's debt before seeing any potential returns-returns likely to be siphoned off by the leadership anyway. Most of the farmers who had also labored in the plantation stated that although they needed the biweekly pay from palm maintenance, it was too low and irregular, requiring them to take out loans from the Association to cover daily family food needs and costs, particularly rice. 14 Crucially, with parts of the CADT filled with palm oil adjacent to the mine, the poorest farmers' preexisting livelihood options were effectively squeezed out and limited (e.g., NTFPs access). The entire practice was illegal. Yet the illegality and marginal terms took little away from the acceptance and outcomes of these major economic promises. The hopes and expectations for tangible benefits from the political conjuncture of mining and palm oil in one locality far outweighed the broader need to ally with the NGO consortium, their moral politics, and intangible REDD C developments.

## Discussion and Conclusion

Along this recursive trajectory, the ability of grassroots NGOs to garner and leverage moral capital through strategic behavior and successive 'wins' has always been in flux relative to societal and ecological changes; today, however, the prospect of doing so has become increasingly difficult due to the intensifying nature of agrarian change in the Philippine frontier. The difficulty of leveraging moral capital through existing networks in civil society in ways deemed legitimate and desirable by others, from the state to local farmers, is now constrained by the conjuncture of broader, intensifying political economic trends: fewer funds geared for social welfare, deepening social and environmental problems, the prominence of hollow marketbased approaches from bilateral agencies and donor banks, and the competing promises of tangible benefits emerging from deep extractivism (B € uscher and Davidov

2013). These events reflect the rapidly intensifying disjuncture among environmental governance, livelihood support, and extractive trajectories in the context of changing social realities and aspirations in rural areas (Mosse and Lewis 2006). Although disjunctures between policy and practice have always existed-as dominant, normative orders of beliefs and expectations seldom match shifting local realities-earlier 'applications' of conservation and development were at least partly framed with concepts and practices in terms of how rural societies worked (Dressler et al. 2010).

Today, however, desires to improve rural livelihoods and invoke local aspirations are no longer simply organized around the usual technical categories and interventions of rendering livelihoods legible and landscapes productive (Li 2007). Rather, transnational governance partly fuels conservation as development by facilitating the coproduction of abstract ideas and commodities that ostensibly underpin finance-based solutions locally, often for intractable global problems (Igoe 2010; B € uscher 2014). In this context, transnational policies and governance-and the community of actors who interpret, invest in, and sustain thememphasize and convey beliefs and ideas that invoke notions of success or gain, wherein moral beliefs, sentiments, and actions are drawn on to enroll local people and spur hope and expectations. The sociopolitics of such enrollment involves those who broker governance interventions, from programs to projects, to assign beneficial and desirable attributes to the objects of implementation that influence future aspirations (Ahmed 2010). As in the past, NGO actors broker their practices by drawing on and deploying politically potent assumptions and symbolic images of indigenous characteristics as markers of difference for strategic purposes (Merlan 2009)-simplified images that are unsettled when essential features fail to align with 'glocal' realities (Swyngedouw 2004). As shown, various NGOs and others work through such moral framing to serve as cultural brokers who try to align local users with the presupposed ideals and outcomes of their interventions (Mosse 2005; Mosse and Lewis 2006).

In Palawan, NGOs and state agencies have tried to implement REDD C relative to extractive economies using the promises of noncarbon (and eventually carbon financing) benefits to legitimize interventions and mobilize local people toward common, shared ideals of conserving forests through added value livelihoods closer to traditional practices (Brosius 1999). Negotiating the generative potential of the economy of expectations, most indigenous rights and environmental NGOs aim to maintain their moral capital as they scramble for funding and, often reluctantly, accept new market-based approaches. Rather than being able to draw on sustained, developmental funding, civil society and government now contend with governance approaches and associated funding that invest in or expand markets that aim to add (dollar) values to nature. The pretense of such market-based governance is often speculative in nature, where investments and outcomes are future-oriented, intangible, and rhetorical. Adopting such governance has often challenged the legitimacy of some NGOs as interventions intersect with and embolden local aspirations toward things that are poorly understood and out of reach (REDD C carbon payments, etc.; Asiyanbi 2015). Problematically, NGO capacities and local realities are now situated in this governance context, as rural people, livelihoods, and landscapes are reoriented toward higher value commodities, against which intangible promises hold little traction.

## Aftermath: Troubling Conjunctures

Yet the challenges and constraints facing NGOs in sustaining their moral work and broader campaigns have not just simply emerged due to the speculative nature of market-based governance. Rather, NGOs negotiate such governance in (and as part of) intensifying, cumulative neoliberal spaces-with profoundly uneven and destructive political economies-that have emerged at the contemporary conjuncture of successive historical events such as deregulation, mining liberalization, and the growth of boom crops, often in the same spaces intensifying with local desires for real and imagined modernities. The Biluan case is emblematic of this troubling conjuncture. In Biluan we find locally sovereign spaces held and sown by farmers and civil society being reterritorialized through the scaled governance of capital flows that rupture 'the social and material ecologies in which people live and survive' (Stoler 2013, 2). In line with Li (2014), NGO and farmer engagement with such contrasting economies of expectations is thus partly path dependent but with new emergent properties and consequences; as shown, 'set[s] of elements, processes and relations that shaped people's lives at [a certain] time and place' (4) yield new outcomes and challenges. Such conjunctural outcomes are politically eventful precisely because of the intensity of encounters with

extractive capital-encounters that further influence and reproduce related events.

As various events and conditions converge through political and economic processes, certain structural elements cohere and align in rural spaces as productive, violent encounters. These encounters have created new situations and circumstances in which Palawan NGOs (and locals) must now contend with once unimaginable pressures. Those NGOs and farmers who engage the political economic context of former indigenous colleagues rebuffing REDD C and embracing extractivism must negotiate historically contingent and convergent outcomes, often with new characteristics. Over time, multiple moments cumulatively shape the current context of struggles for and against oil palm and REDD C relative to local future aspirations.

In this context, NGOs must draw on their historical legacies to reaffirm their moral positioning and legitimacy in conservation and development in the face of changing local aspirations and rapidly commodifying landscapes. In the emerging economy of expectations, where market-based policies support multiple, intangible objectives such as payment for ecosystem services, NGOs work with (and potentially at the expense of) moral capital as they roll out policy interventions that ostensibly offer new solutions and positive outcomes. An NGO's social legitimacy thus carries both the progress and promise of 'innovative' interventions and so the traction of the ideas infused in local expectations. Invoking the legitimacy of local reputations and trust, some NGOs might lean on the 'truth value' of certain governance approaches but also in terms of improving local conditions and supporting aspirations. In doing so, they try to ensure that the predictive and generative potential of their policy interventions takes on greater certainty and tractability, locally, the basis of which is translating complex governance ideas into locally relevant concepts and practices to ensure significance and sustained project enrollment (Mosse and Lewis 2006). The extent to which NGOs can draw on their moral capital thus influences the veracity and durability of certain promises and expected outcomes associated with market-based interventions that contrast so significantly with lucrative boom crops.

Yet the moral capital of NGOs is now challenged when their policy promises are complex and future oriented among local people whose desires for material well-being are pressing and immediate. In cases where the economy of expectations amounts to intangible policy interventions compared with new material realities, the latter will likely succeed in drawing farmers and challenge the legitimacy of NGO advocacy. Whereas many farmers continue to align with NGO morality and programs such as REDD C , many more are incorporated into extractive economies with more lucrative and tangible benefits on offer. As rural frontiers saturate with capital investments and market-oriented governance, the moral standing, advocacy, and campaigns of NGOs will be evermore challenged as both civil society and farmers are drawn into intensifying commodity production in the region's final frontiers.

## Funding

This research was funded under the ARC Future Fellowship scheme (FF130100950).

## Notes

1. In this article, governance is processual and reflects the production and use of knowledge, the influence of knowledge, and the transfer of authority to inform realities and outcomes (Jasanoff 2004).
2. I use the economy of expectation in a literal and metaphorical sense, wherein a more market-oriented, speculative conservation is mediated by NGOs locally to set into motion social structures, organization, and meanings that promote hopes and expectations that attract more interest, clarify roles and responsibilities, and establish the technical means by which to fulfill such potential and expectation (Borup et al. 2006, 285-86). REDD C governance involves each of these attributes.
3. Since the 2007 Bali Action plan, international bodies and states have championed REDD C as an innovative and efficient way for wealthier countries to pay poorer ones to enlist rural farmers to conserve forest and carbon. Post-Paris (COP 21), it remains a fragmented global initiative to create a financial value for the carbon stored in forests, offering incentives to governments and farmers in developing countries to reduce emissions from forestlands and invest in low-carbon rural development pathways (see www.un-redd.org).
4. Palawan's main indigenous groups are the Tagbanua, Pala'wan, and Batak people.
5. Despite being subject to logging and mining since the 1960s, or earlier, capitalist relations, capital flows, and indigenous identities have become increasingly entangled on the island (Eder and Evangelista 2015).
6. The work of Ahmed and others suggests that the coproduction of aspirations is a recursive process of investment and renewal by which certain ideas, objects, and interventions are pointed out as leading to better outcomes relative to other alternatives; the associated hope and promises serve as signals and triggers by which certain choices are made (Ahmed

- 2010). I draw on the interpretative essence of Ahmed's main points rather than demonstrating affect in any deep substantive manner.
7. These include Conservation International, the World Wildlife Fund, and the Nature Conservancy, among others.
8. The obligation for governments, companies, and civil society to engage affected communities in FPIC is now enshrined in national and international policies (e.g., United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples).
9. In terms of REDD C , for example, the Plan VIVO Standard requires FPIC to incorporate social and biodiversity safeguards for the future pursuit of certified carbon emissions reduction.
10. PPVOMI is 60 percent Singaporean and 40 percent Filipino owned and AGPI is 75 percent Filipino and 25 percent Malaysian owned (Larsen, Dimaano, and Pido 2014). The Malaysian parent company is Agusan Plantations, Inc.
11. Control is placed with AGPI and most of the financial risk is absorbed by the cooperatives. AGPI can impose a 10 percent management fee on services provided to the cooperative and 14 percent compounded interest rate on delayed payments from the cooperatives; AGPI also controls cooperative finances by acting as a cosignatory on bank transactions. The term loans secured from the Land Bank Countryside Development Foundation, Inc., require that cooperative members (and laborers) offer up their land holdings (private title or in usufruct) as collateral for the loans. Given this significant interest, most cooperatives have not met their targeted production to generate a profit to repay their loan and reacquire their lands, only driving them further into debt. In some cases, however, these difficulties resulted in new tripartite agreements between the coops, LBP, and AGPI in 2015, wherein rates and management fees were lowered.
12. Although struggles and disagreement exist, relations between domestic and national chapters of BINGO are amicable due to long-standing solidarity networks from the Marcos era (see earlier).
13. REDD C implementation has been fraught with major challenges in Southeast Asia largely because its apolitical and speculative governance frames and interventions unfold in and conflict with complex agrarian political economies (Fletcher et al. 2016).
14. The rising demand in loaned rice is often because palm laborers have less time to tend their own fields properly (e.g., neglecting weeding), which in time leads to declining yields.

## References

- Ahmed, S. 2010. The promise of happiness . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Aldaba, F., P. Antezana, M. Valderrama, and A. Fowler. 2000. NGO strategies beyond aid. Third World Quarterly 21 (4): 669-83.
- Ancestral Domain Land Watch (ALDAW). 2013a. Issues, questions, and reflections to be raised during the Oil Palm
- Inter-Agency meeting . Palawan, The Philippines: ALDAW.
- ---. 2013b. The Palawan oil palm geotagged report 2013 . Palawan, The Philippines: ALDAW, The ICCA Consortium.
- Asiyanbi, A. 2015. Mind the gap. In The international handbook of political ecology , ed. R. Bryant, 274-90. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
- Baconcgo, K. 2010. Lumads hit 'deception' in carbon trading, demand climate justice. Minda News 13 July 2010. http://www.mindanews.com/human-rights/2010/07/ lumads-hit-%e2%80%98deception%e2%80%99-incarbon-trading-demand-%e2%80%98climate-justice %e2%80%99/ (last accessed 9 December 2016).
- Barney, K. 2009. Laos and the making of a 'relational' resource frontier. The Geographical Journal 175 (2): 146-59.
- Bello, W., H. Docena, M. de Guzman, and M. Malig. 2004. The anti-development state . London: Zed.
- BNC turns over P154 million to Tagbanua IPS in Biluan and Bantuan Quezon. Palawan Times .
- Borup, M., N. Brown, K. Konrad, and H. van Lente. 2006. The sociology of expectations in science and technology. Technology Analysis and Strategic Management 18 (3-4): 285-98.
- Brillantes, A. B., Jr. 1994. Redemocratisation and decentralisation in the Philippines. International Review of Administrative Sciences 60:575-86.
- Brosius, J. P. 1999. Analyses and interventions: Anthropological engagements with environmentalism 1. Current Anthropology 40 (3): 277-309.
- Brown, N., and M. Michael. 2003. A sociology of expectations. Technology Analysis and Strategic Management 15 (1): 3-18.
- Bryant, R. 2001. Explaining state-environmental NGO relations in the Philippines and Indonesia. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 22 (1): 15-37.
- ---. 2002. Non-governmental organizations and governmentality. Political Affairs 50:268-92.
- ---.2005. Non-governmental organizations in environmental struggles . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- B € uscher, B. 2014. Selling success: Constructing value in conservation and development. World Development 57:79-90.
- B € uscher, B., and V. Davidov. 2013. Rural livelihoods and the ecotourism/extraction nexus . London and New York: Routledge.
- B € uscher, B., W. Dressler, and R. Fletcher. 2014. Nature Inc.: Environmental conservation in the neoliberal age . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- Chapin, M. 2004. A challenge to conservationists . Washington, DC: Worldwatch Institute.
- Clarke, G. 1998. The politics of NGOs in South-East Asia . London and New York: Routledge.
- CODE REDD. 2011. Home page. http://ntfp.org/coderedd/ about-code-redd/objectives-and-strategies/ (last accessed 1 March 2015).
- Colchester, M., and S. Chao. 2011. Oil palm expansion in South East Asia . London: Forest Peoples Programme.
- Conklin, B. A., and L. R. Graham. 1995. The shifting middle ground. American Anthropologist 97 (4): 695-710.
- Constantino-David, K. 1998. A history of Philippine NGOs. In Organizing for democracy , ed. G. S. Silliman

and L. G. Noble, 26-48. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press.

- Cook, J. 1999. Morality and difference . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- de la Cade ~ na, M., and O. Starn. 2007. Indigenous experience today . New York: Berg.
- Dressler, W., B. B € uscher, M. Schoon, D. Brockington, T. Hayes, C. Kull, J. McCarthy, and K. Streshta. 2010. From hope to crisis and back? A critical history of the global CBNRM narrative. Environmental Conservation 37 (1): 1-11.
- Dressler, W., and R. Roth. 2011. The good, the bad and the contradictory: Neoliberal conservation governance in rural Southeast Asia. World Development 39 (5): 85162.
- Eaton, K. 2003. Restoration or transformation? Trapos versus NGOs in the democratisation of the Philippines. Journal of Asian Studies 62 (2): 469-96.
- Eder, J., and O. Evangelista. 2015. Palawan and its global networks . Manila, Philippines: Ateneo de Manila University Press.
- Fisher, W. 1997. Doing good? The politics and anti-politics of NGO practices. Annual Review of Anthropology 26:439-64.
- Fletcher, R., W. Dressler, B. B € uscher, and Z. Anderson. 2016. Questioning REDD C and the future of marketbased conservation. Conservation Biology 30 (3): 67375.
- Formoso, C. 2008. Conflict among Tagbanua in Biluan rises due to royalty share. Palawan Times 18 July 2008.
- Forsyth, T., and A. Walker. 2008. Forest guardians, forest destroyers . Seattle: University of Washington Press.
- Franco, J. 2014. Reclaiming free prior and informed consent (FPIC) in the context of global land grabs . Amsterdam: The Transnational Institute.
- Glassman, J., B. G. Park, and Y. J. Choi. 2008. Failed internationalism and social movement decline. Critical Asian Studies 40 (3): 339-72.
- Gururani, S., and P. Vandergeest. 2014. New frontiers of ecological knowledge. Conservation and Society 12 (4): 343-51.
- Hilhorst, T. 2000. Records and reputations . Manila, Philippines: Ateneo de Manila University Press.
- Horowitz, L. 2009. Environmental violence and crises of legitimacy in New Caledonia. Political Geography 28:248-58.
- ---. 2012. Translation alignment: Actor-network theory, resistance, and the power dynamics of alliance in New Caledonia. Antipode 44 (3): 806-27.
- Igoe, J. 2010. The spectacle of nature in the global economy of appearances. Critique of Anthropology 30 (4): 375-97.
- Igoe, J., and D. Brockington. 2007. Neoliberal conservation. Conservation and Society 5 (4): 432-49.
- Jasanoff, S. 2004. States of knowledge . London and New York: Routledge.
- Korten, D. 1987. Third generation NGO strategies. World Development 15:145-59.
- Kull, C. 2002. Empowering pyromaniacs in Madagascar. Development and Change 33 (1): 57-78.
- Larsen, R. K., F. Dimaano, and M. D. Pido. 2014. The emerging oil palm agro-industry in Palawan, the Philippines . Stockholm, Sweden: SEI.
- Li, T. 2000. Articulating indigenous identity in Indonesia. Comparative Studies in Society and History 42 (1): 14979.
- ---. 2007. The will to improve: Governmentality, development and the practice of politics . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- ---. 2010. Indigeneity, capitalism and the management of dispossession. Current Anthropology 51 (3): 385-414. ---. 2014. Land's end . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Mahanty, S., and C. L. McDermott. 2013. How does 'Free, Prior and Informed Consent' (FPIC) impact social equity? Land Use Policy 35:406-16.
- Malhotra, K. 2000. NGOs without aid. Third World Quarterly 21 (4): 655-68.
- McCarthy, J., J. A. C. Vel, and A. Suraya. 2012. Trajectories of land acquisition and enclosure. Journal of Peasant Studies 39 (2): 521-49.
- McCoy, A. 2002. An anarchy of families . Manila, Philippines: Ateneo de Manila University Press.
- Mercer, C. 2002. NGOs, civil society and democratization: A critical review of the literature. Progress in Development Studies 2 (1): 5-22.
- Merlan, F. 2009. Indigeneity. Current Anthropology 50 (3): 303-33.
- Mitlin, D., S. Hickey, and A. Bebbington. 2007. Reclaiming development? NGOs and the challenge of alternatives. World Development 35 (10): 1699-1720.
- Montefrio, M. J. F., and W. H. Dressler. 2016. The green economy and constructions of the 'idle' and 'unproductive' uplands in the Philippines. World Development 79:114-26.
- Moore, J. 2009. Sugar and the expansion of the early modern world economy. Review 23 (3): 409-33.
- Mosse, D. 2005. Cultivating development . London: Pluto.
- Mosse, D., and D. Lewis. 2006. Theoretical approaches to brokerage and translation in development. In Development brokers and translators , ed. D. Mosse and D. Lewis, 1-26. Bloomfield, CT: Kumarian.
- Novellino, D., and W. H. Dressler. 2009. The role of 'hybrid' NGOs in the conservation and development of Palawan Island, the Philippines. Society and Natural Resources 23 (2): 165-80.
- Nyiri, P. 2012. Enclaves of improvement. Comparative Studies in Society and History 54 (3): 533-62.
- Parks, T. 2008. The rise and fall of donor funding for advocacy NGOs. Development in Practice 18 (2): 213-22.
- Philippine National REDD Plus Strategy. 2010. The Philippine national REDD plus strategy . Quezon City, The Philippines: Philippines REDD Plus Strategy Team, DENR-FMB, and CODE REDD-plus Philippines.
- Putzel, J. 1998. Non-governmental organizations and rural poverty. In Organizing for democracy , ed. G. S. Silliman and L. G. Noble, 77-112. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press.
- Rasch, E. 2013. Ecotourism, not mining in Palawan! In Rural livelihoods and the ecotourism/extraction nexus , ed. B. B € uscher and V. Davidov, 236-54. London and New York: Routledge.
- Silliman, G. S., and L. G. Noble. 1998. Organizing for democracy: NGOs, civil society, and the Philippine state . Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press.

- Singh, J., and A. Camba. 2016. Neoliberalism, resource governance and the everyday politics of protest in the Philippines. In The everyday political economy of Southeast Asia , ed. J. Elias and L. Ethal, 49-71. London: Cambridge University Press.
- Singh, S. 2012. Natural potency and political power . Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press.
- Stoler, A. 2013. Imperial debris . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Sullivan, S. 2009. Green capitalism and the cultural poverty of constructing nature as service-provider. Radical Anthropology 3:18-27.
- ---. 2013. Banking nature? The spectacular financialisation of environmental conservation. Antipode 45 (1): 198-217.
- Swyngedouw, E. 2004. Globalisation or 'glocalisation'? Cambridge Review of International Affairs 17 (1): 25-48.
- Tsing, A. 1999. Becoming a tribal elder and other green development fantasies. In Transforming the Indonesian uplands , ed. T. Li, 159-202. London and New York: Routledge.
- ---. 2003. Natural resources and capitalist frontiers. Economic and Political Weekly 38 (48): 5100-106.
- West, P. 2009. Conservation is our government now . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

WOLFRAM H. DRESSLER is an Associate Professor and ARC Future Fellow in the School of Geography, University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. Email: wolfram.dressler@unimelb.edu.au. His broader research interests include the politics of conservation and development in Southeast Asia's changing frontiers.