<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

[ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21](https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21)

## The Bakken Blind Field: Investigating Planetary Urbanization and Opaqueness in the Oil and Gas Fields of Eastern Montana

Susan J. Gilbertz , Matthew B. Anderson &amp; Jason M. Adkins

To cite this article: Susan J. Gilbertz , Matthew B. Anderson &amp; Jason M. Adkins (2020): The Bakken Blind Field: Investigating Planetary Urbanization and Opaqueness in the Oil and Gas Fields of Eastern Montana, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2020.1774351

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2020.1774351

<!-- image -->

曲

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 27 Jul 2020.

[Submit your article to this journal](https://www.tandfonline.com/action/authorSubmission?journalCode=raag21&show=instructions)

[View related articles](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/mlt/10.1080/24694452.2020.1774351)

[View Crossmark data](http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1080/24694452.2020.1774351&domain=pdf&date_stamp=2020-07-27)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## The Bakken Blind Field: Investigating Planetary Urbanization and Opaqueness in the Oil and Gas Fields of Eastern Montana

Susan J. Gilbertz,  Matthew B. Anderson, † and Jason M. Adkins 

 Department of Social Sciences and Cultural Studies, Montana State University, Billings

†

Department of Geography, Anthropology, and Planning, Eastern Washington University

This work advances the critical urban studies literature on ' planetary urbanization ' by emphasizing the everyday struggles experienced by the people who live in and through planetary transformations. Specifically, we empirically investigated people in eastern Montana who experienced the intensive and extensive oil and gas production of the Bakken Boom via interview and survey data. In the process, we interrogated Lefebvre ' s notion of the ' blind field ' and conclude that what we call the Bakken blind field represents a deeply engrained ' habit of the mind ' that functions for the energy industry as a means of neutralizing the transformative potential that always lurks in response to persistent socioenvironmentally exploitative practices. We suggest that the degree of illumination that results from personal hardships can determine the degree to which local exploitation is rejected (or accepted) as a necessary result of living with oil and gas. Key Words: energy, geography, political ecology, rural, urban.

I n Montana, the Bakken oil and gas region includes six counties, totaling just over 11,000 square miles (Figure 1). There are only 40,000 households in this six-county region, which has historically been dominated by agriculture and small towns. Billings, a city of roughly 100,000 people, is 300 miles to the west. Minneapolis is 600 miles to the east. Yet, if recovered in their entirety, Bakken oil reserves could equate to over four years of national energy independence (approximately 32.36 billion barrels of consumer fuels; U.S. Geological Survey 2019). Eastern Montana is thus an important industrial hinterland where oil and gas development fuses the region with emergent processes of ' extended urbanization, ' illustrating the progressive transformation of spaces formerly identified as ' rural ' into industrial-productive landscapes that serve the ever-expanding global accumulation of capital and concentration of people and resources in ' urban regions ' (Brenner and Schmid 2015).

Eastern Montana has long been connected to the global urbanization process. Dating back to settlement by white Europeans in the late nineteenth century, the region served as an urban-underpinning space providing industrial agricultural production (livestock and food grains; Cronon 1992). Oil and gas development began in Montana in the 1920s, with eastern

Montana experiencing its first major boom from 1950 to 1965 (Hennip 1973), followed by another in the 1980s. The Bakken inaugurated its most recent boom in 2005, spurred by innovations in hydraulic fracturing technologies. The industry ' s environmental operating standards are much improved as compared to decades past, yet even a cursory review of the Montana Board of Oil and Gas Conservation (MBOGC) quarterly reports demonstrates that salt water, crude oil, and the newly introduced industrial fluids used in ' fracking ' processes are sometimes spilled (see Board of Oil and Gas Conservation 2019). Anecdotal and empirical evidence demonstrates that the boom and bust cycles typical of extractive resource economies in rural communities are problematic; yet, following McEvoy et al. (2017), local understandings of the benefits and drawbacks in the Bakken remain mostly shaped by established sociopolitical ideals (e.g., conservative populism and libertarianism), which minimize risk perceptions.

We argue that the post-2005 Bakken boom has more deeply morphed the region into an emergent form of extended urbanization, a landscape replete with the kind of creative destructive impacts reported in other similar contexts (Arboleda 2015, 2016), what we refer to as an extractive resource urban rurality . This study provides an empirical

Figure 1. Map of Montana with Bakken counties (shaded).

<!-- image -->

investigation of this particular form of extended urbanization and is situated within the critical urban studies literature on ' planetary urbanization. ' Noting, however, Rudduck et al. ' s (2018) call for an emphasis on the everyday struggles experienced by the people who live in and through these broader planetary transformations and the interrelated processes of subject formation that consequently manifest, we focus on this deficiency in the literature. We chronicle the diverging political subjectivities of the Bakken ' s increasingly diverse array of inhabitants through a mixed-methods, multiyear research project that includes findings from semistructured interviews with Bakken area residents and a regional survey. Each approach was aimed at deepening our understanding of the social ontologies that pervade life in the Bakken.

As a combined set, the findings provide a strong empirical illustration of planetary urbanization in one of the most ostensibly ' rural ' corners of the United States, and reveal a mix of narratives that, generally, forgive the inevitable socioenvironmental consequences of extractive resource activities. We also found, though, that the forgiving tone of this narrative evaporates, often significantly, when locals have witnessed, firsthand, the negative consequences of production. We borrow the notion of the ' blind field ' from Lefebvre ([1970] 2003) to identify this forgiving narrative as a discursive fac ¸ade that works to shield the urban-industrial consequences of this emergent landscape from view. In the process, we both extend the planetary urbanization thesis and interrogate its conceptual limitations in accounting for the nuanced complexities that mark this and similar kinds of localized transformative processes elsewhere.

In what follows, we first review the relevant literature on planetary urbanization and, in particular, Lefebvre ' s notion of the blind field. We then briefly describe the historical context of the Bakken region in eastern Montana, leading up to the post-2005 oil and gas boom, and the problems this context poses for particular facets of the planetary urbanization thesis. Then, we present two different modes of analysis: one qualitative, the other quantitative. We present the Bakken blind field as a deeply engrained ' habit of the mind ' (Brenner 2018) that functions for the energy industry as a means of neutralizing the transformative potential that always lurks in response to persistent exploitative practices. Yet, although such blinding narratives are tenacious, we also reveal varying degrees of partial awareness, a differentiated ' opaque field ' associated with this particular urban-industrial landscape, where the degree of illumination that results from personal hardships can determine the degree to which local exploitation is rejected or accepted.

We identify this opaqueness as a rupture that represents a ' condition of possibility ' (Jefferson 2018), a foundation for politically charging a critical mass of people that could, potentially, lead to translocal connections with broader scale networks and activist groups. As reflected in the protests against the Keystone Pipeline in North Dakota in 2016 and 2017, such translocal connections can be, at least temporarily, powerful (Kipfer 2018). Yet, despite this partial awareness and visibility, we expose critical social and spatial limitations associated with this landscape in terms of building oppositional resistance. Even the most illuminated individuals face conditions of disempowerment that are as severe (if not more so) than those found in more traditional urban settings. Moreover, the levels of blindness that pervade the Bakken region today are in notable contrast to Montana ' s rich history of labor and environmental resistance that transformed mining practices in the twentieth century. In comparison, we find more (rather than less) blindness in the region today. We conclude by discussing and querying the limitations to the explanatory power of the planetary

urbanization thesis, particularly when examining questions of political subjectivity.

It is important to note that the Bakken region also extends into North Dakota and Canada (Figure 1). The grants that funded this research, however, from the National Institutes of Health and the National Science Foundation, limited us to the state of Montana. Research concerning the most intense sites of regional development, North Dakota ' s Bakken, is growing (e.g., Bangsbund and Hodur 2019), although even more studies focus on other regions (Brasier et al. 2011; Weber 2012; Weible and Heikkila 2016). Comparatively little scholarship has focused on Montana ' s portion of the Bakken (although see Haggerty et al. 2018). Although a comparative analysis was beyond the scope of this study, we build on this work, because Montana offers its own distinct regulatory system (through which oil and gas development is mediated).

## Planetary Urbanization and the Blind Field

Planetary urbanization represents one of the most prominent research thrusts in critical urban theory today (Merrifield 2013, 2014a; Brenner 2014; Peake et al. 2018; D. Wilson and Jonas 2018). This emergent body of literature stakes the claim that capitalist urbanization has now progressed to the point where the entire planet is implicated and engulfed in its influence and is increasingly marked by a dual process whereby, as Merrifield (2014b) put it:

The urban unfolds into the countryside just as the countryside folds back into the city. … Absorbed and obliterated by vaster units, rural places have become an integral part of post-industrial production and financial speculation, swallowed up by an ' urban fabric ' continually extending its borders, ceaselessly corroding the residue of agrarian life, gobbling up everything and everywhere in order to increase surplus value and accumulate capital. (524 -25)

Identifying this process as planetary, following Merrifield (2013) further, is to highlight ' the final frontier, ' the inevitable planetary culmination of this perpetually imploding and exploding urbanization as ' the telos of any earthly spatial fix … of the planetary expansion of the productive forces of capitalism ' s penchant to annihilate space by time and time by space ' (6).

In short, the urban is to be understood as a process rather than a bounded form of settlement (i.e., built environments reflecting a certain degree of population density). This process is underpinned by a perpetually expansionary consumption of resources (i.e., oil, gas, coal, water, food, timber, minerals, metals, electricity), all of which are invariably extracted from spaces that extend far beyond the municipal boundaries of any ' city, ' a process that now spans the entire planet. Such resources are typically transported into urban regions from far-flung places (increasingly across continents) and represent the basis for what makes urban life today, in all of its varieties, possible. Here, capitalist urbanization is understood to invariably depend on such extra-urban places and populations, progressively feeding on (and transforming) them via the forging of increasingly complex, interlocking connections (Jefferson 2018).

In this conceptualization, the urban process generates what can be described as a centripetal force, a simultaneous implosion (agglomeration) and explosion (decentralization) constituted by an increasingly complex web of globally expansive ' urban tentacles. ' Nowhere is left free from serving the ' spatial clustering of population, means of production, infrastructure and investment ' that characterize spaces of concentrated urbanization, or what typically qualifies as the city proper (Brenner and Schmid 2015, 170). As Lefebvre ([1970] 2003) reminded us, ' Even though local and regional features from the time when agricultural production dominated have not entirely disappeared, [rural areas have] been changed into a form of industrial production ' (3), subordinated to urban demands.

Simultaneously, the footprint of land turned over to concentrated urbanization continues to steamroll across spaces formerly characterized as the countryside. Even in spaces that still appear rural, the extent to which the economic practices of such spaces are linked to this globalizing urban process renders notions of ' city ' and ' rural ' as relic categories (Lefebvre [1970] 2003). Put simply, the urban -rural binary recalls a time when agrarian societies ostensibly subsisted in relative isolation from the ' city. ' Moreover, what continues to appear as rural is increasingly pervaded by media that emanate from spaces of urban agglomeration (television, the Internet, cell phones, etc.), effectively disseminating an ' urban culture ' into all corners of the globe. This is the result of an increasingly globalized industrial

capitalism whereby ' agricultural production has lost all its autonomy in the major industrialized nations and as part of the global economy ' and where the urban, for Lefebvre ([1970] 2003), ' does not narrowly define the built world of cities but all manifestations of the dominance of the city over the country ' (3 -4).

The notion of planetary urbanization is explicitly meant to transcend the urban -rural binary and the presupposed ontological existence of the urban as a form of settlement exhibiting levels of population density beyond some empirically measurable threshold. For Brenner and Schmid (2014), the boundary between the urban and rural has become increasingly blurry, to the point where both categories cease to reflect any coherence as objective, empirically verifiable, spaces in the world. Given the lack of uniform criteria or methods for classifying spaces as urban or rural across spatial or temporal contexts, such categories are understood as subjectively determined and therefore can only be ascertained as theoretical abstractions.

## Uneven Planetary Urbanization

It should be stressed that this planetary urban fabric is not a uniform or homogenous landscape that literally spans the world. Rather, it is multidimensional and unfolds through variegated pathways of uneven spatial development. In addition to extended urbanization, Brenner and Schmid (2015) identified two other mutually constitutive moments or forms of this process: concentrated urbanization and differential urbanization. These moments are presented to overcome the linguistic roadblocks manifest within the long-standing urban -rural dichotomy, and are understood to be dialectically related and analytically distinguishable.

Concentrated urbanization refers to the spaces that typically confront us as ' urban, ' the spaces where people, resources, and capital have clustered together into relatively dense centers of population and built environment. Differential urbanization refers to the relentless creative destruction of multiscalar modes of territorial organization, the inherent unevenness of the urbanization processes under capitalism whereby spatial fixes are increasingly and progressively sought in the pursuit of capital accumulation, rendering some places new sites for investment and profitability while consequently, and necessarily, leaving others mired in disinvested neglect.

This historically and geographically variegated process is also mediated by a myriad of contextually specific institutional formations, evolving political climates, and sedimented sociocultural norms and struggles. Following postcolonial critiques (Sheppard, Leitner, and Maringanti 2013; Roy 2016; also see Schmid 2018), it should be stressed that urbanization processes do not emanate from a centralized (Western) core but represent a ' center-less unfolding ' that ' equally looks from the periphery and asks where ' the urban ' and its connections lie ' (D. Wilson and Jonas 2018, 1577). It also does not imply that rural or nonurban spaces have disappeared. Rather, these spaces should be reconceptualized as spaces of extended urbanization that demand, as Brenner (2018) asserted, careful empirically and contextually specific investigations that are theoretically reflexive, replete with new conceptual orientations that are consistent with contemporary realities and capable of illuminating that which has remained hidden, or ' blind, ' for much too long. This study proceeds with these insights in mind.

## The Blind Field

The planetary urbanization thesis was first posited by Lefebvre ([1970] 2003) in his now seminal text The Urban Revolution . At the time, Lefebvre hypothesized that this globalizing urbanization was a ' virtual reality ' insofar as it was not empirically visible, an emergent formation unfolding at a time when antiquated understandings of the urban versus the rural appeared to remain valid. This virtual reality constituted, for Lefebvre ([1970] 2003), a ' blind field, ' as well as a ' point of arrival for existing knowledge and a point of departure for a new study and new projects ' (4). The planetary urbanization framework explicitly follows this proposition to theoretically and empirically illuminate this planetary urban fabric (Brenner 2014).

Lefebvre identified the planetary urban fabric as a blind field specifically because it does not connote objects or realities that can be identified visually on the surface of society; rather, the fabric flows from relations that we typically cannot see with our own eyes and that require empirical analysis to conceptually understand. The blind field is not merely a poorly understood or explained reality but ' blind in

the sense that there is a blind spot on the retina, the center -and negation -of vision ' and where ' blindness consists in the fact that we cannot see the shape of the urban, the vectors and tensions inherent in the field, its logic and dialectical movement, its immanent demands. We see only things, operations, objects ' (Lefebvre [1970] 2003, 28, 40).

For Lefebvre, the planetary urban remained invisible at the time because the conceptual tools and theories that continued to mark urban studies were forged in the preceding epoch to describe realities that no longer existed. It was also an emergent tendency, a planetary urban formation not yet fully realized, or completed, but would become a fully globalized reality at some future date. Brenner and Schmid (2015) argued that this moment of planetary realization arrived in the 1980s and that ' today it has become increasingly evident that the urban has indeed become a worldwide condition in which all aspects of social, economic, political and environmental relations are enmeshed, across places, territories and scales, crosscutting any number of longentrenched geographical divisions ' (172).

## Global Urban Society and the Bakken

Lefebvre also predicted that alongside this fully globalized reality would be its progressively increasing visibility. This moment of planetary culmination would then inaugurate the formation and realization of a single ' global urban society ' (GUS), the linking of the global population via increasing media technologies and commonalities associated with the variegated urban experience and associated modes of exploitation and marginalization wrought by progressive capital accumulation. For Lefebvre, GUS represented a necessary precondition for reclaiming the ' right to the city ' by and for those formerly kicked to the curb by capital: It prioritizes use value considerations related to the quality of everyday life for the overwhelming majority in the world, progressively opposing the (neo-imperial, racialized, and gendered) forces of global capitalism through which such emergent processes of planetary urbanization are dialectically forged.

Lefebvre ' s notion of GUS can also be conceptualized as in its infancy in the context of the post-2008 surge of global resistance movements, such as Global Occupy, the Indignados in Spain, and the Arab Spring revolutions across the Middle East and North

Africa (J. Wilson and Swyngedouw 2014). In this context, the urban represents not just a theoretical question but also a practical one, to tease out the radical potentials impregnated within an increasingly interconnected global proletariat who inhabit the various corners of this emergent and hyperdifferentiated urban fabric (Keil 2018a) and understand how people actively generate such potentials by navigating the ' domains of constraint and enablement through which people contemplatively and reflexively produce an evolving social habitus ' (D. Wilson and Jonas 2018, 1577).

The conceptual underpinnings of planetary urbanization have been subject to extensive critique in recent years, including an entire special issue devoted to this topic (Peake et al. 2018). Although a substantive review of this critical response is beyond the scope of this article, we follow D. Wilson and Jonas (2018) in productively moving this dialogue forward, to more ' fully engage the concept ' s utility and future potential … in light of extant historical materialist thinking and future possibilities ' (1579), in the following ways.

First, the category of extended urbanization has been empirically examined only minimally (Kanai 2014; Monte-Mor 2014; Arboleda 2015, 2016; Nussli and Schmid 2016) and demands more investigations that deepen our understandings of the variegated pathways and sociospatial forms this particular urbanization process takes (Brenner 2018; Derickson 2018). For example, Keil (2018b) argued that the category of extended urbanization subsumes too much variation (e.g., emergent suburban forms) and needs to be thoroughly unpacked. Indeed, globalized suburban landscapes bear little resemblance to places like Sidney, Montana, rendering the category, for Keil, void of meaningful analytic value. It is in this context that we situate this study ' s geographic setting as undergoing a long-standing and tension-ridden transformation from one particular form of extended urbanization, a productive agricultural urban rurality, to an even deepened manifestation of another: an extractive resource urban rurality.

Second, we also explore a corresponding dimension of extended urbanization processes that remains relatively underexamined: the transformation of ' the everyday, ' what Ruddick et al. (2018) identified as the ' seedbed of struggle, and the locus from which subjects are capable of transforming both themselves and the world in which they live ' (399). The notion

of GUS implies a profound process of ' subject formation, ' in which the social ontologies that people exhibit at the ground level are significantly reworked to the point of influencing the urbanization process in radically different ways. As such, the study foregrounds this ' restructuring of subjects ' in relation to the transformation of Montana ' s Bakken and queries the extent to which the people who inhabit this landscape exhibit a shift from blindness to illumination to the creative destructive realities that confront them, as Lefebvre ' s notion of GUS implies.

Although it is safe to say that the blindness identified by Lefebvre ceases to pervade academia, it stubbornly persists beyond it, to some degree at least, by virtue of its embeddedness in popular representations of the world (e.g., the urban age thesis) that continue to use such outmoded conceptual tools and categories (Brenner and Schmid 2014). Because many of these conceptual relics continue to visually appear ' real ' today (e.g., city vs. country), this study asks to what extent society ' s collective vision remains blind, at least in places like eastern Montana, to the increasingly visibly apparent evidence that Brenner and Schmid (2015) cited for a fully planetary (yet hyperdifferentiated) urban reality today. This question has never been empirically examined in this way, nor has the blind field concept in general.

It is in this context that our contribution reveals a set of cultural narratives that both blind and (partially) illuminate the planetary urban realities of Montana ' s Bakken to yield a general condition of what we call opaqueness (or translucency). The following sections empirically chart the contours of this emergent opaque field and identify processes of subject formation that confound one ' s expectations based on Lefebvre ' s notion of GUS.

## Case Study Context: The Bakken Region of Eastern Montana

According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration (2019), in 2018 the United States consumed 7.5 billion barrels of petroleum products, or 20.5 million barrels per day. With this figure increasing, the estimated 7.4 billion barrels of recoverable oil that remain in the broader Bakken region will not be ignored for long. More broadly, the region ' s oil supply represents a source of surplus value for major national and global energy firms. As such, the surplus value produced by these extractive mining activities is, for the most part, siphoned away from the region and funneled through firms with operations that are national and even global in scope, with headquarters in major urban centers. The results might be visually subtle, but the effect is to stitch the region into the broader urban-industrial fabric of global capitalism more and more deeply.

Moreover, the approach to governing the oil and gas industry is a state-by-state affair that is especially susceptible to the neoliberal ' growth machines ' that characterize many urban governances in North America and beyond (Logan and Molotch 1987). State officials and legislative bodies are pressured to ' compete ' with surrounding states in terms of providing business-friendly environments. Known in Montana as the ' Oil and Gas Tax Holiday, ' the 1999 Montana legislature provided the industry with an incentive to operate in the state by lowering the rate of taxation on new wells during the first months of production. This means that when a well is most productive, the tax rate is the lowest (Montana Budget and Policy Center 2019).

This has resulted in limited tax revenues for state agencies and local governments and, consequently, limited government capacity to address negative externalities when they arise. Indeed, although attractive in terms of bringing jobs and industries to communities, oil and gas development is notorious for causing social and economic woes (Ruddell 2017). Boom and bust economies are well documented, and the Bakken region has not been immune to this cycle. Attention has focused on the multitude of socioeconomic concerns brought to these communities when their populations surge (burgeoning jobs), especially when their infrastructures are overwhelmed (housing, schools, sewage treatment facilities; Haggerty et al. 2018).

In 2014, it was widely reported that Williston, North Dakota, had the highest apartment rental rates in the nation, approaching $3,000 per month for a one-bedroom apartment (Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 2014). Although eastern Montana has yet to experience the ' disjunct fragments ' (Keil 2018b) of global suburbanism evident in Williston, North Dakota (Adamson 2015), rental rates have not been much lower, with the now infamous ' man camps ' seemingly emerging overnight (especially near the town of Sidney, the epicenter of the boom

Figure 2. ' Man Camp ' near Sidney, Montana, Spring 2015.

<!-- image -->

in eastern Montana). These camps, which housed much of the migrant labor force attracted to the boom, were simply rows of camper trailers on a nondescript prairie hill, mostly without sewage or garbage services (Figure 2).

Moreover, increases in rents and home prices place considerable stress on many longtime residents. According to the U.S. Census Bureau (2019), between 2013 and 2017 the median household income for a family in Richland County, Montana, was $66,572, suggesting that housing costs, especially for the elderly on fixed incomes, were well over 50 percent of disposable incomes. Accompanying this population growth was a surge in crime (drug abuse, burglary, rape, etc.; Brown 2012), which led to changes in various local customs, such as having to lock doors. It even prompted the town of Sidney to invest several million dollars in a new Justice Center, necessitated and paid for by the boom. Social and cultural woes, however, are not the only problems. Key environmental concerns have also emerged. As with many traditional urban centers, air pollution is now an increasing concern, as well as heightened fears of environmental hazards and related health issues (Gibson 2013). Water quality and quantity are among the chief concerns, particularly with respect to the frequency of oil and ' produced water ' spills (water that is captured when a ' fracked ' well begins to flow).

None of this, however, as noted earlier, is new to the region. Montana has a long history of extractive mining activities, from the century of copper mining and smelting practices in Butte and Anaconda (Bryson 2013), to the gold and silver mining scattered across the state (Kruger 2002), and to previous booms of oil and gas development (Hennip 1973). Industrial agriculture has also long been a feature of the economy, although it is now (perhaps) less prevalent. Lefebvre ' s blind field, marked here by the tendency to ignore or forgive negative impacts and consequences in favor of jobs and economic growth, has also long been observed in these contexts. Following McDonald (2010), however, leftist-agrarian and pro-union politics used to be much more prevalent across the state, including the strong communist roots planted by the Non-Partisan League in eastern Montana during the 1920s and in explicit response to the domination of the region by eastern (and urban) business interests.

That such radical politics are nowhere to be found in this region today suggests, ironically, that more people were illuminated in the past, prompting the following questions: Is there something specific to the most recent period that more sharply circumscribes one ' s illumination than previously? What role does historical memory (or amnesia) play in political subject formation in the region and in accounting

for this seemingly contradictory movement of Lefebvre ' s hypothesized blindness -illumination progression toward GUS? These questions emerged on our radar after fieldwork had concluded and therefore represent a limitation of the study. We do, however, present preliminary hypotheses, based on our findings, and discuss the implications for the planetary urbanization thesis in the final sections of the article.

## Phase 1: Qualitative Methods and Results

This study is part of a wider research project investigating the socioenvironmental impacts of oil and gas development in eastern Montana (also see McEvoy et al. 2017). We already knew several narratives operating in the local communities of this region, so we set out in 2015 to build on this understanding by exploring the details and functions of these narratives. We hoped to discover the degree to which these narratives were shaping how local residents framed the environmental exploitations and risks associated with oil and gas development and the extent to which these narratives constituted degrees of blindness or illumination.

## Qualitative Methods

We conducted a series of ' long interviews ' (McCracken 1988) that would allow us to identify and investigate the narratives at work among the people of the Bakken in eastern Montana. The interviews were designed to foster conversations during which the interviewees would be given ample opportunities to describe in their own words how it is to live with oil and gas development. As is customary in qualitative research, we viewed interviewees as differentially positioned subjects embedded within broader discursive constellations (Fairclough 2003) and set out to unearth the specific narratives that demonstrated how informants constructed order in their everyday lives.

Because we were specifically interested in how locals live with the environmental exploitations inherent to emergent urban-industrial realities, we decided to focus on landowners who had experienced an industrial spill on their land regardless of the type of spill (salt water, oil, or produced water). Questions were tailored toward exploring the landowners ' experiences with the industrial mishap, their attitudes toward the industry (and the state), and the coping logics that owners constructed to reconcile the stressors that resulted from these impacts. We also contacted at least one mayor or county commissioner from each county who had been actively engaged in a cleanup operation. The interviews were audiorecorded, transcribed, and then subjected to a systematic content analysis (Denzin and Lincoln 1994) in relation to the questions guiding the study.

To find landowners, we requested from the MBOGC a list of all of the most recent reported ' spills ' in the six Bakken counties recorded between January and October 2015. The list included more than 140 incidents, and each listing included the name and address of the affected landowner. We then stratified the list according to counties and then randomized the county lists for purposes of contacting owners. In total, we conducted long interviews with twenty-nine landowners and six civic officials. We had informants from all counties, on whose lands the spills ranged in size from a few gallons to several hundred barrels of industrial fluids. Some were unaware that an incident had happened on their property, whereas others had been notified within minutes and had taken an active role in determining how the spills would be remediated.

In the process of conducting and analyzing these interviews, a number of discursive themes were inductively identified. We then organized these themes as constituent and interrelated components within the two distinct narratives we outline next.

## Qualitative Results

Narrative 1: Mishaps Are Excusable. Many of our informants explained how they had come to accept that it was impossible to imagine the industry operating without mishaps. Thus, the first component of this narrative we identify is inevitability , and it was disclosed in several ways. For instance, one landowner explained, ' It is part of doing business. … You get a hole in a pipeline and it leaks for a while. ' Another stated, ' There ' s no such thing as, ' it never should have happened '-things do happen. ' Another person invoked an analogy: ' It ' s like driving your car. You hope nothing bad will happen to you, but you also know it is a possibility every time you get behind the wheel. '

We also heard another common refrain, usually stated simply, ' Accidents happen. ' We identified

this as the accidentalism component. Not only are mishaps inevitable, but it is assumed that they are also unintentional, thereby making them easier to excuse. Some landowners and local leaders were even defensive of the industry. One commissioner said, ' Most of these companies do the best they can … as quick as they can. ' Several informants suggested that when they compared the operating procedures of today to those of the past, the industry is now much cleaner and safer. One landowner further explained why the industry would strive to operate carefully: ' They want to get along with the community. They don ' t want a bad name. '

When confronted with specific examples, both landowners and local leaders explained that the majority of spills they experienced and dealt with were minor. One landowner explained, ' The spills are inconsequential, ' and we found repeated evidence of this inconsequential component when others described spills as ' minimal ' or ' short-lived. ' The field team was stunned to note that several people explained that small oil spills are helpful: ' Crude oil is like a fertilizer. In small amounts, the crude makes the grass grow. '

The overall narrative is also underpinned by a notable sensitivity to the local community in terms of what we call the payoff component. More than one person stated that ' oil and gas puts a lot of people to work. ' Many examples were offered, such as sons hired by oil companies to reseed and reclaim damaged areas, daughters hired by contractors to drive flag cars, and family businesses expanded to accommodate more customers. We were told that one family built additional bays in their facility so they could replace more broken semitruck windshields, noting with pride that they replaced 100 windshields on their busiest day. Some explained that the direct income from oil and gas was the only reason they could ' afford to stay on the farm. ' One local estimated that ' in excess of 90 percent ' of the community benefit from oil and gas, directly or indirectly, and others noted that the ' brand new high school football field with the artificial turf … [was] better than the college field in Bozeman. '

The narrative was further supported, however, by stories about other types of stress, leading us to identify yet another component: comparative triviality . For instance, a county commissioner explained:

There were man-camps everywhere, and people were living in trailer parks that had no sewage facilities. …

The people who owned the trailer parks would hire a truck to collect the waste once a week, but [the City] had to turn away dozens of truckloads of raw sewage because the treatment plant was already over capacity.

When asked what happened to sewage that was not taken by the treatment facility, one informant speculated, ' Maybe they just opened the valve and drove down the highway. ' Another landowner explained that he had been forced off the road by a trucker who veered into his lane. He was taking his daughter to school when he nearly lost control of his vehicle, and he feared for their lives. A third landowner told the story of a drug dealer who had stolen a car and was thought to be evading the police by hiding somewhere near his farm. When he realized the drug dealer was hiding in a shed a few yards from the family house, the landowner told his wife to call 911. Meanwhile, he took it upon himself to hold the suspect at gunpoint until the sheriff arrived. A fourth landowner, living about thirty-five miles from the nearest town, explained ' The spill was trivial. Real stress was the night [the sheriff] told me a murder suspect had been spotted on my ranch, and [he] couldn ' t send anyone out. The sheriff told me to ' just keep a gun by your bed ' . '

The comparative triviality component puts industrial spills into a context of multiple materialities of risk and stress, both environmental and social. When asked to use a 0- to 10-point scale for scoring stress levels (with 0 being no stress and 10 being one of the most stressful moments of one ' s life), several of the informants noted industrial spills as 0, 1 or 2, and they rated other stressful events (some just described) as 9, 10, or even 15. For many, the spills were ' nothing ' when compared to the ' real stress ' of living with unmanaged sewage, large trucks on narrow roads, drug dealers, auto theft, and murder. In this context, although this narrative ultimately underpins (and is underpinned by) a notable acceptance of industrial mishaps as necessary consequences when living with oil and gas development, this acceptance becomes more tenuous when the preceding social impacts are thrown into relief. We conceptualize this component coupled with inevitability, accidentalism, inconsequentiality, and payoffs as interrelated elements that constitute the narrative: Mishaps are excusable.

Narrative 2: Eyes Wide Open. As we proceeded through the early stages of the qualitative fieldwork (twenty-two interviews), we encountered

two informants whose views were distinctly at odds with Narrative 1. We began to ask our informants whether they knew folks who might feel very differently toward the industry. Several names came up as often mentioned. We then made a second trip to the field during which ten additional landowners and three additional civic officials were interviewed. This second round of interviews produced a whole new narrative that diverged from Narrative 1, what we call ' eyes wide open, ' because the informants who articulated it apparently witnessed and even experienced particular firsthand consequences that others were less inclined to consider serious. This narrative is constituted by the following key constituent components: alienation , dismay , and despair . Due to space limitations, we present this narrative in the form of three abbreviated stories that were shared by local informants.

One informant, a rancher, found that twelve of his breeding cows had perished at their watering pond, a significant loss both monetarily and emotionally. In short, the pond had been contaminated with salt-laden drilling muds, although the drilling company denied any wrongdoing and refused to provide compensation. The rancher approached several local officials to find out how they might help, including the sheriff ' s office and a county commissioner. He also called the MBOGC and was certain someone would be able to help, but no one would. The incident occurred between private parties on private land. After a legal battle that spanned several years, the rancher was finally awarded compensation for each cow, twice. Of course, having spent so much time and money, it was a somewhat hollow victory for the rancher, who had felt profoundly mistreated and alienated : ' Nobody helped us. We had to sue those bastards. ' Had this rancher not been able to hire an attorney, it is likely that his losses would never have been properly compensated. Even though he was finally compensated monetarily, this consequence of oil and gas development was clearly not inconsequential to him.

Our second example stems from a family that was at ' ground zero ' for the pipeline break in 2015 that put 31,000 gallons of crude oil into the Yellowstone River near the town of Glendive ( ' Yellowstone River Spill ' 2015). Several individual property owners were affected, and because the crude oil affected water quality and the health and habitats of wildlife and fish, both the U.S. Department of the Interior and the State of Montana had public resources at stake.

Additionally, the spill contaminated Glendive ' s water system, forcing residents of the town to use bottled water for many months after the spill.

When this spill occurred and a few people realized what happened, it was not clear who to call for help, because it was a weekend and many offices were closed. One woman called 911, only to be told that the dispatcher had no instructions for dealing with oil spills. In fact, it was not until the following Monday that the pipeline company and public officials got fully involved. This delayed response is thought to have worsened the contamination issues for Glendive. Sadly, even though this was the second major oil spill on the Yellowstone in just a few years ' time, local and state authorities were ill prepared for this type of accident. The locals who discovered the spill were dismayed to learn that there was not an available authority to whom they could report the problem, and at a public meeting a few days later a local official was reported to have said, ' You had no business calling 911 about this. '

The Montana Department of Environmental Quality eventually negotiated a $1 million settlement on behalf of a fishery that was affected, but some families received no payments. With obvious contempt, our informant said, ' Oh, the Governor came by with a jar of jelly. ' Officials have assured folks that much was learned from the accident and that reports are now immediately referred to ' on call ' state officials, even on weekends. For families near this spill, though, the ' resolution ' comes much too late.

The final situation was explained by a young third-generation farmer living roughly thirty miles outside of Glendive. He began by explaining that he feared for the safety of his family, especially his two small children, because of the development of a new hazardous waste facility within a mile of his property. He claimed that the oil and gas industry was responsible for putting his family in harm ' s way and that he felt that his property was greatly, if not completely, devalued. He explained that his neighbor had filled a lucrative market niche; the neighbor had built a facility that accepted naturally occurring radioactive materials.

This informant ' s property was located on the only route into and out of the waste facility. That gravel road would be traveled by hundreds of trucks each month, each potentially carrying (perhaps leaking) radioactive materials on the road. With his house just downwind from the road, he worried that dust

from the road would endanger the development of his small toddlers. Once the informant understood what was happening, he had appealed to local and state authorities but was told ' the date for comment was over. ' He learned that scant more was required than an obligation by his neighbor to post a public notice of intention to build such a facility in the local newspaper. He also learned that there were no specific regulations in place to ensure proper installation or maintenance of the facility. Although he has since learned that some regulations are now in place, the despair this farmer felt was striking when he said, ' There were no rules about this in the State of Montana. ' He continues to worry about his family ' s potential exposure to radioactive materials.

Perhaps most distressing for all of the informants was a realization that they were ' on their own. ' Each explained that neither government officials nor regulations acted as corrective forces. They were also clear that when they attempted to draw attention to their personal plights, the community was often unsympathetic -the football field was just too cool, ironically paid for by the very family that opened the naturally occurring radioactive materials waste facility. As the couple who experienced the pipeline rupture on their property put it, ' Oh, that new football field is important. People will overlook a lot, just for that. '

Some informants of the eyes wide open narrative explained that they had joined a local organization of like-minded people. The group was described as an ' action ' group that sponsored efforts to resist the industry ' s degradations and exploitations, with one informant noting that she thought ' there might be forty enrolled members ' across the Montana portion of the Bakken. Narrative 2 illuminated lives where environmental damages felt personal; where the acceptance of environmental degradation could not be excised simply as accidental, inevitable, or inconsequential; and where the payoffs were not enough. Furthermore, the nonresponsiveness of government compounded the injuries, leaving those with their eyes wide open to feel betrayed and alienated. During these interviews, the informants often cried.

## Phase 2: Quantitative Methods and Results

Based on our initial qualitative findings, we then constructed a survey instrument in the fall of 2016 to see whether the narratives our interviews revealed represented broad cultural phenomena in eastern Montana. In other words, we set out to see whether we could document whether or not Narrative 1 was broadly accepted and the degree to which Narrative 2 might also be found among members of the community.

## Quantitative Methods

We designed a survey instrument that consisted of thirty-five questions (due to space limitations we cannot include the survey). Nineteen questions used a Likert scale (1 -5) to assess the degree to which respondents agreed or disagreed with statements about the impacts of the Bakken boom on the economy, community, health, and environment. We noted that many properties are defined as split estates, meaning that every landowner would not necessarily hold mineral rights and every mineral rights holder would not necessarily own land. As well, economic benefits to personal incomes might or might not be directly linked to production of the mineral estate. We chose to not attempt to unwind the quagmire of mineral estates and split estates as matters of personal or household incomes. Instead, the survey simply asked respondents to indicate their overall household income (defined as eight different ranges of income) and the degree to which people they know have benefited from the most recent boom.

Three questions asked about respondents ' experiences with and perceptions of accidents related to the oil and gas industry. Five questions were designed to assess respondents ' expectations of how oil and gas accidents should be dealt with by governmental entities. Eight demographic questions were asked at the end of the survey. We employed a research service company to provide us with a list of roughly 10,000 residential addresses in the six counties of Montana ' s Bakken. We then randomly selected 5,400 addresses and sent the survey by mail to those households. By January 2017, 878 of the surveys had been returned (each at least 90 percent completed).

Three dependent variables were created from three distinct categories of questions in the survey. These three categories are distinguished by whether the boom was perceived to have (1) been beneficial to their community, (2) had negative impacts on health and safety for both residents and those employed in the industry, and (3) threatened the quality of the environment. Using factor analysis,

Table 1. Logistic regression results for attitudes on impact of oil and gas drilling

|                      | 1           | 2                 | 3            | 4          | 5                | 6          | 7           | 8                | 9               |
|----------------------|-------------|-------------------|--------------|------------|------------------|------------|-------------|------------------|-----------------|
| Variables            | Benefit     | Benefit           | Benefit      | Health     | Health           | Health     | Environment | Environment      | Environment     |
| Witness              | - 0.083     | - 0.11            | - 0.012               | 0.23             | 0.17                   | 0.17             | 0.11        | 0.14                   | 0.14                  |
|                      | (0.066)     | (0.066)           | (0.026)      | (0.059)    | (0.059)          | (0.059)    | (0.069)     | (0.061)          | (0.062)         |
| Number spills        |             | - 0.053           | - 0.046      |            | 0.15                   | 0.16             |             | 0.078                   | 0.082                  |
|                      |             | (0.046)           | (0.046)      |            | (0.035)          | (0.035)    |             | (0.038)          | (0.039)         |
| Barrel estimate      |             | 0.21                    | 0.22               |            | - 0.21                   | - 0.21             |             | - 0.37                   | - 0.37                  |
|                      |             | (0.036)           | (0.035)      |            | (0.032)          | (0.032)    |             | (0.032)          | (0.032)         |
|                      |             |                   | 0.0016       |            |                   | - 0.0015   |             |                  |                 |
| Age                  |             | - 0.0017 (0.0024) | (0.0031)     |            | - 0.0036 (0.002) | (0.0026)   |             | 0.00079 (0.0021) | 0.0029 (0.0028) |
| Female               |             | 0.09              | 0.08         |            | - 0.047          | - 0.053    |             | 0.16                   | 0.16                  |
| Party ID             |             | (0.069) 0.043                    | (0.042) 0.042               |            | (0.06) - 0.045                   | (0.061) - 0.045             |             | (0.063) - 0.15                   | (0.063) - 0.15                  |
| Income               |             | (0.024) 0.079                    | (0.24) 0.079 |            | (0.0021) - 0.055                   | (0.0021)   |             | (0.024) - 0.076  | (0.024)         |
|                      |             | (0.0018)          |  (0.0066)              |            | (0.015)          | - 0.054  (0.015)            |             |  (0.016)                  | - 0.076  (0.016)                 |
| Education            |             | - 0.056                    | - 0.061  (0.024)              |            | 0.003            | 0.00048    |             | 0.037                   | 0.033           |
|                      |             | (0.0088)          |              |            | (0.02)           | (0.021)    |             | (0.021)          | (0.022)         |
| Years lived in state |             |                   | - 0.0035               |            |                  | - 0.0022             |             |                  | - 0.0022        |
|                      |             |                   | (0.002)      |            |                  | (0.0017)   |             |                  | (0.0018)        |
| Constant             | 0.042       | - 0.73                    | - 0.75               | - 0.11             | 0.92                   | 0.90             | - 0.46      | 1.67                   | 1.65                  |
| Observations         | (0.044) 801 | (0.29) 801        | (0.29) 801   | (0.04) 801 | (0.24) 801       | (0.24) 801 | (0.046) 801 | (0.026) 801      | (0.26) 801      |

Note: Ordinary least squares regression. Standard errors in parentheses.

 p &lt; 0.05.

 p &lt; 0.1.

 p &lt; 0.01.

the questions in each category distilled several questions in each category down to one factor variable. In terms of interpreting factor variables, zero is the mean value and negative and positive integers represent standard deviation from the mean. There are several measures that contribute to an individual ' s relative blindness, including demographic attributes such as age, gender, political party identification, income, and education level. Additionally, respondents were asked whether they had personally witnessed an industrial spill or accident related to the oil and gas industry within the past ten years.

To address missing values, which unfortunately reduced the number of observations using traditional methods from more than 800 to 400, multiple imputation was used to calculate missing values. This technique uses logistic regression to estimate the missing values based on other respondents who responded similarly but answered the question that has a missing value. This technique is preferable to mean substitution because missing values were at random. Multiple imputation allows us to capture the power of a relatively large sample without much effect on the regression estimates. Because the dependent variables are continuous variables, ordinary least squares regression was used to estimate the effects of the independent variables.

## Quantitative Results

We conducted a series of regression models of the survey data to more systematically query why some residents continue to exhibit blindness and others reveal varying degrees of illumination (see Table 1). We find that party identification is a strong predictor of attitudes toward the boom, because the variable is statistically significant in all models with that measure. Those who identify as stronger Republicans, compared to those left on a typical political spectrum, not only believe that the boom is good for their communities but also tend to disagree that the boom has negative health or environmental effects on the region. Those with higher incomes also have attitudes similar to those who are strong Republicans. Education has a reverse effect compared to income: those who are more educated tend

to indicate the boom has not benefited their respective communities and are more concerned about the boom ' s health and environmental effects. Education is only statistically significant with the benefit and environmental concern models, however.

Those who have lived in Montana longer indicate that they do not think the boom has been beneficial to their communities, with the variable statistically significant. These individuals, though, are not as concerned about the health and environmental effects of the boom compared to those who have been in the state for a shorter amount of time. Gender only has a statistically significant effect for the environmental concern model: women are more likely to agree that the boom is a cause for environmental concern. Several interactions among the statistically significant variables were calculated in models not presented (e.g., county of residence), but the interactions were not statistically significant and did not increase the explanatory power of the regression models.

In short, none of these results were surprising, although they do reveal a degree of complexity within the region ' s population in relation to one ' s relative blindness or illumination, detailing the contours of a condition we call differential opaqueness. Of greatest interest to us, however, was the link between witnessing a spill and the degree to which a respondent expressed concerns about the environmental risks or mishaps. What is clear in the data is that regardless of where on the political, educational, or income spectrum one resides, his or her willingness to overlook environmental harm was significantly diminished when the individual had personally witnessed an industrial spill. Most notabe, witnessing a spill, by itself, is a strong predictor that the boom is considered to have negative effects on health and the environment (although it is not statistically significant regarding whether the boom is or is not considered to have an economic benefit to the community).

## Discussion

This study identifies and illustrates an emergent form of extended urbanization taking root in a region least likely to be considered urban. The continued and deepened exposure of this landscape to the suite of urban-industrial artefacts that come with extractive mining practices has been met with an array of socioenvironmental disruptions that people experience, and make sense of, in varying ways. The recent boom has brought these realities much more closely to the foreground of people ' s everyday lived experiences. Although many locals tend to couple rural sensibilities (neighborliness and self-reliance) with conservative, libertarian political worldviews, they also now exhibit an evolved sociopolitical landscape that features a clash between traditional sensibilities and the emergent urban-industrial artefacts that mark contemporary extractive resource urban ruralities.

As far as Lefebvre ' s blind field is concerned, nobody in this region would say the Bakken is ' urban, ' but people do generally recognize that this place has and is substantively changing, for better or worse and in varying ways and degrees: It is no longer the ' community ' that had seemingly been intact for generations. Many of the local residents are uncomfortable with the disruptive changes and the relative uncertainty that follows, but they also know that the region ' s fortune and future is linked to broader, global forces (i.e., oil prices). In some ways people want to go back, but in other ways they do not. They are disconcerted by sudden demands on school systems, water treatment plants, and roads, and they are stressed by apparent prostitution, drug use, and even murder, all concerns that are more familiar to those living in more traditionally urban settings. Indeed, for many, the environmental mishaps are the least of their worries.

Those who have personally experienced significant hardships, though, tend to be more acutely aware of, or willing to admit, the socioenvironmental exploitation that comes with urban-industrial processes. Informants told of lasting harm and fractured governmental authority that resulted in mismanaged socioenvironmental problems and where narratives of tolerance seemed mendacious. Worse, when they voiced their new awareness, they became alienated from their communities. For these informants, extractive mining activities bring this sociomaterial reality into hyperrelief. Yet, they do not necessarily see this as an artifact of global industrial capitalism. What organized resistance exists is most evidently in response to the destructive injustices of a corrupt industry, rather than the routine, structured processes of contemporary capitalist urbanization.

It is in this context that the sociomaterial realities of extended urbanization in Montana ' s Bakken are only partially masked. In some ways, and more for some than others, this planetary urban reality has indeed become increasingly visible, or opaque or translucent, a variegated condition that we hypothesize as a defining attribute of spaces experiencing similar transformative processes of extended urbanization. The most illuminated are not only those who have witnessed an industrial spill but those that have reaped catastrophic consequences that extend beyond the visual sensory organs. As such, we must also consider the role of affect, the emotional impacts related to the associated smells and tastes (i.e., when drinking contaminated water) that come with experiencing a major industrial accident. These hardships should be seen as multifaceted -social, material, and emotional -and are magnified further when coupled with the corresponding health problems and helplessness that follows. Only for the select few who have experienced these hardships most viscerally has there been a ' full awakening, ' representing a potential, albeit embryonic, building block toward Lefebvre ' s GUS and reminding us of Horkheimer and Adorno ' s (1972) understanding of how it is ' culture shock ' that ultimately catapults people out of complacency.

It does not follow, though, that this region is less blind today. Historically, Montana ' s Bakken has long functioned as an urban rurality in its productive agricultural form, periodically punctuated by cyclic booms of oil and gas development throughout the twentieth century. When contextualizing this partial visibility observed today, it follows that locals were once more illuminated (e.g., in the 1920s), a seeming paradox in the albeit limited narration of Lefebvre ' s blind field in the planetary urbanization thesis. Even after three decades since the planetary urban purportedly completed its march to integrate the entire world into its web of tentacles, little has transpired in Montana ' s Bakken to suggest the substantive integration of the region into the broader formation of GUS.

How can we make sense of this paradox? Based on our experience in the field, we hypothesize that a good degree of historical amnesia has set into place. Although analysis of the relation between past historical periods is beyond the scope of this study, existing literature on the systematic erasure of leftistsocialist politics in the United States since the post -World War II period -for example, McCarthyism and the Red Scare (Wolff 2012) and the restoration of class power embodied in the ascendency of neoliberal hegemony post-1980 (Harvey 2005) -suggests the potential for further illumination (in Montana and beyond) has been thoroughly co-opted by capital. Despite continued and progressive extended urbanization in places like Montana ' s Bakken, decades of capitalist colonization of rural populist-libertarian narratives have frustrated the radical political potential that might otherwise -that once did -puncture the region ' s sociopolitical landscape, thereby preserving an acceptable degree of blindness that functions to shield the energy industry from potential political threats or disruptions. The overwhelming support Donald Trump received in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, especially in Montana, only further verifies this.

In short, the complete urbanization of the world was aided and abetted by the emergent forces of neoliberal globalization (Brenner and Schmid 2015), the very same forces that have safeguarded the preservation of acceptable profit margins by and for a global capitalist energy industry hell-bent on plundering the world of its natural resources. In this context, we follow a Gramscian interpretation in asserting that the continued prevalence of the forgiving narratives we revealed earlier is no accident but the outcome of an elaborate and insidious project of subject formation (and mode of governmentality) designed to cultivate docile, predictable citizens consistent with the ongoing accumulation and circulation of capital in and through the myriad socionatural landscapes of the world.

Consequently, insofar as the most victimized (and illuminated) are callously alienated from the rest of their communities, they are relegated to a cold, disempowering reality and minority that poses no substantive threat to the industry. In fact, unlike lowincome, victimized populations in more traditional urban centers, where there is a critical mass of people that can apply political pressure as a force of resistance, Montana ' s Bakken residents arguably face greater hurdles in this regard. The nonprofits, nongovernmental organizations, service providers, and activist groups that tend to locate in concentrated urban centers are comparatively lacking in eastern Montana, which means that living with oil and gas comes with only a minute possibility of a socialized power base to mobilize claims of abuse and

exploitation. Local government and state agencies, generally complicit with the interests of the industry, are thoroughly fractured and revenue strapped, rendering them ill equipped to deal with the boom ' s negative externalities. Even the low population density of the landscape itself serves to frustrate the development of a collectivized resistance movement, because most people live and work at a considerable distance from neighbors, let alone other victimized people, who might live several counties away. Broadband problems continue to pervade such remote places as well, further marginalizing the victimized and further diffusing any substantive resistance.

This, we suggest, marks another paradox. In this context at least, the greater the illumination one experiences is met with a greater sense of helplessness and disempowerment, contrary to Lefebvre ' s hypothesis of GUS. The new Justice Center does little to assist in this regard beyond acting as a coping mechanism for those who fear heightened criminal activity, and the new, glamorous football field -indeed, the economic benefits in general -further acts to distract from the negative externalities and politically pacifies an otherwise potentially threatening social class struggle.

## Concluding Remarks

Eastern Montana represents an ongoing and transforming urban rurality that has left and continues to leave considerable creative destructive impacts in its wake. Although this mode of extended planetary urbanization wrests open pathways toward illumination that could potentially lead in the direction of GUS, we argue that this in no way is inevitable. Any assumption that this and similar blind fields elsewhere will continue to wither is unfounded insofar as it underestimates the resilience of capital to overcome any barriers it encounters in its historical mission to continually (re)make the world in its own image. Despite signs of partial illumination, most people in this region, we hypothesize, are under the influence of broader, capitalist-friendly political narratives that blanket the industry with safety. For those few who exhibit full awareness, there are simply not enough people or resources in this region (yet, at least) to take on the globalized energy industry.

Documentaries like Gasland (Fox 2010) and the 2016 and 2017 protests over the Keystone Pipeline in

North Dakota, however, suggest that translocal connections and resulting media attention can be cultivated and that promising resistance is possible. Of course, much of this protest stemmed from Native American organizing capacities and people coming from elsewhere (i.e., celebrities from California), rather than local residents who, as we find, generally accept the risks that come with oil and gas (until they are personally victimized) and do not want more government (despite its ineffectiveness). This, of course, does not preclude the possibility of greater, more genuine radical potentialities in other sociospatial contexts. Whether the Bakken blind field continues to shift to ever greater degrees of translucency is an open question that demands more empirical investigations. As we reveal, the blind field, and Lefebvre ' s potential transition to GUS, is profoundly mediated by place-specific political ecologies, imaginaries, and histories that both illustrate and confound expectations related to the planetary urbanization thesis. Although this thesis offers considerable explanatory power, we echo Brenner ' s (2018) call for more empirical examinations that outline the contours of its applicability as well as limitations in particular contexts.

## Acknowledgments

The research team is appreciative of the people of Montana living within the Bakken field of oil and gas development. This project was dependent on their willingness to meet with us for extended conversations and their willingness to return completed surveys. We also thank the following scholars for their help with field activities: Shanna Lewis (undergraduate research assistant at Montana State University, Billings) and Drs. Jamie McEvoy and Nick Bergmann (both with Montana State University). Finally, we thank Dr. Joseph Hoover (Montana State University, Billings) for creating the map that appears as Figure 1, as well as Drs. Luke Ward (Rocky Mountain College) and Damon Hall (University of Missouri) for their comments on an earlier version of this article.

## Funding

The research reported here was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health (Award Number

P20GM103474), via Montana IDeA Network of Biomedical Research Excellence (INBRE), and it was further supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) via the Montana Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR; Cooperative Agreement IIA-1443108 and EPS-1101342). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health, Montana INBRE, the National Science Foundation, or Montana EPSCoR.

## References

- Adamson, M. 2015. Anthropocene realism. The New Inquiry . Accessed November 13, 2013. https://thenewinquiry.com/anthropocene-realism/.
- Arboleda, M. 2015. Financialization, totality and planetary urbanization in the Chilean Andes. Geoforum 67:4 -13. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2015.09.016.
- Arboleda, M. 2016. Spaces of extraction, metropolitan explosions: Planetary urbanization and the commodity boom in Latin America. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 40 (1):96 -112. doi: 10.1111/ 1468-2427.12290.
- Bangsbund, D., and N. Hodur. 2019. Petroleum industry ' s economic contribution to North Dakota in 2017. Report No. 792, Department of Agribusiness and Applied Economics, North Dakota State University.
- Board of Oil and Gas Conservation. 2019. Incidents (spreadsheets), attached to the Montana Board of Oil and Gas Conservation quarterly reports, found as Hearing Information-Hearing Files-Archives. Accessed August 27. http://bogc.dnrc.mt.gov/ Hearings/.
- Brasier, K., M. Filteau, D. McLaughlin, J. Jaquet, R. Stedman, T. Kelsey, and S. Goetz. 2011. Residents ' perceptions of community and environmental impacts from development of natural gas in the Marcellus Shale: A comparison of Pennsylvania and New York cases. Journal of Rural Social Science 26 (1):32 -61.
- Brenner, N. 2014. Implosions/explosions: Towards a study of planetary urbanization . Berlin: Jovis.
- Brenner, N. 2018. Debating planetary urbanization: For an engaged pluralism. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 36 (3):570 -90. doi: 10.1177/ 0263775818757510.
- Brenner, N., and C. Schmid. 2014. The ' urban age ' in question. In Implosions/explosions: Towards a study of planetary urbanization , ed. N. Brenner, 310 -38. Berlin: Jovis.
- Brenner, N., and C. Schmid. 2015. Towards a new epistemology of the urban. City 19 (2 -3):151 -82. doi: 10. 1080/13604813.2015.1014712.
- Brown, M. 2012. Crime booms in Montana, Dakota oil fields. The Missoulian . Accessed November 13, 2013. http://missoulian.com/news/state-and-regional/crime-
- [booms-in-montana-dakota-oil-fields/article\_e15bd0d2-8d40-11e1-915d-0019bb2963f4.html.](http://missoulian.com/news/state-and-regional/crime-booms-in-montana-dakota-oil-fields/article_e15bd0d2-8d40-11e1-915d-0019bb2963f4.html)
- Bryson, J. 2013. Smoke space: Material and imagined nature in the smelter city of Anaconda. Journal of Historical Geography 40:16 -23. doi: 10.1016/j.jhg. 2012.12.002.
- Cronon, W. 1992. Nature ' s metropolis: Chicago and the great west . New York: Norton. doi: 10.1086/ahr/97.3. 939.
- Denzin, N., and Y. Lincoln. 1994. Handbook of qualitative research . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
- Derickson, K. D. 2018. Masters of the universe. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 36 (3):556 -62. doi: 10.1177/0263775817715724.
- Fairclough, N. 2003. Analyzing discourse: Textual analysis for social research . London: Psychology Press.
- Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. 2014. Community divided: North Dakota oil boomtown has nation ' s highest rent. Accessed July 23, 2019. https://www. minneapolisfed.org/publications/community-dividend/ north-dakota-oil-boomtown-has-nations-highest-rent.
- Fox, J., (Director). 2010. Gasland [Motion picture on public television documentary]. USA: International WOW Company/HBO.
- Gibson, J. W. 2013. Bombing North Dakota: Living amid the Bakken oil boom. Earth Island Journal , Winter. Accessed November 13, 2013. http://www.earthisland. org/journal/index.php/eij/article/bombing\_north\_dakota/.
- Haggerty, J., A. Kroepsch, K. Walsh, K. Smith, and W. Bowen. 2018. Geographies of impact and the impacts of geography: Unconventional oil and gas in the American West. The Extractive Industries and Society 5 (4):619 -33. doi: 10.1016/j.exis.2018.07.002.
- Harvey, D. 2005. A brief history of neoliberalism . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Hennip, R. 1973. History of the crude oil industry in Montana. Master ' s thesis, Department of Business and Administration, University of Montana.
- Horkheimer, M., and T. Adorno. 1972. Dialectic of enlightenment . New York: Herder and Herder.
- Jefferson, B. J. 2018. Dark side of the planet: Hidden dimensions of urban agglomeration. Urban Geography 39 (10):1581 -88. doi: 10.1080/02723638.2018. 1450464.
- Kanai, J. M. 2014. On the peripheries of planetary urbanization: Globalizing Manaus and its expanding impact. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 32 (6):1071 -87. doi: 10.1068/d13128p.
- Keil, R. 2018a. The empty shell of the planetary: Re-rooting the urban in the experience of the urbanites. Urban Geography 39 (10):1589 -1602. doi: 10.1080/ 02723638.2018.1451018.
- Keil, R. 2018b. Extended urbanization, ' disjunct fragments, ' and global suburbanisms. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 36 (3):494 -511. doi: 10. 1177/0263775817749594.
- Kipfer, S. 2018. Pushing the limits of urban research: Urbanization, pipelines and counter-colonial politics. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 36 (3):474 -93. doi: 10.1177/0263775818758328.

- Kruger, R. 2002. Relocating regulation in Montana ' s gold mining industry. Environment and Planning A: Economy &amp; Space 34 (5):867 -81.
- Lefebvre, H. [1970] 2003. The urban revolution , trans. R. Bononno. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Logan, J., and H. Molotch. 1987. Urban fortunes: A political economy of place . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- McCracken, G. 1988. The long interview . London: Sage.
- McDonald, V. 2010. The red corner: The rise and fall of Communism in northeastern Montana . Helena: Montana Historical Society Press.
- McEvoy, J., S. Gilbertz, M. Anderson, K. J. Ormerod, and N. T. Bergmann. 2017. Cultural theory of risk as a heuristic for understanding perceptions of oil and gas development in eastern Montana, USA. The Extractive Industries and Society 4 (4):852 -59. doi: 10. 1016/j.exis.2017.10.004.
- Merrifield, A. 2013. The politics of the encounter: Urban theory and protest under planetary urbanization . Athens: University of Georgia Press.
- Merrifield, A. 2014a. The new urban question . London: Pluto.
- Merrifield, A. 2014b. The right to the city and beyond: Notes on a Lefebvrian reconceptualization. In Implosions/explosions: Towards a study of planetary urbanization , ed. N. Brenner, 523 -32. Berlin: Jovis.
- Montana Budget and Policy Center. 2019. Oil and gas tax holiday: Montana cannot afford giving away millions to oil companies. Montana Budget and Policy Center, January. Accessed July, 23 2019. https://montanabudget.org/report/oil-and-gas-tax-holiday-montanacannot-afford-giving-away-millions-to-oil-companies.
- Monte-Mor, R. L. 2014. What is the urban in the contemporary world? In Implosions/explosions: Towards a study of planetary urbanization , ed. N. Brenner, 260 -67. Berlin: Jovis.
- Nussli, R., and C. Schmid. 2016. Beyond the urban -suburban divide: Urbanization and the production of the urban in Zurich North. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 40 (3):679 -700. doi: 10. 1111/1468-2427.12390.
- Peake, L., D. Patrick, R. N. Reddy, G. Sarp Tanyildiz, S. Ruddick, and R. Tchoukaleyska, eds. 2018. Placing planetary urbanization in other fields of vision. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 36 (3):374 -610. doi: 10.1177/0263775818775198.
- Roy, A. 2016. What is urban about critical urban theory? Urban Geography 37 (6):810 -23. doi: 10.1080/ 02723638.2015.1105485.
- Ruddell, R. 2017. Oil, gas, and crime: The darkside of the boomtown . New York: Palgrave/Macmillan.
- Ruddick, S., L. Peake, G. S. Tanyildiz, and D. Patrick. 2018. Planetary urbanization: An urban theory for our time? Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 36 (3):387 -404. doi: 10.1177/0263775817721489.
- Schmid, C. 2018. Journeys through planetary urbanization: Decentering perspectives on the urban. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 36 (3):591 -610. doi: 10.1177/0263775818765476.
- Sheppard, E., H. Leitner, and A. Maringanti. 2013. Provincializing global urbanism: A manifesto. Urban
- Geography 34 (7):893 -900. doi: 10.1080/02723638. 2013.807977.
- U.S. Census Bureau. 2019. QuickFacts: Richland County, Montana. Accessed July 23, 2019. https://www.census. gov/quickfacts/fact/table/richlandcountymontana/ PST045218.
- U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2019. How much oil is consumed in the United States? Accessed July, 23 2019. https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq. php?id=33&amp;t=6.
- U.S. Geological Survey. 2019. How much oil and gas are actually in the Bakken Formation? Accessed July 23, 2019. https://www.usgs.gov/faqs/how-much-oil-and-gasare-actually-bakken-formation?qt-news\_science\_products= 0#qt-news\_science\_products.
- Weber, J. 2012. The effects of a natural gas boom on employment and income in Colorado, Texas, and Wyoming. Energy Economics 34 (5):1580 -88. doi: 10. 1016/j.eneco.2011.11.013.
- Weible, C., and T. Heikkila. 2016. Comparing the politics of hydraulic fracturing in New York, Colorado, and Texas. Review of Policy Research 33 (3):232 -50. doi: 10.1111/ropr.12170.
- Wilson, D., and A. Jonas. 2018. Planetary urbanizations: New perspectives on the debate. Urban Geography 39 (10):1576 -80. doi: 10.1080/02723638.2018.1481603.
- Wilson, J., and E. Swyngedouw, eds. 2014. The post-political and its discontents: Spaces of depoliticization, spectres of radical politics . Edinburgh, UK: Edinburgh University Press.
- Wolff, R. 2012. Democracy at work: A cure for capitalism . Chicago: Haymarket Books.
- Yellowstone River oil spill. 2015. Montana Department of Justice. Accessed July 23, 2019. https://dojmt.gov/ lands/yellowstone-river-oil-spill-january-2015/

SUSAN J. GILBERTZ is a Professor of Geography in the Department of Social Sciences and Cultural Studies at Montana State University Billings, Billings, MT 59101. E-mail: sgilbertz@msubillings.edu. Her research interests include continuity within, and disruptions to, rural senses of place. She often focuses on narrative structures and components, especially as they can explain competing interests among members of Montana ' s communities. She works collaboratively with local groups whose needs intersect limited, and sometimes damaged, public resources. Her work is often sponsored by such groups and by and state and federal authorities whose multiple jurisdictions intersect riverine contexts.

MATTHEW B. ANDERSON is an Associate Professor in the Geography, Anthropology, and Planning Department at Eastern Washington University, Cheney, WA 99004. E-mail: manderson22@ewu.edu. His research interests, broadly speaking, are focused on the political economy of the contemporary U.S. city, the politics of water provision and governance in the

U.S. Northwest, and critical social and spatial theory. His current research examines the dynamics of rent in gentrifying neighborhoods in Portland, Oregon, the environmental impacts of oil and gas production in eastern Montana, and the dynamics of water planning initiatives in Montana ' s Yellowstone River Basin. In each case, he examines emergence and evolution, particularly in terms of the ways in which governing actors respond to rapidly changing sociopolitical conditions and economic realities.

JASON M. ADKINS is an Assistant Professor of Political Science in the Department of Social Sciences and Cultural Studies at Montana State University Billings, Billings, MT 59101. E-mail: jason.adkins1@msubillings.edu. His research interests include public opinion, with a focus on racial and religious identity, using original survey data. He also is the director of the annual Mountain States Poll that surveys residents of Montana and Wyoming on various political issues.