## Ruptures and Recuperations of a Language of Racism in Alaska's Rural/Urban Divide

Matthew Kurtz

Geography Discipline, The Open University

Anumber of scholars note that racism transforms its shape and character at different times and places: both ideas of ''race'' and concepts of racism have been subject to change. I extend the work of one such scholar, Ann Stoler, who argues that the slipperiness of racial discourse-its ''polyvalent mobility''-accounts for its longstanding power. This article is staged on four episodes since World War II, narratives that trace ruptures and recuperations of racial discourse in Alaska through its geographies of state formation. The stories follow the entanglement of two binary structures used to categorize and govern Alaska's population: formations of ''race'' (Native/white particularly) and frameworks of space (rural/urban) that are often understood to be a code for ''race.'' The first and third episodes sketch transformations of a language of equality for Alaska Natives in the 1940s into a conservative discourse in the 1980s that contested a rural subsistence priority. The second situates a reinscription of racial discourse in a progressive project of state formation and the social divisions deployed to represent Alaska in 1956. The episode challenges an equation of progressive Alaskan politics with nonracism. Public comments following the fourth, a discriminatory paintball attack in 2001, neatly illustrate the slipperiness of racial discourse. This polyvalent mobility has made racism a shifty target for critique and, at the same time, accounts for some of the paradoxical power of racial discourse in contemporary Alaska. Key Words: Alaska, indigenous, racial discourse, rural, state formation.

O n14January 2001, three white teenage boys climbed into a family Subaru with a paintball gun and a video camera. They drove to Anchorage, about 20 km (12 miles) from their homes in Eagle River, a predominantly white, affluent bedroom community in a glacier-carved valley in south-central Alaska. Their 24-minute amateur video begins with one of them practicing his golf swing, and then cuts to a segment recorded in the car on the four-lane freeway outside Anchorage. Against the night, highway lamps become brightly beaded circles that radiate across a dark, wet windshield as one teenager narrates: ''We're going to nail some Eskimos, also known as muktuks. 1 And we'll get back to you, as soon as we get to Anchorage'' ( Anchorage Daily News 2001). In downtown Anchorage and in other poorer neighborhoods of the city, they explicitly targeted people they thought to be Alaska Natives. 2

The videotape shows at least a dozen people hit during their spree with the paintball gun. On tape, the boys explicitly refrained from shooting anyone they thought to be ''Chinese'' or ''a white guy.'' After one non-Native woman on Fourth Avenue was hit, she noted the plates when the car circled around the block. She reported the incident to the police, who then traced the Subaru and obtained the paintball gun and videotape with a search warrant (Joling 2001; Porco 2001). The tape shows another victim, formerly from Barrow

(Cochran 2001), who was hit four times in the back as the young men laughed with what was later described as ''horrible glee'' (Brown 2001). Elsewhere it shows a Native man approaching the car in challenge to their earlier taunts, who then jerks away and shields his face at the popping sound of the gun. An Anchorage Daily News reporter (Porco 2001) described another assault on the tape as follows:

[T]he car pulls up beside a man walking down a street, and one of the suspects says, ''Hello. . . . Are you drunk?'' ''I'm always drunk,'' the man says, looking straight ahead. ''We're tourists from California, and we just wanted to talk to some Alaskan people,'' one says. Without stopping, the man says he's from Nome and is 52 years old and has had trouble with alcohol since he was 14. ''T alk to the camera, man,'' one of the suspects says. ''We're taking this back to our families.'' As the man turns around, he's shot in the face.

After trying to locate more victims for several weeks, the police released videotape footage to the media in hopes that some of those people targeted on the videotape would come forward. Using footage made by the perpetrators, the story was covered in every newspaper in Alaska and ran on nationwide television. Furthermore, the incidents recorded on the small cassette captured the attention of Alaskans for months to come. In the two

weeks after the story, twenty-four letters about the attack appeared in the Anchorage Daily News , Alaska's largest newspaper. T wo working groups, the Governor's Commission on Tolerance (2001) and the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights (2002), began investigating what the latter called ''racism's frontier'' soon after the incident. As a New York Times reporter later observed, the incident ''clearly struck a chord'' and ''sparked discussion'' about racism in Alaska (Verhovek 2001). Its recurrence in public debate in Alaska suggests the story is a potent one. This is partly because the boys themselves provided disturbing and vivid documentation of their actions (mimicking a number of video-diary horror films), partly because it was unusually clear evidence of violent racial prejudice in a state that many believed to be exceptionally tolerant overall, and partly because the principal term that the story invoked-racism-is one of the most highly charged words in the United States.

Although the story may grab attention, this article does not center on incidents of undeniable racism in Alaska, moments like that on 14 January 2001. It centers instead on racial discourse and its critique. It is not the paintball attack that I hope to historicize in the following pages, but aspects of the public discussion and debate about racism in Alaska subsequent to that episode. Issues of racial discourse and representation should not be taken as secondary to the brutality of racism. In the paintball attack, representations of places, practices, and people-the varying symbolic resonance of danger, bravado, and human worth-were integral to the violence, motivating and guiding the actions of the teenagers as they talked to the camera. Language, stories, and ideas have power and, just as people possess unequal degrees of power, ideas of ''race'' and varied notions of racism have become powerful articulations that possess people differently. As Jackson (1989, 133) suggests, ''the idea of race is embedded in the English language and should be analyzed in its linguistic and social context'' because ''there are different languages of race . . . in different historical periods and geographical settings.'' An analysis of this charged discourse in Alaska does not excuse or obscure the violence of racist assaults. Rather, it situates these brutal transgressions against the slipperiness, sensitivity, and explosive volatility of a language that variously draws history, society, and people to account.

A number of scholars have noted that racism transforms its shape and character at different times and places: ideas of ''race'' and concepts of racism have been subject to change. I extend the work of one scholar, Ann Laura Stoler (1995), who argues that the slipperiness of racial discourse-its ''polyvalent mobility''-accounts for part of its longstanding power. The article is staged on four episodes since World War II, narratives that trace ruptures and recuperations of racial discourse in Alaska. The stories follow the entanglement of two binary structures used to categorize and govern Alaska's population: formations of ''race'' (particularly, Native/white) and the frameworks of space (rural/urban) that are often understood in Alaska as a code for ''race.'' The first and third episodes sketch the transformation of a language of equality for Alaska Natives in the 1940s into a conservative discourse in the 1980s about the ''reverse racism'' of the state's rural subsistence priority. The other episodes disrupt a simple narrative of appropriation and challenge an equation of progressive Alaska politics with nonracism. One situates the recoding of racial discourse in the progressive project of state formation and in the social divisions that were deployed to represent Alaska in 1956. Public comments following the other episode, the paintball incident in January 2001, neatly illustrate the slipperiness of the language of racism. My central thesis, sketched in greater detail in the next section, is that the polyvalent mobility of racial discourse has made racism a shifty target for critique and, at the same time, accounts for some of its paradoxical power in contemporary Alaska.

## Contexts and Methods

I write in conjunction with scholarship on geographies of racialization, driven as much by recent theoretical and methodological reformulations as by matters of racial discourse and racism in Alaska. The past two decades have witnessed a well-documented shift in geographical studies of ''race,'' from ethnogeographies of migration and racial segregation that did not challenge the basic idea of ''race,'' to inquiries about the spatial processes of racialization that established ''race'' as a set of socially constructed yet seemingly natural categories (Dwyer 1997; Bonnett and Nayak 2003; Kobayashi 2004). Where ''differences in skin color have been and are signified as a mark which suggests the existence of different 'races,' '' recent perspectives in critical race theory suggest that ''people do not [simply] see 'race': rather, they observe certain combinations of real and sometimes imagined somatic and cultural characteristics, to which they attribute meaning with the idea of 'race' '' (Miles and Torres 1999, 32). 3 Drawing from this approach, geographers have examined the power of racial categories while arguing that they cannot be taken for granted (e.g., K. Anderson 1987; Jackson and Penrose 1993; Hannah 2000; The Professional Geographer 2002). Such work in geography is ''generally grounded in the supposition of race as a constructed category of understand-

ing'' (Schein 2002, 4) and focuses on ways through which such categories are given geographical expression and unequal power.

In geography, it is less widely argued that racism (along with ideas of ''race'') is also a social construct, born of varied histories and geographies. That argument entails the perspective that racist ideas and practices take ''many crude and subtle forms,'' and it rejects the presumption that racism is a natural or universal human tendency across all societies (K. Anderson 2000, 385). Some geographers have taken this approach. For example, Blaut (1992) has examined its varied forms at a general level, sketching a historical trajectory from biological racism to cultural racism in Western thought, and Pred (2000) has described varied forms of racism in modern Sweden. Jackson (1987, 9) was an early proponent for such research in geography: ''One of the most important lessons of recent writings about 'race' is, in fact, the need to recognize the multiple forms that racism can take . . . [since] racism is not a unitary or static phenomenon.'' Jackson then quoted Sivanandan (1983, 2), who wrote: ''Racism does not stay still; it changes shape, size, contours, purpose, function-with changes in the economy, the social structure, the system and, above all, the challenges, the resistances to that system.'' Jackson, Blaut, K. Anderson, and Pred all follow Fanon's (1956, 32) observation-written half a century agothat ''[r]acism has not managed to harden,'' that it has adapted, transformed, and renewed itself in new contexts.

In keeping with these suggestions, I outline the changing shape of racism in modern Alaska. I do not argue that racism is everywhere, that Alaska's recent colonial history has driven racism to infect every moment without recourse. Such an interpretation is based on an assumption that I do not share: that the word racism identifies something essential, something common to all of the phenomena to which the word is ascribed. 4 Instead, I sketch how the term racism has been used in different ways within changing contestations over the meaning and critical utility of this one highly charged word, 5 and how racism has been reconstituted in the process. In this endeavor, I draw from Stoler (1995), who argues that the ''slipperiness'' of racial discourse-its ability to be adapted and renewed in new contexts-is precisely that which has been intrinsic to the power of racism and to difficulties in its critique. In accordance with her observations, my central thesis is this: the slipperiness of racial discourse (what Stoler calls its ''polyvalent mobility'' across the political spectrum) accounts for part of its paradoxical power in Alaska.

The thesis is premised on a particular notion of racial discourse. As an analytical tool, the phrase is not synonymous with ''racist ideology'' because I do not assume it to have much unity or coherence. As N. Thomas (1994, 49) argues, the ''underlying problem here is simply that it is thought necessary to take 'colonial [or racial] discourse' as a singular and definable entity'' at the start. I prefer Foucault's (1972, 231) formulation where ''discourses are to be treated first as ensembles of discursive events,'' as related sets of practices rather than signifying elements in a unified code. Their derivations are assumed to be social, historical, contingent, not necessarily systematic, in character. Given the varying uses of the term discourse in geography and the propensity in colonial discourse theory to render racial discourse as a transhistorical logic of denigration, I use a less common phrase-a ''language of racism''-to register these distinctions. As a series of discursive events, a language of racism is not assumed to be held together by any essential characteristics. Where tracing the roots of a language of racism necessitates that it be shown or assumed to be a singular entity, 6 a more circumspect approach first looks to the varied uses of a language of racism, to the conditions and contexts in which its terms were employed, and to a series of affinities, fractures, and contortions that have emerged across the terrains of their engagement. Indeed, a failure to grasp the conflicted and possibly dispersed character of racial discourse (more than just ''internal'' contradictions in what is presumed to be an otherwise coherent ideology or body of statements) may miss an important factor: the shifty potential for languages of racism to be grafted, adapted, and transformed beyond general recognition as such.

A similar understanding of racial discourse is implicit in Stoler's (1995) work. She begins a critical reading of the 1976 lecture series by Foucault (2003) about the mutability of European racial discourse. Extending his work, she then traces the various routes through which ideas of race, sexuality, and bourgeois citizenship renewed and transformed older languages of racism in the Dutch East Indies. Although she does not spell out Foucault's understanding of discourse, his approach nonetheless helps her ''unseat the conventional coupling of a discourse with a specific political ideology'' (Stoler 1995, 89). Overall, the approach serves to illustrate a fundamental paradox of racial discourse. Namely, that such discourse invariably draws on a cultural density of prior representations that are recast in new form; that racism appears at once as a return to the past as it harnesses itself to progressive projects; that scholars can never decide

among themselves whether they are witness to a legacy of the past or the emergence of a new phenomena all together. Foucault's analysis suggests that these scholarly discrepancies are irresolvable precisely because they mirror what is intrinsic to the paradoxical power of racist discourse itself; namely, that it is, as George Mosse once noted, a ''scavenger'' discourse or as Barbara Fields writes, a ''promiscuous critter.''

-(Stoler 1995, 90)

For Stoler, the ''polyvalent mobility'' of racial discourse ''does more than describe its etymology; it critically accounts for the nature of modern racism and the sustained power invested in it'' (Stoler 1995, 69). These investments recuperated ''earlier forms of sedimented knowledge'' (203) as they called on new ways of thinking, repeatedly reconfiguring the varied terms of a language of racism. Stoler's reading suggests that languages of racism were mutable tools, used for different purposes by beleaguered seventeenth-century nobility as well as popular eighteenth-century revolutionaries, by colonial subjects and imperial administrators, by conservatives as well as progressives. ''Race is a discourse of vacillations'' (72), and Stoler argues that racial discourse derives its force not just from the appropriations and violence with which it has been enmeshed, but also from its mobility across the political spectrum, from slippery ruptures and recuperations that responded to, and initiated, charged contestations about justice and the meanings of the word racism.

This particular theorization of racial discourse leads Stoler to identify a largely unnoted tactic in Foucault's genealogical approach. Foucault is renowned for his focus on the historical breaks and discontinuities between an older discourse and emergent ones. Stoler argues that he became concerned with sketching the ''recuperations'' of terms, grammars, and concepts as well, to show how an older language of racism ''lent its weight'' to the power of later discursive practices. For her, ''this tension between rupture and recuperation is more than a stylistic quirk. It is at the very basis of how Foucault worked and understood the nature of discursive transformation'' (Stoler 1995, xi). In the 1976 lecture series, Stoler finds that which ''concerns him is not modern racism's break with earlier forms, but rather a discursive bricolage whereby an older discourse of race is 'recovered,' modified, 'encased,' and 'encrusted' in new forms'' (61). 7 Foucault's objective is not to identify ''the end of one discourse and the emergence of another, but rather the refolded surfaces that join the two'' (72). Nor is this tactic just a reiteration of continuity and change (common themes in historical research). His concern with discursive events enables greater liveliness in the tensions between recuperation and rupture-discursive moments that are performed, which do not simply happen-whereas such agency is more difficult to sustain in studies of continuity and change.

In her examination and extension of Foucault's work on racial thought, Stoler outlines some productive tools and tactics that have seen little explicit attention in geography. T ogether, they constitute less an approach for studies of continuity and change in racial discourse, more an analysis of the ruptures and recuperations in what may prove to be less singular and far more intractable subjects: the lively languages of racism, the interwoven discourses and critiques of ''race'' and racism that people variously practiced, produced, and transformed. In the subsequent sections of this article, I use these analytical tools and tactics for a genealogy of racial discourses in Alaska. I argue that the slipperiness of the language of racism accounts for part of its riveting power. However, to do so necessitates that I first make a persuasive case that racial discourse in Alaska has been a slippery subject with little internal coherence or ideological consistency. I do so by way of illustration across several different episodes in Alaska's history. One problem is that the tenuous connections between these episodes may make the overall narrative difficult to follow, but this reach across seemingly discrete domains is precisely that which is required in order to make the case that racial discourse is a slippery and critically heterogeneous subject. An opposing problem is that the methodology and broad scope of the narrative may suggest that I claim mastery, detachment, and objectivity over the varied politics of racism and antiracism. Yet I believe my efforts are limited, as well as enabled, by the social locations from which I work (Jackson and Jacobs 1996; Rose 1997; Kobayashi 2003). They are colored not only in obvious ways-by my gendered, classed, and racialized identity as a former Anchorage resident and a white male geographer-but also in ways beyond my imagination. I hope to contribute to a collective endeavor that opens and extends what can be imagined, that explores the routes of racism in Alaska rather than its roots, and, most important, that works through and against the diffuse legacies of racism across urban and rural Alaska.

One particular essay has guided my research: an article by Pete Tarruq Schaeffer (2001). He is a member and former director of the Native Village of Kotzebue in northwest Alaska, where I lived in 2001. His essay provided an opportunity for ethnographic displacement (N. Thomas 1994), an invitation to ''travel'' beyond my usual routines and idioms, as Said (1994) recommends.

In the wake of the paintball attack, Schaeffer invited urban Alaskans to help him describe various ''paintballs'' that are regularly targeted at people in rural Alaska. The metaphor was apt, insofar as a paintball (like racial discourse) is a tactical device that can be shaped, colored, and used in different ways. One kind of paintball is ''just plain racism'' or racial prejudice, which became far more unpopular after World War II. Such prejudice was the target of an antidiscrimination bill passed in Alaska in 1945, the topic of the next section. For Schaeffer, the ''second paintball is the political process'' through which rural Alaskans are constituted as a minority and the strength of their legislative vote is ''continually weakened.'' Accordingly, I revisit Alaska's Constitutional Convention in 1955 in the subsequent section, where I argue that state formation, as it invoked categorical urban/rural divides, involved ruptures as well as recuperations of racial discourse.

Schaeffer (2001) suggests that a third paintball targeted at rural Alaskans is the one called ''equity,'' whereby state funds are to be allocated to urban projects in proportion to population, regardless of regional variations in cost. Attempts to do otherwise are then criticized as special privileges based on ''race'' or residency, a critique that draws on the public unpopularity of racial prejudice. Along a similar line, I outline how hunters in the state's major cities recuperated the language of equality in the 1980s to undermine a rural priority for managing subsistence harvests in the 1980s. In Schaeffer's brief account, a fourth paintball regularly used to racialize people is ''hatred'' and its threats of violence. With that I return to the paintball attack in 2001 in the last section, but I do so in order to illustrate, contextualize, and historicize the slippery languages of racism that followed in public dialogue. I conclude with a discussion of differences between a nonracist approach and an actively antiracist politics.

## Racial Prejudice and Alaska's Antidiscrimination Act, 1945

The manager of the movie theater in Nome, Alaska, walked down the aisle to tell Alberta Schenck that she had to move. This was going to be unpleasant. It was March 1944. Alberta was a popular sixteen-year-old with a brother in the service, an Irish father, and an Eskimo mom. He had hired her to make sure that Eskimos (those who were new to town especially, those who didn't know any better) did not sit on the left side of the aisle, which was reserved for whites. She had complained about her job a few weeks before-she was losing friends, apparently-and he had fired her. Then Al- berta wrote that piece in the Nugget about it. Who did she say was complaining? Society folks? But the rejoinder in the paper last week nailed it. It's about standards: ''some of the Natives themselves do not like to sit next to 'odoriferous' persons.'' Like the letter said, they should ''complain'' to their own people, work from ''within the Native population, raise their own standards and earn the right for which they are asking.'' As the soap ads used to say: thousands who unknowing let body-odor offend. He could write one of those strips himself. The setting: Dreamland Theater in Nome, Alaska. The story: a ''T rue B.O. Experience: No. 618.'' Not even Alberta wants to sit on the right side. He tells her she has to move. Her date, an Army Sergeant in the seat next to her, says she should stay. The manager stares at her. She does not move. He leaves to get the Chief of Police. In a few minutes, the policeman walks in, orders Alberta to move, then pulls her into the aisle and evicts her from the theater . 8

With the rehearsal of this story, the manager's segregationist policy for the theater in Nome, along with the unequivocal racial prejudice used to justify his actions, became an exemplar of racism in Alaska (e.g., Daily Alaska Empire 1945a; Neuberger 1947a; Marston 1969; Gruening 1973; Cole 1992; O'Harra 1994; Associated Press 1999b). The incident occurred in 1944, almost a dozen years before James Blake, in order to make room for three white people on the city bus he was driving, moved the ''Colored Section'' sign another row back, ordered Rosa Parks to vacate her seat, and then called the Montgomery Police to arrest her. At the time, such practices were usually described as ''bigotry'' and ''racial discrimination''; the word racism was first coined only in 1934, and one decade later it was still rarely used in the United States (Miles 1989; Blauner 1993). In Alaska, Alberta Schenck had challenged the theater's segregation by ''race'' before her refusal to move, first by talking to the manager, and then in a letter to The Nome Nugget . There Schenck (1944) argued that Americans were currently ''fighting for the purpose of freedom,'' for equality ''regardless of race, creed, or color,'' but that this had been curtailed before the war, when ''the so-called society people in our city'' were ''complaining'' about ''where we should sit in a theater because of being natives or part natives. In other parts of Alaska, all people are treated equally. Seemingly Nome is the only town in Alaska treating the natives and breeds as outcasts. These people, trying to be so-called society people, are only following in the steps of Hitlerism.''

Upon her forcible eviction, Schenck wired a note to Governor Ernest Gruening for support, and her parents filed suit against the theater and the Nome police (Marston 1969). In the Governor, Schenck found an enthusiastic supporter. Gruening was a member of the

NAACP and, while editor of The Nation , he had expressed his concern about Hitler's rise to power as early as 1933 (Johnson 1998). He immediately wired the Mayor of Nome, Edward Anderson, who said her eviction had been ''a mistake.'' Gruening (1944) replied to Schenck and told her of his own efforts ''to fight this discrimination'' through the T erritorial law:

The discrimination which crops out here and there in Alaska against people of native blood, Indian, Aleut, or Eskimo is very objectionable to me. I consider it unAmerican . . . and directly in conflict with the issues on which this great war is being fought. In this war, American boys of all races and creeds are enlisted. . . . In the last Legislature, a bill was introduced which would forbid just such discrimination on a basis of race, color, or creed. . . . It failed in the House by the smallest margin possible-a tie vote. The greatest opposition to this bill, I regret to state, came from the Legislators [from Nome] in your own Division.

There had been many instances of racial discrimination brought to the Governor's attention, with numerous letters of protest still in the archives. One was written by two Tlingit leaders, Elizabeth and Roy Peratrovich (1941). They told of their shock when hearing stories from Germany about ''public places having signs, 'No Jews Allowed,' '' and pointed to a local hotel with ''a sign on the door which reads, 'No Natives Allowed.' '' In light of the wartime emergency and all the calls for unity, they asked, ''don't you think that it is very Un-American?'' The two then urged Gruening to ''use your influence to eliminate this discrimination [throughout] the whole Territory.''

Among this correspondence, Schenk's telegram was best situated in a pitched political battle for an antidiscrimination bill. From the start of his gubernatorial appointment in 1939, Gruening acted as a government reformer and a state builder. When his efforts for tax reform were stalled by intractable legislators in 1941, he turned his legislative agenda to a civil rights bill. When that bill failed in 1943, Gruening focused on the structure of the territorial legislature (Johnson 1998; Whitehead 2004). The 1939 Census indicated that 45 percent of the territory's population was Native, but only one Native had ever been elected to the legislature (Gruening 1954). Acting on his advice in 1943, the Secretary of the Interior directed teachers in Alaska's Native villages to ensure their villages had voting precincts. Also at Gruening's suggestion, Congress added sixteen seats to the two chambers of Alaska's legislature in 1944. Gruening then supported campaigns of Native candidates to fill the additional seats. T wo were elected:

Frank Peratrovich and Andrew Hope, both in southeast Alaska (Cole 1992). Copies of the Governor's letter to Schenck were also sent to Nome's unit of the new Alaska Territorial Guard (see Geist 1944), the ''Eskimo Scouts'' who had been asked to fulfill their civic duty by protecting Alaska's northwest coast. These copies may have had no effect, but in the wake of the public controversy about the theater, an antidiscrimination bill gained two new supporters from Nome in the 1944 elections: Edward Anderson, the former mayor, and O.D. Cochran, the lawyer who represented Schenck in her suit. Anderson introduced the bill. After another representative from Nome said that ''there was no discrimination there,'' Senator Cochran ''revealed a Nome case where a 'fine upstanding lovely native girl' was ousted from a theatre.'' Following a long debate that culminated in a now legendary speech by Tlingit leader Elizabeth Peratrovich ( Daily Alaska Empire 1945a, 1945b), the legislature passed the Anti-Discrimination Act in February of 1945. Hailed as the first such law in the United States since 1873 (E. Thomas et al. 1991), its first paragraph read:

AN ACT to provide for full and equal accommodations, facilities and privileges to all citizens in places of public accommodation within the jurisdiction of the T erritory of Alaska; to provide penalties to violations.

-(E. Thomas et al. 1991)

This event was a remarkable victory against racial discrimination. Before we take a person as complex as Governor Ernest Gruening as a champion of the antiracist cause in Alaska, however, we should examine his relationship with American imperialism. Born in 1887 in New York City to wealthy German immigrant parents, he received an M.D. from Harvard. Upon graduation, he began a career in journalism, working in Boston, New York City, and Portland, Maine. Interests in antimonopoly and political corruption issues led to a job with The Nation in 1921, where he developed expertise in Latin American politics. He became a major critic of American military intervention and dollar diplomacy. In May 1934, President Roosevelt offered him a position as Director of the new Division of Territories and Island Possessions in Washington, D.C. (Johnson 1998). A month later, Gruening proclaimed in the New York Times that ''the old doctrine of 'Manifest Destiny' is giving way to the new policy of equal dealings with all nations'' (Gruening 1934, 16). Yet his own management of Puerto Rican land reform and its reconstruction programs from afar put the Director at odds with those who advocated for the island's political independence, and his credibility was undermined by his association with those accused of

killing nineteen nationalists in the 1937 Ponce massacre. Roosevelt exiled Gruening from the Washington beltway with a gubernatorial appointment in Alaska two years later (Johnson 1998).

Gruening had thus been ''steeped in the Progressive tradition'' (Whitehead 2004, 118) when American imperialism was ''progressivism writ large'' (Brands 1992, 61), an insistence on rewriting societies around the world so that they looked like what educated, uppermiddle class Americans knew best: a national polity in the revolutionary tradition of the United States. Accordingly, it was not by chance alone that Gruening harbored desires ''to build Alaska into a more mature political body'' (Whitehead 2004, 210, emphasis added). Here he revived his state-building project and, drawing from the immigrant analogy that had informed the ''ethnicity paradigm'' developed some years earlier by sociologists at Chicago (Omi and Winant 1994, 16), Gruening refashioned himself as an assimilationist (Naske 1991; Hensley 2002). In the northwest corner of the continent, he then extended a standard national narrative: the ''Last Frontier'' would be settled by American pioneers, and with economic development, Alaska would become an ethnic melting pot. The economic and geographical contours of his thought are also significant. Gruening's faith in capitalism, if regulated against monopolies, was founded on a belief that technological changes and improved production efficiencies had created a ''new economy of abundance,'' though one that could stagnate with overproduction (Gruening 1932). Alaska's Native communities, he argued, needed only the ''diversification of economic opportunity, first through education and training, and [then] establishment of new industries'' (Gruening 1959, 7), and he consistently regarded any community or tribal land claims as ''dubious'' (Naske 1991).

The geographical contours of Gruening's vision assumed that the Territory was the best unit for effective governance and assimilation, once considering whether Alaska would not best stand ''as a sovereign and equal country'' on its own (Gruening 1955a). That he would focus on this geography for his sense of community is not surprising: even had he not been Governor, media, news markets, and transport networks had created a common print-language and an imagined community among many settler colonials in this part of the continent (B. Anderson 1991). Yet his vision went further toward an active cultivation of '' Alaska'' as a hegemonic mark of cultural and political identity, so as to effectively acculturate people as members of this sociopolitical body and to supplant other loyalties. Gruening's work for the AntiDiscrimination Act, for instance, was simultaneously an effort to promote a sense of belonging and shared selfdetermination among the diverse people within the cartographic boundaries that were broadly drawn in distant metropoles. Moreover, the law's measure of equality was qualified-Gruening's bait came with a hook-because the bill granted equality only to ''citizens'' of this newly manufactured entity: Alaska. In 1945, discrimination was accordingly reconfigured as the legitimated distinctions of Territorial law, codes that recognized scriptural and geopolitical technologies of state (i.e., Alaska) rather than indigenous government, and affiliation first by nationality (e.g., American) rather than by other relationships. Less part of an inexorable, global march of modern notions of community (contra B. Anderson 1991), the Governor's state-building project was a particularly American endeavor, in which its geopolitical power was used to promote the Chicago School's recent concept of ethnicity (in lieu of ''race'') as the paradigmatic means to define and delineate nations and nationalities around the world (Smith 2003), and to forcibly inscribe the ''nation-state'' model into the diverse politics of decolonization (Kelly and Kaplan 2001).

As this episode suggests, World War II had three significant effects on a language of racism in Alaska. First, the war had ''left a legacy of revulsion at racism and genocide'' (Winant 2000, 170). In Alaska, this dimension had provided language and force for arguments against explicit racial discrimination and prejudice, arguments that Gruening and Schenck had helped to put in place. However, the war's impact on transforming racial discourse in Alaska was not consistent. As its second effect, the military and economic hegemony of the United States in world affairs at the war's end meant that many American representatives were able and willing, like Gruening, to set the terms for decolonization and the creation of ''nations'' and states. Third, the war had set the conditions for a major demographic shift in Alaska as soldiers and support personnel moved north, doubling its voting population over a single decade.

The next episode focuses on Alaska's Constitutional Convention in 1955. Here I explore legislative apportionment and state formation in the wake of these three changes. I suggest that the Convention's division of territory into binary spaces-rural Alaska and urban Alaska-transfigured languages of ''race'' into a formalized language of space, and that this transformation was a highly significant rupture from earlier ideas of ''race.'' I also argue that urban/rural divide was a problematic recuperation of longstanding languages of ''race'' as well, insofar as the new language of space was internal to the very structure of an ongoing colonial project: the fabrication of the State of Alaska.

## The Political Process and Alaska's Constitutional Convention, 1955

On 9 November 1955, fifty-five delegates gathered in Fairbanks to draft a constitution for state government. Gruening gave the keynote address, titled Let Us End American Colonialism! Rather than ending colonialism, his speech relocated Alaska's colonial legacies within different scales of operation. In the address, Gruening mentioned Natives only once. He compared Alaska to the thirteen colonies under King George III, arguing that the federal government had exploited Alaska to the neglect of its own interests and economic development. Gruening said (1955b, 21),

What progress has been made in Alaska . . . has been made in spite of these colonial impositions, and largely because of the character and fibre of the colonials themselves. Coming here from the forty-eight states, following the most cherished American trend, the westward march in search of greater freedom and greater opportunity, they brought to the last frontier and to its friendly native population, the very qualities that have made America.

The generally racialized alignment of the endeavor for statehood is illustrated not just in the former Governor's address, but also in the composition of delegates to the convention. Of the fifty-five delegates elected in the territory, just eight had been born in Alaska and only one, Frank Peratrovich, was Native (Fischer 1975). A merchant from Klawock, Peratrovich had first been elected to Alaska's legislature in 1944 after its enlargement and reapportionment. Despite the disproportion of representation in drafting Alaska's Constitution, I do not argue that the apparatus of state government is biased because it was created primarily by white people. Rather, through an analysis of district apportionment procedures, I suggest that state formation itself drew on legacies of racial discourse and categorization.

The debate over the apportionment of Senate seats during the Constitutional Convention provides a clear illustration of the events through which the slippery language of racism was transformed and reconfigured. In this case, a language of space emerged. The Convention followed on the work of the U.S. Census Bureau. The volume for Alaska in 1950, published in 1952, only three years before the Constitutional Convention, had included a new page that enumerated Alaska's urban and rural populations (Figure 1). Not only were the tables new; this seems to have been the first time that Alaska was described in print in these terms: ''urban and rural'' Alaska. The Census had begun to use urban as a technical term by 1890, but the historical geography of

<!-- image -->

Figure 1. Census tables for urban and rural Alaska, 1950. Source: U.S. Census (1952, 51-4).

migration helps to explain why the Census redeployed the binary terms for Alaska first in 1950.

Before World War II, the population of the territory was recorded at 72,534. Juneau was the largest town at 7,632 people, followed by Fairbanks and Anchorage. The war brought a large build-up of military forces and Alaska's population grew by 77 percent in ten years. Anchorage quickly became the largest city, four times the size of Juneau in 1950 (T able 1). By 1960, Anchorage had grown to 82,833 people, twenty-two times its size just two decades earlier, and 42 percent of Alaskans were reporting that they had lived in another state five years earlier. World War II and the Cold War initiated a wave of migration to Alaska, and two places with military bases nearby-Anchorage and Fairbanks-grew rapidly larger.

The migration to south-central Alaska had innumerable effects. Population growth made differences between Alaska's cities and its villages far more remarkable, and air transport allowed its residents to experience its cities and its vast interior countryside as now distinct domains, as the smaller Native communities ''could be viewed as anachronistic elements of a landscape that was passively viewed''-from an airplane, no less-''without direct contact'' (Braun 2002, 220; and

Table 1. Alaska population characteristics by decade, 1939-2000

| Date                                                                                 | 1939   | 1950    |     1960 |     1970 |     1980 | 1990    | 2000    |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------|---------|----------|----------|----------|---------|---------|
| Area statistics                                                                      |        |         |          |          |          |         |         |
| 1) Alaska population, total                                                          | 72,524 | 128,643 | 226167   | 300382   | 401851   | 550,043 | 626,932 |
| 2) Juneau Borough population a                                                       | 7,632  | 7,785   |   9745   |  13556   |  19528   | 26,751  | 30,711  |
| 3) Fairbanks Borough population a                                                    | 5,117  | 18,217  |  43412   |  45864   |  53983   | 77,720  | 82,840  |
| 4) Anchorage Municipality population a                                               | 3,728  | 31,545  |  82833   | 124542   | 174431   | 226,338 | 260,283 |
| 5) Anchorage population as percentage of Alaska's population                         | 5.1    | 24.5    |     36.6 |     41.5 |     43.4 | 41.2    | 41.5    |
| Alaska immigration statistics                                                        |        |         |          |          |          |         |         |
| 6) Alaskans who lived in another state five years earlier                            | n/a    | n/a     |  80833   |  93094   | 105570   | 105,605 | 95,562  |
| 7) Raced as white (percentage of row 6, above)                                       | n/a    | n/a     |     96   |     93.7 |     88.2 | n/a     | n/a     |
| Alaska military statistics                                                           |        |         |          |          |          |         |         |
| 8) Veterans (as percentage of Alaska's population 16 1 years old)                    | n/a    | n/a     |     17.5 |     20.7 |     19.2 | 17.3    | 15.6    |
| 9) On-duty in the Armed Forces (as percentage of Alaska's population 16 1 years old) | 2.0    | 28.3    |     22.9 |     16.4 |      7.7 | 6.4     | 3.7     |

Sources: U.S. Census (1952, 1961, 1971, 1981, 2000); Rogers and Cooley (1963).

a Pre-1980 population numbers for urban areas are estimated using contemporary borough boundaries.

see Harris 1997). Nor were villages the only places seen in a new way; city-dwellers produced visible and new urban order. The many documentation projects (maps, development plans, daily papers, the diagrams of government structure) framed an urban landscape within ledgers of visibility and order, yet the ready representation of cities in Alaska made for ''a curious one-way vision'' between rural and urban Alaska: ''Those inside [villages] can see out all too clearly, but those outside can only see in by making a special effort to do so'' (Rogers 1969, 450). While urban and rural Alaska became increasingly integrated by movements of people, material, and capital, the new technologies of movement and perception also facilitated a binary division of conceptual space, changing the way Alaska's landscapes were most readily seen and understood.

In this context, the categorical terms that the Census first used in 1950, ''rural'' and ''urban'' Alaska, had more resonance than ever before. With its tabulations, the bureau accomplished much more than a body count: it simultaneously constituted the social body of the T erritory, so that Alaska residents could be seen as objects of knowledge (Cohn 1987; Hannah 2000; Harris 2004). Its statistics encouraged Alaskans to see themselves as groups in a larger social body, a territorial population divided within itself along the lines prescribed. The census was part of a ''vast documentation project,'' and even as ''populations were being enumerated, fixed, and classified, 'peoples' were being regrouped and reconfigured according to somatic, cultural, and psychological criteria that would make such administrative interventions necessary and credible'' (Stoler 1995, 39).

The census was the most important tool at the disposal of the Apportionment Committee, charged with establishing initial election districts for a new state. The committee consisted of seven men, including Peratrovich. At its first meeting, he asked that the committee obtain the services of Dr. George Rogers, a Harvard-educated economist who had just been appointed director of the new Alaska Rural Development Board. Rogers then ''presented statistics and material on population distribution and population trends'' (Gray 1955). The committee also received various proposals, letters from the public, and testimony from nearly all the other delegates, after which the group began to draw lines on a map to represent house districts in Alaska. They agreed that the number of seats for each house district should be allocated in proportion to its population. The twenty-four house districts were then paired together for twelve senate districts. Voters of each senate district would elect one senator-regardless of its population-for a total of twelve district senators. The committee suggested there also be four ''senate regions'' covering much larger areas, from ''Southeastern'' to ''Northwestern'' (see Figure 2). Voters would then elect two ''senators-at-large'' for their region, so that the senate chamber would consist of twenty seats in total. Guiding their plan ''was the principle that the nonurban areas should be assured of Senate representation,'' regardless of their much smaller population (Apportionment Committee 1955, 4).

On the floor of the convention, the plan faced long debate and three unsuccessful attempts at amendment. A fourth amendment stabilized the ''total number of senators and [the] approximate perimeter'' of senate districts against major changes or reapportionment. It ensured that Alaska's senate would be based ''strictly, 100 per cent upon area'' (Hellenthal, in Alaska Consti-

Figure 2 . Map of the state's original twenty-four house districts and four senate regions. These initial house districts were paired into twelve senate districts, which, like the senate regions, were to remain permanent and fixed from redistricting and reapportionment. Four city names have been added to the map by the present author.

<!-- image -->

Source: Alaska Constitutional Convention (1956).

tutional Convention 1965, 3469) and that ''rural areas . . . would be guaranteed representation'' (Harris in Alaska Constitutional Convention 1965, 3468). The amendment passed, limiting future modification of the senate districts. Before the final vote on the plan, the Apportionment Committee chair summarized the preceding debate: ''we are starting out on the conflict between the urbanites on the one hand and the ruralites on the other, and I hope that, as we become a state and go forward, that we will always use the good sound judgment that this body has used in resolving the conflict'' (Hellenthal in Alaska Constitutional Convention 1965, 3485). Forty-five voted in support, and the plan became part of Alaska's constitution.

The apportionment debates subtly recuperated an abstract and tenuous language of racism at the same time that its emergent language of space, urban and rural Alaska, wholly severed ''race'' from its vocabulary. This reconfiguration occurred in at least three registers: (1)

new deployments of referentiality; (2) recuperated grammars of a social body; and (3) continuing cultivations of social differentiation.

The deployment of referentiality can be traced through the committee's technical consultant, George Rogers. One year earlier, he had initiated a plan to create a new entity in the territorial government, the Alaska Rural Development Board. ''I was in the Governor's Office,'' Rogers recalled (in a personal interview, 5 July 2000), and the Commissioner of Labor ''came up with the 1950 Census and [said], George, we've got to do something about the rural population.'' They scheduled a meeting for July 1954 with the T erritorial administrators for education, public welfare, highways, and health. Rogers indicated that he wanted to avoid using racial categories in the Board's objective, but also ''to recognize that the indigenous people were the ones that needed the help, the development.'' His intent was not to start ''bringing in smokestacks,'' he added, but ''to develop

enough resources that they could participate in'' (Rogers, personal interview). Alaska's legislature followed his suggestion in passing the Alaska Rural Development Act in 1955. In early correspondence (Rogers 1956), he wrote that the Board ''represent[ed] only the merest beginnings of an approach to the problems of the future of Alaska's Native peoples. (I believe it is significant and important to note here that the term 'Native' is nowhere used. The Act's language refers merely to 'Alaskans residing in rural and remote areas of the T erritory.')'' Part of the significance is that the object of reference then remained roughly consonant with racialized groupings, so that the new language resonated and gained weight from prior racial discourse even though the analysis had changed. It is an important shift. The chosen terms no longer referred to seemingly biological characteristicsto ''race'' per se-but to a set of socioeconomic relationships that were thought to be contained in an area: ''rural Alaska.'' The legislature's acceptance of this language, along with the adoption of the consultant's concept of ''integrated socio-economic areas'' to delineate house districts in the Constitution, suggests that Rogers was not alone in considering the rupture to be significant.

In a second register, the discursive reconfiguration recuperated the grammars of opposition within a social body. By Foucault's (2003) account, a modern language of racism emerged in relation to a field of concepts that reconfigured the social body and the state in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Society (and later the nation-state) was then ''conceived as an entity saturated with the relations of war'' (Stoler 1995, 65), and languages of ''race'' provided enduring grammars of heroic opposition in narratives of ''national history.'' Through these grammars, the stories created the appearance of a coherent social body that the state, in turn, would represent: ''the people'' or ''the majority,'' as well as ''marginal groups'' and distinct ''populations'' that were made visible as such through the census and history books (Asad 1994; Foucault 2003). In 1955, the social body of Alaska was similarly understood to be composed of two conflicting groups, less ''whites and natives'' than urban and rural Alaskans. These two groups constituted the social body of Alaska while at the same time giving the State of Alaska its raison d'e ˆtre: it was to be the mechanism through which wars within the new social body of Alaska were to be negotiated.

The grammar of opposition was embedded in the formation of government and its major project, to manage a population at war with itself. Here, spatial discourse recuperated a language of racism in a third register: continuing cultivations of social differentiation or civility. Many delegates, for example, strived to present themselves as worthy urbanites. As much as European bourgeois colonials defined their ''race'' and class in a continual guard against vulnerabilities (Stoler 1995), urban Alaskans struggled to prove themselves ''urbane'' against popular American perceptions that ''urban Alaska'' was an oxymoron. 9 Urban delegates were thus vulnerable from two directions at once: they had to prove themselves urbane to Congress and American media, and they needed support from voters in rural districts to ratify the constitution and boost the statehood cause (Fischer 1975). Addressing both vulnerabilities at once, delegates decided to model Alaska's legislature on the U.S. Congress. With that model, Alaska's urban delegates renegotiated structures of power that had produced, and had been produced by, binary categories of difference. They did so with seeming civility, by providing the strength of seats and numbers in the state's senate chamber (if not in its house or executive office) to those who historically had been categorically marginalized in the body of the population: rural Alaskans.

The Constitution was ratified in Alaska by popular vote, 17,477 to 8,180, in April 1956, and the area-based apportionment of senate seats went into effect when Alaska gained statehood in 1959. The singular advantage that it provided to rural Alaskans was to be shortlived. The U.S. Supreme Court soon passed a series of decisions requiring all fifty states to reapportion their legislatures wholly on a population basis. This principle (''one person, one vote'') was established in light of the gerrymandering of senate districts that had disenfranchised African Americans in several southern states (Dixon 1968). In Alaska, Governor Egan issued a response that, at the Constitutional Convention (over which he had presided), it was thought to be ''in the public interest to have one house of the legislature apportioned more by area rather than population, to serve as a check and balance on the other. That is still my view. However . . . [the] Supreme Court of the United States is our final arbitrator of justice'' (Egan 1965). The Governor then re-apportioned Alaska's senate seats on an equal-population basis in 1966. 10

The Constitutional Convention in 1955 provides a clear illustration of events through which languages of ''race'' and racism were transformed into a language of space. This transformation was part of a very progressive project, an effort to allocate a measured compensatory advantage to those who had been historically impoverished and categorically marginalized within Alaska's colonial institutions. Indeed by present-day standards, the

Apportionment Committee's plan was far more progressive than Gruening's assimilationist efforts. Moreover, their language of space was a significant rupture from complex languages of ''race.'' By that gauge alone, the progressive project might be taken as a fundamentally nonracist endeavor, but in this episode I have argued that the committee's politics were nonetheless implicated with the grammars of racial discourse. This is because, even though their language did not use racial categories, the committee still articulated a grammar of binary opposition and social war between ''populations'' within a state, much as a mutable language of ''races'' had set the terms for social conflict and state formation in early modern Europe. If the episode accordingly suggests that a deeply progressive project was complicit with older languages of racism, the next episode shows that a neoconservative project for equality in Alaska fared considerably worse.

## Equality and Alaska's Rural Subsistence Priority, 1989

In more recent years, a debate about Alaska's subsistence resource policies has been central to the use of the peculiar phrases rural Alaska and urban Alaska as key terms in public discourse. More than any other issue, the subsistence debate speaks to the regulation of vital social practices of production and cultural reproduction. At stake are the rights of indigenous and customary subsistence users regarding access to ecological resources on state government lands, some 28 percent of all Alaska (Hull and Leask 2000). According to a sustained yield principle in Alaska's Constitution, the State can allocate priority to subsistence uses (which account for 3 percent of total annual harvests) over commercial and sport in times of shortage. This recognizes the importance of subsistence: more than 60 percent of rural Alaska households participate in harvesting fish and game, which accounts for 35 percent of their required annual calorie intake (Fall 2000). Nonetheless, since 1989 the State has not been able to allocate priority to any select categories of users in its allocation of permits. Even if the number of caribou in a herd is dangerously low, Alaska's Constitution is now interpreted to mean that neither rural Alaskans nor those who have been racialized as ''Native'' can receive priority, on that basis, to harvest a few animals. So long as it is for subsistence, all Alaskans must have access to permits for harvesting the wildlife.

The situation can be better understood in its historical and geographic contexts. Alaska has only one reserva- tion, even though it has the highest percentage of Native people in the country: 15.5 percent of Alaskans reported an '' American Indian or Alaska Native'' background (about 0.9 percent are Native American nationally). Since 1867, Congress had deferred the settlement of Alaska's aboriginal land claims. After statehood was granted in 1959, officials began to select lands from the federal public domain for state ownership. This prompted Native protests, since many state selections conflicted with indigenous claims. That led to the organization of the Alaska Federation of Natives (AFN) in 1966, which rearticulated language from the civil rights movement to press for a comprehensive land claims settlement in Alaska. An important element was drawn from relatively new critiques of institutional racism. Because the institution of individual private property had excluded collective Native land claims, it could well be considered racist. The argument exonerated most Alaskans from implications of individual prejudice, thus helping to build limited support for a settlement in the 1960s. After the discovery of Prudhoe Bay oil reserves in 1968, Congress passed the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act in 1971, in part to clear land titles for the construction of an 800-mile pipeline across the state. The Act facilitated the creation of Native corporations that now hold title to 12 percent of Alaska's land acreage, yet it contained no subsistence provisions (Haycox 2002).

In 1976, one year before oil began to flow down the pipeline, the population of the caribou herd in northwest arctic Alaska crashed. The State Board of Game allocated hunting permits on state-owned land in the area only to local village residents for subsistence. In accord with the conservative national forces that had begun to react to minority civil rights claims in the 1970s (Omi and Winant 1994), the Tanana Valley Sportsmen's Association in Fairbanks filed suit for discrimination (Supreme Court of Alaska 1978). Alaska's legislature then passed a law in 1978 so that priority could be granted, in times of shortage, to subsistence users who met three criteria: (1) ''local residency,'' (2) ''customary and direct dependence'' on the wildlife for livelihood, and (3) the lack of alternative resources (Alaska 1978). At the same time, Governor Hammond lobbied Congress to remove the language in a federal bill that gave preference to ''Natives'' for subsistence harvests on public lands (Norris 2002). While the AFN argued for a Native priority, all parties assumed that a rural priority was a practical compromise (AFN 2000). In 1980, Congress passed the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act, a bill that allocated a rural priority for managing subsistence resources on Alaska's federal land. Replacing the word ''Native'' with ''rural'' in federal law ran in

accord with popular perceptions: Alaska's cities (Anchorage, Fairbanks, Juneau, and other large towns where money-based economies were predominant) were largely considered ''white'' in cultural as well as racial terms. This was in contrast to a ''Native'' space of villages off of the main transportation networks, where hunting, fishing, and gathering often put food on the table. Census data also showed that in 1980 and 1990 most people in Alaska's cities and larger towns had categorized themselves as white, and those raced as Native tended to constitute a majority in small villages (Table 2). Although those statistics reveal correlations, associating Natives with rural Alaska and whites with urban Alaska was in fact very simplistic. It overlooked a steady stream of rural-to-urban movement in Alaska over the last century, as well as a long history of immigration from other parts of the world directly to those resources and jobs located in the less populated parts of the state.

In 1986, the state legislature amended its 1978 statute. The amendment defined ''subsistence use'' as traditional and noncommercial use of fish and wildlife resources ''by a resident domiciled in a rural area of the state.'' The statute was circuitous since the term rural was then defined as ''a community or area of the state in which the noncommercial, customary, and traditional use of fish or game for personal use or family consumption is the principal characteristic of the economy'' (Alaska 1986). The definition brought state resource management practices into conformity with federal practice, but its effect was to short-circuit the contingency of scarcity: with the 1986 statute, urban residents could not receive subsistence hunting permits at any time because subsistence was now defined as a rural practice. For many urban Natives, this result contradicted their view that cultural practices of subsistence were ''a collective right based on sharing'' rather than an effort to meet the minimal needs of livelihood (Lee 2002). Yet this should not obscure an important element. Alaska's legislature had crafted law that associated rural spatiality with a socioeconomic configuration (a culture or economy), not just with sparse populations in a given space. It attempted to take account of Alaska's unique social formations. A ''Letter of Intent'' by House legislators made this clear; they recognized that ''unlike any of the other forty-nine states, the economy of many rural communities in rural areas in Alaska'' was dependent on fishing and hunting for local consumption (Alaska 1985, 1229).

Before the 1986 amendment passed, three men from Anchorage filed suit. They argued that ''the right to subsistence should depend on individual needs and traditions, not on one's place of residence'' (Supreme

Table 2. 1990 U.S. Census data on urban and rural Alaska

| Geographic Area                         |   1990 population (U.S. Census) | Alaska Native or Native American   | White   |
|-----------------------------------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------------|---------|
| Urban Alaska                            |                         371,325 | 9.8%                               | 78.0%   |
| Rural Alaska                            |                         178,808 | 27.6%                              | 60.5%   |
| Places with populations less than 1,000 |                          68,915 | 57.2%                              | 40.7%   |

Note: For its purposes, the Census Bureau defines ''urban'' as places with 2,500 people or more; ''rural'' is then its residual category-everything that is not urban.

Court of Alaska 1989, 5), and further that the rural priority went against Alaska's Constitutional decree that no person ''is to be denied the enjoyment of any civil or political right because of race, color, creed, or national origin.'' In 1989, the Supreme Court of Alaska agreed, invalidating the rural criteria for all subsistence use permits. Writing the majority opinion, Justice Warren Matthews argued (Supreme Court of Alaska 1989, 11) that the law had violated equal protection clauses. Matthews was sympathetic with the objective of the amendment, but not its methods:

One purpose of the 1986 act is to ensure that those Alaskans who need to engage in subsistence hunting and fishing in order to provide for their basic necessities are able to do so. This is an important interest. However, the means used to do so are extremely crude. There are . . . substantial numbers of Alaskans living in areas designated as urban who have legitimate claims as subsistence users. Likewise, there are substantial numbers of Alaskans living in areas designated as rural who have no legitimate claims. A classification scheme employing individual characteristics would be less invasive.

Although Matthews's argument is compelling, his critique was based in part on a grammar of individualization, with individuals who were then made to have rights that ''come down to us from the laws of England and may be regarded as a common heritage of English-speaking people'' (Supreme Court of Alaska 1989, 12). This quotation, borrowed from a 1913 Arkansas decision, is the only instance where Matthews framed a social category or a people (other than ''Alaskans'') in positive terms. In consequence, the heritage of his ''Englishspeaking people'' effaced community rights and reduced the field for group mobilization in order to privilege individual rights in Alaska.

In the decade before the Court's 1989 decision, another process was also at work. With the construction of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline and an expanding state government, immigration had jumped. Between 1973 and

1985, the state population increased from 350,000 to 550,000 people (Williams 1998). Half of the new residents had come from the western United States, another quarter from the south. Anchorage alone gained over 100,000 people between 1970 and 1990 (see Table 1), nearly doubling its size. Even faster growth rates occurred in areas to the north and south of the city: the Mat-Su Valley grew from 6,509 people to 39,683 in the same twenty years, and the Kenai Peninsula from 15,836 to 40,802 (Norris 2002). With a lobby called the Alaska Outdoor Council (or AOC), this new suburban fringe population became the target of a neoconservative political project. In campaigns for equal access regardless of ''race'' or place, AOC members cited, recited, and resituated Matthews's text across the state. The group had begun in 1953 as a federation of three sportsmen's clubs: Tanana Valley Sportsmen's Association in Fairbanks, another in Juneau, and a third based just north of Anchorage. By 2002, the AOC included fifty-one member clubs, groups like the McKinley Mountainmen Muzzle Loaders and the Personal Watercraft Club. Its project was to assure ''equal access to public lands'' and ''equality among users of public resources.'' T oward that end, the AOC had established a litigation fund in 1983 to support the lawsuit that reached the Supreme Court of Alaska in 1989 (AOC 2002). Its media resources were also substantial. Through an array of newspaper columns, talk show appearances, testimony, and newsletters, AOC members created a trail of material that reshaped languages of racism among the new population. Their success drew partly from an ability to appropriate and adapt the critical language of racism and Alaska's civil rights legacy from the 1940s for their own purposes. The AOC's opposition to the rural priority was thus cast as a fight for ''equality'' among all Alaskans, as the other side to the AFN's ''race-based'' politics, and as the ''nonracist'' position. Y et these claims readily slipped into racializing narratives about ''non-Native'' hunting traditions (AOC 2002) and, further, toward the cultural politics of white rights in resistance to a liberal state similar to the Wise Use movement in New Mexico (cf. McCarthy and Hague 2004).

The power of the AOC was most visible in Alaska's legislature. Strong vocal support came from representatives elected by voters in two areas around Fairbanks and Anchorage. In Anchorage it was concentrated in the Hillside district and on the suburban fringe to the north, the Mat-Su Valley and Eagle River. In these areas, hunting and fishing are popular, the percentages of those raced as white are the highest in Alaska (over 87 percent), and voters there consistently elected legislators who supported the AOC. After 1989, several of the legislators blocked attempts to amend Alaska's Constitution for a subsistence priority. Had the legislature allowed it, polls were indicating that voters would pass such an amendment (Bellisle 2001). Repeated attempts to pass such an amendment in the 1990s made headlines. By the start of the legislative session in 1999, an ''urban/rural split'' was a recurring story in the newspapers, with charges of racism targeted in both directions across the House floor (e.g., Holtz 1999). In May of that year, 3,000 people marched through Anchorage in a ''We the People'' rally to support a rural priority ( Associated Press 1999a). In September during a special session in Juneau, the House passed a bill to put an amendment on the ballot so that, constitutionally, subsistence users could receive priority, during times of shortage, based in part on where they lived. It failed to get two-thirds support in the Senate ( Associated Press 1999c; Alaska 1999). Of the twenty seats in that chamber, thirteen were occupied by legislators from Anchorage and Fairbanks. In these areas, under the 1956 apportionment plan, at most six residents would have been elected senators. Of those thirteen senators, seven placed votes against the bill, votes that represented the group rights of a whitened and oppositional suburban constituency within the new State of Alaska.

## Hatred and the Languages of Racism, 2001

Sixteen months later, on 14 January 2001, three white teenage boys climbed into a family Subaru with a paintball gun and a video camera. They drove to Anchorage, where they planned to shoot paint pellets at people they thought to be Alaska Natives. Their videotape reveals that, within the city, the boys chose to look for targets-to make their so-called ''Eskimo connection''-in just three neighborhoods: the downtown area, Fairview, and Mountain View. It was an exercise of geographical imagination, one that associated those raced as ''Native'' with these three particular areas. In these neighborhoods, people who claimed Native background on the 2000 Census stood at 24.5 percent, the highest ratios found in a city where the overall average was 10.4 percent. 11 The three areas also had the lowest percentages of those marked as white: 42.8 percent for all three, compared to 72.2 percent across the municipality. Per capita incomes continue to be low ($15,212 per person, compared to $25,287 citywide), and migration from other parts of Alaska is high: in these three areas, 9.5 percent had lived in another borough in 1995, compared to 5.4 percent citywide. The figures may begin to show why ''race'' might be translated into space, but they do not explain how racial and geographic stereo-

types about certain places can be created. T o sketch that process, let me turn to another neighborhood.

The boys lived in Eagle River, a suburban bedroom community 20 km northeast of downtown Anchorage. At 87.3 percent, Eagle River was predominantly white. Those who claimed a Native background (5.2 percent) stood at half the citywide percentage in the Census. At almost $27,000, per capita income was a little higher than Anchorage's average and a lot more than the statewide average. Veterans accounted for 20.6 percent of adults in the community (cf. T able 1). A larger percentage of Eagle River residents were also newcomers to Alaska: 20.3 percent reported that they lived in another state in 1995 (U.S. Census 2000). Indeed, two of the boys had moved north from the state of Washington in 1999 (Brown 2001). They conformed in other ways as well to stereotypes of Eagle River: that it was largely a community of suburban white conservatives who (like the boys) had the privilege to believe that their being marked as white was of little or no consequence, and who (like the boys) considered hunting a recreational pastime. Moreover, the teenagers lived in a town that had elected several of the most vocal opponents to the rural priority as its representatives, legislators who were often taken to ''represent Eagle River,'' not simply to speak on behalf of its residents. The community was large enough to have a number of names in Juneau linked to it (Dyson, Kott, Phillips), names that were then associated throughout-and through-the state with opposition to a rural priority. If Eagle River residents were then caricatured as suburban white conservatives who stood uniformly opposed to the needs of rural Alaskans, then the paintball attack helped to solidify that image as the boys (minors who could not be named in the press) were consistently identified as ''the three teenagers from Eagle River.''

The historical context and its analysis help toward understanding why news of the paintball spree resonated across Alaska as it did, but it does not explain why the incident in Anchorage generated a great deal of discussion and debate across Alaska. One reason was that it followed upon the rapes and murders of five Alaska Native women in the city the previous year. 12 Another reason the incident evoked a passionate response across the state was precisely because the responses were so varied to paintball attacks that everyone agreed were racist. To some extent, the languages of racism derive their force from this variation. Their charge is energized by the mobility of terms across the political spectrum, such that the same wordracism -can be harnessed to different objectives in contests for justice. One set of public comments provides a clear illustration toward this end. On 4 March 2001, one week after the first news about the paintball attack, four more letters appeared in the Anchorage Daily News (Figure 3). The disquiet in the

Figure 3. Daily News letters after the paintball attack. Source: Anchorage Daily News , 4 March 2001, p. F4. (Used with permission of the Anchorage Daily News .)

<!-- image -->

letters is indicative of a broader flood of protest and projects set in motion with the incident. McQuaid decried ''the state's legacy of racism,'' especially that represented by the ''paramilitary squad of 'security ambassadors' '' in Anchorage who hustle ''Natives and other undesirables'' out of sight. Adamcik offered a recommendation: a statewide high school requirement for a course on Native culture. The two other letters sat in ideological opposition. In the upper left side of the page, Aslin suggested that the perpetrators should be prosecuted ''to the fullest extent'' of federal law because the attack was specifically targeted and clearly racist, and unlike state law, federal statutes would allow the attacks to be designated ''hate crimes.'' Aslin's view sat in direct contrast to Slama's position in the third letter down. He argued that the law should be color-blind and, accordingly, a crime should be treated as ''equally serious no matter what race'' its victim is.

These two opposing views correspond to what Blauner (1993) has called ''different languages of race'' that operate in American English. Blauner argues that disagreement over the meaning of the term racism has been a key element in American society. He suggests that the use (and thus the meaning) of the word has expanded and diversified over the past half-century in the United States. In its earliest and simplest form, the word referred only to acts of overt prejudice against someone based on their ''race'' or skin color. Racism is thus understood to be located only ''in color consciousness, and its absence in color blindness'' (Blauner 1993, 5). In Figure 3, Slama used this definition of racism when he argued that state law must be colorblind, that it must treat citizens of Alaska equally, or else it too would be racist. With this connotation in mind, most readers probably agreed that the paintball attack (much like Schenck's eviction from the theater) was a clear-cut case of racism. With this understanding of the word, civil rights leaders are thought to have won a fairly complete victory against racism long ago, so that most people nowadays are not racists (with a few notable exceptions). Racism then, by this definition, is largely a thing of the past. Yet when some people emphasize a racial identity that is different from a majority of Alaskans, for instance when someone does so based on their having been cultured in rural Yupik traditions or raced as a Native (or both), those who hold to this definition of racism sometimes consider the emphasis to be ''reverse racism'' because the person is not being color-blind.

Blauner (1993, 6) contrasts this definition with a ''new, more encompassing idea of racism'' that emerged in public discourse in the 1960s. During the civil rights movement, the meaning of the word racism moved beyond a reference to individual actions and began to refer instead to institutional processes that created and sustained a racially stratified society. In Alaska, classic targets for that kind of critique were the legal institutions that had effectively created private property over the last century, simultaneously dispossessing Native communities from the land on which they lived (e.g., Hensley 1966). Similarly in Aslin's letter about the paintball attack (Figure 3), the reference point for racism shifts from individual acts to whole social structures, so that apartheid or '' Alabama'' can be described as racist. Aslin's vision of justice drew from this expanded definition of racism, enabling him to emphasize social groups and structural processes: he wanted the teenagers prosecuted using federal hate-crimes laws, and he wanted them to do ''community service downtown with the people they shot at'' (whomever that group may be). This shift in meaning-from individual prejudice to structural processes of discrimination-has been followed by observations about ''the new racism'' of the 1980s, when racial discrimination was recoded and deployed as ''nonracist'' principles in seemingly race-neutral institutions like education, employment, and law. Although ostensibly blind to matters of ''race'' on an individual basis, many of these institutions now produce even more ''racially differentiated effects for which the causes can always be made to appear non-racial'' (Fiske 1998, 70; and see Brown et al. 2003). In Alaska, one example is state policy for the allocation of fishing and hunting permits as game managers try to sustain endangered wildlife resources on state-owned lands, the effects of which put indigenous subsistence activities ever more at risk. Another example is the apportionment of Alaska's senate so as to represent equal numbers of people with each seat. With major waves of migration north to Alaska in the 1970s, the effect of this ''nonracist'' principle has been to continually weaken the legislative voice of rural Alaska, which, as Schaeffer (2001) observed, also ''happens to be predominantly Native.'' Complete agreement with the examples is hardly necessary to see that, from such a perspective, the word racism invokes a critical understanding of various institutions. Those with this perspective need not claim that individual racial prejudice is at work at all.

Blauner goes on to suggest that white people and conservatives often want to restrict the meaning of racism to its earlier definition (individual and overt prejudice), whereas African-Americans struggle ''to enlarge the meaning of racism [as] part of that group's project to make its view of the world and of American society competitive with the dominant white perspec-

tive'' (1993, 8). Stoler (1995, 91) makes a similar argument, but in a somewhat different register: that racial discourse is slippery, diffuse, and paradoxical; and that languages of ''race'' continue to provide some basis (and in rather unexpected ways) for radically different ''claims about how the social world once was [and] why social inequities do or should persist.'' Blauner's thesis is interesting, but ultimately disappointing for a couple reasons. First, he accepts ''race'' as a given, as an explanatory factor for understanding the two languages of racism. But as Miles and T orres (1999) argue, ''race'' is not a given. It is a historically constructed and powerful idea. As such, it does not provide an explanation but needs to be explained through analysis. Likewise, Stoler's concern with recuperative aspects of racial discourse draws on a similar aversion to using race as an explanatory element. As in this article, a major aim in her work has been the analysis of processes of racialization.

Second, Blauner theorizes the languages of race as two discrete discourses, as two distinct systems of signification. This allows him to construct a very tidy map of each discourse and their presumptive racial groupings: whites who use one discourse and African-Americans who use the other. But thinking in terms of separate languages of racism can constitute new binary divisions and schisms. In contrast, the promise of Stoler's work is that social division is contingent in her analysis, never categorical, making it possible to highlight complex entanglements and relations that involve recoveries and renewals as much as ruptures and discontinuities. Accordingly, I would situate the difference between Blauner's ''two languages of race'' in another way, as a difference between distinct ideological projects that moved across racialized boundaries, projects that all drew upon diffuse languages of race. For example, progressives like George Rogers hoped to address cyclical deprivations and longstanding structural inequalities across the state, yet the spatial binaries in his analysisurban and rural Alaska-did not wholly break from the oppositions that, by Foucault's (2003) account, have long been endemic to the languages of race and state formation. Conservatives were probably the first to suggest that an urban/rural dualism recuperated some elements of these older languages, yet their recent efforts to purge the slippery language of race and rurality from Alaska law has crippled the state's ability to address historically structured and highly racializing inequalities in health, income, and formal education within its boundaries, at the same time (and not by coincidence) that racial discourses continue to infiltrate their injunctions about permissible vocabulary.

## Assessments and Strategies

The recoding of racial discourse into a language of space in Alaska can be better understood in the context of its historical geographies. As K. Anderson (2000) suggests, migration and colonial state formation are two key elements in this context. Migrations have complicated any simple map between ''race'' and place in Alaska. State formation reconfigured the hegemonic scale in which social divisions were most commonly imagined and understood. 13 A third element is the construction and circulation of documents and media, which carry significant if limited powers to shape the direction of actions. These three elements-migration, state formation, and textual circulation-then render a more nuanced relationship between ''race'' and place in Alaska.

Anderson also suggests that geographers move ''beyond a frame of racism'' to study instead the geographies of nation-building projects. Critiques of racism , she argues, ''inscribe notions of majority/minority as if those binary positions were derived from a politics that is wholly internal to the nation'' (K. Anderson 2000, 383). Her insights are incredibly valuable, but to abandon analyses framed around racism and its critique may be premature. It is still productive to examine the language of racism in order to ask why it is so slippery, yet so ubiquitous as to make racism appear to be a singular and universal human trait. Furthermore, to look for the roots of racial discourse may be to ask ''the wrong question. We need to understand that racial discourses, like those of the nation, have derived force from a 'polyvalent mobility,' from the density of discourses that they harness, [and] from the multiple economic interests they serve'' (Stoler 1995, 204). One of Stoler's most valuable insights is that the slipperiness of racial discourses across differing political ideologies is precisely ''what is intrinsic to the paradoxical power'' of a language of racism (1995, 90). The slipperiness of racial discourse-that which was manifest in responses to the paintball attack-helped to intensify differences and disagreements over Alaska's urban/rural divide, and helped to exacerbate the process of racialization all the while. At its most benign, coming to better terms may entail a simple recognition that various people are using the same word, racism , in different ways. But if racial discourse is as slippery as I suggest, if its polyvalent mobility is a significant reason for some of the contentiousness in and around this newly fabricated state, then working toward some reconciliations may be a much more disturbing and complicated endeavor.

This is not to argue that racism is everywhere and inescapable. It is to argue that we live in a ''wholly ra-

cialized world'' (Morrison 1992, 4) and that various people in Alaska have drawn from the complex languages of racism in contradictory ways. Nor do I argue that, because different political projects were infused with subtle recuperations of racial discourse, they were roughly commensurable. To the contrary, there are worlds of difference between an antiracist endeavor and a putatively ''nonracist'' approach. T urning a blind eye to all matters of ''race,'' which many Alaskans now advocate, is impossible if we live in a wholly racialized world, if the dominant geographic scale for sociopolitical affiliation and ''equality'' is in any way a cultural product of history, and if the languages of racism are slippery and diffuse. Antiracism, on the other hand, ''involves an active commitment to overcoming racism and its effects,'' as Kobayashi (2003, 551) suggests. If racism is adaptable and diverse, then antiracist politics must also be diverse. Accordingly, it is ''sometimes contradictory'' and ''always complicated.'' For geographers, antiracism involves placing our work ''within a historical context with the express purpose of intervening politically [through] a diachronic analysis of the relationship between historical constructions'' (like those of racism, ''race,'' and Alaska's urban/rural divide) ''and ongoing risks to the physical and emotional well-being of racialized people'' (Kobayashi 2003, 551). For Alaskans, much like McQuaid concludes (see Figure 3), it involves a very long and very difficult endeavor ''to finally acknowledge the city and the state's legacy of racism and to seek ways to assure that it does not continue.''

## Acknowledgments

I thank George Rogers, the Kotzebue Elders Council, Pete T arruq Schaeffer, Cole Harris, Lawrence Berg, John Paul Jones, Victor Fischer, Alex and Martha Siikauraq Whiting, Becky James, Frank Norris, Audrey Kobayashi, and three anonymous reviewers for the helpful comments they generously provided on earlier drafts. None necessarily agree with the paper's thesis, and I am alone responsible for remaining flaws and errors. In the Anchorage Police Department, Mark Mew graciously facilitated the analysis of the teenagers' 24-minute video. At the University of Alaska, Anchorage, the Department of History and Geography kindly provided travel funds for presentations of my work. The result is dedicated to the memory of the late Dr. Dwight Pollard. As the State Climatologist in Anchorage, he was a wonderful colleague and an ever-curious thinker who probably would have found this paper rather puzzling.

## Notes

1. ''Muktuk'' is an In ˜upiaq Eskimo word for a piece of the outer skin and blubber of a whale. The word is also used as a racial slur against In ˜upiaq Eskimos.
2. In contemporary Alaska, the capitalized word ''Native'' refers to indigenous people.
3. The word ''race'' is accordingly put in quotation marks throughout this article in order to signal that it cannot be taken as a natural or biological category.
4. In contrast, Miles (1989) and Gilmore (2002) argue that racism has fundamental, unifying characteristics. Gilmore (2002, 16) writes: ''If race has no essence, racism does. Racism is singular because, whatever its place-based particularities, its practitioners exploit and renew fatal powerdifference couplings.'' Theirs are thoughtful challenges to my central thesis. Gilmore's argument resonates, no less, with Foucault's suggestion-made in the last pages of a genealogy of racial discourse in Europe-that modern racism is ''the precondition for [the State's] exercising the right to kill . . . [and forms] of indirect murder: the fact of exposing someone to death, increasing the risk of death for some people,'' and so on (2003, 256).
5. A note on style: when particular words like racism and rural appear in sans serif font in this article, readers are asked to briefly suspend all of the meanings that are normally associated with the word, so as to consider the term only as a signifier or as raw audio/textual material for a moment.
6. Cf. Jackson (1989, 132-54), for whom the local coherence of a ''racial discourse'' is assumed as he explores racist ideologies and traces ''the roots of British racism.''
7. There is some similarity (and difference) between Foucault's concern with rupture and recuperation on the one hand, and on the other, Marx's (1852, 320) comments about the ''borrowed language'' and ''time-honored'' slogans that are conjured in times of revolution.
8. This vignette of segregationist reasoning in 1944 is my attempt to imagine what the manager of the Dreamland Theater might have been thinking at a critical moment in Alaska history. The sequence of actions between Schenck getting fired and her getting evicted is based on Marston (1969, n.d.) and Cole (1992). Except for ''True B.O. Experience'' (Sivulka 2001, 208), all of the narrative's quoted material is drawn directly from an anonymous letter in The Nome Nugget (1994) by ''A Subscriber'' who was replying to Schenck's (1944) earlier letter in that newspaper. As the anonymous letter suggests, hygiene was a major theme in early twentieth-century debates about racial equality in Alaska, but for critical cultural studies of the magazine strips and other instructional advertisements that encouraged readers to use commercial soap on a much more popular basis in America between 1875 and 1940, see Ewen (1976) and Sivulka (2001); in the British empire over the same period, see McClintock (1995).
9. The efforts of others helped combat an appearance of contradiction. Statehood advocates, for example, won the designation of '' All-America City'' for Anchorage in 1956 (Atwood 1957), and a journalist who supported statehood titled his New York Times article, published shortly after the 1946 statehood referendum, ''Our Urbane, Civilized Frontier'' (Neuberger 1947b).

10. To my knowledge, the status of native tribes and regional indigenous cultural formations as historically ''sovereign'' entities-like the fifty states, whose seats in the U.S. Senate are not apportioned on a ''one person, one vote'' rule-was never addressed in these decisions.
11. In percentages for Native populations, I include all who claimed any '' American Indian or Alaska Native'' background. The percentages for white populations include only those who claimed only the ''white'' category on the 2000 Census and no additional categories.
12. I am very grateful to members of the Kotzebue Elders Council for their emphasis on this point. It is especially unfortunate that, to my knowledge, issues of sexuality and gender in the paintball attack by three boys brought little (if any) public discussion.
13. Indeed, the now popular refrain of multiculturalism and tolerance has done little to upset the hegemony of ''Alaska'' in setting the terms for discussions of cultural and political identity. Some of the projects that followed from the paintball incident, in fact, have the unfortunate effect of promulgating that vision of territorial affiliation without recognizing the cultural peculiarity of that vision. An example is a new high-school student exchange program that seeks ''to promote the healing of social, political, cultural, and economic gaps that have grown between urban and rural Alaskans'' (Alaska Humanities Forum 2001). Other examples include the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights (2002) and the Governor's Commission on Tolerance (2001), both of which are framed as promoting tolerance amid ''the multicultural diversity of Alaska.''

## References

- Alaska Federation of Natives (AFN). 2000. Subsistence chronology: A short history of subsistence policy in Alaska since statehood . Anchorage: Alaska Federation of Natives.
- Alaska. 1978. Session Laws, Resolutions: Chapter 151 . Juneau: Legislative Affairs Agency.
- FFF . 1985. Alaska House Journal . Juneau: Legislative Affairs Agency.
- FFF . 1986. Session Laws, Resolutions: Chapter 52 . Juneau: Legislative Affairs Agency.
- FFF . 1999. Alaska Senate Journal . Juneau: Legislative Affairs Agency.
- Alaska Constitutional Convention. 1956. Constitution of the State of Alaska . Juneau: Alaska Constitutional Convention. FFF . 1965. Official Minutes of the Daily Proceedings . Juneau: Alaska Legislative Council.
- Alaska Humanities Forum. 2001. Urban Rural Youth Program (last accessed 17 November 2001).
- Anchorage Daily News . 2001. Teens' video of paintball spree [43 second video extract] http://www.adn.com/video/story/ 630922p-675180c.html (last accessed 11 April 2002).
- Anderson, Benedict. 1991. Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of nationalism . London: Verso.
- Anderson, Kay. 1987. The idea of Chinatown: The power of place and institutional practice in the making of a racial category. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 77: 580-98.
- FFF . 2000. Thinking ''postnationally'': Dialogue across multicultural, indigenous, and settler spaces. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 90: 381-91.
- Alaska Outdoor Council (AOC). 2002. What is AOC? http://www. alaskaoutdoorcouncil.org/ (last accessed 30 March 2002).
- Apportionment Committee. 1955. Committee Proposal/14. Dated 17 December 1955, in Folder 206, Reel 3, Alaska Constitutional Convention Records, UAA Archives, Anchorage, Alaska.
- Asad, Talal. 1994. Ethnographic representation, statistics, and modern power. Social Research 61 (1): 55-87.
- Associated Press. 1999a. Native rights march draws 3,000. 6 May. FFF . 1999b. Statehood, oil, and ANCSA help define the last 100 years in Alaska. 29 December.
- FFF . 1999c. Subsistence amendment fails in the Senate. 30 September.
- Atwood, Evangeline. 1957. Anchorage: All-America city . Portland, OR: Binfords &amp; Mort.
- Bellisle, Martha. 2001. Survey finds Alaskans want vote on rural subsistence priority. Anchorage Daily News , 16 September: B1.
- Blauner, Bob. 1993. Language of race. Current 349 (January): 4-11. Blaut, James. 1992. The theory of cultural racism. Antipode 24 (4): 289-99.
- Bonnett, Alastair, and Anoop Nayak. 2003. Cultural geographies of racialization: The territory of race. In Handbook of cultural geography , ed. Kay Anderson, Mona Domosh, Steve Pile, and Nigel Thrift, 300-12. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
- Brands, Henry W . 1992. Bound to empire: The United States and the Philippines . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Braun, Bruce. 2002. Colonialism's afterlife: Vision and visuality on the northwest coast. Cultural Geographies 9:202-47.
- Brown, Michael, Martin Carnoy, Elliott Currie, Troy Duster, David Oppenheimer, Marjorie Shultz, and David Wellman. 2003. Whitewashing race: The myth of a color-blind society . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Brown, Molly. 2001. Man gets jail time in paint ball attack. Anchorage Daily News , 1 September: A1.
- Cochran, Oakley. 2001. Former residents victims of paint ball attack. Arctic Sounder (Kotzebue, Alaska), 29 March: 1,6.
- Cohn, Bernard. 1987. The census, social structure and objectification in South Asia. In An anthropologist among the historians and other essays , ed. B. Cohn, 224-54. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Cole, Terrence. 1992. Jim Crow in Alaska: The passage of the Alaska Equal Rights Act of 1945. Western Historical Quarterly 23 (4): 428-49.
- Daily Alaska Empire. 1945a. Packed House hears Equal Rights debate: ANB head calls for new deal for Native groups or else. 31 January: 8.
- FFF . 1945b. Super race theory hit in hearing: Native sisterhood president hits at ''rights'' bill opposition. 6 February: 8.
- Dixon, Robert, Jr. 1968. Democratic representation: Reapportionment in law and politics . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Dwyer, Owen. 1997. Geographical research about African Americans: A survey of journals, 1911-1995. The Professional Geographer 49: 441-51.
- Egan, Governor William. 1965. Statement regarding 1965 Reapportionment Proclamation. Dated 3 September, in the Legislative Library, Juneau, Alaska.
- Ewen, Stuart. 1976. Captains of consciousness: Advertising and the social roots of the consumer culture . New York: McGrawHill.

- Fall, James. 2000. Subsistence in rural Alaska's mixed economy . Juneau: Alaska Division of Subsistence.
- Fanon, Frantz. 1956 (1970). Racism and culture. In Toward the African revolution (political essays) , ed. F. Fanon, trans. Haakon Chevalier, 31-44. New York: Grover Press.
- Fischer, Victor. 1975. Alaska's Constitutional Convention . Fairbanks: University of Alaska Press.
- Fiske, John. 1998. Surveilling the city: Whiteness, the black man, and democratic totalitarianism. Theory, Culture, &amp; Society 15 (2): 67-88.
- Foucault, Michel. 1972. The archaeology of knowledge and the discourse on language , trans. A. Sheridan Smith. New York: Pantheon Books.
- FFF . 2003. ''Society must be defended'': Lectures at the College de France, 1975-76 , trans. David Macey. New York: Picador.
- Geist, Otto. 1944. Ernest Gruening to Alberta Schenck. Copies of a letter dated 17 March, in Folder 6, Box 11, Geist Papers, UAF Archives, Fairbanks, Alaska.
- Gilmore, Ruth Wilson. 2002. Fatal couplings of power and difference: Notes on racism and geography. The Professional Geographer 54: 15-24.
- Governor's Commission on Tolerance. 2001. Final report . Juneau: State of Alaska. PDF file at http://www.gov.state.ak.us/ tolerance/ (last accessed 10 May 2002).
- Gray, Douglas. 1955. Minutes of the Committee on Elections, Suffrage, and Apportionment. Dated 22 November, in Folder 206, Reel 3, Alaska Constitutional Convention Records, UAA Archives, Anchorage, Alaska.
- Gruening, Ernest. 1932. A revolution has begun. Unpublished manuscript in Folder 504, Box 772, Gruening Papers, UAF Archives, Fairbanks, Alaska.
- FFF . 1934. Our era of 'imperialism' nears its end. New York Times Magazine, 10 June: 4-5, 16.
- FFF . 1944. Letter to Alberta Schenck. Dated 17 March, in Folder 64, Box 22, Gruening Papers, UAF Archives, Fairbanks, Alaska.
- FFF . 1954. The State of Alaska . New York: Random House. FFF . 1955a. Letter to Robert Atwood. Dated 18 March,
- Folder 36, Box 1, Gruening Papers, UAF Archives, Fairbanks, Alaska.
- FFF . 1955b. Let us end American colonialism . College: University of Alaska.
- FFF . 1959. Ernest Gruening and the Native people of Alaska. Unpublished manuscript in the Alaska State Library, Juneau, Alaska.
- FFF . 1973. Many battles: The autobiography of Ernest Gruening . New York: Liveright.
- Hannah, Matthew. 2000. Governmentality and the mastery of territory in nineteenth-century America . New York: Cambridge University Press.
- Harris, Cole. 1997. The resettlement of British Columbia: Essays on colonialism and geographical change . Vancouver: UBC Press.
- FFF . 2004. How did colonialism dispossess? Comments from an Edge of Empire. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94: 165-82.
- Haycox, Stephen. 2002. Frigid embrace: Politics, economics, and environment in Alaska . Corvallis: Oregon State University Press.
- Hensley, William. 1966. What rights to land have the Alaska Natives? http://www.alaskool.org (last accessed 31 July 2005).
- FFF . 2002. ANCSA at 30 Lecture Series: Number Four. http://litsite.alaska.edu/uaa/aktraditions (last accessed 31 July 2005).
- Holtz, Steve. 1999. Rural/urban split grows. Juneau Empire 31 January: 1.
- Hull, Theresa, and Linda Leask. 2000. Dividing Alaska, 18672000: Changing land ownership and management. Alaska Review of Social and Economic Conditions 32 (1): 1-15.
- Jackson, Peter, ed. 1987. Race and racism: Essays in social geography . London: Allen &amp; Unwin.
- FFF . 1989. Maps of meaning: An introduction to cultural geography . London: Unwin Hyman.
- Jackson, Peter, and Jane M. Jacobs. 1996. Editorial: Postcolonialism and the politics of race. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 14 (1): 1-3.
- Jackson, Peter, and Jan Penrose, eds. 1993. Constructions of race, place, and nation . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Johnson, Robert D. 1998. Ernest Gruening and the American dissenting tradition . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Joling, Dan. 2001. Man charged in Anchorage paintball attack. Associated Press, 21 March.
- Kelly, John, and Martha Kaplan. 2001. Nation and decolonization: Toward a new anthropology of nationalism. Anthropological Theory 1 (4): 419-37.
- Kobayashi, Audrey. 2003. The construction of geographical knowledge-Racialization, spatialization. In Handbook of cultural geography , ed. Kay Anderson, Mona Domosh, Steve Pile, and Nigel Thrift, 544-56. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
- FFF . 2004. Critical ''race'' approaches to cultural geography. In A companion to cultural geography , ed. James Duncan, Nuala Johnson, and Richard Schein, 238-49. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.
- Lee, Molly. 2002. The cooler ring: Urban Alaska Native women and the subsistence debate. Arctic Anthropology 39 (1-2): 3-9.
- Marston, Marvin R. 1969. Men of the Tundra: Eskimos at war . New York: October House.
- FFF . n.d. Nome Theatre (Alberta Shank [ sic ] Story). In Folder 7, Series 5C, Marvin Marston Records, Loussac Library Alaska Collection, Anchorage.
- Marx, Karl. 1852 (1959). Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. In Marx and Engels: Basic writings on politics and philosophy , ed. Lewis Feuer, 320-48. New York: Anchor Books.
- McCarthy, James, and Euan Hague. 2004. Race, nation, and nature: The cultural politics of ''Celtic'' identification in the American West. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94: 387-408.
- McClintock, Anne. 1995. Imperial leather: Race, gender, and sexuality in the colonial conquest . London: Routledge.
- Miles, Robert. 1989. Racism . London: Routledge.
- Miles, Robert, and Rodolfo D. T orres. 1999. Does ''race'' matter? Transatlantic perspectives on racism after ''race relations.'' In Race, identity, and citizenship: A reader , ed. Rodolfo D. Torres, Louis Miron, and Jonathan Xavier Inda, 19-38. London: Blackwell.
- Morrison, T oni. 1992. Playing in the dark: Whiteness and the literary imagination . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Naske, Claus-M. 1991. Ernest Gruening and Alaska Native claims. Pacific Northwest Quarterly 82 (4): 140-48.
- Neuberger, Richard. 1947a. Fight for freedom in the Arctic. The Nation 165 (11): 254-56.

- FFF . 1947b. Our urbane, civilized frontier. New York Times Magazine . 13 July: 16-17, 22-23.
- The Nome Nugget . 1944. Communications: Dear editor. 10 March: 3.
- Norris, Frank. 2002. Alaska subsistence: A National Park Service management history . Anchorage: National Park Service.
- O'Harra, Doug. 1994. Prejudice in paradise: Is White Alaska's racism against Natives gone, or just easier to hide? Anchorage Daily News , 6 February: G7.
- Omi, Michael, and Howard Winant. 1994. Racial formation in the United States: From the 1960s to the 1990s , 2nd ed. London: Routledge.
- Peratrovich, Elizabeth, and Roy Peratrovich. 1941. Letter to Governor Ernest Gruening. Dated 30 December, in File 40-4b, Reel 273, General Correspondence of the Alaska Territorial Governor, 1909-1958, National Archives, Anchorage, Alaska.
- Porco, Peter. 2001. Three teens hunted Natives with paintball guns, police say. Anchorage Daily News , 24 February: A1.
- Pred, Allan. 2000. Even in Sweden: Racisms, racialized spaces, and the popular geographic imagination . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- The Professional Geographer . 2002. Focus: Race, racism, and geography. Special Issue, 54 (1): 1-66.
- Rogers, George. 1956. Letter to Mr. Gilliam, dated 2 April. In the ''Prior to Sept 1956'' Folder, Box 647, Series 107, Record Group 315-''Rural Alaska Development Board,'' Alaska State Archives, Juneau, Alaska.
- FFF . 1969. Party politics or protest politics: Current political trends in Alaska. Polar Record 14 (91): 445-58.
- Rogers, George, and Richard Cooley. 1963. Alaska's population and economy: Regional growth, development and future outlook. Vol. 2, Statistical Handbook . Anchorage: University of Alaska Press.
- Rose, Gillian. 1997. Situating knowledges: Positionality, reflexivities, and other tactics. Progress in Human Geography 21 (3): 305-20.
- Said, Edward. 1994. Identity, authority, and freedom: The potentate and the traveler. Boundary 2:1-18.
- Schaeffer, Pete T arruq. 2001. Paintballs and the people who use them. Qikiktagrugmiut Tusaayugaat . May: 1-2. Kotzebue, AK: Native Village of Kotzebue.
- Schein, Richard. 2002. Introduction. The Professional Geographer 54: 1-5.
- Schenck, Alberta. 1944. Communications: To whom it may concern. The Nome Nugget, 3 March: 3.
- Sivanandan, Ambalavaner. 1983. Challenging racism. Race and Class 25 (2): 1-11.
- Sivulka, Juliann. 2001. Stronger than dirt: A cultural history of advertising personal hygiene in America, 1875 to 1940 . Amherst, NY: Humanity Books.
- Smith, Neil. 2003. American empire: Roosevelt's geographer and the prelude to globalization . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Stoler, Ann Laura. 1995. Race and the education of desire: Foucault's History of Sexuality and the colonial order of things . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Supreme Court of Alaska. 1978. State of Alaska v. T anana Valley Sportmen's Association . 583 P .2d 854.
- FFF . 1989. McDowell vs. State of Alaska . 785 P .2d 1.
- Thomas, Edward, Central Council of Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska, Sharon Olsen, and Wanda Culp. 1991. A recollection of civil rights leader Elizabeth Peratrovich, 1911-1958. http://www.alaskool.org/projects/native\_gov/ recollections/peratrovich/ (last accessed 20 August 2003).
- Thomas, Nicholas. 1994. Colonialism's culture: Anthropology, travel, and government . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- U.S. Census. 1952. Census of the population: 1950. Vol. 1: Number of inhabitants . Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
- FFF . 1961. Census of Population: 1960. Volume I. Characteristics of the Population: Part 3. Alaska . Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
- FFF . 1971. Census of Population: 1970. Number of Inhabitants. Alaska . Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
- FFF . 1981. Census of Population: 1980. Volume 1. Characteristics of the Population. Chapter A. Number of Inhabitants. Part 3. Alaska . Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
- FFF . 2000. American FactFinder. http://factfinder.census. gov/servlet/BasicFactsServlet (last accessed 17 July 2003).
- U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. 2002. Final report of the Alaska Advisory Committee . http://www.usccr.gov/pubs/aksac02/ adv.htm (last accessed 10 May 2002).
- Verhovek, Sam Howe. 2001. Alaska panel has suggestions for improving race relations. New York Times, 30 December: A14.
- Whitehead, John. 2004. Completing the union: Alaska, Hawai'i, and the battle for statehood . Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Williams, Greg. 1998. Population projections. Alaska Economic Trends 18 (9): 3-12.
- Winant, Howard. 2000. Race and race theory. Annual Review of Sociology 26:169-85.

Correspondence: Geography Discipline, Faculty of Social Sciences, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, United Kingdom, e-mail: m.a.kurtz@open.ac.uk.