## The Best of Times and the  Worst of   Times: Structural Adjustment Programs and Uneven Development in Africa: The Case Of Ghana*

## Kwadwo Konadu-Agyemang

The University of Akron

Since 1983, Ghana has been undergoing World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) sponsored Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs). The implementation of the SAPs, it is claimed, has arrested Ghana's economy from complete collapse, resulted in consistent growth in GDP averaging 6% over the past decade, reduced inflation levels, created budget surplus, and increased export earnings. Compared to the 1970s, these are the best of times indeed. But while these SAPs-derived improvements in the national economy have been recorded at the macro level, the benefits at the micro level are a matter of considerable debate. This study revisits the issue of socioeconomic and spatial disparities that have characterized Ghana since colonial times, emphasizing the period from 1983 when Ghana' s SAPs began. It examines current patterns of socioeconomic disparities with emphasis on the distribution of, and access to, health, education, basic services, and the like. The study focuses on urban-rural as well as interregional disparities in the country. Key Words: Ghana, World Bank, IMF, Structural Adjustment Programs.

## Introduction

escribing the turbulent times that characterized the setting of his book A Tale of Two Cities , Charles Dickens wrote, 'It was the best  of  times  and  the  worst  of  times.'  This time-honored phrase may, to a great extent, describe  the  current  bittersweet  socioeconomic conditions  and  spatial  inequalities  in  Ghana, Zimbabwe, Kenya, Malawi, and several other African countries, with regard to mixed blessings that have flowed from the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) sponsored Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs). While D

many African economies undergoing structural adjustment may experience unprecedented socioeconomic growth, judging by standard economic indicators, they may also experience uneven  development,  decreasing  standards  of living,  increasing  poverty,  and reduced access to basic services. This study focuses on Ghana, whose economic restructuring experience over the past 15 years has been hailed by the Bretton Woods institutions and their supporters as the most successful case of structural adjustment in Africa.

The questions of uneven development and socioeconomic  and  spatial  inequalities  in  de-

* An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Canadian Association of Geographers Meeting in Ottawa Canada, June 2-6, 1998. I would like to thank Drs. Allen Noble, Charles Monroe, and Larry Ma of the University of Akron for their helpful suggestions; and Dr. Loren Siebert, Sean Lowery, Kivy Pridgen, and Dafna Peled for developing the maps used in this paper. Thanks also to the anonymous reviewers and Dr. Stuart Aitken for their comments.

veloping countries, especially those in Africa, are well documented in the literature. Indeed, socioeconomic and spatial inequalities are listed among the litany of ills that are said to characterize underdeveloped countries (Lipton 1977;  Harrison  1979;  UNDP  1994;  World Bank 1995a, 1996, 1997; T odaro 1996). Wide disparities  exist  in  incomes,  access  to  health care, education, and other services not only between  the  rural  and  urban  areas,  but  also between regions and genders. In almost all of the  developing  countries,  especially  those  in Africa,  inequalities  seem  to  have  increased throughout  the  1960s  and  1970s,  and  gotten worst as the economies deteriorated in the late 1970s  and  early  1980s  (Adedeji  1991).  The worsening  poverty  and  increasing  socioeconomic and spatial inequalities have been linked to the economic mismanagement that has characterized African countries since the late 1960s.

According  to  neoclassical  economic  theory that forms the bedrock of World Bank and IMF restructuring  programs,  socioeconomic  and spatial inequalities are merely short-term aberrations that arise from structural factors, in an otherwise  well  functioning  system.  Consequently, it is assumed that the inequalities created  between  the  rich  and  the  poor  and  between  prosperous  and  depressed  areas  melt away as countries undertake development programs, especially those that are driven by market  forces  (see  Kuznets  1955;  Theil  1979; Browett 1984). While this equilibrium theory may have some validity and seems to enjoy support among many social scientists, some geographers  have  long  argued  that  interregional, spatial,  and  socioeconomic  inequalities  never melt away (see Hirschmann 1958; Berry 1969), especially in economies that operate under the capitalist mode of production. If anything, they become self-perpetuating (Myrdal 1957; Healey and Ilbery 1989). Indeed, unevenness of development between different parts of the same country may be the 'inevitable and concomitant  condition  of  growth  itself'  (Berry  1969, 12), and a necessary and essential pre-condition for capital accumulation (Mandel 1968; Browett 1984; Smith 1990). Therefore, at the very least, uneven spatial development should be seen as the geographical expression of the contradictions of capital (Smith 1990, 152).

Ghana  has  participated  in  such  IMF  and World Bank sponsored Structural Adjustment

Programs  (SAPs)  since  1983.  The  Bretton Woods agencies claim that the implementation of SAPs almost invariably leads to poverty reduction and bridges the gaps between the rich and the poor and between the rural and urban areas, and that countries that adjust tend to be better off than the non-adjusting ones (World Bank 1994). Three main arguments are often presented in support of this claim.

1. Failure to adjust will, ultimately, impose huge costs on the poor, with unsustainable budget and trade deficits leading to hyperinflation,  currency  instability,  and economic collapse (Watkins 1995).
2. SAPs, where properly implemented, have not only created conditions for growth, but  growth  that  benefits  the  poor.  The key contention is that state intervention in the rural sector, where a vast majority of the poor live, lowered prices, reduced market  opportunities,  and  thereby  depressed household income. Rural market deregulation, however, raises prices and creates  rural  employment. In the urban sector, import liberalization makes local industries more competitive by allowing them to take advantage of imported technology. Therefore, liberalization, together  with  labor  market  deregulation, will  lead  to  the  creation  of  jobs  (World Bank 1991; Watkins 1995, 78).
3. SAPs incorporate 'social conditionality' and  provisions  that  aim  at  protecting welfare service delivery in areas of concern to the poor (World Bank 1993; Watkins 1995).

Indeed, the World Bank claims that its central goal is poverty reduction, as is evidenced in an annual speech delivered to the board of governors  in  1988  by  then-president  Barber  Conable. The address focused

On the central goal of the bank: the reduction of poverty. Poverty on today's scale prevents a billion people from having even minimally acceptable standards of living. T o allow every fifth human being on our planet to suffer such existence is a moral outrage. It is more: it is bad economics, a terrible waste of precious development resources. Poverty destroys lives, human dignity, and economic potential. (quoted in Nafziger 1990, 99)

The question  now  is:  T o  what  extent  do  the World Bank's programs lead to poverty reduc-

tion  and  resolution  of  spatial  disparities  as  is often claimed? This study revisits the issue of socioeconomic and spatial disparities that have characterized Ghana since colonial times, emphasizing the period from 1983 when Ghana's SAPs began. It examines current patterns of socioeconomic  and  spatial  disparities  with  emphasis  on  the  distribution  of,  and  access  to, health, education, and other basic services. The paper  examines  socioeconomic  and  disparity indicators to understand how effective 15 years of  World  Bank  and  IMF  sponsored  development have been in eliminating or minimizing poverty and disparities in Ghana, focusing on urban-rural as well as interregional disparities in the country.

Ghana is divided into ten administrative regions (Fig. 1) and the organization of most statistical data along these lines makes it logical to focus on regions as the units of study. However, the  ecological  belts,  consisting  of  the  rural northern savanna zone with its poor resources and  underdevelopment and the relatively  developed and urbanized forest and coastal zones with  their  cash  based  economies,  have  long been synonymous with deprivation and prosperity,  respectively.  Therefore, this study will not only focus on how the various administrative regions fared under SAPs, but will also examine the extent to which the disparities between the ecological zones have been altered.

## Data Sources and Methods

Data for this study primarily derive from the 1993 Ghana Demographic and Health Survey (GSS/GDHS 1994). The GDHS is a stratified nationally representative survey of 4,562 women  and  1,302  men  aged  15-59,  chosen from 400 Census Enumeration Areas (CEAs) in  all  of  Ghana's  ten  administrative  regions. Both rural and urban areas are included in the sample.  The  survey  was  conducted  between September  1993  and  February  1994  by  the Ghana  Statistical  Services  and  the  US-based Macro International, Inc (GSS/GDHS 1994). Other sources include the three Ghana Living Standards Surveys, nationwide surveys undertaken  by  the  Ghana  Statistical  Service  (GSS 1988, 1989a, 1992). World Bank/IMF publications are also cited in this paper. Using comparative statistical  analyses  from  primary survey  data,  the  study  draws  attention  to  the increasing spatial and socioeconomic inequalities, and lack of access to services under SAPs. Although data pertaining to pre-1983 has been difficult  to  obtain,  efforts  have  been  made  to glean bits and pieces from diverse sources, as incomplete as they may be.

## Ghana: From Glory to Dirt

Ghana  came  into  being  when  the  British granted  political  independence  to  their  then colony, the Gold Coast. The British ruled, or controlled, the country in one form or another starting from 1844, and through colonial plunder turned their so-called model colony into a 'periphery' country, unscrupulously exploited by the 'core' country (Omaboe 1966; Howard 1978;  Onimode  1982).  The  result  of  the  exploitative activities of the colonial government itself  and  European  firms  (especially  cocoa buying,  banking,  shipping,  and  mining)  was that  when  the  British  finally  pulled  out  of Ghana  in  1957,  they  left  behind  a  country which bore all the most important features of underdevelopment.  In  particular,  it  suffered from  an  acute  form  of  structural  dislocation. Production  and  consumption  were  not  integrated within the country but through external trade.  Thus  the  colony  exchanged  commodities such as cocoa and gold, which it produced but did not consume, for mainly manufactured goods that it did consume, but in many cases could not produce itself (Kay 1972, xv).

All the exploitation and symptoms of underdevelopment notwithstanding, the British probably left Ghana in better shape than any other country  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa.  Ghana's  primary material export-based economy was well established.  At  independence in March 1957, Ghana was  the  world's  leading  producer  and exporter of cocoa, exported 10% of the world's gold, and had foreign reserves of £200 million (equivalence of three years' imports). Furthermore, it had one of the best infrastructure systems in Africa, the most educated, skilled, and experienced workforce in Sub-Saharan Africa, and well-formulated development plans (Huq 1989; Roe and Schneider 1992; Werlin 1994). By all criteria, Ghana was probably much better endowed than most Third World countries, and  certainly  had  better  opportunities  to  develop than any other country in Sub-Saharan Africa.  Ghana's  per  capita  income  of  £50  in

Figure 1: Map of Ghana depicting the ten administrative regions, major towns and cities.

<!-- image -->

1957 put it at par with South Korea (Werlin 1994),  and  it  was  comfortably  placed  among the  'club'  of  middle  income  countries.  In 1960,  Ghana's  per  capita  national  income  of £70 was still higher than that of Nigeria (£29), India (£25), and Egypt (£56), and the growth rate was around 6% (Huq 1989). In the words of Apter:

Richer than most (African) countries, carefully groomed for independence, with trained cadres exceeding those of far larger countries, without racial  minority  problems,  having  inherited  a good and expanding educational system, Ghana is  regarded as having the resources, manpower and moral and spiritual qualities to set the pace and tone of political development in all Africa. (Apter 1972, 337)

The bright and promising star of Africa, however, did not maintain its luster for long. By the middle of the 1960s, Ghana was teetering towards  bankruptcy.  The  growth  rate  of  GDP had fallen to 0.4%; foreign reserves had dried up and the nation was in serious debt (US $1 billion); real value of the minimum wage had dropped by 45%; and the public sector earnings and industrial earning had fallen by 20% and  25%,  respectively  (Huq  1989;  Rimmer 1992). Furthermore, the producer price paid to cocoa  farmers  had  decreased  by  66%  (Fitch and Oppenheimer 1966), and the lower half of income  earners  shared  one-third  of  the  national  income  as  against  one-half  in  1956. Ghana's economic woes continued through the rest of the 1960s into the 1970s and early 1980s, orchestrated in part by political instability and corruption.  Between  1970  and  1983,  import volumes  declined  by  over  33%,  real  export earnings  fell  by  52%  while  domestic  savings and investments dropped from 12% of GDP to almost zero, and an unprecedented number of Ghanaians-artisans, teachers, and medical professionals, as well as the unskilled-left the country. By the early 1980s, the inflation rate was in excess of 100%, the per capita GDP had fallen from its 1960 level of US $1009 to $739, and the nation was going through one of the worst droughts and famines in its history. As if these troubles were not enough, the Nigerian government suddenly repatriated well over one million Ghanaians whose arrival worsened the already  chaotic  socioeconomic  environment. (Huq 1989; Chazan 1991; Rimmer 1992; Werlin 1994; Brydon and Legge 1996).

While it is difficult to pinpoint the exact factors  behind  Ghana's  fall  from  a  promising middle-income economy to a country teetering on  the  edge  of  bankruptcy,  researchers  have suggested a number of causes. These include economic mismanagement, over-regulation, inability to control inflation, productivity disincentives,  an  over-bloated  and  mismanaged public  sector,  over-subsidized  social  services (education and health in particular), overvalued currency, political instability, corruption, inept leadership, acts of God, unfavorable terms of trade,  and  clientelism  (Huq  1989;  Chazan 1991; Rimmer 1992; Werlin 1994; Brydon and Legge 1996). It was this bleak and dismal economic situation that led to the 'invitation' of the  twin  Bretton  Woods  'doctors,'  the  IMF and World Bank, by the Provisional National Defense Council (PNDC) government (which in any case had caused part of the problem) in 1983 to provide solutions.

## The IMF Diagnosis and Treatment

The IMF and the World Bank came on the scene  in  February  of  1983  and,  predictably, their  prescription  was Structural  Adjustment Programs. Indeed,  the  IMF  and  World  Bank solution to economic maladies in Third World countries since the late 1970s has always been in  the  form  of  structural  adjustments:  a  new euphemism for modernization and growth at all  costs  that  had  been  'abandoned'  in  the 1970s.  The  IMF  and  World  Bank  inspired structural adjustment programs often consisting  of  a  package  of  actions  that  include  currency  devaluation,  reducing  inflation,  downsizing the public service, drastic  cutbacks on government expenditure on education, health and welfare, financial reforms, privatization of public enterprises, export promotion, and  other  policies  geared  to  enhancing  economic growth.

According to the IMF and other proponents of SAPs, the economic problems of developing countries have nothing to do with exogenous factors as is often asserted by neo-Marxist theorists (see Amin 1974; Wallerstein 1974; Frank 1975;  Onimode  1982),  but  are  rooted  in  endogenous factors that serve as obstacles to development and therefore need to be removed to pave the way for economic growth. These so-called obstacles to development, such as un-

warranted state interference in the workings of the price mechanism, over-bloated public service,  exchange  control,  state  ownership  of manufacturing enterprises, and investment in social welfare, only serve to clog the wheels of efficiency (World Bank 1981; Green 1987). African countries in particular are singled out as carrying an unnecessary and excess baggage of price  control,  overvalued  currencies,  political instability,  inward-looking  trade  policy,  and heavy government spending. These factors, it has been argued, constitute a drain on the efficiency of the market, and caused Africa's dismal economic  performance,  vis-à-vis  Asian  and Latin American countries, in the past three decades  (Roe  and  Schneider  1992;  Sahn  1994; Werlin  1994;  World  Bank  1994).  The  only path  to  the  elimination  of  economic  bottlenecks, and hence the fostering of development, is to allow the invisible hands of market forces to  determine  economic  activities  unfettered (Roe and Schneider 1992). Consequently, economic  efficiency  and  rational  management along the lines of market mechanism, they argue,  should  constitute  the  sole  scale  upon which  all  national  considerations  of  production, administration and culture are measured (Ould-Mey 1996, 14).

In  April  1983,  Ghana's  economic  recovery program designed by the IMF was put into action.  The  implementation  of  SAPs  in  Ghana over  the  past  15  years  has  consisted  of  compressing government expenditure through massive cuts in social services and retrenching public sector workers; adjusting the exchange rate  through  discrete  devaluation  of  Ghana's currency,  the cedi ;  abolishing  domestic  price controls; mobilization of government revenue through  broadening  of  the  tax  base;  and  the strengthening  of  tax  administration.  Other strategies include completing the privatization of state-owned enterprises, promoting the efficient allocation of resources for growth, rehabilitation of economic infrastructure, increasing  reliance  on  market-based  instrument  of monetary policy, and encouraging sector development. There has also been a massive export drive to encourage the production and export of both traditional exports (cocoa, mineral resources,  timber)  and  non-traditional  exports (crafts,  foodstuff,  vegetables)  (Anyinam  1994; World Bank 1995; Ghana Government 1997, 1998; ISSER 1995).

## Impact of Structural Adjustment Programs in Ghana, 1983-1998

The implementation of the SAPS, its proponents  claim,  rescued  Ghana's  economy  from complete collapse. Indeed, Ghana's  GDP, which had seen consistent negative growth in the  previous  decade,  started  improving  with SAPs. Between 1984 and 1991, GDP growth averaged 5%-6%, and since 1992 has hovered between 2.5% and 4%. Furthermore, the annual rate of inflation dropped from an average of  123% in the early  1980s  to  32%  in  1991, 34% in 1994, and 29% in 1997. Again, it has been argued that but for SAPs, Ghana's industrial production, which plummeted to less than a  quarter  of  installed  capacity  in  the  1970s, would have died out completely. But thanks to the SAPs, most industries are now operating at 35%-40%  capacity.  Other  achievements  of SAPs include repairs in structural imbalances, growth in goods and services, generation of donor confidence and the attraction of foreign investment (Huq 1989; Boachie-Danquah 1992; Anyinam  1994;  ISSER  1995;  World  Bank 1995b,  1996).  Compared  to  the  1970s,  these are the best of times indeed.

While these SAPs-derived improvements in the  national  economy  are  recorded  at  the macro level, their benefits at the micro level are matter of considerable debate (Anyinam 1994; Panford 1994; Brydon and Legge 1996; Konadu-Agyemang  1998).  The  implementation of SAPs has not only culminated in the retrenchment  of  over 300,000  public sector workers, but has also led to unprecedented cuts in state expenditures on public services and social  welfare  and  the  introduction  of  user  fees for  health  and  education.  Thus  access  of  the poor  to  health  and  educational  services  has been reduced. The effective devaluation of the Ghanaian cedi ,  from 2.75 5 US$1 in 1983 to 2,300 5 US$1 in 1998 (approximately 80,000% devaluation)  has  raised  the  cost  of  imported machinery,  drugs,  school  supplies,  and  other essential  items.  Ghana's total  debt  more than quadrupled  from  $1,398  million  in  1980  to $5,874 million in 1995, while external debt as a percentage of GDP also rose from 31.6% to 95% over the same period (World Bank 1997). Debt servicing, now 62% of export earnings, is diverting resources from local needs on a massive scale, thus depriving Ghanaian children of

their right to education, health, and adequate nutrition. That said, the national income may have been slightly redistributed in favor of the poor  given  that  the  percentage  share  of  the bottom  20%  increased  from  7%  in  1988  to 7.9% in 1992 (World Bank 1995a, 1996). Nevertheless, poverty is well and alive, especially in the  savanna  belt.  The  three  GLSS  Reports (GSS 1988, 1989, 1992) all indicate that despite slight  improvements in the incidence of poverty between 1987 and 1992, 31% of all Ghanaians fell  below  the  poverty  line,  which  was fixed at a household income of 132,230 cedis per year in May 1992 prices. More than half of the poor were classified as 'hard-core' with incomes below the ultra-poverty line which was also  fixed  at  an  annual  household  income  of 99,173 cedis in 1992 prices (GSS 1995). Moreover, the rural area's share of the poor population has increased, for despite the fact that the rural areas contain 64% of the population, 80% of the poor lived there in 1995, compared to 57% in 1981 and 60-65% in 1978. Socioeconomic and spatial disparities also worsened, not only  between  the  urban  and  rural  areas,  but also  between  'core'  and  'periphery'  regions (Roe and Schneider 1992; GSS/GDHS 1994; GSS 1995; Stewart  1995;  Brydon  and  Legge 1996; World Bank 1997). These are all in the face of the World Bank's assertion that SAPs in Ghana have resulted in the redistribution of resources from urban to rural areas considering the  number  of  small-scale  farmers  who  have benefited  from  higher  producer  prices.  The worst of times indeed.

## Unequal Socioeconomic and Spatial Development in Ghana: The Saga Continues

In this section, the impacts of adjustments on the  distribution  of,  and  access  to,  education, health, other services in the both rural and urban areas in Ghana are examined. The absence of data on pre-adjustment conditions notwithstanding, the results of the three GLSS studies covering  the  1986-1992  period  demonstrate that uneven development may have indeed occurred  under  SAPs  (GSS  1987,  1989,  1992). The issues of poverty, differences in the quality of life between the coastal and forest towns on the one hand and the savanna belt settlements, on the other, interregional disparities, and the disparities  between  cities  and  the  rural  areas, are  nothing  new.  Indeed,  colonial  economic development policies created multiple nations in one country. While efforts were made to create  social  and  economic  infrastructure  in  the form of schools and hospitals, and harbors, railways, and roads in the forest and coastal belts to facilitate  the  exploitation  and  export  of  resources,  the  resource-poor  rural  savanna  belt was  denied  any  meaningful  social  and  economic development. The quality of life in the towns and cities, although low by international standards, was much better than it was in the villages.  Wide  differentials  also  existed  between  living  standards  in  the  northern  and southern regions (see Rimmer 1992).

Post-independence development policies under Kwame Nkrumah, however, attempted to ameliorate the vast disparities by universalizing free  education  and  health  care,  and  creating roads  and  other  social  infrastructure  in  the hitherto deprived northern and upper regions. This seemed to yield dividends, as evidenced in rise in literacy levels, reduction in infant mortality  rates  (Ray  1986)  and  the  emergence  of large and prosperous towns such as T amale and Bolgatanga  in  the  north  (World  Bank  1984; Ray 1986). Although the gains that accrued to the  north  and  other  deprived  areas  under Nkrumah's broad vision of national equity were partially  lost  during  Ghana's  economic  doldrums of the 1970s and early 1980s, I contend that the era of structural adjustments may have made matters worse, and rewidened the gaps. This  is  due  primarily  to  the  philosophy  of SAPs, and the cost recovery element attached to the provision of education and health. Primary education may still be free in Ghana, but the requisite parental contribution in the form of books, furniture, and other supplies has effectively  driven  many  children  from  the  deprived north and other rural areas out of the school system.

One of the  key  tasks  of  SAPs  is  to  reduce governmental budgetary expenses to the barest minimum, and social services tend to become the obvious casualties. Under the first phase of the SAPs (1983-1986) as much as 62% of the total funds was allocated to physical infrastructure, 30%-32% for 'productive activities' and export-oriented activities, and less than 5% for social  services  that  include  health  and  education. This trend has continued for the last 15

years. Allocation to the health sector was 25.1 billion cedis (i.e., 1.16% of the national budget) in  1996,  with  an  anticipated  addition  coming from  foreign  donors.  Allocation  increased  to 38.3 billion in 1997, but still represented only 1.3% of the national budget. This is a far cry from  1980  and  1982  when  allocation  to  the health sector represented 7% and 10% of government expenditure, respectively. Even though the proportion of GNP spent on health and education was increased from the 1981 level of 2.9% to 4.86 in 1990, it only restored it to the 1977-1978 level. Education suffered an even worst fate under SAPs, with its share of budgetary allocation falling from 4.3% of government expenditure in 1982 (ISSER 1993, 1995) to less than  1%  in  both  1996  and  1997.  Like  the health  sector,  the  government  expected  the generosity of foreign donors to supplement it with 56 billion cedis in 1996 and 39 billion cedis in 1997 (Ghana Government 1997, 1998). So far as Structural Adjustment Programs are concerned, education, health, and other social services  may  be  treated  as  unwanted  stepchildren who deserve only a small fraction of the family budget, with the rest of their sustenance expected to come from charitable donations. As a result, education, health, and maternal and child health and welfare have suffered tremendously  over  the  past  15  years.  More- over, the hardships and poverty that emerged under SAPs  have accelerated malnutrition among vulnerable groups: children, the aged, urban poor, and the residents of rural areas.

Stunting and wasting (underweight) are prevalent among Ghanaian children, but in a more acute form in the rural areas where close to 64% of the population live. Between 1988 and 1993, no improvement occurred in the rural areas (see T able 1). A 1986 nationwide study of 14,000 children under five years of age found that 58.4% were 80% below their ideal weight, compared to less than 30% in 1961-1962 and 35% in 1980 (Roe and Schneider 1992; Stewart 1995).  The  GLSS  survey  of  1988  came  out with a figure of 31.4%, but this is still worse than  the  situation  in  the  1960s  and  1970s (GLSS 1988). Again, in 1987-1988, 31% of all children  under  five  were  classified  as  undernourished,  7.8%  acutely.  Infant  mortality  in the nation as a whole fell from 120 per 1,000 births in 1965 to 86 in 1997, but it was still at the  1978-1982  level.  Mortality  among  children under five however, still remains as high as 155 per 1,000 live births (compared to 152 in 1982),  and  Ghana  is  listed  in  the  UNICEF high-risk group of countries (Hunger ProjectGhana  1996).  The  overall  low  figures,  however, seem to camouflage the wide differences between the different ecological zones, admin-

Table 1 Stunting, Wasting, and Malnourishment among Under-Three Population (%), 1988-1993

|               |          |          |         |         | Malnourishment   | Malnourishment   |
|---------------|----------|----------|---------|---------|------------------|------------------|
| Place of      | Stunting | Stunting | Wasting | Wasting | Chronic          | Acute            |
| Residence     | 1988     | 1993     | 1988    | 1993    | 1993             | 1993             |
| Rural         | 30       | 30.1     | 8       | 12.6    | N/A              | N/A              |
| Urban         | 25       | 15.7     | 7       | 8.6     | N/A              | N/A              |
| North         | N/A      | 35.9     | N/A     | 19      | N/A              | N/A              |
| Upper East    | N/A      | 26       | N/A     | 14.5    | N/A              | N/A              |
| Upper West    | N/A      | 33.3     | N/A     | 20.6    | N/A              | N/A              |
| Greater Accra | N/A      | 15.7     | N/A     | 15.7    | N/A              | N/A              |
| Western       | N/A      | 33       | N/A     | 13      | N/A              | N/A              |
| Central       | N/A      | 23       | N/A     | 12      | N/A              | N/A              |
| Eastern       | N/A      | 25       | N/A     | 5.9     | N/A              | N/A              |
| Ashanti       | N/A      | 27       | N/A     | 8.4     | N/A              | N/A              |
| Volta         | N/A      | 20       | N/A     | 10.4    | N/A              | N/A              |
| Brong Ahafo   | N/A      | 25       | N/A     | 13      | N/A              | N/A              |
|               | 1988     | 1989     | 1988    | 1989    |                  |                  |
| Rural Coastal | 27.2     | 28.7     | 6.3     | 2.5     | 24               | 8.3              |
| Rural Forest  | 37.4     | 37.6     | 5.2     | 3       | 33               | 7.1              |
| Rural Savanna | 36.4     | 35.5     | 8.7     | 4.9     | 36               | 9.5              |
| Accra         | 20.6     | 15.5     | 3.1     | 4.6     | 22               | 6.5              |
| Other Urban   | 20.7     | 24.3     | 5.2     | 3.2     | N/A              | N/A              |
| ALL           | 30.6     | 31       | 6.1     | 3.5     | N/A              | N/A              |

Sources: GSS/GDHS 1994; GSS 1988, 1989, 1992

istrative regions, and between the rural and urban areas. Incidence of poverty, malnutrition, and children in poor health is much more severe  in  the  rural  areas  and  in  the  Northern, Upper  East,  and  Upper  West  regions.  The GDHS  makes  a  strong  connection  between child health, nutrition, and mortality  and mother's educational attainment. Whereas only 10% of children whose mothers have secondary or higher education are stunted, the average figure for less educated and/or illiterate mothers is around 33 percent. Malnutrition is therefore more prevalent in the North (36%), Upper West (33%), and Upper East (26%) regions where 75%, 68%, and 67%, respectively, of all mothers have no education at all (see Fig. 4).  Compare  these  figures  to  Greater  Accra where stunting is only 16%, with an illiteracy rate of 19%. These figures are low by African standards, yet they do not speak well of a nation that the IMF frequently showcases as the best example of successful structural adjustment in Africa.

Spatial disparities are also evident in the delivery  of  all  aspects  of  healthcare  services  including access to hospitals and clinics, health care professional, pre- and post-natal care, vaccinations,  doctor-assisted  deliveries  and  the like (see T able 2 and Fig. 2). In all cases, urban residents  seem  to  have  better  opportunities than  rural  residents.  For  instance,  whereas 79% of urban residents had the benefit of child delivery at health facilities between 1990 and 1993, the same is true for only 28% of rural residents. Such disparities also prevail at the interregional  level.  According  to  the  data  presented in T able 2 and Figures 2 and 3, whereas there  is  one  government-employed  physician per 5,300 people in the Greater Accra region, the ratio is as high as 1:64,000 in the North. Since  infant  and  maternal  mortality  rates,  as well as other incidents of morbidity, are higher in the rural areas and the peripheral regions, a strong relationship appears to exist between access to health care facilities and personnel and mortality rates (GSS 1993). One's place of residence is therefore an important determinant of access to basic services (see T able 2 and Figs. 2, 3a and 3b).

While lack of health facilities  may  prevent people  from  using  healthcare,  affordability may also  be  a  significant  factor.  Residents  of the  urban  areas  are  generally  more  educated

Table 2 Access to Basic Services by Place of Residence, 1990-1994

| FRS/REL f Asst. Del.   | 6.2 26.3 13.7 14.7 7.7 27.8 11.4 16.1 15.8 31.9 35.1 54.2                                  |
|------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| UTBA e Asst. Del.      | 5.3 19.1 12.3 17.4 4.1 15.8 14.8 12.5 8.1 31.9 35.1 54.2                                   |
| TTBA d Asst. Del.      | 4.7 19.4 27.9 29 4.6 13.7 13.9 12 12.4 13.4 16.9 11.3                                      |
| TNM c Asst. Del.       | 64.7 26.8 32.4 36.6 55.6 29.5 48.9 48.3 48.8 13.8 22.1 16.9                                |
| Doctor Asst. Del.      | 16.5 2.7 7.4 0.9 24.4 4.7 6.3 7.4 6.7 2 0 2.1 56.9                                         |
| Home Delivery          | 20.5 70.9 63.7 63.8 20.4 65.8 43.9 45.3 45 85.4 75.3 82.4 42.2                             |
| Health fac. Delivery   | 79.3 28 36.3 34.8 79.6 33.3 55.3 53.2 53.6 14.6 22.1 16.9 26.2                             |
| MHHH b No Educ         | 12.2 32.9 17.8 18.5 9.8 20.8 16.9 17.4 21.7 62 56.9 50.9 38.3                              |
| FHHH a No Educ         | 22.3 46.8 34.1 35.6 19.4 34.3 27.1 33 30.8 75.9 67.9 66.5                                  |
| Access to PipedWater   | 75.8 12.8 25.3 48.7 89.3 19.3 28.4 39 19.1 16.4 6.3 15.2 25.4                              |
| Access to Electricity  | 74 6 26.4 29.6 80.4 8.5 26.6 38.3 19.1 11.3 10.3 10.3 30.6                                 |
| Place of Residence     | Urban Rural Western Central G/Accra Volta Eastern Ashanti B/A Northern U/West U/East Total |

Source: GSS/GDHS, 1994.

<!-- image -->

TotalMedicalPersonnel

83-125

202-516

126-20

517-1049

1050-1973

<!-- image -->

Pop.per Medical Personnel

614-1497

1498-3009

3010-3629

3630-4332

4333-13763

<!-- image -->

PopulationperPhysican

5339-7837

7838-28620

28621-34628

34629-51530

51531-63437

Figure 2: Distribution of medical personnel in government hospitals by region (population) 1993. Source: GSS/GDHS 1994.

and better paid (relatively) and are more likely to afford, and therefore seek, the assistance of hospitals during child delivery than their rural counterparts (most of whom depend upon seasonal  incomes).  The  introduction  of  hospital user fees in 1985 as part of SAPs, however, affected both urban and rural residents, but the latter more severely. While the fees led to an immediate drop of 25%-50% in hospital and clinic visits in the Accra area, it was as high as 45%-80% in some rural areas during the first eight  months  (Enyimayew  1988).  This  trend continues until today, and the poor people of the savanna belt and the rural areas still suffer the consequences of 'pay as you use' in healthcare  delivery.  Moreover,  poor  transportation links to health centers may pose problems especially if sickness or labor occurs at night or in the rainy season when rural roads become unusable. In the Northern and Upper regions, in most  cases,  the  closest  health  facilities,  often understaffed, may be up to 100 or more miles away, and hence not easily accessible. The culmination of all of these factors is that 74% of all ill persons in the rural savanna consulted practitioners other than doctors in 1991-1992, up from 66% in 1987-1988. While 39% of these healthcare providers include nurses, and medical assistants, 29% is made up of non-professional  medical  personnel  such  as  spiritualists and traditional healers (GSS 1989, 1992).

Although  some  people,  especially  those  in the rural areas, may opt for treatments outside biomedicine,  considering  the  fact  most  Africans tend to classify ailments into 'hospital and non-hospital  sicknesses'  (Stock  1986),  available  evidence  suggests  that  most  Ghanaians prefer  modern  medicine  to  traditional  treatments  (GSS  1992).  Therefore,  there  is  no doubt  that  well-equipped  and  appropriately staffed health facility in the rural and peripheral areas and at affordable prices will be well patronized. The success of the forty or so mission hospitals scattered throughout the country may attest to this assertion.

Access to education continues to be unequal, not only between the urban and rural areas, but also between regions (see Fig. 4 and T able 3). In 1993, 85% of all 6- to 14-year-olds were enrolled in schools in the urban areas, compared to 71% in the rural areas. While, overall, national school enrollment figures have seen considerable  improvement  over  the  1981  levels, Accra and other urban areas still enjoy higher gross  enrolment  vis-à-vis  the  rural  areas  and the poor regions in the north at both primary and secondary levels. Moreover, the number of untrained teachers in the rural areas and 'periphery'  regions  still  remains  unacceptably high.  In  1988-1989,  39.7%  of  all  primary school  teachers  were  untrained,  an  improvement over the 46.2% reported in 1980-1981 (GSS 1989). However, the figure was as high as 59.4% in the Northern region and as low as 12% in  Greater  Accra  ( Ministry  of  Education , cited in Mikell 1991). In 1997, there was an ex-

a

<!-- image -->

b

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

NoVaccinations

4.8

4.9 -12.2

12.3-16.9

17-18.9

19-28.1

Figure 3: (a) Tetanus injections received by expectant mothers (in percentages) 1993. (b) Vaccination received by children 12-23 months old (in percentages) 1990-93. Source: GSS/GDHS 1994.

cess  of  7,000  teachers  in  urban  areas  while 21,000 positions in the rural areas were waiting to be filled.

## SAPs and Socioeconomic and Spatial Inequalities

Structural Adjustment Programs are designed to change the structure of the economy via policies that encourage increasing exportable goods, and implementing institutional reforms to reduce the role of the state in the economy. This would allow market forces to determine not  only  production,  distribution,  and  loca- tional decisions, but also access to goods and services. According to the IMF and the World Bank, African countries are unnecessarily encumbered by oversubsidized state enterprises, and overspend on social services such as education, health, and basic services. Therefore, they call  for  reduction  in  government  expenditure through privatization, withdrawal of subsidies, and  the  institution  of  'pay  as  you  use.'  But given the extent of deprivation in most African countries, government involvement in the provision of health and education, inefficient as it may  appear  to  be,  still  represents  the  only means  of  ensuring  equitable  distribution  and

Figure 4: Educational attainment of female household heads (in percentages) 1993. Source: GSS/DHS 1994.

<!-- image -->

access  for  the  poor.  T otal  government  withdrawal or cutbacks and the subjugating of these services to market forces lead to spatial and socioeconomic disparities,  which  are  inevitable, and even necessary, under capitalism (see Browett 1984). This seems to have been the experience  of  Ghana  over  the  years,  but  even more so in the last 15 years. Cuts in government funding for health services and education have not only left hospitals and schools, especially those in the rural areas and 'hardship regions,' understaffed, but also made them unaffordable. The country has seen a resurgence or revamping of private schools, day care centers, and hospitals, most of these in the Accra-T ema and  metropolitan  area,  and  the  other  urban centers.

While adjustment programs also aim to raise rural  incomes  and  reduce  urban  bias,  and thereby improve the quality of life in the rural areas, this approach seems to have had the opposite  effect.  The  usual  hypothesis  is  that through currency devaluation and price liberalization, the rural/urban terms of trade would improve dramatically in favor of the rural areas. This  would  then  place  more  incomes  in  the hands  of  rural  folks  and  hence  reduce  rural poverty. However, the evidence in this paper, as patchy and ambiguous as it may be, seems to suggest  that  poverty  levels  in  the  rural  areas have risen. Indeed, most of SAPs-generated rural income increases accrued to cocoa producers, but only 19% of the rural poor are engaged in cocoa production. Wholesale prices of foodstuffs increased in the past 15 years, but the excessive devaluation of the Ghanaian currency has reduced its purchasing power dramatically. Moreover, in the north where the rate of poverty is the highest, the farmers are engaged in subsistence agriculture, and if there were any benefits  at  all,  they  did  not  trickle  down  to them (Stewart 1995).

SAPs thus involve large-scale changes in the distribution  and  redistribution  of  resources,

Table 3 School Enrollment by Age, Sex, and Place of Residence, 1993 (Percentages)

| Age   | Male   | Male   | Male   | Female   | Female   | Female   | Total   | Total   | Total   |
|-------|--------|--------|--------|----------|----------|----------|---------|---------|---------|
| Group | Urban  | Rural  | Total  | Urban    | Rural    | Total    | Urban   | Rural   | Total   |
| 6-14  | 87.4   | 72.6   | 77     | 83       | 68.5     | 73.2     | 85.2    | 70.7    | 75.1    |
| 15-19 | 54.9   | 48.5   | 50.6   | 30       | 28.1     | 29       | 41.3    | 39.9    | 40.5    |
| 20-24 | 14.5   | 12.8   | 13.5   | 7.4      | 4        | 5.3      | 10.4    | 7.8     | 8.8     |

Source: GSS/DHS 1994.

which  are  certain  to  leave  some  people  and places  worse  off.  Rising  poverty  levels,  high rates of unemployment, reduced access to basic services,  and  increasing  levels  of  spatial  inequalities have, almost  invariably,  been  the aftermath  of  SAPs.  This  has  been  demonstrated not only in Ghana, but also in Zambia, Madagascar, Bolivia, Chile, Honduras, Mauritania,  and  indeed  in  all  countries  that  have taken the IMF 'medicine' (Stewart 1995; Brydon  and  Legge  1996;  Ould-Mey  1996).  Attempts at putting a human face on the otherwise draconian programs led to the adoption of Programs of Action to Mitigate the Social Cost of  Adjustments  (PAMSCAD)  in  Ghana  in 1988. While PAMSCAD itself was an admission of failure by the IMF, its objectives of assisting  the  'new  poor'  (retrenched  workers), 'vulnerable group' (low income households hit by  price  increases)  and  the  'structural  poor' were laudable. However, it became tied up in ineffective administration and poor targeting, and hence was an ineffective solution to alleviate  the  suffering  of  SAPs'  casualties  (Brydon and Legge 1996).

## Conclusions

Overall, SAPs have not been universally effective in Ghana, and for that matter, all African countries that have accepted the World Bank/ IMF  package.  While  lack  of  consistent  data makes it difficult to reach unambiguous conclusions, it would be fair to say that the distribution of the so-called achievements under SAPs may have been quite uneven. The people in the rural areas as well as the poorest of the poor in the urban  areas  seem  to  have  suffered  significantly due to their inability to compete in the market. While Ghana's economy may perhaps be experiencing  the  best  of  times  at  the  macro  level (compared to the 1970s), the benefits have not trickled down to all parts of the country, and to all  socioeconomic  groups.  Living  conditions have become harsh for the poor, especially the residents  of  the  rural  areas  and  savanna  belt whose  access  to  education,  health,  and  other services has been severely curtailed  under Structural Adjustment Programs. Fifteen years of  SAPs  have  not  been  able  to  alleviate  rural poverty  and  the  long  existing  socioeconomic and spatial disparities in Ghana as predicted by neo-classical economic theory. If anything the gaps have widened in line with neo-Marxist theory that postulates that market-oriented development  almost  invariably  leads  to  socioeconomic  disparities,  which  are  inevitable,  and even  necessary,  under  capitalism  (see  Browett 1984). In order for the supposed benefits of the SAPs to spread evenly, the programs themselves need to be adjusted and become more humane to avoid the worst of times. j

## Literature Cited

Adedeji, Adebayo. 1990. Foreword. In The Human Dimension  of  Africa's  Persistent  Economic  Crisis , ed. Adebayo Adediji, S. Rasheed, and M. Morrison,  vii-x.  London:  Hans  Zell  Publishers  for UNECA.

Amin,  Samir.  1974. Accumulation  on  a  World  Scale. New York: Monthly Review Press.

Anyinam, Charles. 1994. Spatial Implications of Structural  Adjustment  Programs  in  Ghana. Tijdschrift voor economische en social geografie 85(5):446-50.

Apter, David E. 1972. Ghana in Transition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Berry, Brian J.L. 1969. Growth Centers and Their Potentials in the Upper Great Lakes Region. Washington DC: Upper Great Lakes Commission.

Boachie-Danquah, Yaw. 1992. Structural Adjustment Programs and welfare interventions: The case of Ghana. Africa Insight 22(4):244-48.

Browett, John. 1984. On the necessity and inevitability  of  uneven spatial development under capitalism. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 8:155-76.

Brydon,  Lynne,  and  Karen  Legge.  1996. Adjusting Society: The World Bank, IMF and Ghana. London: Tauris Academic Studies.

Chazan, Naomi. 1991. The political transformation of Ghana under the PNDC. In Ghana: The Political Economy of Recovery , ed. Donald Rothchild, 2147. Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner Publishers.

Cornia, Giovanni Andrea, Richard Jolly, and Frances Stewart. 1987. Adjustment with a Human Face. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Enyimayew, Kwesi. 1988. Cost and Financing of Drugs Supplied  in  Ghana:  The  Ashanti-Akim  Experience. Paper  presented  at  World  Health  Organization (WHO) Conference, Geneva, June.

Fitch,  Bob,  and  Mary  Oppenheimer.  1966. Ghana: End of an Illusion. New York: Monthly Review Press.

Frank, Andre Gunder. 1975. On Capitalist Underdevelopment. Bombay: Oxford University Press.

Ghana  Government.  1997. 1997  Budget  Statement. Accra: Government Printer.

---. 1998. 1998  Budget  Statement. Accra:  Government Printer.

Ghana Statistical service (GSS). 1988. Ghana Living Standard Survey. Accra: Ghana Statistical Service.

- ---. 1989a. Ghana Living Standard Survey. Accra: Ghana Statistical Service.
- ---.  1989b. Quarterly  Digest  of  Statistics,  June. Accra: Ghana Statistical Service.
- ---. 1992. Ghana Living Standard Survey. Accra: Ghana Statistical Service.
- ---.  1993. Quarterly  Digest  of  Statistics,  June. Accra: Ghana Statistical Service.
- ---. 1995. The Pattern of Poverty in Ghana. Accra: Ghana Statistical Service.
- Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) and Ghana Demographic and Health Survey (GDHS). 1994. Ghana Demographic and Health Survey. Accra: Ghana Statistical Service.
- Green,  Reginald  H.  1987. Stabilization  and  Adjustment Policies and Programs. Country Study I: Ghana. Annankatu, Finland: WIDER.
- Harrison, Peter. 1979. Inside the Third World. Hommondsworth: Penguin.
- Healey, Michael J., and Brian W. Ilbery. 1989. Location and Change: Perspectives on Economic Geography. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Hirschman, Abert O. 1958. Strategy of Economic Development. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Howard, Rhoda. 1978. Colonialism and Underdevelopment in Ghana. London: Croom Helm.
- The  Hunger  Project-Ghana.  1996. Agenda  for  the Sustainable  End  of  Hunger  in  Ghana. Accra:  The Hunger Project.
- Huq, Mohammed M. 1989. The Economy of Ghana: The First 25 Years . London: Macmillan.
- Institute  of  Statistical,  Social  and  Economic  Research (ISSER). 1993. The State of Ghana's Economy in 1992. Legon: ISSER.
- ---. 1995. The State of Ghana's Economy in 1994. Legon: ISSER.
- Kay, Godfrey. 1972. The Political Economy of Colonialism in Ghana: A Collection of Documents and Statistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Konadu-Agyemang, Kwadwo. 1988. IMF Sponsored Structural Adjustment Programs and the perpetuating of poverty in Africa: Ghana's experience revisited. Scandinavian Journal of Development Alternatives 17(3-4)127-44.
- Kuznets, Simon. 1955. Economic growth and income inequality. American Economic Review 45:1-28.
- Lipton, Michael. 1977. Why the Poor Stay Poor: Urban Bias in World Development. London: Temple Smith.
- Mandel, E. 1968. Marxist Economic Theory. London: Merlin Press.
- Mikell, Gwendolyn. 1991. Equity issues in Ghana's rural development. In Ghana: The Political Economy of Recovery. ed. Donald Rothchild, 85-100. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
- Myrdal, Gunner. 1957. Economic Theory and Underdeveloped Regions. London: Duckworth.
- Nafziger, E. Wayne. 1990. The Economics of Developing Countries. Englewoods, NJ: Prentice Hall.
- Omaboe, E.N. 1966. Introduction to the economy of Ghana.  In A  Study  of  Contemporary  Ghana. ed. Walter  B.  Birmingham,  I.  Neustadt,  and  E.N. Omaboe, 17-33. London: Allen and Unwin.
- Onimode, Bade. 1982. Imperialism and Underdevelopment. London: Zed Press.
- Ould-Mey,  Mohammed.  1996. Global  Restructuring and Peripheral States: The Carrot and the Stick in Mauritania. Lanham, MD:  Rowman  and Littlefield.
- Panford, Kwamina. 1994. Structural Adjustment, the State  and  workers  in  Ghana. Africa  Development XIX(2):71-95.
- Ray,  Donald  I.  1986. Ghana: Politics,  Economics  and Society. London: Frances Pinter.
- Rimmer, Douglas. 1992. Staying Poor: Ghana's Political Economy 1950-1990. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
- Roe, Alan, and Hartmut Schneider. 1992. Adjustment and Equity in Ghana. Paris: OECD.
- Rothchild, Donald. 1991. Ghana: The Political Economy of  Recovery .  Boulder,  CO:  Lynne  Rienner Publishers.
- Sahn, David E. 1994. Adjusting to Policy Failure in Africa. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Smith,  Neil.  1990. Uneven  Development:  Nature, Capital and  Production of Space. Oxford:  Basil Blackwell.
- Stewart, Frances. 1995. Adjustment and Poverty. London: Routledge.
- Stock, Robert. 1986. Disease and development or the underdevelopment of health: A critical review of the  geographical  perspectives  on  African  health problems. Social  Science  and  Medicine 23(7):689700.
- Theil, Henry. 1979. World Income Inequality and its components. Economic Letters 2:99-102.
- Todaro, Michael. 1996. Economic Development. New York: Addison Wesley.
- United  Nations  Development  Program  (UNDP). 1994. Human Development Report. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Wallerstein,  Immanuel.  1974. The  Capitalist  World Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Watkins, Kevin. 1995. The Oxfam Poverty Report. Oxford: Oxfam.
- Werlin, Herbert H. 1994. Ghana and South Korea: Explaining development disparities. Journal of African and Asian Studies. 3-4:205-25.
- World Bank.1981. Accelerated Development in Africa: An Agenda for Action. Washington DC: World Bank.
- ---. 1984. Ghana: Policies and Program for Adjustment. Washington DC: World Bank.
- ---. 1991. Poverty  Handbook. Washington  DC: World Bank.
- ---. 1993. Ghana: 2000 and Beyond. Washington DC: World Bank.
- ---. 1994. Adjustment in Africa: Reforms, Results, and the Road Ahead. New York: Oxford University Press for the World Bank.

---. 1995a. World Development Report. New York: Oxford University Press.

---.  1995b. Country  Briefs. Washington  DC: World Bank.

---. 1996. World Development Report. New York: Oxford University Press.

---. 1997. World Development Report. New York: Oxford University Press.

KWADWO KONADU-AGYEMANG is Assistant Professor  in  the  Department  of  Geography  and Planning  at  the  University  of  Akron,  Akron,  OH 44325-5005.  His  research  interests  include  spatial organization in developing countries, economic restructuring, immigration, housing policy, and urban management.