## Reencountering Development: Livelihood Transitions and Place Transformations in the Andes

Anthony Bebbington

Department of Geography, University of Colorado at Boulder

Neither poststructural nor neoliberal interpretations of development capture the full extent and complexity of rural transformations in the Andes. Poststructural critiques tend to view development as a process of cultural destruction and homogenization, while neoliberal interpretations identify a different development 'failure' that inheres in 'inefficient' patterns of resource use, and the 'nonviability' of large parts of the Andean peasantry. In each case, the state is seen as a problem: as an agent of dominating modernization, or as a brake on market-led transformation. The paper reviews these positions in the light of the transformations in governance, livelihoods, and landscape that have occurred in the regions of Colta, Guamote, and Otavalo, all centers of indigenous Quichua populations in the Ecuadorian Andes. These transformations question the accuracy of arguments about cultural destruction or nonviability. Instead they suggest that people have built economically viable livelihood strategies that, while neither agricultural nor necessarily rural, allow people to sustain a link with rural places, and in turn allow the continued reproduction of these places as distinctively Quichua. The cases also point to the increased indigenous control of political, civil, and economic institutions and the important roles that development interventions, including those of the state, have played in fostering this control. In sum, this suggests the need for more nuanced interpretations of development that emphasize human agency and the room to maneuver that can exist within otherwise constraining institutions and structures. It also suggests the value of placing livelihood and the coproduction of place at the center of any interpretation of the processes and effects of rural development. Key Words: critical development geography, livelihood, place, Andes, social movements.

hether seen as 'pioneering,' 'biting,' or 'an opportunity lost,' (respectively, Peet  and  Watts  1996b:  17;  Cooper and Packard 1997: 15; Lehmann 1997: 568) Arturo  Escobar's  work  (1984,  1988,  1991,  1995) has stirred the worlds of critical geography and development studies. 1  Emblematic of a broader poststructural critique of development, Escobar's analysis falls within a long and distinguished tradition that sees little possibility of improvements in  human  well-being  without  radical  political economic change. His work questions the possibility of building or even imagining alternatives from within the current languages and institutions of development. 2  Indeed, it suggests that these very institutions and languages are deeply implicated in processes of cultural destruction. W

Poststructural critiques are not alone in posing profound and critical questions about rural development and its official institutions. Neoliberal interpretations similarly see little cumulative  benefit  from  state  intervention  in  rural areas. In much of Latin America, such approaches increasingly argue that large parts of the peasantry (or campesinado ) are no longer 'viable' in the face of a globalizing market economy. Thus, while, in the poststructuralist critique, the state and development are viewed as the aggressive agents of modernization, according to neoliberal critiques, they have largely stood in the way of the  transformative  and  modernizing  potential of the  market. This leads to recommendations for further liberalization of market-based resource allocation from the constraints placed on it by state and customary institutions. That such liberalization  would  fuel  a  redistribution  of  rural resources  (especially  land  and  water)  to  more competitive and larger economic agents, and a

concomitant  movement  of  campesinos  out  of agriculture and rural areas, is deemed desirable on efficiency grounds.

While empirically and normatively dubious, such interpretations command far more political influence than do poststructural ones. This makes it that much more important to build a counternarrative that meets them on their own turf  while  questioning  many  of  their  suppositions on conceptual and empirical grounds. Yet in this sense, poststructural positions are troublesome. By finding so little that is recoverable within the practice of development, by failing to address in any detail the economic dimensions of alternatives, and above all, by not exploring the diversity of development processes and outcomes, they fail to develop the empirical bases of a  possible  counternarrative.  Furthermore,  when subjected to empirical interrogation, the categorical assertions of such positions appear overstated, in turn suggesting theoretical weaknesses. As a result, and however unintentionally, they cede ground  to  neoliberal  interpretations  and  the types of programs that might derive from them.

That poststructural critiques give little attention to alternatives and leave so little space for a continuing dialogue with the development experience to date is largely a consequence of their emphasis on discursive critique. 3  Interpretations of development, and its alternatives, might differ if they were based on ethnographic and historical analyses of the ways in which development  interventions  and  market  transactions become part of a longer, sedimented history of a place  and  its  linkages  with  the  wider  world (Moore 1999; Massey 1994). Indeed, if we look at histories of places, rather than of discourses, and  trace  actual  processes  of  livelihood  and landscape transformation and the institutional interventions that have accompanied them, it becomes easier to identify elements of feasible development alternatives. Germs of these alternatives  have  already  been  elaborated  at  the intersection  of  popular  practices  and  external interventions, albeit in quite unanticipated ways. In this sense, I will use discussions of regional transformations in highland Ecuador to point to problems (as well as strengths) in the normative positions and analytical tools of both neoliberal  and  poststructural  interpretations. These observations will provide a basis for building theory that draws on insights of each type of interpretation, and that helps identify ways forward for a far more geographical theory of devel- opment revolving around notions of place and livelihood. Indeed, the implication is that a more comprehensive  development  theory  has  to  be built at the interface of geography and history.

To make these claims, the first section of the paper lays out elements of recent poststructural and neoliberal interpretations of rural development in the Andean region, subjecting them to critical  scrutiny  on  conceptual  grounds. 4   The second  section  then  subjects  these  interpretations to empirical scrutiny through a comparative analysis of regional transformations in three localities in highland Ecuador: Colta, Guamote, and Otavalo. It quickly becomes apparent that it is impossible to judge the development experience of these places through the blunt interpretations of either type of critique. These are places where outmigration and land-degradation have  been  accompanied  by  increased  indigenous control of everything from municipal government,  to  regional  textile  markets,  to  bus companies. They are places where increased consumption of modern commodities has come together with the emergence of assertive and ever more ethnically  self-conscious  social  organizations. More generally, as the economic geography of these regions has changed, so new and changing cultural practices have also been played out, creating landscapes that continue to be distinctive, and indeed alternative to modern capitalist landscapes even as they incorporate many ideas, practices, and technologies of modernity.

The third section teases out certain patterns across  these  cases.  Overall,  profound  transformations in the social relations that structure access to resources and power have accompanied and  contributed  to  the  development  of  these places.  So  also  has  a  progressive  expansion  of grassroots  influence  and  control  over  the  processes through which these places are produced and  governed.  These  changes  appear  to  be  as much a result of the external interventions of state programs, NGOs, and churches as they are an effect of popular initiative. The transformations and interventions involved are, then, too complex and contingent to be judged simply as normatively  desirable  or  not,  as  'success'  or 'failure,' as 'development' or 'destruction.' They also  question  the  accuracy  of  frameworks  that work  with  relatively  unitary  and  unproblematized notions of state, market, and community.

The final section of the paper draws out implications for theory. It suggests that cases such as those discussed here lay the bases for encoun-

tering a notion of development that is at once alternative and developmentalist,  critical and practicable. Indeed, this is the larger goal. Critical development research has so often been vulnerable  to  the  charge  of  impracticability  because  its  normative  concerns  and  profound critique of mainstream notions of development have blunted empirical inquiry into whether the practice of  development indeed had the effects that this critique anticipated, and whether popular practices indeed  carried  the  germs  of  the same utopias as those implied by this theory. Too often  this  led  to  theory  without  actors  (and therefore  without  entry  points  into  practice), and alternatives that required forms of structural change  that,  in  the  short-to-medium  terms, seemed improbable at best (Booth 1994). If research  engaged  with  questions  of  practiceboth  popular  and  bureaucratic-it  might  become  apparent  that  the  goals,  meaning,  and power relationships underlying development often differ from those imputed by much development theory. Power, meaning, and institutions are constantly being negotiated, and these negotiations open up spaces for potentially profound social and institutional change. Understanding how these spaces open and how they are used is a critical research challenge, and will take us beyond some of the oppositions that haunt much development theory.

## Critiques of Development in the Andes

The analytical tools and normative concerns of poststructural and neoliberal critiques of development (critiques that Cooper and Packard [1997: 2-3] term, respectively, 'postmodernist' and 'ultramodernist') differ profoundly. At one level,  these  differences  are  part  of  a  far  longstanding split in development studies between critical  Marxian  and  sociocultural  interpretations,  and  more  developmentalist  approaches informed by neoclassical economics and rational choice theory. Neoliberal approaches aim to understand the means through which resources can  be  most  efficiently  allocated  to  maximize their  economic  productivity.  In  their  purest sense, they therefore criticize interventions that support  rural  producers  on  criteria  other  than competitiveness as diversions from the normative goal of efficiency maximization. In this view, people are producers and consumers of value-a value assessed in monetary terms. Poststructural critiques begin from a profoundly different notion of value, and of valid knowledge. Valuing difference, they are critical of modernizing notions of development, perhaps especially neoliberalism,  on  the  grounds  that  they  break  down difference, impose cultural homogenization, and constitute a form of domination: 'the project of neoliberal globalization represents the most recent of such discourses, and contains within it the attempted subordination of different modes of thought and interpretation' (Slater 1997: 274).

Yet  ironically  these  critiques  converge  to  a considerable degree around other claims: each declares that orthodox development has failed and that official development bureaucracies are deeply  implicated  in  this  failure;  each  relies largely  on  externally  defined  criteria  to  judge this failure; and each has suggested radical (as opposed to reformist) alternatives that involve a decentering of the state. 5  These alternatives derive in considerable measure from their respective theoretical frameworks, as well as their primary concerns about the failure of mainstream development practice. The poststructural critique, primarily concerned with the ways in which development constitutes a form of cultural domination and homogenization, seeks alternatives in the cultural and political practices of popular actors.  The  neoliberal  critique,  primarily  concerned  with  the  failure  of  development  programs to foster rural growth and income generation, seeks alternatives in the efficient allocation of resources that would derive from the liberalization of markets.

Cowen and Shenton (1996) suggest a yet deeper sense  in  which  the  two  frameworks  converge. They argue that both approaches (indeed all development doctrine) ultimately imply a notion of 'trusteeship,' in which one actor, on the basis of  their  presumed  privileged  understanding  or institutional authority, determines on behalf of others  the  direction  in  which  development should proceed. In apportioning trusteeship to agents who are ultimately not the citizenry, such frameworks, they suggest, frustrate the possibility of autonomous human improvement. 6

## Development as Knowledge-Power Regime: Poststructural Critiques

While not alone in pursuing a critique of development informed by Foucault in particular,

and post structural theory more generally, Escobar's has been the most sustained critical project (Escobar  1984,  1988,  1991,  1995;  Watts  and McCarthy 1997: 73). In essence, he claims that development represents a further elaboration of the Enlightenment project, in the process imposing Northern interests on those of the South (Escobar 1995: 55-101; Apffel-Marglin 1998: 29; cf. Frank 1969). 7  Thus, the idea of development allows for the notion that there are people and places that are underdeveloped, 'backward' and poor,  and  therefore  in  need  of  development. This labeling turns them into the targets of development programs that then intervene in order to promote a particular ethnocentric notion of what it is to be developed. These interventions aim to turn rural people into efficient producers, and if they do not make this transition, then  they  ought  be  encouraged  to  leave  the countryside: 'produce or perish,' Escobar puts it (1995: 157). As these instruments are not based on an understanding of the actual concerns, aspirations, and strategies of the popular sectors, they inevitably fail, but this merely-he suggests-justifies a further round of intervention to get it better. That there is bureaucratic complicity in development failure is argued yet more forcefully in Ferguson's (1990) study of rural  development in Lesotho. Ferguson suggests that development failure serves the interests of the very institutions charged with implementing development, because their own reproduction  depends  on  a  continued  official  commitment  to  development  at  the  same  time  as  an official belief that it has not yet been achieved. 8 Ferguson's  state,  like  Escobar's,  seems  monolithic, unable and unwilling to act in a way that does  anything  but  depoliticize  development and reproduce  development  failure  (cf.  Moore 1999).

These  critiques  are  not  dissimilar  from  the dependency  writing  of  the  1970s  (Lehmann 1997; Watts and McCarthy 1997: 75), though their form of analysis and implications for strategy  are  different.  Dependency  writing  emphasized the need for change in the wider political economy (de Janvry  1981).  Poststructural  critiques of development instead emphasize change at  a  more  decentralized,  local  scale: 9   '[T]here are  no  grand  alternatives  that  can  be  applied to all places or all situations,' and so 'one must resist the desire to formulate alternatives at an abstract,  macro  level;  one  must  also  resist  the idea  that  the  articulation  of  alternatives  will

take place in intellectual and academic circles' (Escobar 1995: 222). Instead, this articulation will occur in the alternative grassroots practices that resist development, and more generally in the practices of popular groups 10  whose 'organizing  strategies  .  .  .  begin  to  revolve  more  and more around two principles: the defense of cultural difference . . . and the valorization of economic needs and opportunities in terms that are not strictly those of profit and the market' (Escobar 1995: 226). For Escobar, the defining features  of  the  alternatives  being  pursued  among these groups reside in the 'defense of the local,' 'identity  strengthening,'  'opposition  to  modernizing development,' and the elaboration of proposals  from  the  context  of  existing  constraints (1995: 226). That these are indeed the defining features of these popular practices, and that they hold out any realistic hope for feasible alternatives is, however, less substantiated. 11

In framing a view of alternatives in this way, Escobar is drawing-as does much work in critical anthropologies and geographies of developmenton  notions  of  the  resistant  peasant  (cf.  Scott 1985). 12  Such conceptualizations, however, have their  own  difficulties-in  particular,  the  tendency to essentialize about peasant motivation, and  to  invoke  voluntaristic  interpretations  of cultural politics. But, as Smith (1989) has suggested,  forms  of  peasant  cultural  politics  are rooted deeply in the material conditions of peasant existence-in the ways in which they make a living. Making a living, making living meaningful, and struggling for the rights and possibility of doing both are all related. Yet the literature  on  resistance  and  alternatives  tends  to detach interpretations of politics of identity and place  from  these  livelihood  practices.  If  they were reembedded, and if frameworks made clearer how very situated are such practices and politics, then we might anticipate forms of political behavior and responses to development that are neither necessarily resistant nor antipathetic to the  logics  of  markets  and  modernity.  Locality might  also  be  conceptualized  differently-not as  pregiven  but  rather  as  continuously  produced at the intersection of livelihood practices (understood as making a living and making it meaningful),  local  politics,  institutional  interventions, and the wider political economy. Understood  thus,  place  would  be  less  something that  people  defended,  and  more  something whose means and practices of production they aimed to control.

Such a conceptualization means foregrounding  problems  of  livelihood  and  production  as much as problems of politics and power-and emphasizing negotiation and accommodation as much as resistance. More generally, it suggests the  importance  of  paying  more  attention  to agency. 'Poor' people may be discursively constructed as objects of development (or even as subaltern subjects of resistance), 13  but they also act individually and collectively, creating their own room for maneuver within and beyond any constraints these categories may place on them. As Escobar suggests, the seeds of alternatives are most  likely  to  be  found  in  those  actions.  But those same actions, rather than presumed analytical  categories,  will  define  the  contours  of those  alternatives  and  the  particular  ways  in which  they  negotiate  relationships  with  state, market, and civil society.

## Viable Andes? Neoliberalism and Andean Futures

While  the  poststructural  critique  has  assumed  progressively  greater  force  in  academic debate, a quite distinct critical conversation has also emerged in Latin America: the discourse on 'viability.' Though the steady differentiation of a peasantry into a capitalized sector on the one hand, and a landless or land-poor proletariat on the  other,  has  absorbed  many  pages  of  debate (de Janvry 1981; Lehmann 1986; Llambi 1989; Kay  1995),  the  significance  of  this  discussion has increased in recent years. Driven by the rise of  neoliberal  agendas,  some  have  argued  with increasing explicitness that there is little virtue in an uncompetitive and inefficient campesino sector. 14   They therefore argue that rural development programs  should  focus  only  on  viable campesinos,  helping  them  to  restructure  their productive strategy so as to become competitive in an open market. Those who are not deemed viable ought be assisted in making the transition to other livelihoods, most likely in urban areas (López 1995; Hojman 1998). Though voiced most explicitly in Chile, where some estimate that up to half of the peasantry is not viable (see Kay 1997; Sotomayor  1994),  these  discussions  are  equally apparent elsewhere. An InterAmerican Development  Bank  (IDB)  report,  for  instance,  suggests that significant parts of the Bolivian altiplano [high plane] are nonviable and that programs there should foster outmigration (IDB 1996).

Such interpretations have serious flaws. They read the viability of rural places only in terms of economic competitiveness, and likewise understand  poverty  only  in  income  terms.  As  good 'trustees' of development (cf. Cowen and Shenton 1996), their authors presume to prescribe for others-prescriptions that will clearly foster the destruction of rural practices in the name of fiscal efficiency. Yet at the same time, these interpretations do point to empirically substantiated problems related to the economic dimensions of livelihoods (Mayer and Glave 1999). Studying programs  of  three  well-respected  nongovernmental  organizations  (NGOs)  in  the  Peruvian and Bolivian highlands, van Niekerk (1994) concludes that the impact of their interventions on incomes was less than the cost of implementing the programs. Worse still, a recent study of thirteen municipalities in four departments of the Bolivian highlands suggests that 79 percent of the population perceives a decline in crop and livestock  productivity,  with  even  higher  rates among poorer farmers; only a handful of communities perceived any impact from livestock or crop  projects  (VMPPFM  1998;  cf.  Zoomers 1998).  Similar,  if  less  drastic,  patterns  also emerge from recent surveys in Ecuador, which suggest  declining  agricultural  income,  an  increased  reproduction  squeeze  on  the campesinado ,  and  an  increase  in  temporary migration, with  between  twenty  and  fifty-five  percent  of males  migrating  (Hentschel  et  al.  1996;  Lanjouw 1996). Within the current policy context, many farms in higher, drier, more remote locations seem no longer able to sustain families in situ. Some observers end up succumbing to the despair of environmental determinism: 'When all is said and done, one can't change environmental limitations'  (an  official  quoted  in  van Niekerk 1997: 3; see also Hentschel et al. 1996).

For  all  the  limits  of  neoliberal  arguments about viability in the Andes, the empirical work that underlies them is therefore a reminder of real problems of production and income. It highlights the extent to which a focus on discourse misses  a  large  part  of  the  drama  of  livelihood struggles, practices, and dilemmas in the Andes and  therefore-like  neoliberal  frameworkspresents a partial view of rural life. Furthermore, they  remind  us  that  a  failure  to  address  the ways in which more viable livelihoods are and might  be  constructed  only  favors  the  ascendancy and hegemony of neoliberal frameworks that would ultimately endorse policies that would

have  the  effect  of  fostering  the  demise  of  the campesino sector.

## Ways Forward? Hybrid Livelihoods and Comparative Ethnographies

Neoliberal  and  poststructural  positions  are, in one sense, like oil and water: their political agendas, normative intents, and epistemological positions are quite different. Partly as a consequence, they emphasize different dimensions of rural livelihoods. Neoliberal takes on rural development in the Andes draw our attention to the  very  real  challenges  that  Andean  people confront  in  making  a  living  and  negotiating their relationships with a range of product, labor,  and other markets. Meanwhile, poststructural positions focus our attention on the ways in  which rural people make living meaningful and struggle politically for spaces of autonomy and self-realization-themes on which the viability discussion, and much other development research, are largely silent.

Yet while their normative intents make these approaches  fundamentally  incompatible,  their substantive  concerns  surely  represent  different parts of a larger whole in which rural people are engaged all the time: the challenge of securing a viable way of guaranteeing the material basis of their livelihood and, at the same time, building something  of  their  own.  If, in  practice ,  people pursue  these  concerns  at  the  same  time,  then analytical approaches that pay attention primarily to one or other dimension of them are likely to work with oversimplified notions of grassroots economic and political action, and of grassroots notions of 'development' and betterment. Indeed, I argue that if our approaches give equal weight  to  these  different  dimensions  of  livelihood, then this can challenge notions both of viability and of development. On the one hand, it shifts the notion of viability from one focusing only on viable economic activities, to one concerned with livelihood and place, and the ways in which people struggle to keep rural localities alive by somehow generating incomes that will allow the material reproduction of these places. On the other hand, it will challenge notions of development as destruction  and  of  markets  as anathema, for one of the critical means through which people make livelihoods and places viable is engaging with the institutions of development, the wider modernizing processes of which they are a part, and a range of product and labor markets. Finally, it is likely to challenge our notions of resistance and politics at least as these relate to development, for as Keith (1997: 276) notes, 'a politics of the possible must inevitably emerge from a sustained engagement with the empirical, not a naïve romance of the real.'

Escobar provides us with something of a lens for thinking about these issues with the notion of  'hybrid  cultures'  (1995:  217-26).  Popular practices-which, he suggests, should be the basis of any alternative  development-constantly piece together the old and new, elements of modernity with longer-standing elements of local practice.  They are, in his words, characterized by  a  relentless  'traffic  between  the  traditional and  the  modern'  (1995:  222).  The  difficulty with the notion of hybrid, however, is that it assumes that there exist 'prehybrid' cultures. Yet Latin American  landscapes  and  livelihoods have been hybridized at least since the sixteenth century (Whitmore and Turner 1992). It is perhaps this implicit assumption of 'prehybridity' that underlies a certain tendency to invoke ideal typical notions of popular practice as the basis of development  alternatives.  Yet,  if  all  practices and cultures are indeed hybridized, then it seems unreasonable  to  make  categorical  statements about the principles that will characterize popular practices and development alternatives-for they, along with identity and place, will be dynamic, unstable, and above all situated.

A  second  point  of  departure  begins  from poststructural concerns to highlight differences and identities, radicalizing the point more than do their discussions of alternatives. For just as people might assert difference and identity visà-vis development and its institutions, these differences are also at stake in relationships within the  popular  sectors.  Imagining  alternatives,  as well as practicing current livelihoods, is therefore likely to be internally debated and conflictive,  among  genders,  generations,  kin  groups, communities, and others. This is not to minimize the importance of these alternatives, but it is  to  push  a  step  further  in  not  romanticizing them, and therefore in making them seem more credible.

The third and central point of departure also derives from Escobar: his call for more ethnographies of development and of how it is experienced and resisted. Again, though, if local cultures  are  hybrid,  to  emphasize  questions  of resistance to development is perhaps once again

to apply too partial a lens to popular practices. If one of the principle challenges in the contemporary Andes is to address problems of production and income, it may be appropriate to call for ethnographies of how people have struggled to compose livelihoods aimed at making a living, and making it meaningful. It is in building these livelihoods that people encounter development interventions, state and market, in ways that  might  be  interpreted  sometimes  as  resistance, sometimes as accommodation, and sometimes as instrumental. If in such ethnographies, we find-as I believe we do-that livelihoods have not only been viable, but have also allowed accumulation, albeit in very unanticipated ways, then the neoliberal discourse on viability needs reframing. And if we find-as I believe we dothat  this  has  been  possible  to  a  considerable degree because of development programs, state interventions, and market integration, again in often  very  unanticipated  ways,  then  the  poststructural critique also needs reframing, normatively and analytically.

In  this  sense,  empirical,  ethnographic  and historical  analysis  of  particular  regional  contexts might also generate the type of knowledge and  theory  that  could  resolve  the  problem  of trusteeship as laid out by Cowen and Shenton (1996). By illuminating the concerns and notions of improvement implicit in popular strategies, and by understanding the types of development of which these actors aim to be 'trustees,' empirical work offers the prospect of illuminating the idea of development as lived, rather than invoked, thus rescuing the idea of development from  the  doctrinal  lenses  of  those  who  would otherwise define it. This might also change the criteria used for thinking about the impacts of development.

## Transitions and Transformations in the Ecuadorian Andes

The  risk  of  calling  for  such  ethnographies and histories of development is that it succumbs to the problem of exceptionalism, making difficult any effort to build theory on the basis of individual  cases.  One  possible  response  is  to  do comparative analysis of ethnographic and historical  material. 15   Though  this  has  its  own methodological difficulties (see below), it is the approach taken here. I discuss the transformation of three localities in the Ecuadorian Andes

(Figure 1) during the second half of this century. The cases deliberately juxtapose two localities (Colta and Guamote, both in the province of Chimborazo) which, for many observers, have been examples of development failure and areas where campesino livelihoods are in crisis, with a third case (Otavalo), which is often viewed as one of the most successful instances of local development in the Andes. The reason for juxtaposing the cases is to suggest that there are also intriguing similarities among them. In each case, access to resources has become more inclusive, and  new  and  more  accountable  local  governance  structures  have  been  created.  Likewise, livelihoods  have  been  built  that,  by  engaging with a range of markets, have allowed levels of accumulation that in part sustain the material basis for these other sociopolitical and cultural changes.  In  each  case,  external  interventions have played (often unanticipated) roles in fostering  these  processes  of  transformation.  Together,  these  patterns  make  it  difficult  to  talk glibly either of nonviability or of development as destruction. 16   The cases do, though, suggest the  importance  of  further  elaborating  some  of these claims. First, though, a comment on questions of method.

## Reflections on Methodology

To attempt a comparative reading of the articulations between development interventions and microregional political economy opens up a series of methodological questions. Such ethnographically informed comparisons across different sites 'may entail a novel kind of fieldwork. Rather than being situated in one, or perhaps two,  communities  for  the  entire  period  of  research, the fieldworker must be mobile, covering a  network of sites that encompasses a process, which is in fact the object of study' (Marcus and Fischer 1986: 94). This raises several interpretative issues, for while the analysis of the process itself  might  remain  'thick,'  discussions  of  the particular  place-based  manifestations  of  that process are necessarily thinner. Such a research approach also raises logistical issues. Multilocale work  necessarily  involves  extended  field  presence, which is only possible at certain stages of a career. In my own case, the most in-depth basis for this comparative analysis was laid in 19881989, during a fourteen-month study of the processes of agrarian change and development in-

Figure 1. Ecuador and case study locations.

<!-- image -->

tervention in Colta and Guamote. That research involved intensive involvement in four communities,  and  sustained  contact  with  leaders  and staff of five federations of indigenous communities and with staff of six separate state and nongovernmental development organizations. This work  combined  participant  observation,  extended and repeated discussions and interviews, a short household survey in two of the communities,  and  some  soil  analysis  and  crop  trials. This was combined with far less intensive interactions with people in twelve other communities.

I have since complemented that initial study with five other field visits to the region over the past decade. Though each subsequent study has had different purposes, they have been part of a larger deliberate attempt to understand the cumulative  effects  of  development  intervention on  rural  livelihoods  and  institutional  change over  an  extended  period.  T wo  studies  were  of campesino organizations in Guamote and Colta, and their relationships to NGOs; one looked at the role of NGOs in local development; another focused on the impacts of peasant organizations on local governance in Guamote; and the fifth was simply a return to some of the same communities where the earliest work was conducted, to discuss patterns of change. This subsequent research, conducted for far shorter periods of variable duration, has involved in-depth interviews (rather than ethnographic work) with some of the  same  households,  federations,  NGOs,  and key informants as were encountered in the earlier work. The advantage of such a sustained involvement is that it brings to light processes of change that can be missed in single-stay periods of research. It has also allowed me to discuss my own evolving interpretations with a variety of the  actors  involved.  The  disadvantage  is  that the  nature  and  quality  of  information  and  insights varies among the different periods of field research.

These methodological problems of comparative analysis are made much more serious by an attempt  to  compare  across  different  authors' ethnographic and ethnohistorical research. Eth-

nographies emphasize place, context, case specificity, and authorial insights. To seek more generic  principles  across  ethnographic  accounts can  do  violence  to  the  authors'  own  intents. Furthermore, given that different ethnographies emphasize  different  dimensions  of  local  social and cultural practice, they do not all give comparable  attention  to  the  same  issues.  Any  attempt to draw comparisons might then stretch the  data  beyond  its  justifiable  reach.  Indeed, some would eschew the possibility of such comparison unless they were able to witness or participate in the same empirical moments, and not have  to  depend  on  the  interpretations  of  the ethnographer  (Schegloff  1999).  While  there can be no easy answer to this problem, to reject entirely the possibility of reading across ethnographic  and  historical  accounts  greatly  diminishes  the  potential  role  of  such  approaches  in building  up  more  nuanced  and  problematized understandings of rural change. More generally, it  probably  undermines  the  potential  for  the sorts of ethnographically informed accounts of regional  processes  called  for  by  commentators such as Marcus and Fischer (1986).

What follows is therefore my own comparative  reading  of  these  different  accounts.  It  is based on the conviction that much of what is narrated  in  these  other  accounts,  when  read through the lens of my own experience, seems quite plausible to me, while, at the same time, providing  additional  insights  that-though beyond  my  own  field  experience-I  am  prepared  to  accept  as  valid,  given  the  convergences of other authors' insights with my own interpretations. While this is perhaps an insufficiently  rigorous  set  of  criteria  for  reading across different bodies of work, it is akin to the criteria that researchers use when, as lay folk, we engage in simple conversation aimed at extending the boundaries of our own knowledge and understanding.

## Colta: Migration and the Viability of Place

The canton of Colta is located in the central highlands  of  Ecuador,  with  a  population  of slightly less than 50,000 people, 17  living mostly in rural communities at altitudes of 3000 m and above,  along  with  a  handful  of  small  'urban' centers of some two thousand people or so. Primarily agricultural, Colta is also notable for the high levels of periodic outmigration among its residents. Such outmigration from rural areas is often  taken  as  an  indicator  that  local  livelihoods  are  not  viable.  This  phenomenon  has been interpreted as semiproletarianization, the ever incomplete absorption of poor rural people into the urban economy, as well as a necessary survival strategy in conditions of naturalresource scarcity (de Janvry 1981). Other authors see periodic migration as a deliberate attempt to continue to be a campesino (Farrell et al. 1989), and  to  retain  some  form  of  economic  activity that offers a buffer against downturns in urban labor markets (cf. Brown et al. 1997). Without denying the sense in which migration is, in considerable  measure,  a  consequence  of  structural constraints and regional  underdevelopment, these  latter  accounts  also  emphasize  that  migrants are also agents, and in which migration is a strategy as well as a necessity. For many families in Colta, it has been a strategy for maintaining a foothold in the region. 18  This foothold, in turn, allows  the  maintenance  of  agricultural  practices,  religious  practices,  and  local  institutions through which the extent of Quichua (i.e., indigenous) control of Colta has expanded, and through which its material landscape has been transformed-in both its agricultural and built forms. Though transformed, Colta thus continues to be the locus of a range of practices and identifications  with  place  and  history  which, though  constantly  in  flux  and  varying  across gender,  generation,  and  other  lines  (cf.  Silvey and Lawson 1999), together constitute an important basis of being a Quichua from Colta.

These  transformations  are  all  the  more  remarkable given that as recently as 1965, a Cornell research team produced a study on the Quichua  population  of  Colta  entitled  'Indians  in Misery'  (Maynard  1965).  The  study  depicted Quichuas dominated by large rural estates (haciendas) through various forms of tied labor relationship that restricted access to land. The ties between  hacienda,  church,  and  local  political authorities likewise restricted possibilities of indigenous accumulation or any form of political participation, preserving forms of social control and exclusion in much the same way as Casagrande  and  Piper  (1969)  described  for  the neighboring parish of San Juan. Yet at the same time as the Cornell team was working, a series of changes  were  occurring  that  would  drive  the transformation of this region. The most important  of  these  was  land  reform.  National  landreform laws were passed in 1964 and, more far

reaching, in 1973. These laws marked the end of the hacienda-based mode of production and social control, and had profound effects on Colta's agrarian and sociopolitical structure. Some subdivision of estates had begun before land reform, as early migrants used savings to purchase land, and some hacienda owners began to sell, especially those who had a particularly unruly labor force (cf. Thurner 1993). The laws, however, led to an intense acceleration of this process of land acquisition. By 1990, more than forty-three percent of Colta's land surface had been affected by the land-reform process, and no large hacienda remained,  though  some  smaller  ones  still  did (Bebbington et al. 1992: 125).

These changes in access to land, while they ended  the  former  system  of  rural  governance, were not equal across Colta. Families and communities 19 gained access to different qualities and amounts of land as a result of the combined effects of different geographies of population pressure, of social conflict, of the onset of hacienda decline, and of soil and water quality and availability.  In  cases  such  as  the  sector  of  Gatazo, where  families  gained  access  to  valley-bottom alluvial land with irrigation water, and significantly, where hacienda subdivision and migration had started at an earlier date, processes of accumulation began earlier and have been relatively  rapid.  Migration-based  accumulation  in Gatazo was translated into land purchase, which has in turn allowed accumulation strategies based on intensive horticulture. Though again the extent to which this is so varies among households, it has led to a reversal of outmigration as people have moved back to the locale, sustaining themselves  either  entirely  through  agriculture,  or through a mix of agriculture and periodic participation in local labor markets (Allen 1993).

In other cases, far more typical in Colta, the land accessed was unirrigated and sloping and has not allowed any significant agricultural intensification. Indeed, reports from communities in  Colta  with  this  type  of  land  all  emphasize agricultural  stagnation  and  land  degradation rather than intensification, and draw attention to the importance of periodic (and occasionally permanent) outmigration as a livelihood strategy (Bebbington 1990; Knapp 1991; Muratorio 1982; Tolen 1995). Finally, in some more sui generis cases such as the communities of Santiago, where land is poor and scarce, but where migration began quite early, significant numbers have become  itinerant  traders  (Gellner  1982)  and semiprofessionals (teachers, agricultural technicians, etc.).

The livelihoods  of  contemporary  Colta  are therefore now diverse: none linked to the hacienda, all deeply linked to the market, and most still linked to rural property, however small the plot or house. This shift in the nature and geography of livelihoods in Colta has been accompanied  by  important  changes  in  the  landscape. Colta's countryside is a mixture of small, often visibly  eroding  fields  dotted  with  breeze-block houses, of one, two, or sometimes three and four stories. Like Colta resident Manuel Alvarado's two-story  house  (in  the  community  of  Lupaxi Grande),  most  of  these  have  been  built  with money earned elsewhere, in his case, first, while working in the sugar cane harvests on the coast, and  subsequently,  as  a  peddler  of  shoes  and clothing. Also, as in his case, responsibilities for the  house  and  the  fields  are  feminized.  While Manuel is as happy in Colta as on the coast'when I'm on the coast, I'm a costeño ; when I'm in the community, I feel content, and this is my land'-he makes his money on the coast and sends it back to Colta for investment in housing. Like  many  others,  that  is  where  he  will  ultimately retire.

Accumulation and housing investment have also been part of a subtle but important shift in the centers of governance in Colta. New centers have emerged at two scales. At a local level, the hacienda has ceded to the community the center  of  everyday  political  decisionmaking  and surveillance. 20  These legal (and territorial) communities now govern most of rural Colta, most having been created since land reform. Though only localized centers of power, most communities in this area (and Guamote-see below) monitor carefully the passage of other people and vehicles through the space they govern, be these private individuals or government workers. Inevitably, as I was entering a community where I was working less intensively, I would be greeted with a ' Adonde vas gringuito ' [where are you off to, gringuito], and would be sought out by one or another village dignitary shortly after arriving, just checking up on me. Similarly, as the field workers of the farmers' association with whom I spent  much  time  in  Colta  would  drive  into  a community  in  which  they  had  some  task  or other to see to, people would come and check on the purpose of their visit. Very occasionally, and more seriously, communities have held unwanted guests hostage.

The other shift has occurred at the level of the canton, where the parish and cantonal capitals (the former centers of the hacienda-statechurch triumvirate)  have  been  in  demise.  On the  one  hand,  old  mestizo 21 houses  are  being purchased by Quichuas, who split their residence between these capitals and the community. And at the same time, these old centers have been partially replaced by new centers linked to other systems of authority and sources of legitimacy. Some of these new regional 'centers' are linked to commercial success, as in the semiurbanized communities of the Gatazos and Santiago (see above). Others have emerged as a result of another change that was beginning just as the Cornell  team  was  conducting  field  work:  the  rise and subsequent consolidation of the Evangelical Protestant  church.  There  are  many  explanations of how this religious change occurred. At the very least, it seems clear that the ability of the church to enter the region was itself facilitated by land reform and the weakening of the hacienda; it may also have reflected the determination  of  Quichua  campesinos  to  look  beyond  the  institutions  that  had  traditionally dominated  them.  Several  observers  have  also suggested  that  the  Evangelical  church's  complete ban on alcohol consumption was attractive to earlier migrants who wanted to invest their migrant savings in land and housing rather than alcohol-intensive  fiestas  (Tolen  1995;  Gellner 1982). That these migrants were also disproportionately represented among a new generation of more savvy community leaders further strengthened the authority of Evangelicalism. Whatever the  explanation,  the  Evangelical  church  displaced the Catholic Church. Today many communities in Colta have their own communityorganized  center  of  worship,  and  indeed  some have  several  (Tolen  1995;  Muratorio  1981). Meanwhile, the community of Majipamba, where the mission had its center, is now the place that is  popularly  understood  as  being  'Colta.'  Its large churches, radio antenna, and religious organizations  (some  of  which  engage  in  socialdevelopment activities) mark it as the region's new center, at least as seen from the communities (cf. Tolen 1995).

In some areas within Colta, the formation of communities was followed by the creation of federations of communities (this process is discussed in more detail for the case of Guamote below). Each with  their  own  acronym-UOCACI  (Unión de  Organizaciones  Campesinas  de  Cicalpa),

AOCACH (Asociación de Organizaciones Campesinas Autonomas de Chimborazo), UNASAC (Unión de Asociaciones Agricolas de Columbe), AIECH  (Asociación  Indígena  Evangelica  de Chimborazo)-these organizations are new actors  in  the  governance  of  Colta.  They  have projects;  negotiate  with  government  for  services, and have their own buildings and offices on which families and community leaders converge  one  day  a  week  in  order  to  engage  in project-related business,  gossip,  and  squeeze in a game  or  two  of  volleyball.  The  organizations  also  mark  one  of  the  latest  reversals  of ethnic and institutional relationships in Colta. In 1988, though many  rural  development NGOs  worked  in  Colta,  none  had  its  office there. 22   By  1995,  the  technical  team  once linked to one of these federations, AIECH, had recreated itself as an NGO: the Center for Indigenous  Development  (CEDEIN)  with  its headquarters in the main mestizo urban center in Colta. By 1998, it was hiring mestizo advisors,  and  contracting  other  long-established NGOs from other parts of Ecuador to help with water projects. Some in Colta had begun to approach its director, José Bueno, to ask him to consider running for mayor. José smiled at me, at  once  modestly  and  wryly,  saying  he  didn't think it was time yet. One day, he implied, it would be. In the meantime, he wanted to impress on me that when I had first known him and the team, they were being hired by mestizos to implement the activities of other organizations: now the tables were turned, not aggressively, but significantly.

The distance between an image of 'Indians in misery' and contemporary Colta is great. It is an indicator of how profoundly the relationships between  livelihoods,  access  to  resources,  rural governance,  and  rural  landscape  have  been transformed as a combined effect of campesino initiatives, and the state, religious institutions, and  NGOs.  This  is  not  to  imply  that  these changes are unproblematic. People are still very poor, and many (though not all) would prefer not  to  migrate;  most  people  sustain  their  (or their families') residence in Colta with income derived from elsewhere; differences in access to land exist, as do differences in income; intrigue and  gossip  surround  who  benefits  most  from Colta's new institutions. But it is important that arguments about development happen in Colta now, and not only (nor perhaps even mainly) in provincial and national capitals.

## Guamote's New Geographies of Governance

Bordering Colta to the South, the canton of Guamote, with an almost entirely Quichua population of slightly less than 30,000, 23  more than ninety percent of whom live in rural communities  located  above  3,000  m,  has  likewise  been transformed  in  the  last  three  decades,  though the contours and implications of this transformation differ. In 1974, Guamote had the highest concentration of land in large estates in all of Ecuador: today no large or even medium-sized, individually owned property remains. 24  In 1974, governance-both rural and urban-was dominated by the hacienda; today Guamote is at the head of a national list of so-called 'alternative municipalities,' where municipal government is either in the hands of, or works closely with, indigenous populations (Muñoz 1998).

The roots of this transformation lie in state responses to campesino pressure for land. From the 1950s to 1970s, campesino mobilization for land in Guamote became increasingly assertive, bolstered  by  links  to  national  peasant  movements and the communist party. The state, concerned with these levels  of  unrest,  made  Guamote the object of a far-reaching program of land reform.  The  radical  Catholic  Church  was  also active in pushing for land-redistribution, and became the principal counterpart of the national land-reform agency's program in Guamote. 25

In some sense, the idea of Guamote as a center of chronic poverty (which it was) was institutionalized in the 1970s (cf. Escobar 1995: 2154).  Thus  categorized,  Guamote  became  the object of a whole series of development interventions aimed at reducing this poverty. Land reform was followed by a series of state agricultural  and  rural  development  programs,  one (Fondo de Desarrollo de Areas Rurales Marginadas, FODERUMA) coordinated entirely by the Church, the other (Proyecto de Desarrollo Rural Integral, DRI), a project within the National Program for Integrated Rural Development, implemented by the state. Yet it is hard to argue that these development interventions became a 'destructive' force in Guamote (Escobar 1995: 44). Certainly development complicated the local institutional landscape, and while its interventions (together with popular protest) helped wrest  power  from  the  hacienda,  they  also  endowed development institutions themselves with an apparent power to exert great influence on Guamote. Sometimes, under certain leader- ship,  they  availed  themselves  of  this  power  in order  to  control-but  not  always.  During  the leadership of Wilson Huilca in the 1980s, the DRI worked towards the vision of rural development  in Guamote  coordinated and implemented through networks of campesino federations.  Though nowhere written in the project documents, staff from that period recall the vision clearly. Ultimately, some campesino leaders today comment, this was its effect. 26

State rural development programs ran more or  less  continuously  up  until  the  early  1990s, and were then taken over (in part) by a followup NGO program. The radical Catholic Church has remained present throughout, and has built links between communities and church-related NGOs. Increasingly, though far less systematically, Evangelically related NGOs have also established themselves in some communities. In this babble of intervention and acronyms, many agendas and interpretations are at play. No program is 'innocent.' They are all linked to wider projects-of  building  a  state  presence  in  the area, of strengthening campesino organizational capacities, of establishing Evangelicalism, or indeed of fighting off its advance. Yet beyond this, and in conjunction with the cumulative effects of  schooling,  these  interventions  have  had other effects, deriving in large measure from the cadre of younger campesinos who were formed in the very process of mediating between these external institutions and communities. 27 In some cases, the interventions also deliberately created federated organizations to act as counterparts  in  community-level  interventionsfederations within which this cadre of campesinos have become active leaders. The effect-in part deliberate, in part accidental-has been to change  the  governance  of  Guamote.  As  in Colta, the nexus of hacienda-priest-state representative  has  been  replaced  by  a  new  institutional  complex  through  which  Guamote  is governed-a complex of communities, federations, NGOs, the 'new' churches, and most recently, the municipal government.

In the early 1990s, one of the two principal campesino federations in Guamote, the Union of Indigenous and Campesino Organizations of Guamote (UOCIG), launched a candidate  in local  government elections and won the position of mayor (Bebbington and Perreault 1999). Since reelected, the mayor has initiated a series of administrative and governance changes aimed at enhancing community control over the mu-

nicipality, and increasing municipal control over the federations. All federations are required to coordinate with each other and the municipality in the form of a Committee for Local Development that has its base within the municipal building. Under this rubric federations have become the implementing arms of municipal development policy. At the same time, a body to which  each  community  is  supposed  to  send  a representative-a so-called 'Indigenous Parliament' ( Parlamento Indígena )-was created, with the  purposes  of  monitoring  municipal  actions and discussing and presenting issues of concern in the communities. Giving new meaning to an old landscape, the Parlamento uses the old offices of the DRI as its base.

These  are  all  incipient  changes,  and  are fraught with tensions. The two main federations in the canton-Jatun Ayllu and the UOCIGstill jostle for power and prominence. UOCIG is  at  odds  with  the  municipal  government, whose agents argue that, given the indigenous control of the municipality, it would make far more sense for UOCIG to pass its grain mill over to the municipality; UOCIG wants to maintain control  of  the  mill  itself.  Some  communities complain that the federations are not well managed, and particular Quichua individuals tussle for power, each feeling they have special leadership roles to play. At the same time, some NGOs support these changes, others maintain a certain distance. These tensions mark out the micropolitics of arguments over strategy and control (cf. Moore  1998)  in  which  different  individuals, communities, and kin groups have varying opinions over how resources should be used within Guamote, and who should determine these decisions. Yet, in some sense, these are the contents of the 'indigenous self-management' that so stir people. The very occurrence of these arguments  reflects  how  the  governance  of  Guamote has changed profoundly. Power and control  over  local  development have moved from one ethnic group to another (blanco-mestizo to Quichua), from one type of unit to others (hacienda  to  community  and  federation)  and-in the  period  since  1974-from  central  government and line agency to municipal government and federation. 28  With these changes, the image and meaning of Guamote have shifted. In the words of one federation leader, Hilario Maola, 'at  last  we  have  indigenous  self-management' (1998) (after decades of local governance being dominated by the church or state rural develop- ment programs). For others among Ecuador's development  institutions  who  would  have  once seen Guamote as a miserable bastion of brutish haciendas and unruly Indian populations, where planned development intervention (and social research)  was  a  thankless,  and  pointless,  task, Guamote is now an innovative experiment in local governance.

Seen against these political transformations, economic change has been much more modest. There is  less  evidence  of  accumulation  in  the landscape  than  in  Colta,  in  part  because  the greater control exercised by the hacienda over campesinos in Guamote meant that the early accumulation linked to migration from Colta was far less frequent. In some communities, however, accumulation is beginning. In the communities of Sablog Rosa Ines and San Isidro, from the one truck owned in 1988 (by a family that, because of  a  personal  relationship  with  the  hacienda, had been able to purchase twice as much land as any  other  family),  there  were,  by  1998,  seven families with trucks combining agriculture with trade. And one and two-story breeze-block houses have begun to pop up across the landscape. But even though demographic pressure and the level of land subdivision in Guamote is less than in Colta,  incomes  remain  chronically  low:  Guamote's  three  parishes  exhibit  poverty  rates  of near  or  above  90  percent  of  the  population (Torres  1998).  While  the  new  municipal  government has shifted investment from urban centers to rural areas, and has mobilized additional resources  from  external  agencies  primarily  for rural  investments,  this  has  more  effect  on  the 'meaning' of Guamote than on its poverty.

## Otavalo and an Ethnic Market Economy 29

If  Colta  and  Guamote  are  viewed  as  poor, eroded, and backward in the national imaginary, the  image  of  Otavalo  is  quite  the  opposite. Known to tourists through its weekend market and 'ethnic' products, and nationally through traveling Otavaleño merchants in market places selling  textiles  for  popular  consumption,  this weaving center has a special reputation. Otavaleños are seen as proud, well dressed, and successful (cf. Casagrande 1981), and the transformation  of  Otavalo  into  a  relatively  vibrant regional economy was seen early on as a possible model  for  community  development  elsewhere (Salomon 1981). For Salomon, the essence of

Otavalo's success was that through these transformations, Otavaleños had, in Sol Tax's terms, sustained  a  'total  pattern  that  is  distinctively their own' (Salomon 1981: 431). Somehow, he implied, they had crafted a different type of market economy that had become the material basis through which a highly distinctive place and set of regional and ethnic identities was being produced. Delving into ethnographic insights into how  this  occurred  causes  intriguing  parallels with the incipient processes  of  transformation in  Colta  and  Guamote  to  become  apparent. Long before Otavalo's current textile economy, the region had a pre-Hispanic weaving culture. After the Conquest, this culture was harnessed by the Spanish in the form of obrajes -grim rural textile factories based on indebted and otherwise tied Indian labor. Though the fortunes of the obrajes waxed  and  waned,  they  and  other small  textile  enterprises  kept  a  weaving  economy alive into the twentieth century, by which time Otavaleño Quichuas were already regaining  control  of  land.  A  1909  document  of  the town government noted that '[d]ay by day, the Indian is taking over the lands of the Canton, albeit  by  fair  purchase'  (Salomon  1981:  442). The cumulative effect was that by 1946, while a third of Ecuador's rural population worked entirely on other people's land, only thirty-one percent of Otavalans did any work on others' land (Salomon 1981: 426, citing Salz 1955).

The  relative  economic  and  political  independence afforded by early access to land has facilitated  several  transitions  in  the  rural  economy. In some cases, it enabled early migration, income from which was invested in further purchase of land and other investments (Korovkin 1998). It also created a space for the formation of  small  Quichua  textile  enterprises-at  both a household and small-factory scale. Thus emerged both a Quichua entrepreneurial class, as  well  as  a  semiproletariat  that,  employed  in these enterprises, did not need to migrate long distances in order to make a living, and could combine farming  and  weaving.  This  economy facilitated  the  emergence  of  a  trading  class (larger than in Colta, and this time selling products from Otavalo) who, by mid-century, were traveling nationally and internationally to sell textiles (Buitrón 1962). Even by the 1960s, a number of Otavaleños were investing in housing and consumer durables (Buitrón 1962). As haciendas kept control of more fertile valleybottom  land,  the  emergence  of  a  more  dy- namic  campesino  agriculture  came  later  than the household-weaving economy. But in some areas, campesinos have now also gained access to  this  land-not  infrequently  under  the  auspices of land-reform legislation, and far more recently,  in  the  context  of  Catholic  Churchfinanced programs of land purchase in the 1990s. In these areas, rather than a weaving economy, a more  intensive  form  of  agriculture  dominates (Korovkin 1997).

That these already marketand profitoriented initiatives became the basis of a particularly  vibrant  regional  economy-one  that has since  seen  yet  more  dramatic  expenditure on  contemporary-styled  housing  (ColloredoMansfield 1994), as well as relatively low levels of migration-is as much due to external interventions and state policy as it is to popular practices  and  initiative.  Import-substitution  industrialization  policies  in  the  1960s  and  1970s protected  textile  production  for  the  domestic market and also fueled an export boom-each favoring the expansion of the textile economy (Korovkin 1998). At the same time, the growing  tourist  economy  (also  promoted,  if  less clearly,  by  state  policy)  provided  a  particular niche for Otavalo's more 'ethnic' products-a niche  that  its  trading  elite  quickly  exploited (Buitrón 1962; Korovkin 1998).

More  specific development interventions then assisted in the relatively rapid adjustment of  the  ethnic  economy  to  the  market:  first  in weaving  and  later  in  agriculture.  Otavalo  was one of the selected regions for the work of the Andean Mission in Ecuador (Jordan 1988), and the  Mission  provided  technical  assistance  to weavers to help them diversify and improve the quality of their products. This type of support, coupled with-albeit limited-credit assistance, continued in different forms and guises of state intervention, serving to reorient Otavalan production to market opportunities (Korovkin 1998).

If  the  state  provided  some  of  the  means for this reaccommodation and capitalization of community  entrepreneurial  activity,  nongovernmental and religious (often Evangelical Protestant) institutions did much the same, particularly in the form of a range of communitybased savings and loan institutions that emerged to fill  gaps left by the state and private banks. These  institutions  supported  agricultural  and land-purchase activities as much as textile production (Korovkin 1997; 1998).

Otavalo's economic transformation has been accompanied  by  significant  political  changes. Local politics had been dominated by urban and landed groups linked in some way to the hacienda  or  urban  textile  economy,  but  even  by 1962, Buitrón reported the first Quichua teniente político , 30  signaling the beginning of a more profound set of changes. The progressive early displacement of the hacienda's political power and control of land laid the foundation for a progressive, if lagged, shift in the traditional distribution of political power (Korovkin 1998). Principally  these  took  form  in  the  emergence  of indigenous provincial federations  that  became active in county and national politics-a process that began in the 1970s as part of the wider rise of ethnic organizations in the country (Bebbington et al. 1992). Early leaders in these organizations came from relatively prosperous families, marking the clear link between economic transformation and political change, if also raising questions about who it was that these new institutions represented. The two main federations, FICI (Federación Indígena y Campesina de  Imbabura)  and  FICAPI  (Federación  Indígena y Campesina de la Provincia de Imbabura), each played active roles in the management and control  of  the  provincial  bilingual  education programs of the 1980s and 1990s, and have become active in a subsequent national program for the development of indigenous communities (Andrango 1998; Korovkin 1998: 133-34).

Though these changes have not been without their own conflicts among different political, geographical, and kin-based currents within the federations (Andrango 1998), their emergence and  role  in  regional  politics  has  nonetheless shifted the balance of power in discussions of development and access to resources. This marks a significant shift in the political landscape of the region-a shift in which, to some extent, a politics  that  is  also  'distinctively  their  own'  is emerging.  In  Otavalo,  politics,  culture,  and economy have all been transformed and, in the process, become more-if far from perfectlyinclusive.

## Places and Theories

These cases throw light on several of the core themes  in  both  poststructural  and  neoliberal discussions of rural development: themes of viability  and  place,  hybrids  and  alternatives,  and development  as  destruction.  Of  course,  three places constitute too small and purposive a sample from which to draw generalizations, and my purpose  here  is  not  to  stretch  the  material  to make conclusions that cannot be sustained. On the other hand, elements of these transformations  show  certain  similarities,  I  would  argue, with  other  places  of  the  Andes  (Bebbington 1997) in a way that calls into question some of the  generalized  claims  of  both  neoliberal  and poststructural frameworks. This in turn calls for a more inductive, empirical approach to building development theory that, in working at the level of both structure and agency, is more modest in the general claims it makes. Such theory would serve as much to frame questions about possibility as to make assertions about determinacy.

## Viability, Migration, and Place

Migration is frequently taken as a primary indicator of nonviability. Depending on one's analytical lens, it can be seen as a consequence of development destroying agricultural livelihoods, or as a measure of the incomplete absorption of land-hungry peasants into urban labor markets. In these three cases, however, it has been more than either of these interpretations. It has been a means of producing, securing, and investing in rural  localities  with  the  effect  of  transforming them.

Many  dynamics  are  at  play  here.  Migrants have  consistently  used  earnings  to  purchase land,  particularly  in  those  periods  when  more land was available because of lower population densities  and  when  shifts  in  rural  power  relationships weakened  the  hacienda's grip  on land. 31   Migration  has  also  been  an  important way of financing the building of a new architectural  landscape  as  people  replace  adobe  and thatched-roof houses with more modern building materials. 32   Whether as peddlers, urban laborers,  or  international  traders  (as  in  Otavalo and parts of Colta), these migrants have transferred  income  from  engagement  in  labor  and trade markets into the same steady reconquest of land and space that Grillo has noted in the Peruvian highlands (1998: 136-37).

To be a migrant may not be the best of all possible  worlds,  but  the  ways  in  which  many people have used migration also challenge any simple notion of this behavior as a mere indicator of the destruction of rural livelihood, or im-

pending  urban  transition.  Migration  has  become constitutive of lifestyles that make claims on more than one place. It has its appeal to those young adults like Manuel who love to come back to Colta periodically, but with time, get bored, and  so  also  like  to  return  to  urban  or  coastal areas. It has also been used by many, of all income brackets and ages, not just to maintain a link  with  rural  areas,  but  also  to  consolidate this link. Part of this is clearly an issue of status and  conspicuous  consumption  (cf.  ColloredoMansfield 1994). The community of Sablog Rosa Ines in Guamote is like many others in that its showiest  house-a  two-story  house  with  balcony and mock brick facing-is empty for much of the year while its owners work in the northern highlands. But much of this sustained link is also an issue of lifestyle, cultural practice, and identity.  People  comment,  whether  talking  of their  homes, or their participation in community  public-works  programs  to  install  water  or electricity, that this is an investment in a place to which they can return to rest, celebrate fiestas, perform discrete agricultural tasks, and ultimately retire. Speaking of Pulucate, one of the larger communities in Colta, Becky Tolen (1995: 318)  similarly  comments:  '[w]hen  those  who own businesses, even houses, in Guayaquil, are asked why they also built houses in the countryside,  they  insist,  against  all  appearances,  that they will someday live in the countryside again.'

Migration also becomes a means of sustaining subsistence agriculture, and thus the practices  linked  to  agriculture-even  if  these  are practiced by only some members of the household, and only occasionally by migrants on their periodic returns to the highlands. These practices in turn continue to be constitutive of identity. Tolen (1995: 130) again captures this perfectly: 33 '[d]espite the ever-increasing significance of migration, agriculture is the heart and soul of life  in  Pulucate  as  residents  describe  it.  As  a form of activity, agriculture is thought of primarily as the provision of food to people and animals. This act, in turn, is the essence of humanity  and  sociability.'  The  ethnographic  record elsewhere in the Andes similarly emphasizes the relationship  between  place,  the  practices  that coresidence makes possible, and cultural identity  (Allen  1988;  Rasnake  1988;  Weismantel 1988). Retaining some toehold in farming appears to be particularly significant to such questions of practice and identity, however economically uncompetitive that agriculture may be.

Of  course, the structural constraints are many. People migrate partly as a result of the systematic  lack  of  public  investment  in  areas  of dominantly indigenous populations and the historical  failure  of  haciendas  to  invest  significantly in employment generation. Meanwhile, accounts  of  migrant  work  experiences  recall long  hours,  heavy  burdens,  long  commuting trips to work, and cramped living conditions. So this is not to be naïve. But it is to put the agent back into migration and to suggest that people use it for ends that are more than merely ones of survival, and in many cases, have turned migration into strategies that both create economic resources and re-produce rural places. Agriculture may not be competitive, but the livelihoods that it continues to be a part of clearly are.

## Autonomy, Hybrids and Alternatives

The cases all reflect a very significant investment in rural places on the part of campesinos. Individually and collectively, people struggle to maintain  these  places,  and  to  expand  their degree of control over the social and economic processes that unfold there. This process occurs at various levels: the body (in the case of dress), the locality (as, for instance, when people monitor the passage of others into and out of communities), and the microregion (as in the case of governance processes in Guamote).

While  this  statement  resonates  with  Escobar's  claim  that  development  alternatives  will involve the defense of the local, the notion of 'defense' draws too sharp a distinction between local and external. It implies too static a notion of the local, and ultimately more antagonism in the relationship between locality and external institutions  than  necessarily  exists.  Indeed,  to draw on another element of his framework, it seems more apposite to think of people actively engaging in the production of 'hybridized' localities than in the defense of a pregiven locality. This hybridization occurs through active engagement in wider labor and product markets, with the institutions of the national state, and the  institutions  of  development  (discussed  in the  following  section).  Otavalo  is  the  clearest case in which an engagement with markets has been central to strategies (including land acquisition and political organization) that help secure greater control of locality. But such engagements are also apparent in the case of migrants

who work periodically elsewhere, investing their savings  in  the  highlands  (see  above).  Beyond any assertion of status, this investment is also a way of creating places that are more subject to the person's control: '[t]hese houses are not only an expression of having one foot in the urban world: they are also a way of maintaining one foot outside that world, a refusal to accept that one is entirely defined by one's marginalized position in urban society' (Tolen 1995: 318). 34

Of course, Otavalo is something of a sui generis case. Nor is there necessarily much to celebrate  in  livelihood  strategies  based  on  selling labor  cheaply  in  distant  environments,  and building  houses  that  one  cannot  live  in  yearround because highland livelihoods are unable to  generate  sufficient  income.  But  something more is going on. Through various types of organizations  and  networks,  people  are  increasing the extent to which they control these places, and the processes that unfold in and on them. This is most clear in the new organizational and political landscapes of each of these localities. At  a  local  level,  legalized  communities  have multiplied across the landscape to become the basic unit of rural governance. Supracommunal campesino  federations  have  also  developed  in each case, and an increasingly vibrant indigenous Evangelical church in most. These organizations have increasingly trespassed into the terrain  of  the  state,  seeking  to  make  it  a  further mechanism through which local populations increase  their  influence  over  the  ways  in  which places are produced. Guamote is the most obvious case of this process, but in Colta and Otavalo, elements  of  the  same  process  are  apparent.  Indeed, this process reaches wider through the Ecuadorian and, perhaps especially, Bolivian Andes (Booth et al. 1997).

Each of these strategies and practices involve engaging  with  modernizing  institutions  and practices. In the process, new rural landscapes are produced: landscapes with modern building materials, new commodities, new forms of dress, vehicles  parked  outside  campesino  houses,  increasing use of Spanish as an everyday language, Quichuas sitting behind office desks that were once the preserve of others, and so on. These are new landscapes, symbolic of many changes that have occurred in how people live, and think of living, in these rural spaces, and of the extent to which so many of their practices are mediated through  the  incorporation  of  modern  ideas, things, and commodities.

'La gente se esta modernizando' ['people are modernizing'],  one  young  campesino  reflected approvingly as he and I looked out across Sablog's fields and houses one day. This, though, was no rudderless modernization, commented a friend: 'you learn from the past. You tie yourself into tradition and history and bring it forward into the present.' And in this process of assembling the artifacts of modern Ecuador in new ways and combining them with prior practices, these materials and ideas become indigenous, conveying a refashioned but still distinct identity. 35

More  than  defending  and  resisting,  people and their organizations seem to seek means of using, controlling, and making meaningful these processes of composition and hybridization. Or in the words of three Quichua bilingual educators, 'this speaks very clearly of the deep cultural nationalism  [of  Quichuas]  that  must  be  organized and directed, but by their own leaders and social promoters ' (Bueno et al. 1983, my emphasis). 36  As people produce these new places, they produce new meanings and identities-but still, as Salomon insists, maintaining 'a pattern that is distinctively their own.'

## Coproduction, Institutions and Networks

The  transformations  that  have  occurred  in each of the cases discussed here have much to do with the cumulative effect of individual and collective struggles to build livelihoods and rework the relations of power that structure patterns of access to resources and of participation in markets and political processes. But they also have a great deal to do with the ways in which state development programs, different churches, and an array  of  nongovernmental  development  agencies have engaged with, responded to, and often promoted these individual and collective struggles. Even if these intersections between popular practice and the practice of development have sometimes occurred in quite unplanned and unpredictable  ways,  with  equally  unanticipated outcomes,  they  have  implications  for  how  we think about claims that development has failed, at least in the Ecuadorian Andes.

It would be hard to argue that the situation in Colta,  Guamote, and Otavalo is, today, worse than  in  the  periods  when  hacienda-based  regimes  of  power  and  control  dominated  these areas. The transformation of these power relations is clearly, in part, a result of everyday and

organized forms of peasant resistance and mobilization, and land purchase using migrant earnings. But it is also, and primarily, a consequence of land-reform programs. These programs, in part responses to campesino mobilization, also became possible  because  of  pressure  from  an  emerging national bourgeoisie who saw the hacienda as a brake on market expansion, and from the U.S. for land reform throughout Latin America in order to prevent the rise of communism. The legislation created the legal space for campesinos to recover land, a process that very often involved collaborations  between  communities,  state  offices, the church, and NGOs. Over the last decade, the Catholic Church and an NGO, Fondo Ecuatoriano  Populorum  Progressio,  completed this  process  of  complete  land  transfer  in  Guamote, using Church funds to finance campesino purchase of remaining hacienda land. 37

These transformations in relationships of access underlie the subsequent changes in governance in each region as new political and social institutions  have  been  built  or  assumed  more strength.  The  emergence  of  community-based organizations and federations, Quichua municipal governments, and now Quichua NGOs owes much  to  development  interventions.  While much  of  this  support  came  from  NGOs  and priests  who  supported  community  capacity  to negotiate with state programs and to access resources,  some  of  it  came  from  state  programs themselves. This was frequently because of the actions  of  individuals  within  these  programs who turned institutional practice and resources to  particular  purposes.  The  examples  here  are many. Some are of those foot-slogging community organizers, like Miguel Rojas, who, by 1997, could not remember how many communities he had  helped  organize  and  gain  the  legal  status they needed in order to engage with other public  programs.  Others  are  educators  like  Carlos Moreno, who-from within a government education  department-managed  to  mobilize  resources for literacy training programs that trained small armies of community-level promoters (including  those  quoted  earlier),  many  of  whom subsequently  assumed  leadership  positions  in campesino and other organizations. And finally there  are  those  occasional  directors  who,  like Wilson Huilca, turned whole rural development programs into something bearing scant resemblance to the project document. 38  Again none of this is to be naïve about political constraints on  development  interventions-indeed,  after five years and a change in government, Huilca was forced out. It is, though, to recognize agency within these constraints, and to note that its effects can be lagged, and lasting, even after the agent's space has been closed.

The constraints on economic accumulation are greater than those on changes in local governance. There has, though, been accumulation in  these  areas.  Much  of  this  has  occurred  because of work done in other places as migrant labor. Nonetheless, the emergence of the weaving industry in Otavalo (Salomon 1981; Korovkin 1998),  the  more  localized  patterns  of  agricultural intensification in parts of Colta, or cases such as the campesino agroindustrial complex of Salinas  (Bebbington  et  al.  1992)  suggest  that the conditions for competitiveness can be created through external intervention. 39  In the context of a globalized economy, understanding the coproduction of economic possibilities through the joint actions of people, their networks, and external  intervention  thus  becomes  critical  to any attempt to build counternarratives against neoliberal formulations of crisis: counternarratives that recognize, however, the importance of the economic as well as the cultural and political dimensions of alternatives.

Rather  than  read  off  from  different  project documents the ways in which development interventions  aimed  to  discipline  and  control these three areas, these cases therefore highlight the ways in which the practice of development interventions, and their effects , have opened up new  spaces  and  opportunities  in  political  and market  spheres. Contra many  neoliberal  arguments,  this  does  indeed  suggest  that  viability can  be  created,  and-contra  many  poststructural interpretations-it suggests that development interventions can play roles in contributing to such reworkings of power relationships.

None of the above is to make the normative suggestion that current forms of market and political participation are ideal. It is, however, to suggest that spaces have been created through the combined effect of people's initiatives and development  intervention.  Many  people  have used these spaces to secure livelihoods, expand their  control  over  highland  places,  and  continue investing in the highlands. Understanding how such spaces opened up and have been used is critical for thinking about alternatives. Categorical  assertions  about  the  destructiveness  of development distract attention from these spaces and the possibilities that inhere in them.

## Conclusions

## Development as Destruction or Coproduction?

Poststructural and neoliberal takes on development are, both in some sense, narratives on destruction: in the former case, the narrative is that development has destroyed local cultures; in the latter, it is that it ought do so as a 'necessary  if  unfortunate'  consequence  of  fostering more 'efficient' forms of resource use. The cases discussed here make it difficult to accept such interpretations.

There are both epistemological and empirical reasons for challenging the notion that significant parts of the Andes do not merit development investment because they are not economically viable. The epistemological case revolves around the problem of trusteeship (Cowen and Shenton 1996), and the very narrow categories  through  which  such  interpretations define 'viability.' The empirical reason is that though there is clearly a problem of agricultural viability in many parts of Colta and Guamote, people  have  nonetheless  composed  livelihood strategies that allow a degree of accumulation. 40 They have invested heavily in local institutions and built form, if not always in agriculture. In this way, they have kept these places viable and vibrant  even  though  agricultural  livelihoods meet  only  a  small  part  of  household  income needs.  Meanwhile,  cases  like  Otavalo  suggest that in situ viability can be created with time, and that, indeed, income from migration might be an important initial stage in this process. The absence of institutions through which migrant income  can  be  translated  into  productive  investment in places like Colta and Guamote is probably a more important reason for the current stagnation of the local economy than any ecologically determined nonviability.

Poststructural  interpretations  are  similarly vulnerable to both epistemological and empirical critique. From these cases at least, it is not easy to substantiate the view that development programs  and  plans  are  merely  exercises  in  a form of cultural domination exercised through the institutions of the modernizing state. While such interpretations ring true for certain cases, at certain points in time, these cases suggest the importance of empirical rather than simply discursive analyses of these interventions. In these instances,  the  effects  of  these  programs  have been multiple and, in many instances, have contributed to the restructuring of local power relations and patterns of access to resources. These effects in turn depend significantly on the practices  of  agents  within  these  programs.  Indeed, there is considerable dissonance between some of these practices and the sometimes-stated national policy that these programs were intended to  foster  the  integration  and  assimilation  of Quichuas into Ecuadorian society. The implication  is  that  there  are  a  variety  of  knowledgepower regimes at work within the institutions of development.  If  that  is  so,  then  the  ways  in which poststructural analyses have deployed the knowledge-power/institutions-intervention  relationship as the cornerstone of their analyses may be too blunt, obscuring the scope for, and the effects of, agency. As Escobar notes, ethnographies  of  development  are  important:  but  in this case, they challenge elements of his and related frameworks. They question the generalizability of the conclusions as well as some of the categories being used.

The  same  seems  to  be  the  case  in  poststructural discussions of alternatives: these, and the  knowledges  that  are  claimed  to  go  with them, also seem to be essentialized conceptions. The emphasis on resistance is, in some sense welcome and appropriate, but to phrase it categorically as resistance to state interventions, or opposition to modernization, seems unhelpful: for while explaining some phenomena, others become harder to explain when resistance is essentialized in this way. Given this, and given the apparent  logics  at  work  across  these  diverse cases,  it  seems  more  appropriate  to  argue  at  a simpler  level.  People  encounter  development from their mundane, daily concerns to build and improve their livelihoods, to build places they enjoy being in, to give meaning to their lives through  these  livelihoods  and  places,  and  to maintain and, as far as possible, to extend the degree to which they can exercise control over their  conditions  of  existence.  This  encounter can sometimes seem like resistance, sometimes like  accommodation,  and  sometimes  like  selfinterest. But first and foremost, people encounter development in the process of trying to build something of their own. In these cases at least, this means that 'modernizing development' is not necessarily resisted but is more often taken, transformed, and used; and similarly, modernizing  institutions  are  worked  with,  used,  transformed, and turned, as far as possible, to people's

own purposes. As a consequence, almost everything about development is 'coproduced.' This coproduction occurs at the intersections of institutional practices and popular practices, and of  different  practices within those  institutions and popular sectors (for there is rarely a convergence of local minds on the sorts of home and meaning  that  ought  to  be  built,  or  over  who should have a say in this). Similarly, it is coproduced  through  people's  engagements  with  a range of markets, and historical and modernizing ideas and practices.

The  notion  of  hybridity  (Escobar  1995)  is useful  here,  but  needs  further  elaboration.  If popular practice, livelihood, and culture has always been  hybrid,  then  it  is  conceptually  (as well as empirically) inconsistent to celebrate, by definition, the local over the external. Rather, it may be more important to understand the preferred hybrid forms implied in popular strategy, the  terms  and  relationships  of  power  under which such hybridization occurs, and the conditions  under  which  those  relationships  are  reworked to the benefit of those groups whose interests the author is primarily concerned with.

Such an approach, of course, has many dangers. To some extent, it takes the broader political  economy  as  given,  looking  for  room-formaneuver within its constraints. This not only brackets the possibilities that these constraints might be changed. It can also divert attention from critical discussion of the extent to which people have no choice but to pursue their livelihoods through practices structured by a globalized economy whose very dominating effect closes off the possibility of imagining alternatives outside it. On the other hand, a focus on coproduction  can  hone  attention  on  the  extent to which room-for-maneuver for generating  income  and  further  extending  the  social control of local political and economic institutions  might  exist  within  these  political  economic constraints.

## Theorizing Up?

If coproduction and hybridity are central to development  as practiced and experienced, then, as the material reviewed here suggests, observers ought to be cautious before making generic arguments about causation and possibility of the kind made by both neoliberal and poststructural critics of development in the Andes.

Conversely, the risk is that arguments about hybridity and place lead inexorably to analyses of the kind that celebrate difference and contextspecific  alternatives.  Such  approaches  are  vulnerable to the accusation of case specificity and exceptionalism, and can make theory building or generalization difficult. The approach taken here,  to  compare  ethnographic  and  historical accounts of different localities, is one way of addressing this problem, though it has methodological difficulties of its own. The claim, though, is that under certain circumstances it is possible to read across these texts and to suggest the existence of patterns in the ways in which development is experienced locally and in which livelihoods and landscapes are constructed. 41

Of course,  three  cases  are  too  few  to  make categorical  claims.  Such  claims  about  pattern would  obviously  assume  more  authority,  the greater  the  number  of  cases,  and  the  greater the convergence  among  interpretations  of  different readers of these cases. As this process of validated comparison and synthesis moves forward, it becomes easier to theorize and generalize.  The  general  argument  to  be  made  at  this point, however, is that subalterns are not merely victims who resist, but also agents who have succeeded in opening up spaces within states and markets. They have used these spaces to build new types of hybrid livelihood, institutions, and landscapes that are constitutive of quite distinctive forms of place making that, though incorporating many symbols of modernity, are indeed alternative to simple landscapes of modernization. It is hard to imagine that the same spaces would have opened without people having engaged with markets, state programs, and development interventions.

This is an argument for building up a body of ethnographically  informed  histories  and  geographies  of  development  through  the  Andes. Working  at  a  regional  level,  it  becomes  more possible to narrate stories that do more justice to human agency while, at the same time, being clear on structural constraints. Such mesoscale knowledge (cf. Turner 1989) also offers greater hope of reducing the distance between theory and practice, critique and alternative. In these cases, it implies that increasing grassroots control over the ways in which places are produced and governed is central to alternatives. Building more accountable political institutions is critical here, but alone is insufficient. This is so not only because the grassroots control of such insti-

tutions  will  never  be  harmonious,  and  some popular interests will always prevail over others. It is also-and more important-because such institutions have only limited effect on the economic dimensions of livelihood. Yet these economic  dimensions  are  critical  in  determining the types of rural places produced, and the ability of people to spend much time actually living in and enjoying those places.

More  viable  livelihoods  will not  be romanced into existence, but must instead be built up from already existing, and however imperfect strategies.  Understanding  livelihood  thus  becomes critical for theory, in order to understand how places are produced and governed, and who participates in these processes. It is also critical for practice-to understand the ways in which people  have  created  livelihood  opportunities that foster accumulation, as well as the obstacles to such accumulation.

In addition to studying regional transformations of the peasantry, and the multiple ways in which  campesinos  engage  with  their  political worlds  (as  called  for  by  Roseberry  1993),  it  is therefore also important to understand the ways in which rural populations have engaged with different  markets  and  the  public,  nongovernmental, and ecclesiastical institutions of development.  Such  inquiries  would  seek  to  understand the ways in which the practices of (and within) these institutions have both closed and opened opportunities for creative forms of popular  engagement  with  state  and  market.  Ultimately such an approach could identify how actions  have  led,  and  might  lead,  to  change  in both the local and the wider systems in which campesinos are embedded.

Cowen and Shenton (1998: 50) have argued that one of the 'confusions, common throughout the development literature, is between development as an immanent and unintentional process as in, for example, the 'development of capitalism' and development as an intentional activity.'  The suggestion here is that mapping the latter onto the former, and tracing the mutually constitutive interactions between the two, is critical to a geography of development. The challenge is to map onto the geography of capitalist development in the Andes the (always hybrid)  intentions  and  actions  both  of  people building livelihoods and places, and of the actors  involved  in  development  interventions. This would be a mapping exercise concerned to recognize constraint, but above all, and in the spirit of 'reencountering' and rescuing development, to understand possibility.

## Acknowledgments

This paper has not been an easy one to write, and it owes a great deal to feedback received in presentations at Stanford University, the Universities of British Columbia, Texas, and Colorado, and in particular, to the very helpful discussion of the paper by the Colloquium on Agrarian Studies at Yale University. I am particularly grateful to Jim Scott for his encouragement and commentary. My thanks also to the following  for  their  constructive  and  always  challenging comments: Carolyn Cartier, Hugh  Raffles,  Don Moore, Rachel Silvey, Lucien Taylor, Dodie McDowell,  Billie  Lee  Turner  II,  Christian  Kull,  Michael Woolcock, Donna Goldstein, Arun Agrawal, Gaston Gordillo,  Dan  Segal,  Bill  Durham,  Alex  Keyssar, Trevor  Barnes,  Manny  Schegloff,  and  Eric  Wolby. The suggestions of five anonymous referees were very helpful. Thanks also to Jim Robb for the map. I would also like to acknowledge all that I have learned from my exchanges on peasant economy with Octavio Sotomayor, Julio Berdegué, and Nico van Niekerk, and from my many hours discussing Colta with Becky Tolen. The  preparation  of  the  paper  was  supported  by  a Hewlett Fellowship at the Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University.

## Notes

1. For some of the many reflections on its implications for development geography and anthropology, see Blaikie (1998); Watts (1993); Peet and Watts  (1996);  Watts  and  McCarthy  (1997); Yapa (1998); Crush (1995); Rigg (1997); Simon (1998);  Moore  (1999);  and  Little  and  Painter (1995).
2. This family of broadly modernizing initiatives is generally referred to in such writings as 'the development project' (Simon 1998).
3. 'Do  you  or  don't  you  support  drinking  water projects?'  after  reading  Escobar,  one  otherwise sympathetic reader asked aloud. Escobar himself recognizes this problem: '[o]ne of the most common questions raised about a study of this kind is what  it  has  to  say  about  alternatives'  (1995: 222). James Ferguson, who has pursued a similar line of critique, similarly notes: '[t]here seems to be  a  certain  frustration  with  the  fact  that  my analysis traces the effects or mode of operation of an apparatus without providing any sort of prescription or general guide for action' (1990: 279).
4. I  want  to  emphasize  two  points  here.  First,  it should be noted that my focus is on rural commu-

nities and small towns: I do not address issues of urban  development.  Second,  and  more  important, as the paper develops, I put more emphasis on the limitations of the poststructural position. This is not because I wish to imply that I have more sympathy with the neoliberal-quite the opposite. Rather, it is that, because my normative sympathies lie with those positions implied or explicit in the work of poststructural authors, I find  the  empirical  analyses  and  programmatic implications of such approaches that much more disappointing.

5. In  their  discussion  of  Marglin's  (1990)  call  for alternative  development  in  India,  Cowen  and Shenton (1996: 470) note a similar irony. Marglin's  recommendations  are,  they  suggest,  ultimately the same as those of Conservatives in the British colonial period who also argued that improvement could only come from Indian society rather than state policy. 'What irony! What was once  the  part  played  by  conservative  doctrine becomes the script  for  a  present-day,  very  selfconscious radicalism' (1996: 470).
6. At one level, this critique seems to square poorly with the fact that writers on alternative development almost consistently argue that the authors of alternatives ought to be popular actors. The problem, Cowen and Shenton (1996: 458-59) imply, is that ultimately the few still determine the contents of alternatives for the many because 'only those conscious of being so free, and being relatively developed, can assume the burden of trusteeship . . . for the purpose of the relative harmony of authentic development' (1996: 458).
7. Based on a reading of development planning in Colombia, Escobar's is already a view from the Andes. It has been elaborated in Apffel-Marglin and PRATEC's (1998) more specifically Andean critique of development. This critique similarly sees development as a failed extension of a European enlightenment project: 'Development is a symptom  of  the  senile  dementia  .  .  .  of  the plague' of European colonization (Grillo 1998: 137).
8. As I  shall  discuss  below,  recent  debates  in  the Andes question elements of this argument, as the notions  of  failure  and  hopelessness  have  been used by other parts of the bureaucracy to argue that  certain  programs  and  types  of  investment ought be terminated for reasons of fiscal tightness.  Again  the  problem  derives  from  a  treatment of bureaucracies and states as unitary, overlooking  their  internal  struggles  for  resources, power, and the definition of policy.
9. This is not to imply that such authors do not also see the need for broader social change.
10. Ferguson's (1990) epilogue similarly emphasizes the role of such social movements.
11. Escobar's writing on Afro-Colombian communi-
8. ties, however, begins to ask some of these questions (Grueso et al. 1998).
12. Pile and Keith (1997: xi) suggest that we are in a period  'where  everyone  seems  to  be  talking about resistance and domination.'
13. Thanks to Lucien Taylor for making this parenthetical observation.
14. Julio Berdegué, former director of the small-farm technology transfer program of the Ministry of Agriculture, notes that it 'was questioned from two  quite  different  positions,  that  nonetheless complemented each other in that they called for the termination of the program: the technocrats of the economic sector, for whom the campesinado are a pointless waste of time ( una huevada sin destino ), and that it therefore made no sense at all to waste US$20 a year [in per-capita program expenditure] since it was better to support their migration to the city and into other lines of employment; and [secondly] the populists' (Berdegué 1999).
15. Another approach would be to combine ethnographies and survey research-a potentially fruitful approach, though also with its methodological and logistical problems.
16. It also merits saying that although the paper focuses  on  Ecuadorian  material,  I  have  come  to these  interpretations  on  the  basis  of  studies  in other parts of the Andes, especially in Bolivia. In conducting this other research, I have been fortunate enough to collaborate with Tom Carroll, Chema  García,  Leonith  Hinojosa,  Adalberto Kopp, Luciano Martinez,  Diego  Muñoz,  Perico Perés, Godofredo Sandovál, Tom Perreault, Galo Ramón,  Victor  Hugo  Torres,  the  late  Hernán Carrasco, and not least, Denise Bebbington.
17. The 1990 census counts 47,658 people in Colta (INEC 1992: 13).
18. This is not to imply that all families use the strategy. Some leave permanently (or only return for one fiesta a year), yet most families maintain the foothold in Colta, reflected in the fact that population  continues  to  increase  although  more slowly than other cantons in Chimborazo (INEC 1992).
19. The 'comuna,' a legally recognized administrative  unit  since  the  early  1930s,  in  essence,  replaced the hacienda as the basic unit for the governance of rural space. I use the term community to refer to these legally constituted entities, and not to imply a homogeneity of interests within local populations.
20. I use the term 'surveillance' deliberately: communities  monitor  arrivals  and  departures  not only of local people, but also, more important, of strangers.  Cars  and  people  on  foot  are  stopped and  asked  who  they  are  and  where  they  are going. Periodically, forms of 'popular law' are exercised  by  the  community,  when  it  identifies

- wrong-doers.  In  areas  to  both  the  north  and south of Colta, this has recently led to tensions between community authorities and the official judicial and police system.
21. 'Mestizo' refers to mixed-race white/indigenous people  who,  in  Colta  and  Guamote,  typically managed, served, and traded with the haciendas, and would subject Quichuas to a range of abuses (Maynard 1965).
22. One family-planning NGO did, though, have its office there.
23. The 1990 census counts 28,058 people in Guamote (INEC 1992: 13).
24. I say 'individual' because some communities own large  extensions  of  land  (generally  high  grasslands) in common.
25. An official in the regional office of IERAC (the former  national  institute  for  land  reform)  referred to the priest in Guamote as 'a very good friend  of  IERAC,' facilitating the rapid implementation of land redistribution programs in the area (Andrade, 1989).
26. I refer to discussions with Hilario Maola, Genaro Guaylla, and Agapito Muñoz.
27. A number of these leaders had parents who had greater access to land. This meant that their children had to migrate less frequently, and so were better positioned to assume this mediating role.
28. There has, though, been little change in the gendering of local government in Guamote.
29. This section draws on the work of others, and only a few interviews of my own.
30. The teniente político is a local state authority.
31. Lehmann (1986) similarly identifies migration as a key source of income for land purchase in Carchi.
32. These patterns are akin to Jokisch's (1998) wonderful  evocations  of  the  landscape  transformations associated with international labor migration in Cañar.
33. Becky Tolen's work (1995) and my own informed each other, and I want to acknowledge the way in which she helped shape my understanding of Colta.
34. Although  Catherine  Allen's  (1988)  ethnography of a Peruvian community primarily investigates the role of coca chewing in cultural identity,  she  ends  her  book  with  a  vignette  that conveys the sense that younger adults, who have migrated to the city of Cuzco, seek ways of combining  a  presence  in  urban  areas  and  modern livelihoods, with a presence in their communities  of  origin.  She  talks  of  José,  the  son  of  her principal informant: 'José . . . mentioned that he would like to sell the taxi and buy a truck. The taxi was fine-but he liked driving in the countryside. With a truck he could haul produce between Cuzco and Sonqo [his community], and between Cuzco and Cachin [his wife's community]. Emilia [his wife] could go along with him,
- driving back and forth between the city and their ayllus. ' Now that could be a good life, he commented wistfully' (1988: 235-36).
35. This notion has been especially well articulated for  the  case  of  indigenous  dress  in  the  Andes (Zorn  1997;  Tolen  1995);  but  also  see  Jokisch (1998) for the case of housing, and Bebbington (1993) for that of agricultural practice.
36. This is from a document written by three Quichuas for their training course to become bilingual educators. One of them, Jose Bueno, subsequently  became  very  active  in  one  campesino organization, and now leads the Quichua NGO CEDEIN, mentioned in the discussion of Colta.
37. The program was, though, a national one.
38. This observation, of course, cuts both ways: the institutional weaknesses that allowed these individual actions can also allow less savory uses of public resources. Either way, the point is that there is much scope for agency within these institutions.
39. Evans (1995, 1996) has similarly argued that industrial comparative advantage can be created at a national level via certain types of state-business embeddedness.  The  suggestion  here,  following North and Cameron (1998), is that such comparative advantage can also be created at a subnational level.
40. This  is  to  challenge  the  neoliberal  frameworks on their own epistemological grounds.
41. The parallel, in some sense, is that while each region has its own indigenous peasant movement, these  movements  are  also  able  to  coalesce  nationally around certain shared concerns and experiences, however internally debated these national platforms might be.

## References

- Allen, A. 1993. Dos Gatazos: Indigenous Organization and Political Strategy in two Andean Communities.  Ph.D.  dissertation,  Department  of Anthropology, University of Kentucky.
- Allen, C. 1988. The Hold Life Has: Coca and Cultural Identity in an Andean Community. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Publications.
- Andrade, Gustavo. 1989. Personal communication, June 16.
- Apffel-Marglin,  F.,  and  PRATEC,  eds.  1998. The Spirit of Regeneration. Andean Culture Confronting Western Notions of Development. London: Zed.
- Bebbington, A. 1997. Social Capital and Rural Intensification: Local Organizations and Islands of Sustainability in the Rural Andes. Geographical Journal 163:189-97.
- ---. 1993. Modernization from Below. An Alternative Indigenous Development?' Economic Geography 69:274-92
- ---. 1990. Indigenous Agriculture in the Central

- Ecuadorian  Andes:  The  Cultural  Ecology  and Institutional Conditions of Its Construction and Its Change. Ph.D. dissertation, Clark University.
- ---, and Perreault, T. 1999. Social Capital and Development  in  Highland  Ecuador. Economic Geography 75:395-418.
- ---; Carrasco, H.; Peralvo, L.; Ramón, G.; Torres, V.H.; and Trujillo, J.  1992. Los Actores de una Decada Ganada: tribus, comunidades y campesinos en la modernidad. Quito: Abya Yala.
- Berdegué, Julio. 1999. Personal communication.
- Blaikie, P . 1998. Post-modernism and the Calling out of Development Geography. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association of American Geographers, Boston.
- Booth,  D.,  ed.  1994. Rethinking  Social  Development. Harlow: Longmans.
- ---; Clisby, S.; and Widmark, C. 1997. Popular Participation. Democratising the State in Rural Bolivia. Stockholm: Sida.
- Brown, L.A; Mandel, J.L; Lawson, V.A. 1997. Development  Models,  Economic  Adjustment,  and Occupational Composition: Ecuador 1982-1990. International Regional Science Review 20:183-209.
- Bueno, J.; Alberto, G.; and León, A. 1983. Las Creencias  y  Convencionalismos  que  Viven  en  el Mente del Indígena Puruhua. Trabajo previo al grado  de  'Promotor  Bilingue  Intercultural  de Alfabetización.' Gatazo. Chimborazo.
- Buitrón,  A.  1962.  Panorama  de  la  aculturación  en Otavalo, Ecuador. América Indígena 22:313-22.
- Casagrande, J. 1981. Strategies for Survival: The Indians of Highland Ecuador. Cultural Transformations  and  Ethnicity  in  Modern  Ecuador ,  ed.  N. Whitten, pp. 260-77. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- --- and Piper, A.R. 1969. La transformación estructural de una Parroquía Rural en las Tierras Altas del Ecuador. América Indígena 29(4):1039-64.
- Colloredo-Mansfield, J. 1994. Architectural Conspicuous  Consumption  and  Economic  Change  in the Andes. American Anthropologist 96:845-65.
- Cooper, F., and Packard, R., eds. 1997. International Development and the Social Sciences: Essays on the History and Politics of Knowledge. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Cowen,  M.P.,  and  Shenton,  R.W.  1998.  Agrarian Doctrines  of  Development:  Part  1.' Journal  of Peasant Studies 25:49-76.
- ---, and ---. 1996. Doctrines of Development. London: Routledge.
- Crush, J., ed. 1995. Power of Development. London: Routledge.
- de  Janvry,  A.  1981. Land  Reform  and  the  Agrarian Question  in  Latin  America. Baltimore:  Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Escobar,  A.  1995. Encountering  Development:  The Making and Unmaking of the Third World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- ---. 1991. Anthropology and the Development Encounter: The Making and Marketing of Development Anthropology. American Ethnologist 18:16-40.
- ---.  1988.  Power  and  Visibility:  Development and  the  Invention  and  Management  of  the Third World. Cultural Anthropology 3:428-43.
- ---. 1984. Discourse and Power in Development: Michel Foucault and the Relevance of His Work to the Third World. Alternatives 10:377-400.
- Evans, P., ed. 1996. State-Society Synergy: Government and Social Capital in Development. Berkeley: Institute for International Studies.
- ---. 1995. Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial  T ransformation. Princeton,  NJ:  University of Princeton Press.
- Farrell,  G.;  Pachano,  S.;  and  Carrasco,  H.  1989. Caminos y retornos. Quito: Instituto de Estudios Ecuatorianos.
- Ferguson, J. 1990. The Anti-politics Machine: Development, Depoliticization and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Frank, A.G. 1969. Capitalism and Underdevelopment in Latin America. New York: Modern Reader.
- Gellner, B.J. 1982. Colta Entrepreneurship in Ecuador: A Study of Highland Indian Peddlers and the Use of Socio-Cultural Resources. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
- Grillo,  E.  1998.  Development  or  Cultural  Affirmation in the Andes? In The Spirit of Regeneration: Andean Culture Confronting Western Notions of Development , ed. F . Apffel-Marglin and PRATEC, pp. 124-45. London: Zed.
- Grueso,  L.;  Rosero,  C.;  and  Escobar,  A.  1998.  The Process of Black Community Organizing in the Southern Pacific Coast Region of Colombia. In Cultures of Politics/Politics of Cultures: Re-visioning Latin American Social Movements , ed. S. Alvarez, E. Dagnino, and A. Escobar, pp. 196-219. Boulder, CO: Westview.
- Hentschel, J.; Waters, W.; and Webb, A. 1996. Working  Paper  5:  Rural  Qualitative  Assessment.  In World  Bank  1996  Ecuador  Poverty  Report ,  pp. 183-219 Washington: World Bank.
- Hojman, D. 1998. Book Review: Agrarian Change and Democratic Transition in Chile. Journal of Peasant Studies 25(3):137-139.
- InterAmerican Development Bank (IDB). 1996. Bolivia: desarrollo diferente para un pais de cambios. Salir  del  circulo  vicioso  de  la  riqueza  empobrecedora.  Informe  final  de  la  Misión  Piloto  sobre  Reforma Socio-Económica en Bolivia. La Paz: Banco InterAmericano del Desarrollo.
- Instituto Nacional de Estadistica y Censos (INEC). 1992. Censo de Población y de Vivienda IV. Analísis de los Resultados Definitivos de la Provincia de Chimborazo. Quito: Instituto Nacional de Estadistica y Censos.
- Jokisch,  B.  1998.  Ecuadorian  Emigration  and  Agri-

- cultural  Change:  The  Persistence  of  Smallholder agriculture in Lower Cañar, Ecuador. Paper presented at the meeting of the Latin American Studies Association, Chicago.
- Jordan, F. 1988. El Minifundio. Su Evolución en el Ecuador. Quito: Corporación Editora Nacional.
- Kay, C. 1997. Globalization, Peasant Agriculture and Reconversion. Bulletin of Latin American Research 16(1)(special issue):11-24.
- ---. 1995. Rural Development and Agrarian Issues in Contemporary Latin America.' In Structural  Adjustment  and  the  Agricultural  Sector  in Latin  America and the Caribbean ,  ed.  J.  Weeks, pp. 9-44. London: St. Martin's Press.
- Keith, M. 1997. A Changing Space and a Time for Change. In Geographies of Resistance , ed. S. Pile and M. Keith, pp. 277-86.
- Knapp, G. 1991. Andean Ecology. Adaptive Dynamics in Ecuador. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Korovkin, T. 1998. Commodity Production and Ethnic Culture:  Otavalo,  Northern  Ecuador. Economic Development and Cultural Change 47:125-54.
- ---. 1997. Taming Capitalism: The Evolution of the Indigenous Peasant Economy in Northern Ecuador. Latin American Research Review 32:89110.
- Lanjouw, P. 1996. Working Paper 4: Poverty in Rural Ecuador.  In World  Bank  1996  Ecuador  Poverty Report , pp. 141-81. Washington: World Bank.
- Lehmann, A.D. 1997. An Opportunity Lost: Escobar's Deconstruction of Development. Journal of Development Studies 33:568-78.
- ---. 1986. Two Paths of Agrarian Capitalism, or a Critique of Chayanovian Marxism. Comparative Studies in Society and History 28:601-27.
- Little,  P .,  and  Painter,  M.  1995.  Discourse,  Politics and  the  Development  Process:  Reflections  on Escobar's 'Anthropology and the Development Encounter.' American Ethnologist 22:602-09.
- Llambi,  L.  1989.  Emergence  of  Capitalized  Family Farms in Latin America. Comparative Studies in Society and History 31:745-74.
- López,  R.  1995. Determinants  of  Rural  Poverty:  A Quantitative Analysis of Chile. Technical Department,  Rural  Poverty  and  Natural  Resources, Latin America. Washington: World Bank.
- Maola, Hilario. 1998. Personal Communication, August 4, Guamote.
- Marcus,  G.,  and  Fischer,  G.  1986. Anthropology  as Cultural Critique. An Experimental Moment in the Human  Sciences. Chicago:  University  of  Chicago Press.
- Marglin, S. 1990. Losing Touch: The Cultural Conditions  of  Worker  Accommodation  and  Resistance.  In Dominating  Knowledge:  Development, Culture,  and  Resistance, ed.  F .A.  Marglin  and S.A. Marglin, pp. 217-82.
- Massey, D. 1994 Space, Place and Gender. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Mayer, E., and Glave, M. 1999. Alguito para ganar (A Little  Something  to  Earn):  Profits  and  Losses in Peasant Economies. American Ethnologist 26:344-69.
- Maynard, E. 1965. Indians in Misery. Ithaca, NY: Department of Anthropology, Cornell University.
- Moore, D. 1998. Sub-Altern Struggles and the Politics of Place: Remapping Resistance in Zimbabwe's Eastern Highlands. Cultural Anthropology 13:344-82.
- ---. 1999. The Crucible of Cultural Politics: Reworking 'Development' in Zimbabwe's Eastern Highlands. American Ethnologist 26:654-89 .
- Muñoz, J.P. 1998. 'Organización y Municipios Indigenas.' Signos 18:13-16.
- Muratorio,  B.  1982.  Protestantism  and  Capitalism Revisited,  in  the  Rural  Highlands  of  Ecuador. Journal of Peasant Studies 8:37-60.
- ---. 1981. Protestantism, Ethnicity and Class in Chimborazo. In Cultural Transformations and Ethnicity  in  Modern  Ecuador ,  ed.  N.  Whitten,  pp. 506-34. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- North,  L.,  and  Cameron,  J.  1998.  Grassroots-based Rural Development Strategies: Ecuador in Comparative Perspective. Paper presented at the Latin American Studies Association annual meetings, Chicago.
- Peet, R., and Watts, M., eds. 1996a. Liberation Ecologies:  Environment,  Development,  Social  Movements. London: Routledge.
- --- and ---. 1996b. Liberation Ecology: Development, Sustainability and Environment in an Age of Market Triumphalism. In Liberation Ecologies: Environment, Development, Social Movements ,  ed.  R. Peet and M. Watts, pp. 1 - 45. London: Routledge.
- Pile, S., and Keith, M., eds. 1997. Geographies of Resistance. London: Routledge.
- Rasnake, R. 1988. Domination and Cultural Resistance. Authority  and  Power  among  an  Andean  People. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Rigg, J.D. 1997. Southeast Asia. The Human Landscape of Modernization and Development. London: Routledge.
- Roseberry, W. 1993. Beyond the Agrarian Question in Latin  America.  In Confronting  Historical  Paradigms:  Peasants,  Labor  and  the  Capitalist  World System in Africa and Latin America , ed. F . Cooper et al., pp. 318-68. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
- Salomon, F. 1981. The Weavers of Otavalo. In Cultural Transformations and Ethnicity in Modern Ecuador ,  ed.  N.  Whitten,  pp.  420-49.  Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- Schegloff, E. 1999. Personal communication, February. Scott, J. 1985. Weapons of the Weak. Everyday forms of Peasant Resistance. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Silvey, R., and Lawson, V.A. 1999. Placing the Mi-

- grant. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 89:121-32.
- Simon, D. 1998. Rethinking (Post)modernism, Postcolonialism and Posttraditionalism: South-North Perspectives. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 16:219-46.
- Slater, D. 1997. Spatial Politics/Social Movements. Questions of (B)orders and Resistance in Global Times. In Geographies of Resistance , ed. S.  Pile  and  M.  Keith,  pp.  258-76.  London: Routledge.
- Smith,  G.  1989. Livelihood  and  Resistance.  Peasants and the Politics of Land in Peru. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Sotomayor, O. 1994. Políticas  de  modernización  y  reconversión  de  la  pequeña  agricultura  tradicional Chilena. Santiago: ODEPA and IICA.
- Thurner, M. 1993. Peasant Politics and Andean Haciendas  in  the  Transition  to  Capitalism:  An Ethnographic History. Latin  American Research Review 28(3):41-82.
- Tolen,  R.  1995.  Wool  and  Synthetics,  Countryside and City: Dress, Race and History in Chimborazo, Highland  Ecuador. Ph.D. dissertation, Department  of  Anthropology,  University  of Chicago.
- Torres, V .H. 1998. Guamote: La Experiencia Indígena de Gobierno Municipal Participativo. Mimeo.
- Turner,  B.L.  II  1989.  The  Specialist-Synthesis  Approach to the Revival of Geography: The Case of Cultural Ecology. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 79:88-100.
- Vice-Ministerio de Participación Popular y Fortalecimiento Municipal (VMPPFM)-Banco Mundial. 1998. Estudio de Productividad Rural y Manejo de Recursos Naturales: Informe Principal. La Paz, Bolivia: VMPPFM.
- van Niekerk, N. 1997. La cooperación internacional y las políticas públicas: el caso de las zonas andinas de altura de Bolivia. Ponencia presentada al Seminario Internacional sobre Estrategias Campesinas, 3-4 abril de 1997, Sucre, Bolivia.
- ---. 1994. El Desarrollo Rural en Los Andes. Un Estudio sobre los programas de desarrollo de Organizaciones no Gubernamentales. Leiden Development Studies No. 13. University of Leiden.
- Watts, M. 1993. Development I: Power, Knowledge, Discursive Practice. Progress in Human Geography 17:257-72.
- --- and McCarthey, J. 1997. Nature as Artifice, Nature as Artifact: Development, Environment and Modernity in the Late Twentieth Century. In Geographies of  Economies ,  ed.  R.  Lee  and  J. Wills, pp. 71-86. London: Arnold.
- Weismantel, M. 1988. Food, Gender and Poverty in the Ecuadorian  Andes. Philadelphia:  University  of Pennsylvania Press.
- Whitmore, T., and Turner, B.L. II. 1992. Landscapes of Cultivation in Mesoamerica on the Eve of the Conquest. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 82:402-25.
- Yapa, L. 1998. The Poverty Discourse and the Poor in Sri Lanka. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers NS 23:95-115.
- Zoomers, A. 1998. Estrategias Campesinas en el Surandino de Bolivia: Intervenciones y desarrollo rural en el norte de Chuquisaca and Potosí. La Paz: CEDLA/CID/PLURAL.
- Zorn,  E.  1997.  Coca,  Cash  and  Cloth  in  Highland Bolivia: The Chapare and Transformations in a 'Traditional' Andean  Textile Economy. In Coca, Cocaine and the Bolivian Reality , ed. M.B. Léons  and  H.  Sanabria,  pp.  71-98.  Albany: State University of New York Press.

Correspondence: Department of Geography, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0260, email Anthony. Bebbington@Colorado.edu.