## Sow What You Know: The Struggle for Social Reproduction in Rural  Sudan

Cindi Katz

Environmental Psychology Program, City University of New York,  New York,  NY  10036

Abstract. The unity between production and social reproduction is under constant threat o f dissolution.  The practices by which it is maintained or threatened are the stuff o f   everyday life,  and can be witnessed on the ground. A key practice o f   social reproduction is the socialization  and  education  o f children.  This piece  presents  detailed  findings  on  various practices o f   social reproduction-the production,  exchange, and deployment o f   environmental knowledge-and points to the transformative potential inherent in the mundane practices o f work, play, and learning. The village o f   Howa in Sudan has been incorporated within  a  state-sponsored  agricultural  development project and the content, mode o f   acquisition  and  utility  o f children's  environmental  knowledge  has  thereby  changed dramatically.  In  addressing these,  my  larger research goal is to locate instances o f   rupture, resistance, or reformulation in the face o f socioeconomic and cultural-ecological change imposed externally.  The study employs ethnographic methods to elicit  information  on the  content and organization o f   children's environmental knowledge and the means o f   its acquisition and use.  Children contribute significantly to  all environmental  tasks associated with  providing or  producing household subsistence. In their work, play, and formal  learning activities, they acquire, integrate, and use a  substantial body  o f   environmental knowledge, including knowledge o f   agriculture, animal  husbandry,  and  the  use  o f local resources.  The socioeconomic processes o f differentiation  and  commoditization  associated with inclusion in the agricultural project increased demands for children's  labor  and began to dissolve the existing unity  o f   work and play,  to dislodge the home as the locus o f   social reproduction, and  to  deskill the peasant population.  Coupled with static land tenure relations,  these changes are likely to lead t o  significant disjuncture between what children  learn and what they will  do as adults. The trajectory of economic development may thereby also be altered.

Key  Words: children,  Sudan,  environmental knowledge, social reproduction,  household labor, socioeconomic change.

A child is perched precariously  atop a donkey laden with a sack  of sorghum seeds,  a digging stick, and a couple of hoes. She steadies herself and rides surely  along the canals  as  the  sun  rises.  It takes nearly an hour to reach her family's field. She and her  brother  and  sister  will  spend  the  morning planting part of their family's farm tenancy in sorghum while their father clears  the irrigation ditches nearby. Punctuating their  work at  irregular-and to their father annoying-intervals,  this  girl and her brother will  set  up  a  homemade net  trap  in an unsuccessful  attempt to ensnare some of the birds that descend on the area during the rainy season. On other days they may succeed in  trapping a dozen or more small birds which the boy will kill, following Islamic practice, and the children's mother or older sisters will cook for a family meal. School i s  out during the rains, mainly to allow teachers to return home from rural areas which become inaccessible and difficult  to live in during this time. Partly by design,  but mostly by coincidence, this schedule also  allows all  children,  including  students,  to assist  their  households with  the  heavy burdens of agricultural work. As the children make their way to the fields, they cross paths  with a number of herdboys leading flocks of small animals out to pastures just  turning green with the arrival of the rains.

HE  survival of  agricultural  production systems over  time turns, at  least in part, on what children learn about the natural environment,and how they use this knowledge and its attendant skills during their  childhood and a s   they come of age.  This narrative drawn from ayear of geographic field research in rural Sudan  suggests  both  the  importance of and variation  in children's  environmental  interac-

tions in  an agrarian community. What children learn  about the environment and how they use this knowledge in their work and play are fundamental cultural forms and practices, shared in a  social  matrix and bearing a specific relationship  to  the  prevailing  social  relations  of production and reproduction in the area.  Inherent in them are the contradictory possibilities  of  replication,  reformulation,  and  resistance. While this contradictory  relationship is increasingly recognized in social theory, there have been few studies in any field and almost none in  geography  that examine its  possibilities and practices on the ground.'  This  piece invokes one such investigation to argue that the cultural  forms  and  practices of  social  reproduction, such as those which were its focusthe production, exchange, and use of environmental knowledge-have the potential to disrupt,  subvert,  and  even  reconstitute  the  accumulation of  capital and its attendant social relations of production.

i n  an agriculturally based economy, learning about the environment-aboutfarming, animal husbandry, and the use of  local resources-is an aspect of socialization essential to maintaining and reproducing society. Moreover,  as  is documented amply in  the literature on household labor in the Third World (e.g., Cain 1977; Caldwell 1977; Gala1  el Din 1977a; Mascarenhas 1977;  Michaelson 1981;  Nag et al.  1978;  Rodgers  and  Standing  1981; Rosensweig  1977; Tienda 1979),  children's  work  often is fundamental  to  the daily maintenance  of their households, and thus the community as a whole. My study  approached the  question  of  children's environmental interactions a s   central not only to the activities of  production  but as  fundamental  to  the  daily  reproduction  of their households, and their  environmental learning and  knowledge  as  crucial  to the  long-term maintenance of the socioeconomic system itself.

My research on these questions enabled me to examine the entwined processes of socioeconomic  transition  and  cultural-ecological change from a perspective little addressed  in the development literature in geography, sociology, anthropology or economics, and to  cast new light on the practical response of  Third World populations experiencing  pronounced shifts in  the nature of their articulation with the relations  of capitalist  production. This study links the  human-environment tradition in geogra- phy,  and  in particular  its  concern  with  how people come to know the environment and act to transform it, with the larger project of cultural  studies which  seeks  to  understand the connections between particular aspects of culture, such  as art, ideology, consciousness, dreams and fantasies, literature, knowledge,  and everyday life, and social and economic structures  and practices(e.g.,  Aronowitz 1973; Bourdieu  1977;  de  Certeau 1984;  Genovese 1972; Gramsci 1971; Johnson  1979; Said 1978; Samuel and Jones  1982;  Spivak 1987; Thompson 1963, Williams 1977; Willis 1977).  Its  central argument is that under circumstances of socioeconomic transformation, what children learn about the environment  and  how they  acquire and  use that knowledge can have contradictory effects not only upon the children  as they come of age but on the outcome of the social change itself.

The goals of my research were threefold: (1) to discover and document both the activities through which children  acquired and used environmental knowledge, and the content and organization of that knowledge; (2) to examine these as cultural forms and practices, that is,  in dynamic articulation with the labor process  and the social  relations that  underlie it;  and (3) to describe,  and  if  possible  analyze,  how  children's environmental learning, knowledge, and interactions appeared to be changing in relation to the larger social,  economic,  and environmental changes taking place in  rural Sudan.

i n recent years geographers have addressed the  complex relationships  between  human agency and the social and economic structures of society. Their work represents  an admirable effort to enrich our understanding of the central problematics of human geography-spatial relationships,  the making of place and humanenvironment  relations-by articulating  rigorous historical  analyses  of socioeconomic, spatial and political structures,  and the means by which people create, transform and respond to them (e.g.,  Harvey 1989, 1990; Soja 1989; Warf 1988; Gregory and Urry 1985;  Pred 1984a,  b;  Smith 1984;  Clark and Dear 1984;  Thrift 1983;  Christopherson 1983; Watts 1983; Gregory 1982). It i s   difficult,  however,  to move analytically between structure and substance, and most studies  end  up concentrating  on  socioeconomic and political structures  without any real  analysis or  understanding of  the practical activities of the people who create and are constituted by these  structures. Alternatively,  they  focus on

human behavior and consciousness without locating these in a mutually determining sociospatial and political-economic field. All too often,  people are  recognized  as  "making  their own history,"  but this history is rather thin and pale, a narrative  of socioeconomic change that points to but glosses over  the material social practices  of everyday life to  focus only on their temporal and spatial outcomes.  Equally problematic,,  the fact is elided that  people do not make their  own history out of  circumstances of their own choosing,  and the material social practices of  everyday  life are presented as  if unbounded by any social or  economic  structures.  In this way,  history and geography become voluntaristic free-for-alls.

These are political decisions and omissions. Part of the problem is that few of the analyses claiming to address structure and agency empirically are grounded in theory that can analyze or explain the mutual determinations between the two and their material  outcomes  over time  and space. Moreover, few of these studies draw  even  partially  on  an  ethnographic  approach to  address the multiplicity of forms and practices  that constitute social activity. We are often left with only the traces of human action that are measurable and lose the texts and textures o f that action.

Serious consideration of feminist theory and research over the last two decades would improve this work substantially.  Although it is not clear from reading  geographic  work in  what has come to be known  as the  structurationist  school, much of the ground linking human agency to social and economic structure was  broken by feminist theorists  who turned to "everyday  life" to find subversive power in the voices that had been systematically excluded from history (eg, Dalla Costa 1972,  1977; Moraga and Anzaldua 1981; "Development  and The Sexual Division of  Labor" 1981; Sargent 1981; Caulfield 1974; Ehrenreich  and English 1975; James 1975; Conference of  Socialist  Economists 1977).2 In addition to its influence on the direction of  research in social  science,  feminist  theory  is at the root of much poststructuralist literary theory which analyzes texts as,  inter alia,  expressions  of  socioeconomic and political struggle (e.g., Spivak 1987; de  Lauretis 1982; Haraway 19 8 4 ) . In broadly defining the "text"  and analyzing it against the grain of sociocultural and political-economic  structuring,  this  work, though rarely acknowledged by geographers, i s   at the root of the social science project link-

ing agency and structure.

As a geographer, part of my project in  Sudan was  to address  a  single  place-the village of Howa-at a particular historical moment-ten years  after  its  incorporation in a  state-sponsored  capitalist  agricultural  project-as one such "text," constituting at  once the ground (literally) for a particular set of material social practices and a repository which expressed in material  form  the  outcomes  of  these  practices. These were understood as mutually constituting. The scale was  local, the historical subjects small,  but the material social practices associated with their acquisition and use of environmental knowledge are articulated fundamentally  with  the  profound socioeconomic  and cultural-ecological  changes underway  there and in the rest of Sudan.  In addressing these,  my intent was  to analyze theoretically  and practically the relationship between the social relations  of  production  and  social reproduction under  conditions  of  socioeconomic  transformation.

## Background

During 1980-81 I  conducted a year-long ethnographic study in  a farming village I call Howa in  central eastern Sudan. My  study focused primarily  upon  the  environmental  learning, knowledge,  and  interactions  of  ten-year-old children addressed  in relation  to  household production and the reproduction of the social relations of  production. I chose to undertake this study in an area undergoing profound socioeconomic  change in an  attempt  to locate instances of  contestation between the reproduction of  what  Bernstein (1982, after  Marx, 1967, vol. 3) calls the natural economy and the reproduction of capitalist relations of production.'  The latter had been imposed on the area most decisively by  incorporation  in the  government-sponsored  Suki  Agricultural  Development Project in 1971, ten years prior to my study  and the  year  the  children who  are  its focus were born.

## Study

## Site

Howa, a village on the banks of the ephemeral Dinder River east of Sennar in  central east-

ern Sudan (Fig. I), was  settled in the late nineteenth century  by  pastoralists.  Until 1971, i t s people cultivated sorghum on  a subsistence  basis,  supplemented  by sesame which they sold to passing traders  in  order to  meet their limited needs  for  cash.  Animals  were  an  important source of subsistence and savings for the population.  According  to local residents and historical accounts of the area,  most families kept at  least  a  few  goats  and  sheep  for  milk  and occasional meat,  and  many  households kept some cattle or camels along with flocks of ten to  fifty small  animals(Ahmad  1974;Duffield 1981; Gruenbaum 1979; OBrien 1978; al Tayib 1970; Tothill 1948). Many families maintained close ties  with  relatives who  remained  exclusively pastoralist, not only  having their  herds travel with the pastoralists for  part  of  the year,  but renewing and maintaining familial relations by intermarriage.

During the 1950s the village was  further integrated  with  the  national  cash  economy through the private cotton schemes along the Blue Nile approximately fifty kilometers away. Men from the village worked as  agricultural wage laborers and a few managed to become tenants in these private pump schemes. These tenants apparently began  to  accumulate  capital when cotton fetched record prices during the 1950s and early 1960s. Apart from involvement in these schemes,  most  of  the population  of Howa  remained  subsistence  cultivators  until 1971.

That year, Howa  was incorporated  in  the statesponsored Suki Agricultural  Development Project.  Not only  was  the  basis  of  the socioeconomic formation of Howa altered from the subsistence  production of  food crops to the irrigated cultivation of cotton and groundnuts as cash crops,  but more importantly local control over production and reproduction  was undermined and the relation between them interrupted (cf. Barnett 1975,1977; Duffield 1981 for  other examples in Sudan). Under the Project, agents of state capitalism-the project authorities-determined not  only  which  crops would be grown by tenants,  but also the production schedules and acceptable agricultural tools  and  practices for  their  cultivation.  The peasant farmers of Howa actively resisted each of  these externally imposed changes on their farming practices.

At the root of this disruption  in the rhythm of daily and annual work cycles was an altered

Figure 1 . main rivers and location o f study site. Sudan,  showing provincial boundaries,

<!-- image -->

relationship between the local population and productive resources, primarily the land. Land in the vicinity  of  Howa historically  had been held in common and allocated through customary  right  by  local sheikhs to villagers for dryland  cultivation.  The  local  economy  was geared primarily to the production or extraction of use-values, i.e.,  goods to satisfy its own subsistence needs, from a combination of agriculture,  animal husbandry and forestry.  Under  these  socioeconomic  conditions,  constraints on production  were determined more by the physical  and economic limits of available labor and other resources than by external political-economic  relations such as  those associated with the Suki  Project.  It not only  circumscribed the land available for  cultivation, but determined  who  had access  to it under what conditions.

It would be erroneous to assume that state intervention  and  economic  penetration  by merchant capital are the sole sources of transformation  in this  or  any  socioeconomic  formation.  Indeed,  my conceptualization  of  the problematic was one of active negotiation between social, economic, cultural, political, and ecological relations and  practices.  This  study addresses  some  of  its  manifestations on  the premise that people are not dupes, but rather are active subjects making their own histories and geographies within and against the deter-

minations  o f historically  and  geographically specific  structures.  In Howa  these  practices  were a  nexus, o f struggle  between  and  among the local  population and fractions therein, including  agents  o f state  capitalism  such  as  school teachers and Project authorities, and local  religious leaders, particularly o f   mystical and fundamentalist orders o f   Islam (cf.  el Hassan  1980). It  i s   noteworthy that these struggles, which are fundamentally over capitalist  hegemony, were carried  out  between,  and  even  within,  real people.  They  are  trivialized  if  they  are  constructed  as  roles  played  out  in  a  structuralist drama  that  pits  the agents of state  capitalism against the poor  peasants (cf. Thrift  1983, 35).

Many o f the changes  brought about by  inclusion  in  the  agricultural  project  were welcomed by the local population. For years many had  sought  increased  incomes  as agricultural laborers, and when possible, tenants in the private cotton schemes along the Blue Nile. They saw the Suki Project as offering the  opportunity for  increased income at home. But  under the Project the local community lost much autonomous control over production,  and it was over these relations that much o f   the ensuing struggle turned. This shift  in  the social  relations o f production and  reproduction-what Watts (1987)  calls the 'multidirectional and episodic' nature  o f capitalist  development-marks t h e larger  context for  my  study of children's acquisition and use o f   local environmental knowledge.

Having  outlined  the larger  context,  I  refer briefly to  some o f   the specific changes brought about in  Howa  as a  result  o f incorporation  in the  Suki  Project.  First,  the  Project  removed 35,700 hectares  (85,000 feddans) in the  area (1050 hectares in the immediate vicinity o f   Howa)from a system o f   mixed land-use combining the dryland cultivation, animal husbandry, and woodlands.  Land was cleared,  graded, and irrigated for  the  intensive  cultivation  o f cotton  and groundnuts,  virtually  eliminating  the  cultivation o f   sorghum and other staple food crops in favor o f   export crops. Most households in Howa became dependent on the market to provide the  means  o f existence.  Prior  to  1971  most households  purchased  grain  only  during  extremely dry years, and many farmers noted that in  good years,  surpluses were saved to offset future  shortfalls.* Indeed, by 1980  matmura, the underground grain storage mounds which characterize the landscape in  much o f   central eastern  Sudan,  had  disappeared  completely

from  Howa  and  its  surrounds-vulnerability represented on the landscape.

Second, incorporation in the Project marked a  dramatic  shift  toward  capitalist  production relations  in  which  peasants  become  tenant farmers. Fundamental issues such as what crops were  cultivated,  what  tools  were  used,  how family  labor  was  allocated, and  the timing o f agricultural operations were all sites  of  struggle in  1981. In  Howa production for consumption has  been  gradually  displaced  by  production geared to exchange and ultimately  the accumulation o f   profit. This transformation, resisted by  many,  propelled  socioeconomic  diff erentiation, exacerbating previously existing differences between households' earnings and assets as  it  created  new  ones.  These  changes  were also inscribed on the landscape as families who were accumulating capital replaced their  mud and  thatch  homes  with  sturdy  brick  houses, established  general  merchandise  Stores,  and acquired  market trucks.  The most marked effect of t h e  agricultural  project  was  that  it  altered people's relationship to land, the primary productive resource in the area, and this, more than the heightening o f   socioeconomic differentiation, was the focus o f   their  response and resistance.

Finally, the Project altered the local environment fundamentally and had  a marked  effect on human-land  relations in  the area. The shift in control o f   more than 1050 hectares bordering  the village  from  traditional  land-use  patterns with access determined within the community, to the irrigated cultivation o f   cash crops carried  out as  part  o f a  state-sponsored  agricultural  development  effort,  has  had  a  pronounced effect on forestry resources, pasture lands, and the practice o f   alternative methods o f   agriculture in the  area. The preexisting landuse system  left  adequate fuel and grazing  resources  in  the  local  environment. The  landscape speaks o f   these changes too. The project area, cultivated in  100 percent rotation, leaves little room for natural vegetation; and the nonproject area, already marginal, has been devegetated due to overcutting and overgrazing (Fig. 2).

## Methodology

I lived  in  Howa from late 1980 to late 1981. At the outset I  conducted a villagewide house-

Figure 2. Deforestation in the area surrounding the village. Acacia arabica has been replanted by the Government forestry department, but of necessity, villagers and outsiders frequently cut seedlings even in protected areas, published with permission of  Children's  Environments Quarterly.

<!-- image -->

hold survey both to introduce myself and my work,  and  to establish a socioeconomic  and cultural  profile of  the study area.  The  survey included a census, the findings of which were corroborated  by an  enumeration undertaken independently by the village school teachers  at my request. The population profile  of Howa as revealed in my census is presented in Table 1. It i s  noteworthy that  more than 52 percent of the population of Howa  was under fifteen years old.  This figure  is similar to the general population profiles of  both Sudan and Africa as a whole, and points to the importance of studying children in these settings. I  chose to study ten-year-old  children because I wanted children from middle childhood, between the 'age of reason' (seven years old),  and adolescence. Working with children of this age circumvented the effects of  developmental  delays associated with early childhood and the social psychological  changes  associated  with  adolescence.

There were approximately  180 children roughly ten years of age in Howa. Fifty-six percent were male. (A similar ratio between male and female children was  reported in the 1973 population census of Sudan [cf. Sudan, Ministry of  National Planning].) I selected a  sample  of eighteen  children,  ten  boys  and  eight  girls, drawn from a socioeconomic cross-section of village families as  derived from the household survey. One girl  withdrew from the study within the first months.

A range of ethnographic methods were used

Table 1. Population Profile of Howa

(YO)

| Years of age   | Male N (Oh)   | Female N (YO)   |
|----------------|---------------|-----------------|
| 65 & over      | 21(2.2)       | 16 (1.8)        |
| 15-64          | 432 (45.3)    | 412 (45.7)      |
| 0-14           | 500 (52.5)    | 473 (52.5)      |
| Total          | 953 (100)     | 901(100)        |

Source: Household survey conducted by author, lanuaryMarch  1981.

Table 2. Inventory of Children's Activities

|                           | Observations   | Observations     |
|---------------------------|----------------|------------------|
|                           | Number         | Percent of total |
| Work                      | 390            | 67.1             |
| Fetching water            | 89             | 15 .3            |
| Procuringwoodfuel         | 60             | 10 .3            |
| Collecting                | 26             | 4.5              |
| Cutting                   | 18             | 3 . 1            |
| Charcoal prod.            | 11             | 1.9              |
| Charcoal scav.            | 5              | 1                |
| Herding                   | 42             | 7.2              |
| Farming                   | 40             | 6.9              |
| Errands                   | 38             | 6.5              |
| Shelling groundnuts       | 29             | 5                |
| Gathering plants          | 20             | 3.4              |
| Child care                | 19             | 3 . 3            |
| Animal care               | 11             | 1 . 9            |
| Construction              | 9              | 1.5              |
| Cooking                   | 8              | 1 . 4            |
| Selling water             | 6              | 1                |
| Laundry                   | 5              | <I               |
| Washing dishes            | 4              | <I               |
| Sweeping                  | 3              | <I               |
| Misc. chores              | 3              | < I              |
| Making mat                | 2              | <I               |
| Selling                   | 2              | <I               |
| Leisure                   | 192            | 33 .0            |
| Tatkindhanging out        | 51             | 8 . 8            |
| Gross motor play          | 48             | 8 . 3            |
| Dramatic/modeling play    | 19             | 3.3              |
| Watching adult activities | 15             | 2.3              |
| Walking                   | 15             | 2.3              |
| Quiet play                | 9              | 1 . 5            |
| Resting                   | 9              | 1 . 5            |
| Out of village            | 7              | 1.2              |
| Making toys               | 7              | 1 . 2            |
| Bird trapping             | 6              | 1                |
| Reading                   | 3              | <I               |
| Knocking berriesfrom tree | 1              | < l              |
| Fishing                   | 1              | <I               |
| Fighting                  | 1              | <I               |
| Total                     | 581            | 100              |

Source: Observations by author 1980-81.

to elicit  information  on the  content and organization of children's environmental knowledge and to discover the means of  its acquisition and use. Participant  observation  was used throughout  the study to observe village life in general and children's activities in particular. I undertook three types of observations. The first focused on particular sites within and around the village such as the fields, canal, footbridge between the fields and the village,  river,  mill, playing  field near the school, school, clinic, pri- vate family spaces, and streets and public open spaces  throughout the village.  Second,  I undertook random observations of  each of  the children in the sample group. Here, I attempted to cover all times of the day with each child in order  to discover the range of activities in which each engaged and build an inventory of molar activities in  which ten-year-old children were involved  (Table 2). Third, I undertook extended observations of those activities that explicitly involved environmental interaction such as herding, farming, fetching water, procuring fuelwood, gathering food and other resources from the local environment,  scavenging charcoal, trapping birds, and watering animals.

Each child participated individually in  achildled walk and an exercise combining environmental modeling and 'geo-dramatic'  manipulation  of  miniatures  (cf.  Hart  1978).  These methods were designed to enable children to demonstrate their knowledge of the local environment  and practices  associated  with its use. Use of these  methods was  intended to complement those means that relied more heavily on the children's verbal expression and thus to compensate  for children less facile verbally than others. In  the child-led walks, the children were asked  to show  me whatever  they  thought  it important for  me to see in and around Howa. While several of the children  began  by showing me particular sites within the village such as the well, the mill, the defunct bakery, or a general merchandise  shop, all of the children ultimately made their way out of village bounds to show me the local vegetation, as  well  as  particular land forms, such a s   the riverbed,  the canal,  a termite mound, or a gully. I structured the walks by asking the children to name what they were showing me and to explain to me whether and how each feature identified was used locally.

In  the environmental modeling exercise, the children were asked to model their  village in dirt  using  sticks,  straw,  thorns,  and  water  as additional materials. A few children responded t o  this request by sketching tentatively  in the dirt-outlining squares for  houses and one or two additional features such as the canal,  the field,  or the river. Other children constructed three-dimensional  houses,  ridged  the  fields, dissected  them  with  irrigation canals, and gouged out the river channel to fill it  with water.  Most of  the  seventeen children fell  between these extremes in their models. At the point  when they considered their models  com-

Figure 3. Surveying props for environmental modeling/geo-dramatic exercise.

<!-- image -->

plete, the children  were given miniature toysfarm  animals,  people,  trucks  and  farm  vehicles-and asked to use them in  their models to "show  me life in Howa" (Fig. 3).

The research also drew on ethnosemantic  and open-ended interviews conducted with adults and children.  The ethnosemantic interview  is a  linguistic  technique  designed to  elicit  the shared knowledge of a particular group in the terms used by that group (Spradley 1979). Taxonomies of shared knowledge are constructed based upon the terms used and the organization revealed  by participants  in  aseries  of openended  interviews  built  one  upon the  other. These were conducted intensively with five of the  children  in the  sample  group  who  produced taxonomies o f their  shared knowledge about the local environment,  including  for example, their plant and botanical knowledge  and the specialized place knowledge of  herdboys (Katz 198613,  1989a).

The second type of  interview,  "oral  geography,"  was undertaken with both  children  and elders. "Oral diaries" on  their everyday activities were elicited from the children on an ongoing basis  to  complement my observations. Each time I visited  a  child  in the sample  group  I  asked what they had been doing prior to my arrival and encouraged them to work  backwards to describe their day's  activities. In  this way I  built up the widest possible picture of the children's customary activities. Second,  in extensive interviews with the parents and grandparents of several of the children,  I  elicited oral historical geographies to assess  the  changing world  of childhood in Howa,  and to learn what  environmental curricula and life aspirations elders had for  their  children.  These  detailed  interviews  included questions on their  own childhoods, on the differences between them and that  of  their  children and  grandchildren,  on how Howa had changed during their lifetimes, and on what they were teaching their children about work and other material social practices. The  methods  used  in the  research are  summarized in Table 3, indicating the time frame in which they were deployed.

This  study  was primarily  ethnographic. I worked intensively with a small number of children and their families with constant reference t o   the sociocultural and political-economic dynamic of  the village as a whole.  The children were from households of tenants and nontenants of each socioeconomic status. They themselves were  a  diverse  group-boys and girls, students and nonstudents, of each birth order. This  population  was  selected based on a  full enumeration and survey  of  the entire village.

Table 3. Research Methods

| Method                             |   Sample | Schedule     | Purpose                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|------------------------------------|----------|--------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Observalion (Short, long, film)    |       17 | Through- out | Discover and document environmental in- teractions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Oral diaries                       |       17 | Through- out | Learn about children's activities in general & environmental activities in particular                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Child-led walks                    |       17 | May-Oct.     | Enable children to select, identify and give uses for local environmental features they considered important                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Environmental modeling- geo-dramas |       17 | May-June     | Reveal children's knowledge of Howa as a socio-physicalenvironment                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Ethnosemanticinterviews            |        5 | May-Oct.     | Discover content and organization of par- ticular domains of children's environmen- tal knowledge                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Adult interviews                   |        9 | April-Oct.   | Learn about parents' curriculum for chil- dren's environmental learning. Provide information on childhood experiences of adults in Howa, their sense of socioeco- nomic & cultural-ecologic change in the area, & understanding of nature of child- hood and responsibilities of children |

This,  along with the diversity  of the methodology I developed,  the standards I maintained in working with the children, and comparisons of  my  results  with  those  of  the  few  existing relevant studies,  give m e   confidence in the validity of the information produced. Nevertheless,  it was  not my intent t o  produce findings that could be analyzed statistically with any reliability;  the complexity of the information and the small sample size raise questions about even the simplest o f statistical analyses. Rather,  my agenda  was  to discover,  document,  and  describe  the  range  of  children's  environmental interactions  and the forms and content of their environmental  knowledge  in  all  their  complexity; and to analyze these in relation to the larger context in which they occurred.

The experience of living in the area for a year and working closely with the children and their families  produced extremely  rich data.  These data were discovered and grounded in a particular temporal and geographic context which I shared.  It is important  to remember  that  in this sort of research,  distantiation  is impossible (cf.  Koptiuch 1985;  Probyn 1990). Unlike most positivist  approaches  to  empirical  research, ethnographic  research  does  not  claim  to be objective. Indeed,  its essence  is that  it is  not. I t s   goal,  cultural  description, is  reached  in a wholly subjective manner even though a range of scientific  methods are employed. This text i s  t h e  result of my experiences during a particular year in Howa. Not only my research inter- ests, but my background and personality framed my experience and filtered both  what I  saw and t he way I i nterpreted it. I do not claim,  then, to speak for 'the  other''  (cf. Spivak  1988; Cliff ord  and Marcus 1986; Marcus  and Fischer 1986), t he children  and adults who participated in  this study,  but only for myself. To claim otherwise would be dishonest intellectually.

## Children's Role in Production and Reproduction

## Environmental Work

Because Howa is a farming community,  virtually all the major activities undertaken to  produce or procure either the means of existence or household income involved environmental interaction. As in  most such communities in  the Third World,  children figured  prominently  in these activities whether  undertaken on a subsistence or  income-producing  basis.

The Tasks of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry.  Observations  of  ten-year-old  children  in Howa indicated that they contributed importantly  to the two main income-producing activities there,  agriculture and animal husbandry. In particular, t en-year-old children participated significantly  in planting,  weeding and harvesting. Within the sample group, three children (18 percent) participated in clearing, six  (35  percent) in planting,  nine (53  percent)

~

in  weeding, and seven (41 percent) in harvesting on a regular basis. Boys predominated in  all of  these  tasks  except  harvesting.  Moreover, many boys of this age (approximately 20  percent overall)  worked daily as herdboys guiding their  households' flocks.

Unlike shepherding in which the children's work was autonomous, children's role in agriculture were most often as auxiliaries or assistants to their  parents and older siblings. Nevertheless,  young  children made a  substantial contribution  to  the work of agriculture in Howa. All but one child in the sample group participated in  at least one  agricultural task during  the year. The one child who did not was  a female student whose father worked as a clerk in the nearby headquarters of the Agricultural Project.  The  research indicated that  four  of  the seventeen children (24 percent) were integral to their  households' total agricultural labor effort. The others participated at least sometimes in one or  more field tasks  either  in the tenancies  of  their  households or  those  of  their extended families.  Seven  of  the children (41 percent) also  worked as  paid  laborers in the tenancies of other villagers.

The nature of children's agricultural work is revealed  in  the  following  excerpt  from  my fieldnotes,  when  ten-year-old  lsmael  helped his teenage uncle weeding a field of ground- nuts:

lsmael  had  a child-sized  hoe  with which he  moved up  and  down  the  rows.  Straddling  the  young groundnut  plants, he cleared away the unwanted growth.  His uncle was  more skilled and speedy, but lsmael worked hard and competently at the task.  They  stopped occasionally to clean the wet clayey soil from the hoe blade. Weeding the row closest to the irrigation ditch lsmael did not recognize some recently sprouted onkolib (Sorghum spp.  graminae),  but  his  uncle stopped  him from removing it. lsmael explained that  he thought  it was 'adar(any of several  varieties  of tall uncultivated grass in  the  sorghum  family, unwanted in  cultivated areas). He was  good at recognizing other vegetables planted along the borders of the field, including for  example,  haricot beans,  lentils and corn.

Now he recognizes onkolib.

It took almost an hour and a half to weed about a quarter of a hectare. It was  too wet to continue in  the rest of the field. Before  leaving, lsmael  picked his mother a bunch of mulayta  (Picridium  trigitanum an  uncultivated  bitter  green  favored  for salads which grew profusely along the canals and

Desf.), irrigation ditches.

The other main income-producing activity in Howa was  raising livestock. The primary tasks of animal husbandry were herding, feeding and watering livestock, cleaning and caring for the animals, and milking. Boys and girls assisted  with all of these tasksexcept  milking, which was done largely by women. Herding  was almost entirely the  responsibility  of  boys  between  ten  and eighteen  years of age.  Those  who worked as herdboys generally participated in this task at the exclusion of other chores. Unlike agricultural  work, herding  was undertaken by children on their own,  not as auxiliaries or assistants to elders. However, herdboys were  briefed and debriefed by their fathers  each day about where pasture areas and stock, and any unusual circumstances encountered.  An excerpt  from my fieldnotes provides a more textured account of some of

they led the animals, the conditions of these interactions:

It was  time to move on and the four shepherds worked with lightening speed  to  gather and divide the flocks. This task is a wonderful and totally crazy thing to watch;  each boy runs around yelping and whipping goats and sheep in  and out of place, flying between the collective flock, each crying out his version of  the  clicks,  gurgles,  and  squeaking sounds  made by  shepherds in order  to get  the animals  together and moving in  the right direction. The marvelousand  amazing  thing  is how they know their own and one another's animals at this (or any other) pace. When I asked them how they distinguished the animals they responded variously, by their  faces,  by their  colors,  by  their  brands,  and because, quite simply, they  have known the animals from birth. This rapid-fire round-up of all the animals and their subsequent division into individual flocks requires real team work. The boys race through the task together and coordinate their actions, all the while shouting orders back and forth to catch that stray or push another in  the opposite direction.  The whole  procedure took about  half an hour, after which we moved on to another depression nearby.

Three of  the boys in the sample group (30 percent of the males) worked full time as herdboys. A fourth boy was a student whose household owned less  than  ten  small  animals.  He herded on his day off from school each week and shared the task with his adolescent brother during school vacations.  When school was  in session,  their  family paid a village herdboy to tend their small flock, a s  did  many smallholders. Apart from these boys, only two other children in the sample,  both boys,  participated significantly in  any of the chores of animal care. One watered his family's donkey. The other watered and fed  a donkey that was for his use in  fetching water and wood.  He also cleaned the corrals,

I

and each night during the rainy season built a smoky fire to  protect  the livestock  from insects. No girls  in the  sample  group were  observed engaged in  any of the tasks of animal husbandry,  although two girls in the group  indicated that they were frequently responsible  for leading the few animals kept by their  households to and from pastures near  the village  where they were left to graze on their  own.

Fetching Water.  Perhaps even more important than their work  in agriculture and animal husbandry, children in Howa contributed centrally  to a  range of  subsistence  tasks  that  involved environmental interaction. They played a central role  in  the provision  of domestic  water supplies,,  in collecting or cutting fuelwood for their  households and  in gathering  food and other  resources from the local environment.5 Howa was  an  Islamic  community  in which  a moderate  form  of  purdah, the  seclusion  of women, was practiced. Children's work was of heightened significance  there because many of the tasks that are the responsibility of women elsewhere in Africa,  such  as  procuring water and wood,  generally fall  to them (cf.  Schildkrout 1981 for  an  example of  how children's work partially enables the continuation of purdah in Kano,  Nigeria.)

In Howa, the labor of children was  most significant in the provision of water for domestic use.  Thirteen (77 percent) of  the  children in the sample population fetched water for their households  and extended families at least some of  the  time.  Five  of  these  children were  responsible for fetching all or most of the water used in their  households. One boy  also  sold water  to village  households regularly. Of the five wha drew most or all of the water for their households,  four were girls. Three of the girls and the sole boy were, significantly, the oldest children in their  families. The fourth girl had an  older  sister  close  in age  with  whom  she shared most tasks including drawing  water. Four children  in the sample group were never observed fetching water for their households.  All were  boys who had older  sisters  responsible for  the tasks.

Of all of the environmental tasks involved in the provision of basic needs in Howa, fetching water  was  the central one in which  the contribution of children outweighed that of adults in gross task  completion (the total time spent in the completion of  a  particular  task  at  the community level).6  While the literature on do- mestic labor in  the Third  World often mentions in passing the importance of  children  to the provision of  the  domestic water  supply,  it is indicative of the paucity of data on children's labor,  particularly within the household or  in nonremunerative activities,  that  few  authors discuss, let alone document systematically, the labor  of  children  in such  important  tasks  as drawing water or collecting fuelwood. Thus it i s   difficult  to  compare my findings on  children's participation  in drawing  water  with those  of

others working with children elsewhere.

Provision of Fuel. The  provision of  fuel was another basic needs  activity in  which children's labor was  essential.  As  with  the  provision  of water,  most village  children of  ten  years  old participated in this task.  In many  households children provided the bulk of fuel consumed. Thirteen in  the sample group (77 percent) provided  fuelwood for  their  households or  extended families. But unlike the supply of water, wood  procured by  children  was  often  augmented  with fuelwood cut or gathered by other household members, or with small amounts of purchased fuel.

The major reasons for children's  more auxiliary role in fuel provision were sociocultural, ecological, or task-specific. First, most cooking was done over a hot three-stone fire for which women preferred wood more than a meter long and greater than four centimeters around. The best  wood of  this type was  available  only  by cutting, and most children of ten years did not wield  an axe well  enough to  provide these large pieces  of wood  on  a consistent  basis. This wood was  provided largely by men and older  boys, although in many households, particularly  those in which women were nearing the end or past their  child-bearing years,  household fuel supplies were cut by women. Second, the deforestation affecting this area had led  to  significant increases in the distance traveled and time required for  fuel  collection in Howa. Much of the wood that remained proximate to the village was of poor quality and small size and thus had to be collected  with greater frequency than before.  According  to  the  local  population, journeys to  adequate  wood supplies had almost doubled since the early 1970s when land was cleared for  the Suki Project. These factors of time and distance had led  to  both  the increased participation of children collecting kindling near the village  and the  need to supplement  this with  larger pieces cut further afield by older

household members  (cf. Katz 1984). Third, even without  stress on the local wood supply, the amount of fuel required to cook two or three meals a day coupled with the average load that can be carried by a ten-year-old child (Fig. 4), requires that fuelwood be collected about every three days. Given  children's domestic chores such as child-minding,  errand-running,  cooking,  and cleaning;  their  other  responsibilities such as  drawing water,  farming, and herding; school attendance; and their  need and desire for free play time, many children in Howa did not collect wood often enough to provide an adequate supply of even smaller pieces.

As  indicated above,  thirteen of  the seventeen children in  the sample group participated in the work of  fuel  provision.  Eight (five girls and three boys)  provided about half of the wood consumed in their households. The other five children participated in these activities less extensively, two collected  wood and the other three collected or helped produce  charcoal  for sale in nearby towns. In each case,  their work made  a  meaningful  contribution to  their households.  The four children  who did not  participate at all in the activities of fuel provision were all boys.  Three were  herdboys and the fourth  was a student. Significantly,  each of them and the three children whose only work in  this domain was assisting with charcoal production had an older sister responsible  for the provision of  a  major  portion of  their  households' fuel supply.

Gathering  Food. The final set of environmental  tasks  concerned with the provision of the means of existence is the collection  of seasonal food and other  resources. Most often it was children's responsibilityand  joy to  collect these for their families. Almost all of these  foods were found outside the village, in scenic  or  otherwise  valued places,  and  hunting or  gathering them was as much fun a s   it was work. Most of the wild foods around Howa were no longer available in sufficient quantity for them to have value except to children,  and their  collection was  largely for the children's own enjoyment. However, certain of these foods were seasonal delicacies savored by all.

Ten of the children in  the sample population were observed or  told me of  procuring wild foods during the field period.  Most of  these children provided seasonal fruits and vegetables  for their households  and extended families in quantities sufficient  to be a  major compo-

Figure 4. wood carried by girls. Representative size o f   a headload o f   fire-

<!-- image -->

nent of or complement to family meals. Most prominent was  the collection of the fruit and branches of the doleib palm (Borassus aethiopicum).  Of the seven children who engaged in this activity, three (all boys) collected the fruit both for  household consumption  and to sell for a few cents apiece back in the village. Two of  the  girls  collected doleib  branches which they  burned in the palm grove.  The ash  was used to thicken  stews.  Three  other  children regularly  gathered wild greens  from around the cultivated  areas. An excerpt from my fieldnotes on a trip to  the grove of doleib palms with two girls in  the  sample group, Wad  and Awatif, and ten other girls, breathes  life into the unfolding of  these environmental  practices across time and space:

After an hour's walk from the village, we arrived at the doleib grove. The girls immediately ran in all directions looking for and collecting the choicest fruit from  the seemingly limitless  number  strewn

about the area. After devouring  several fruits  apiece, the girls began to produce wekab  (a  starchy ash) for their mothers. The younger girls continued to collect  and eat the fruit,  while  the others collected armloads of  fallen branches. S u ' a d   piled branches high in  a small clearing  and rapidly set fire  to  them, running  from  the hot  f l a m e s .  T h e  girls  fooled  around on the side,  singing and  eating more fruit as  the branches burned.  They  fetched  water  from  the riverbed nearby to douse the embers. Using long branches with fan-like  fronds as  rakes,  the  girls swept  the  embers outwards  and  sprinkled them with the water. E a c h  girl  swept her damp a s h e s  into a bucket. They repeated  the entire process, which took about two hours, to make more ash.  When they were done, they loaded  their containers  with the heavy a s h  and a few fruits, lifted  these to their heads, and set off for the village in the hot midday sun.

Other wild foods were procured by ten-yearold children in Howa,  but either  because of present environmental conditions or the children's  young age,  their  procurement  did not add systematically to  family nutrition. These activities,  such  as  knocking  berries  from  trees, were more play than work,  undertaken solely to satisfy the children's interests  and appetites. One activity  that  straddled the line between play and work was trapping. Three of the children, two boys and a girl, assisted older brothers or other male relatives in trapping several varieties of  small  birds  that  descended upon the area during the rainy season.  While these bite-sized  birds  were  consumed  most  often within the extended family, upwards of a hundred birds might be trapped in  a good day. Ever the entrepreneurs,  boys tried  to sell  surplus birds within the village for  a few  cents each. Only one of the boys in the sample group participated  in trapping at  this  level.  The  other two,  like most in Howa, approached trapping as  a sport more than as a practice of any eco- nomic significance.

Analysis of Data on Children's  Work. The data on children's environmental work are analyzed according to the individual demographic characteristics of sex,  age,  birth order,  and school enrollment;  and the socioeconomic  variables of  father's  occupation  and  household  socioeconomic status as  determined in the villagewide  survey.  M y  research  suggested  that children's  participation in work  that was  subsistence  oriented,  such  as  fetching  water or collecting wood, was  influenced more readily by individual demographic characteristics such as gender, birth order,  and age;  while partici- pation in  activities related to the accumulation of wealth or undertaken for exchange, such as charcoal production, animal husbandry, or agricultural field  work, was determined to  a greater  degree  by  socioeconomic  factors such  as household status or father's occupation. Given the small sample size,  this finding,  while  illuminating as a way of conceptualizing children's responsibilities  and  use  of  time,  should  be treated as  a hypothesis to be tested in future

research with a larger population.

As the discussion  above indicated, all of the children in the sample group  participated  in the work  of  their  households and,  at  a  more general level, the work  of the village as  well. The average child in  the sample group spent at least two but less than four hours daily the year round engaged in environmental tasks, or participated in environmental work four or more hours daily during certain times of the year. Of the  five  major  categories  of  environmental work-agriculture, animal  husbandry,  water drawing, fuel  procurement, and food gathering-children in  the  sample group participated at least sometimes in  an average of 3.3 task categories. Their participation  was essential to their households in an average of 1.1  of these.

Reference to the adult working day and the broader range of tasks in  which young and old engaged in Howa helps to put these figures in perspective. In  Howa  the average  adult worked eight hours a day during most of the year, but it  would be  wrong to  conclude that the  average child  worked less than half  the time  the  average adult did. The figures presented here on children's  labor  cover  only  the  environmentally oriented tasks in which children engaged. Excluded  were  other  time-consuming  tasks  in which  most  children  participated,  including child-care,  food  preparation  and  processing, cleaning, washing, and running errands. Were they included in the analysis, the average time worked by ten-year-old children easily would have exceeded half the hours worked each day by adults.

There were significant differences between boys and  girls  in the  amount  of  time  spent working at environmental tasks.  Because of their role in the time-consuming task of shepherding,  boys were overrepresented among those working more than four hours a day all year long. Girls, on the other hand, tended to work steadily (two  to  four hours daily the year-round or four or more hours seasonally) at a range of

environmental activities. While  because of herding, boys were found to work more hours at environmental tasks than girls, the data suggested that girls participated in  a greater range of  tasks  and  made  a  contribution  of  greater significance overall (i.e.,  contributed centrally to a greater number of tasks critical to household maintenance  or exchange) than their male counterparts. In other words, while only boys participated  in  herding,  a  particularly  timeconsuming task,  girls played a greater  role in the daily round  of activities by which the means of  existence were secured and household reproduction was ensured. Girls' role in  the provision of fuel and water stands out. Moreover, if we consider the full range of domestic tasks, i . e . ,   not just those involving environmental interaction, the importance of girls' labor would be highlighted  even further.  Indeed,  if  these additional  activities  were considered,  girls might be found to  work more time than boys as well. The nature and implications of  these  gender divisions in children's  labor remain an  impor- tant question for future research.

In much of the literature on the economic value of children in  agricultural economies the assumption is that boys do more work and are, therefore, more  of an economic asset than their sisters (e.g.,  Cain 1977; Tienda 1979; Gala1  el Din 1977a,  b).  My findings  on the gender  differences in children's  total work contribution in Howa raise questions about the findings characteristic of much of the work in this field and the assumptions  that underpin it. My  research, which clearly revealed the significance of girls' labor, suggests that in  analyzing  children's economic value, it is important to  consider all forms of children's work, both  productive and reproductive, in order to better assess the real economic significance  of children. Nag, White and Peet's seminal  study of children's economic activities in  Java  and Nepal  took this broader perspective  and  found that in  almost  all  age groups, girls did more work than boys (1978, 296). Like the work of Nag and his colleagues, my results contrast sharply with  those of  studies which look mainly at  the remunerated work of children (e.g., Peek  1978;  Tienda 1979;  Cain and Mozumder 1981;  Morice 1981). In addressing only  rates  of  labor  force  participation,  these authors fail to recognize the full importance of childrens economic significance, and in particular, the contribution of girls.

While there were variations in  children's par- ticipation in  environmental work at the household level, for  the village as a whole the contribution  of  children  was  meaningful  to  the accomplishment of every category of environmental  work. Children's work participation with reference to the temporal nature of the work itself and the village economy as its larger context isshown in  Table 4. It  summarizes the range and intensity of children's work in Howa, making clear its importance to  the reproduction of the household as well as to the village  economy

as a whole.

The  distinction  between work  undertaken independently and work done as  an auxiliary or  an  assistant  is  also  noted  in Table  4.  The distinction  indicates a  variation  in children's vocational and environmental  learning experiences. For the most part, children operated independently in  tasks which they not  only had mastered, but in which their  contribution was central. Children assisted their elders, from adolescent siblings  and cousins  to parents, grandparents, relatives, and employers, in  tasks which required either greater physical  ability than that of the average ten-year-old  or a coordination of discrete operations too complex and/or  important  to  be  entrusted to  young children alone. Cutting fuelwood and clearing fields are activities representative of  the former;  producing charcoal and sowing fields are representative of the latter.

Finally, Table 4 indicates  the temporal nature of children's environmental tasks to show their role both in children's  daily  lives and  in the work calendar of the village as a whole. A task like  shelling groundnuts, for example, was participated  in intensively  by a  majority  of  children, but only for a short period in the weeks just before planting. Herding, by contrast, was undertaken  by  a  minority  of  children  who worked all day  almost every day  of  the year. Herding  thus consumed more child-hours per year than  certain  tasks engaged in  by many more children.

## Environmental Knowledge

Given that most of the work of production and reproduction in Howa centered  on manipulating the local environment,  the tasks of children generally required the  use  of  environmental  knowledge  of  various  degrees of complexity and sophistication. Not surprisingly

Table 4. Summary of Children's Participation in Environmental Work in a Village in Rural Sudan

| Activity               |   Percent participat- at least sometimes ing | Gender   | Nature of children's contribution   |   Propor- tion o f total effort taken by children. under- | Temporal nature o f work   |   impor- tance village of task in economyb |
|------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| Agriculture            |                                              |          |                                     |                                                           |                            |                                            |
| Shell groundnuts       |                                              |          |                                     |                                                           |                            |                                            |
| (Seed preparation)     |                                           65 | F/M      | Independent                         |                                                         4 | Seasonal                   |                                        1   |
| Clear                  |                                           18 | M        | Auxiliary                           |                                                         1 | Seasonal                   |                                        1   |
| Plant                  |                                           41 | M/F      | Assistant                           |                                                         3 | Seasonal                   |                                        1   |
| Weed                   |                                           47 | M/F      | Auxiliary                           |                                                         2 | Seasonal                   |                                        1   |
| Pick vegetables        |                                           24 | F/M      | Auxiliary                           |                                                         2 | Seasonal                   |                                        2   |
| Pick cotton/groundnuts |                                           29 | F/M      | Auxiliary                           |                                                         2 | Seasonal                   |                                        1   |
| Bird scaring           |                                           18 | M/F      | Independent                         |                                                         4 | Seasonal                   |                                        2   |
| Animal husbandry       |                                              |          |                                     |                                                           |                            |                                            |
| Feed/water             |                                           18 | M        | Auxiliary                           |                                                         1 | Regular                    |                                        2   |
| Animal care            |                                           18 | M        | Auxiliary                           |                                                         1 | Regular                    |                                        2   |
| Milk                   |                                            6 | M        | Auxiliary                           |                                                         1 | Regular                    |                                        2   |
| Shepherd               |                                           24 | M        | independent                         |                                                         4 | Regular                    |                                        2   |
| Water provision        |                                              |          |                                     |                                                           |                            |                                            |
| Well                   |                                           65 | F/M      | Independent                         |                                                         3 | Regular                    |                                        1   |
| Riverbed               |                                           35 | F/M      | Independent                         |                                                         3 | Occasional                 |                                        1   |
| Canal                  |                                           18 | M/F      | Independent                         |                                                         3 | Occasional                 |                                        1   |
| Fuel provision         |                                              |          |                                     |                                                           |                            |                                            |
| Collect fuelwood       |                                           53 | F/M      | Independent                         |                                                         3 | Regular                    |                                        1   |
| Cut fuelwood           |                                           12 | M        | Auxiliary                           |                                                         1 | Regular                    |                                        1   |
| Charcoal manufacture   |                                           12 | M/F      | Assistant                           |                                                         1 | Seasonal                   |                                        2   |
| Scavenge charcoal      |                                           24 | F/M      | independent                         |                                                         3 | Seasonal                   |                                        3   |
| Retrieve flotsam       |                                           12 | M        | independent                         |                                                         3 | Seasonal                   |                                        3   |
| Food procurement       |                                              |          |                                     |                                                           |                            |                                            |
| Trap birds             |                                           12 | M/F      | Assistant                           |                                                         1 | Seasonal                   |                                        3   |
| Pick vegetables        |                                           24 | F/M      | independent                         |                                                         4 | Seasonal                   |                                        2   |
| Pick/gather fruit -    |                                           35 | F/M      | IndeDendent                         |                                                         4 | Seasonal                   |                                        2.5 |

Source: Author (1986b).

then, as is often the case in  such settings, learning about the environment was  an  important component of children's  upbringing in Howa (cf., Middleton 1970; Modiano 1973; Raum 1940; Ruddle and Chesterfield 1977; Wisner 1970). Their  environmental knowledge was  both practical  and abstract, acquired and used largely in the course of their work and play. Direct instruction by older children or adults was  often an integral part of the process  of children's work.  M y  research presented clear  evidence that these activities of work, play,  and learning were relatively unified in the lives of children in Howa during 1981. Indeed, in the literature on children's learning in  settings characterized by  similar  socioeconomic  conditions,  the  integrity between instruction and practice is referred to repeatedly (e.g.,  Ruddle and Chesterfield 1977; Raum 1940; Modiano 1973). So too is the easy  back and forth between work and play in  the course  of children's learning  (cf. Raum 1940).

Environmental Learning.  The  major  themes developed in  the literature on children's learning  in  nonindustrialized  economies  were borne out by my study as well. First, children learned

about  the  environment  and its use  largely  in the context of their  participation in the work and  other  everyday  practices of  their  community as these took place in their  customary settings (cf.,  Fortes 1938;  LeVine and  LeVine 1963;  Mead 1928, 1930;  Modiano 1973;  Raum 1938,1940;  Ruddle and Chesterfield 1977; Wisner  1970). Second,  children's  work  was  often fused with play in time,  space,  and  meaning (cf., Ammar 1966; Fortes  1938; Lancy 1975; Middleton 1970; Modiano 1970; Raum 1940; Ruddle and Chesterfield 1977; Spindler 1974; Whiting and Whiting 1975). Finally,  children's  play itself  was  often  a  creative  means  for  the  acquisition,  use,  and  consolidation  of  environmental knowledge (cf.,  Fortes 1938;  Modiano 1973; Raum 1940; Wisner 1970). These findings were illustrated  in  the narrative  that introduced this piece. When a child assists her family with with her brother to trap birds, she is both working and playing,  and  in this  case  both activities  have environmental content. These three themes are planting sorghum and then runs off developed in the discussion below.

In Howa, herding  was a skill acquired on the job.  Interviews and observations revealed that i n the main, the knowledge associated with it was  passed on herdboy to herdboy in the everyday course of  leading the animals.  Novice shepherds were guided by more experienced boys in such tasks as strategies for  choosing a grazing area, the evaluation of particular plants as grazing resources and hazards, and the local ecology of  these and other resources such as water, sources of food, and special places  where herding could be combined with particular play activities. To some  extent,  new herders were also given direct instruction  by their fathers  and other  older  male  relatives. This  exchange of knowledge took place a s   new herdboys were accompanied to pasture by one of their  relatives in their  first  weeks  of  herding.  In these instances they were instructed in  such relevant matters as  plant  identification,  the  social and environmental hazards to which animals were exposed, and specific attributes of the local  terrain. This body of  knowledge was  not necessarily shared in  the course  of herding, but rather in  forays around  the village  for other purposes and in  discussions  at home. In  Howa  the knowledge of shepherds was reinforced  by the questions and admonishments  of their fathers in  the course of  almost  daily  debriefings  on  where they had led  the animals, what had  been grazed upon, when the animals were watered, and  what unusual circumstances had been encountered. Finally, the  special  and  extensive  body  of knowledge shared by  herdboys also  was  acquired and reinforced  in  their play. They knew and with  obvious delight  shared riddles  and songs that  incorporated  the names and attributes of local flora and fauna, for example. This brief  discussion of  herding illustrates the  integrated fashion in which children's  environmental  learning  took  place in the  course of work,  play, and direct instruction.

Similar discoveries  have been made  by others who have worked  with children  in  rural settings of the Third World. Working with Chaga people in  what is now Tanzania, Otto Raum found that boys began herding on their own at about seven years of age,  but were responsible only for  small  animals and were  relieved  by  their fathers by midday. At these younger ages, boys acquired most of the relevant knowledge in  the course  of  their  participation  in  herding.  By twelve years  old,  however,  they  were  taught more systematically to identify fodder  plants and to discern those plants that caused animals problems (Raum 1940,198). Raum noted, as did I, that  herdboys were also well versed in the legal and economic matters relevant to animal husbandry.  In contrast  to  Howa,  Chaga  girls participated in these activities as well. From as early as  four  or  five  years  of  age,  Chaga  girls accompanied  their mothers  to  cut  fodder grasses and by ten years old were responsible for  making dairy products. The population of Guara in  the Orinoco Delta of Venezuela studied by Ruddle and Chesterfield (1977) seemed to be significantly less involved in raising livestock than that  of  Howa or  the  Chaga community studied by Raum. As a result, although the children  of Guara did work as herders, they appeared  to  have had less experience  with some of the more specialized aspects of animal husbandry which were common in  the other communities. The specialized knowledge  characteristic of herdboys in Howa was not found by Ruddle and Chesterfield in  Guara, despite their noting the same easy familiarity with farm animals that I  observed  among children in Sudan.

Other instances in  which children's work and play were intertwined  were revealed in Howa. These offered grounded opportunities both to acquire and use environmental knowledge. For example,  several children in Howa played an elaborate sociodramatic modeling  game called

Figure 5. Playing "fields." Versions o f this game included playing out the activities of both subsistence cultivation and the agricultural project.

<!-- image -->

"fields"  in which they undertook in miniature the full range of activities associated with agriculture  from  seed  preparation  to  harvest, storage, and marketing (Fig. 5). For some children this was  a chance to reinforce what they had learned  during  work and other expeditions to  the fields, and to  experiment on  a more manageable scale with coordinating work activities in which they participated piecemeal as assistants or  apprentices in a  larger family  enterprise. For other children, the game of "fields" was an introduction by slightly older friends to the agricultural practices of their  community. In a  similar  vein,  children who assisted  their fathers with the production of charcoal occasionally constructed miniature charcoal kilns in which a small amount of usable fuel was  produced.  Adults  in Howa as  elsewhere recognized that in these and myriad other  play activities,  children  learned, practiced,  and reinforced environmental knowledge and skills essential to production and reproduction. (See

Katz 1986a for  an extended discussion of  the relationship between children's environmental work and play.)

Content  of  Environmental  Knowledge.  The content and organization of children's knowledge about the environment was central to my project in Howa. All instances in which  environmental knowledge was  revealed were  recorded, and the content of that knowledge  was carefully  documented  (Katz  1986b).  For  example,  in days spent with children working in their  households' fields, I observed and documented what skills the children had mastered in order  to accomplish their  tasks,  and what knowledge was called into  play in  order to  carry out these activities. In repeating this  process with all of the children engaged in each environmental practice, I constructed a picture of the collective knowledge of ten-year-old children concerning the use and manipulation of the  local  environment. These  were  documented on film as  well (cf.  LaPore and  Katz 1983). (A more detailed discussion  of children's knowledge of agriculture  is presented in Katz 1986a, their botanical  knowledge in  Katz 1989a.)

The knowledge revealed in this manner was rooted in  practice. Nothing of the ways in  which the children organized it  could be inferred  from observation. In order to elicit the content and organization  of  their  shared  knowledge as  a cultural form separate from its deployment in practice, I  conducted a series of ethnosemantic interviews with five of the children.  These interviews  were  focused  on  constructing  taxonomies of particular aspects of the children's environmental knowledge. All five developed detailed taxonomies of their  plant knowledge (Katz 1989a),  and one,  a  shepherd,  also  produced a  detailed  taxonomy of  places  in and around Howa. The focus of  the  latter, which we mapped crudely, was his knowledge of the location and attributes of particular places for grazing. He identified fifty-seven discrete pasture areas in the vicinity of Howa (Fig. 6.)

The  children shared an  extensive and  detailed knowledge of  the environment and its use by the local population. The ethnosemantic interviews also enabled  them  to  reveal  the ways that  this  knowledge was  organized. Not surprisingly, the children's categories  were inconsistent with those of Western botanical scientists. The ways in  which they differed reveal, at least in  part, the  children's practical  connection

Figure 6. course o f   ethnosemantic interview. Shepherd's  map o f pasture  areas  near  Howa,  constructed by a  shepherd  and  the  author  during

<!-- image -->

with the plant environment. For example, categories based on innate characteristics  of plants broke down around the inclusion of cultivated varieties. For some children these appeared to form a category unto themselves. That is,  the children frequently marked three discrete categories of trees, vines, and  other soft-stemmed plants along with a  parallel category of  cultivated plants,  even though the attributes  they defined for the latter  were consistent  with  those they presented for the other three categories. For example,  the children might give the attributes of cucumbers and recognize that each of these matched the characteristics  by which they had defined vines,  but still not place cucumbers in that  more generic  plant  domain. These  children  made  a separate  category of cultivated plants.

## The Changing Roles o f Children during Socioeconomic and Cultural-Ecological Transformation

The general  hypothesis  that guided this work from the outset was  that a change in the production system,  such as was  caused by incorporation in  the Suki Agricultural Project, would alter the settings  and activities for reproducing that  production  system.  My  interest  in  this question  was  rooted in the  perspective  that these  settings  and  activities  were not  simply  the outcome of economic factors, but rather were themselves constructed by the material social practices of  living historical subjects. My goal was  to examine the articulation between the

two, for  in it lie the multitudinous possibilities of  reproduction,  reaction, resistance,  and reformulation.  The  household, the peer group, and the school or other sites of formal training were  the  settings of  particular  concern,  and children's work, play, and formal learning were the activities of  particular  interest.  Following Marx (1967), reproduction was  understood as physical-encompassing both  biological reproduction and the appropriation and/or  production of  means of  subsistence adequate to ensure the  daily  maintenance of  the population, and sociocultural-reproducing the conditions of life and labor in which the skills and knowledge associated with  social  production figure  prominently.  M y   research  addressed children's  roles in production and the  provision of  the  means of  existence, and their  acquisition of the knowledge and skills necessary to maintain the system of  production and reproduction over  time.  These were examined as  lived experiences and contested practices.

Although  there is a  generally recursive nature  to  these material  social  practices  addressed analytically in the literature on everyday  life  (e.g.,  Lefebvre 1984), these  practices and their relationships  to  the social relations  of production and reproduction are always  everywhere in flux. Everyday life is significant as a  critical concept,  not as  a  descriptive notion for  the  mundane and unspectacular practices by  which  we  construct  ourselves and  reproduce society, but because inherent in these is the  potential  for rupture,  breakdown,  and transformation (cf. Kaplan and Ross 1987;  Katz 1989b). At  particular  historical  junctures,  the potential for  these is heightened. The altered relations of  production imposed by inclusion in the Suki Agricultural Project created such a moment  in  Howa.  The  acquisition,  deployment, content, and organization of  children's environmental  knowledge were addressed to examine the  means by  which  the  social  formation of Howa was  being reproduced and to locate discontinuities  in these  cultural  forms and practices.

By the time of my research in 1981, the Suki Agricultural  Development Project, established in 1971,  had already had a significant effect in transforming  not  only  the  social  relations  of production and reproduction in Howa, but the local  ecology as well. These transformations had led to conditions which altered, among other things, the nature  of children's interactions  with the environment as well as the means and content of their environmental learning. My initial hypothesis  was that as a result of the socioeconomic changes underway, more children would attend school and thus participate less in the work  of  their households.  By  extension,  I thought  that  the  decline  in children's  work would begin to erode the traditional relationship between work and play, and in turn,  the experience  of  the two as  means of  environmental learning. While a year of field research did not allow  sufficient  time to analyze definitely how  these activities  were changing  either in themselves or  in relation  to  one  another, analysis of  the sample population  of  children and return trips to Howa  in  1983  and 1984  made clear that this hypothesis was  off the mark.

One of  the contradictory  effects of  incorporation in the agricultural  project was  that rather  than  increasing school  enrolment  and children's play time as I  had hypothesized originally, it  appeared that the changes wrought by inclusion in the Project demanded more labor from children.  According  to teachers  in the village school, enrolment had not increased in the years since Howa was  included in the Suki Project. Moreover, it was  their impression, although they did not keep figures, that a greater proportion o f children  in the  village  primary school left before completion than had done so prior to inclusion in  the Project. The reasons for this were threefold: (1) the higher labor demands associated with the irrigated cultivation of cotton and groundnuts compared with the rainfed cultivation of sorghum and sesame; (2) the environmental changes brought about by the irrigation project; and  (3) the increased need for  cash  engendered by  incorporation  in the agricultural development project  and the global cash  economy which  it represented. These are discussed in turn.

In interviews concerning the changes taking place in  Howa, adults  frequently indicated that the demands  of cultivating cotton and groundnuts  as cash crops exceed those associated  with the rainfed cultivation o f sorghum and sesame that had prevailed before 1971. In addition to the labor demands of irrigation and the use of imported  fertilizers, pesticides,  and herbicides, Project authorities  required four  weedings of each crop with a short-handled  hoe that was more difficult  and  tiresome to use than the customary long-handled or very short-handled variety.' In  most  households,  these  labor  de-

mands  were met with the increased use of family labor, especially children. Many tenant households,  particularly  those  of  lower  socioeconomic status, reported that children were kept from school enrolment or forced to withdraw after a couple of years because  they were needed to help with the full range of  agricultural tasks,  many  of  which  took  place  during  the school  year.  Some  studies  that  address  children's contribution to household labor suggest that  when  children are  needed  for  labor-intensive agricultural or other tasks, they are kept home from school (e.g., Landy  1959;  Tienda 1979). My experience  suggest that  when this was the case for specific seasonal tasks,  households managed without the inputs of their children. But when children's labor was  important to a range of tasks such as agriculture, or for an essential year-round activity  such as  herding, either  they  were  never  enrolled or  they  left school prematurely.

Another reason that children's work in Howa appeared to have increased was  the deforestation that had resulted from the shifts in landuse associated with the irrigation project. The traditional system of mixed land-use, combining  subsistence dryland  agriculture  and  the raising of small animals,  left wooded areas adequate to  meet  local needs.  With the establishment of the Project in 1970-71, the amount of  woodland  in the vicinity  of  the village was severely  curtailed. By 1981  there  were  few trees apart from ornamentals  within a half-hour's walk from the settlement, and most of the remaining trees within an hour's walk were less than five centimeters  in diameter. Adults  in the village noted that this situation had increased  the time required to procure adequate household fuel supplies. In Howa, where many aspects of fuel provision were the responsibility of  children, these changes  led to substantial increases in children's work time.  Not only  did they  have to go further afield to  collect or cut fuelwood, but the poor quality and small size of most of what was available increased  the number of trips per week necessary to provide  sufficient wood for  domestic consumption.

Finally,  children's  environmental and other work had increased because of the larger economic changes associated with the introduction of  the agricultural  project.  Not only  did the Project bring about enormous changes in the  relations  of  production  in  Howa,  but  it heightened the integration of the village into the national cash economy. With the establishment of the Project, access to many goods that had been commonly  held or  freely  available was restricted,  for example, wood products.  The issue of  forestry  resources again  provides an example of particular relevance  to  the question of children's labor. As wood products became more  difficult  to  procure, some  wealthier households  began to purchase  them rather than increase the  demands  on children  or  other household  members.  Members of  poorer households in the village,  including children, began to provide wood for  sale.  In this way a freely  held good  gradually becomes  a  commodity.  As  more  freely  held goods  become commodities, the need for  cash  increases. By 1981 this  process  was  well  underway,  compounded by  an  explosion  in the  number  of merchants  and traders in  the village since 1971. Their presence  introduced an increasingly  wide array of consumer goods to the village.

Commoditization  is  tied to socioeconomic differentiation. In  Howa, the ascendance of the cash  economy  led to increases  in children's work,  because in many households they were needed to earn money to help meet the growing needs for  cash.  Twelve of  the seventeen children in  the sample group earned cash that helped  provide  household  subsistence.  The twinned processes  of commoditization  and differentiation particularly affected two resources that  children  were  significant  in  procuring: wood and water. When marginalized families sought new means to earn cash,  it often fell to children  to fetch water or  cut wood for  sale. Ten-year-old children also helped to produce and scavenge charcoal  for sale in  nearby towns, harvested  vegetables from family garden plots and hawked these in the village, and worked as  hired help in the tenancies of other village households. In these ways,  the increased  need for cash, created by the agricultural project and fanned  by  the  exigencies of  the  monetized economy of which it was a part, increased the work of children in Howa.

These shifts in children's  work  had consequences  for the relationship between work and play,  and the nature of these a s   means for the acquisition  and use of environmental  knowledge (cf. Katz 1986a,  b),  as  well a s   for  school attendance. The gains  in school enrollment I expected  may  have  been  limited,  at  least  in part,  by the increased demand for  children's labor in Howa. In 1981,42  percent of the boys

1

1

and 4 percent of the girls seven to twelve years old were enrolled in  the village school. During 1979 in the largely rural Blue Nile Province as a whole, 53 percent of the boys  and 25 percent of the girls between these ages were enrolled in  primary school  (Sudan, Ministry  of Education and Guidance 1981). Whatever the cause,  the implications of  low school enrolment  are serious both  for the children  as they come of age and for the socioeconomic formation of Sudan as a whole.

My research  indicated that  most ten-yearold children in Howa  were learning the knowledge, skills, and values necessary to reproduce the social relations  and practices  of production that characterized their community in 1981. In their  work and play, children learned the environmental knowledge and practices associated with  maintaining a  farming  community. But for a combination of reasons, it was apparent  that  relatively few  of  those ten years old in 1981 would have access to a farm tenancy when they come of age in  the 1990s. Displacement of  the farming  population  results from three interrelated phenomena:  (1) the static land tenure  relationships associated with the  agricultural project-with 250 tenancies allocated to the village in 1970, there were from the outset fewer tenancies than the number of households (335 by 1981); (2) the size of the average household in Howa-with the fixed number of tenancies, and  an average household size of 5.7, most children do not stand to inherit access to their  family's  tenancy;  and  (3)  the  frequent proximity  in age  between children and their parents, i.e.,  the parents of many ten-year-old children  were  still  in their  twenties  or  early thirties and thus unlikely to  turn over their tenancies  until well  after  their  children reached adulthood.  In the absence of further  agricultural development (and none was  planned for the area)  much of  what  children played and worked  at during their childhoods will not  exist for them in the world of their adulthood. This eventuality  points to a  serious disjuncture  in the course of social reproduction which could lead to profound shifts in the children's  lives as they reach adulthood.

The outcomes differ  for  boys and girls.  M y research suggests that while most of the boys were learning to be farmers,  they will not be. Rather they will be marginalized  as agricultural wage laborers or forced to  seek nonagricultural work  in the  Project  headquarters nearby,  in regional  towns, or in  urban  centers  further away. By contrast, girls were being socialized largely t o   assume their mothers' social  and work roles. While women's  roles were  likely to be stable for  a  longer  period than  men's, it  appeared likely that as men increasingly migrate  from the area in search of labor,  women would assume a large role in agricultural  production.  While girls participated  extensively  in  agricultural  tasks such  as  planting and  harvesting,  unlike  boys they were not taught to organize the full range of  agricultural  operations,  had  little practical experience in  some of these, including clearing and weeding, and had not mastered the use of most tools. Moreover, their participation in all agricultural tasks except harvesting  tapered off as  they reached  puberty. When these girls come of age, they are likely to need knowledge they will not have acquired fully in  their childhoods.

This discontinuity between childhood learning and adult opportunities is part of a process that, in effect, results in the wholesale deskilling  and marginalization  of rural  populations  such as those in  the area of Howa. Given the general lack of formal schooling which might offer the chance for  'reskilling,' there was  little likelihood of most children finding employment in their  adulthoods except at the lowest skill requirements. These discontinuities were not  the same for all children. The dramatic differences in  the rates of school enrollment between girls and boys in Howa (4  percent and 42  percent respectively), suggest that girls will be even less capable than boys of  undertaking nonfarm or nondomestic work. Just as girls lacked experience with the full range of  agricultural  tasks and were not instructed in their overall organization, many boys in Howa did not have the opportunity  to acquire  particular agricultural skills and knowledge because their households lacked  land in  the  agricultural project.  Children from nontenant households lost much of the opportunity shared by tenants' children to acquire and  use  agricultural  knowledge  in the course of  their  everyday  lives.  Thus,  certain children,  by virtue of their  parents' socioeconomic or occupational status, will be less skilled in agriculture than  many of  their  contemporaries, and possibly at a disadvantage in obtaining and holding positions a s   agricultural wage laborers. Under prevailing socioeconomic conditions, these were among the only viable jobs

available. In  this way,  the process of socioeconomic  differentiation engenders further  differentiation. My  research  revealed  some of the mechanisms of  this  process in children's  ex- perience.

For the socioeconomic formation  of  Howa, the intertwined processes of deskilling and differentiation  may  lead in the short-run  to declines in rural  productivity and,  in the  longrun, to  an adult population unable or unwilling to carry out the tasks of production associated with the Suki Project. Rural productivity may decline as the changing relations  of production and the ensuing redefinition of vocational skill dislocate the household as the center  of production and reproduction (cf. Dalla Costa 19 7 7 ) . These dual dislocations have resulted historically in  the depopulation of the household, first as  waged work is found outside of  the home and  ultimately  as  children  leave  in  growing numbers  to  attend school. As a result, less labor is available to the rural household to maintain previous levels  of agricultural productivity.  The process of  labor migration was  just beginning in Howa in 1981.

Finally,  the  increases  in children's  work  in Howa had begun to alter the traditional relationship between work and play, the balance between the two as means for the acquisition and use of environmental knowledge. This process appeared likely to continue whether  the work responsibilities  of the children continued to increase  or greater numbers  began  to  attend school. When play  and  work are separated, play becomes trivialized as 'childish'  activity in  the eyes of adults. Severed  from work, play remains a central means by which children are socialized  in  terms of both  mastering  particular kinds of knowledge or skills and internalizing cultural values and other principles.  However important its socializing role may  be,  play divorced from work is less grounded in the general experience of the community as a whole and thus comes to be viewed as inconsequential. When play becomes isolated and trivialized as an activity only for  children or as something adults do only i n their  time off from work,  the peer group becomes less integral to the larger society because it is no longer a social setting in which work and play are united.  This  represents the loss of an important aspect of autonomous traditional culture and is thus a means by which capitalism 'colonizes'  experience.

## Conclusion

This study  has examined some  of  the ways that capitalism is articulated on the landscape of everyday life. Its central logic, the accumulation  of  capital,  at  once  engenders  and  is achieved in  the colonization of experience and the transformation  of  time,  space,  place,  and nature. In  Howa  it  was possible  to  witness these entwined processes taking place. My research on the practices of social reproduction, and in particular children's  learning,  their  use of knowledge, and the organization and content of  their  knowledge concerning  the environment, was spurred, in  part, by the desire  to  find spaces  that  won't  be  colonized or  to locate instances of experiential decolonization,  glimmers of oppositional practice. These ends and those of the children are connected. Engaged myself  in the  production of  knowledge  that opposes received notions about the relationship between production and reproduction,  I have written this piece at once to point to the subversive power that inheres in the everyday practices  by which knowledge is produced, deployed, and exchanged, and to reformulate or subvert that knowledge in  a  way that recognizes the oppositional  potential of these very prac- tices of social reproduction.

What I have shown-that children shared a rich and intricate knowledge of a resource use complex under erasure; that their autonomous practices of  work and play were being transformed and sundered as unified means for the acquisition  and  use of particular kinds  of knowledge; and that in  the wake of capitalism's local  impress,  children were  not  being  prepared for  the world they are  likely to face as adults-does not occasion optimism about the potential for opposition.  But in examining the acquisition and use of local knowledge as practices of social reproduction in articulation with the political-economic relationships  that at once structure and  are  structured by them, this piece not only has demonstrated the breadth and intensity  of  children's  environmental  interactions,  but, in  constituting these within the critical construction of everyday life,  has pointed t o   their contradictory potential to  alter the trajectory of socioeconomic change.

Most  of  the  evidence  presented  indicates signs of rupture  in  the means by which children

acquired and used environmental knowledge, and  breakdown  in the  relationship  between production  and social reproduction. These disjunctures  appeared  to serve  the  advance  of capitalism  in Howa. The transformation of the local production system and its attendant processes of socioeconomic differentiation, environmental degradation,  commoditizaton,  and deskilliing,are  emblematic of the erosion of the countryside as  a viable  arena o f noncapitalist relation!; of production  and reproduction. Capitalist hegemony is neither achieved nor maintained without struggle, and the community as a  whole was  responding  to the  changes  imposed upon them in a range of ways. The state regulation of  production practices,  for  example,  was  successfully l i mited  by  the  tenants' union when they gained the right to grow sorghum on Project land. The shifting contents of what  constitutes adequate  socialization  for adulthood was recognized by the villagers, and met in the mid-1980s  with a village  self-help project to construct a girls'  school.  While the extension of formal schooling may further capitalist  hegemony  in the area,  inherent  in the nature of education is the possibility that it may not,  but  in fact,  may enable  a  population  to become conscious of their position  in  the larger society and resist such changes actively rather than reactively (Freire 1970). These are but two examples  of  the  local  response t o  the socioeconomic  and structural changes imposed in Howa since 1970. The great vitality and variation I discovered  in the children's  work,  play, and learning  and the contradictions that inhere in them as  material social practices of production and reproduction, suggest another possible arena  by  which  these  changes  might  be opposed,  resisted,  or  subverted.  In order for this t o   b e   accomplished, children and their elders would have to consciously appropriate and link t o  political struggle the strength inherent in  the production  and exchange of knowledge, returning it to their  own interests-to steady themselves and ride surely along the canals as t he sun rises.

## Acknowledgments

The research upon which this paper  is based was supported by a Predoctoral Research Grant from the National Science Foundation and a Dissertation Fellowship from the American Association of University

Women. I  remain grateful to them and to the people of  Howa for  their  generous  support  of  my  work. Thanks to Andrew  Kirby, Sallie Marston, Susan Saegert,  and  Neil  Smith as  well  as  several anonymous reviewers for helping me to better sow what I know.

## Notes

1. Notable exceptions include Willis (1977) in sociology,  Taussig (1980) and Scott (1985) in anthropology, and Johnson (1977) in geography.
2. The literature on everyday life associated  with the French  social theorist Henri  Lefebvre (1984) i s   germane  here as  well.  In recent  years  it  has  been getting  increasing attention  in North  American geography and social science in general. In geography  it  has  been drawn  on  largely by  those interested in the articulation  between social and spatial relations(e.g.,  Soja 1989; Harvey 1989), rather than in the reproduction of particular humanenvironment relations.  Its  crucial insight is its  construction of everyday life as a critical concept, that is,  one in which the possibilities  of  its own transformation are immanent to the very practices of reproduction that constitute it (cf.  Kaplan  and Ross 1987 ) . However, this formulation,  with the associated  literature,  is one that I  came upon  after completing the present project. In tracing my path to it, feminist theory  has  been most influential and offers emancipatory insights that geographers interested in social change frequently ignore.
3.  According to Marx, the natural economy is based in agriculture complemented by domestic handicraft and manufacturing. Its central characteristic i s   that 'a  very insignificant  portion'  of the product enters into the process of circulation (1967, Vol. 3 , pp. 786-87). In other  words,  'the  conditions  of the economy are either  wholly  or  for  the overwhelming  part produced by the economy itself, directly replaced and reproduced out of its gross product' (p. 79 5 ) . The abstraction natural economy describes  a particular relationship to the production of the means of existence  and the relative lack of surplus and thus circulation. It should not invoke notions of classlessness; indeed, socioeconomic differentiation  is often  a  characteristic of so-called natural economies. I follow  Bernstein (1982) in  using  Marx's category  of natural  economy as  an abstraction to suggest a  social formation in which  the  production  of  use-values  predominates, although there is an exchange of surpluses at a basic level. This is an apt characterization of the  socioeconomic formation  of  Howa prior to 1971. Since my purpose is an analysis of  the relationship between production and reproduction as  material social practices in Howa, and not one of the historical transformation of the village as a socioeconomic system, an abstraction  such a s  natural economy is useful a s   a  means to locate the village theoretically.
4. 4 . During  the initial decade  of the Project, when, for the first time, most households  in the village were forced to purchase  the bulk of sorghum  they consumed,  the  price  for  this  staple increased by  a

- devastating 2000 percent! In 1981 the  tenants  union succeeded in their  struggle with the Ministry of Agriculture  and won  the  right to cultivate  sorghum  once  again.  This  activity  was restricted, however, to one-half of the 2 . 1 hectares  available to each  tenant  for  groundnut  cultivation.  With groundnuts  by far  more lucrative than cottonthe gains from which accrued to the agricultural project and not the individual tenantthis  change traded food security for a substantial  reduction in potential income for those electing to grow sorghum.
5. Children were also significant in a range of other tasks  important  to household maintenance, e.g., cooking, child care and cleaning, but my focus on environmental  interaction precluded addressing these activities systematically.
- 6 . Because systematic  labor budgets were  not undertaken a s   a part of  field research with children or adults, all time data are my own best estimates based on extensive observation and checked in comparison  with time budgets undertaken in  similar socioeconomic and ecological settings. Thus, when comparing  children's labor contribution with that of adults,  it is best to think  of  it in terms of general units of participation rather than minutes or other  precise measurements  of time (Table 4 ) .
7. This  information  was  provided  in the course of open-ended  interviews I conducted  with  nine couples, eight of whom were parents of children participating in the research. The remaining couple were the grandparents  of two children in the sample  population.  More significantly, a  similar perspective was  revealed in the open-ended discussions I had with adults in most village households  while I was completing the  village-wide census at the start of my project. Also, it  w a s  reinforced consistently during the informal discussions with a  range of  adults in Howa throughout  the study period.

## References

- Ahmad, Abd al Chaffar M. 1974. Shaykhs a n d  followers: Political  struggle in the Rufa'a  a/-Hoi Nazirate  in the  S u d a n .   Khartoum:  Khartoum  University Press.
- Ammar, H. 1966. Growing up in  an Egyptian  village. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
- Aronowitz,  S. 1973. False promises: The shaping of American working class consciousness. New York: McCraw-Hill.
- Barnett, T. 1975. The Cezira scheme: Production o f cotton and the  reproduction of  underdevelopment.  In Beyond the sociology of development:  Economy and society in Latin America and Africa,  ed. 1. Okaal, T .   Barnett, and D. Booth, pp. 183-207. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. -.
1977. The Cezira scheme: An illusion of development. London: Frank Cass and Co.
- Bernstein, H. 1982. Notes on capital and the peas-
- antry.  In Rural development,  ed. 1. Harris,  pp. 160-77. London: Hutchinson University Library.
- Bourdieu, P. 1977. Outline of a  theory of practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Cain, M. 1977. The economic activities of children in a village in Bangladesh. Population  and Development Review 3:201-27.
- , and  Mozumder, A.  B.  M. 1981. Labour market structure and reproductive behaviour in rural Southeast Asia.  In Child work,  poverty and underdevelopment, ed. G. Rodgers  and G. Standing,  pp. 245-87. Geneva:  International  Labour Organisation.
- Caldwell, J. C.,  ed. 1977. The persistence of high fertility in the Third World. Canberra: University of Canberra, Department of Demography.
- Caulfield, M. D. 1974. Imperialism, the family and cultures of resistance. Socialist Revolution 20.
- Christopherson, S. 1983. The household and class formation:  Determinants of residential location in Ciudad Juarez. Environment and  Planning D: Society and Space 1:323-38.
- Clark,  C.,  and  Dear,  M. 1984. State  apparatus: Structures  a n d  language  of  legitimacy.  Boston: Allen Unwin.
- Clifford, J., and Marcus, C. E. 1986. Writing culture: The  poetics  a n d   politics  of  ethnography. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Conference on Socialist Economists. 1977. On the political  economy  of  women.  C S E   Pamphlet 2. London: CSE.
- DallaCosta, M. 1977. Riproduzione e emigrazione. In  I'Operaio  multinazionale  in  Europa,  2nd ed.,  A. Serafini et al.,  pp. 207-41. Milan: Feltrinelli. .
1972. Women and the subversion of  the community. In The power of women and the subversion of the community, ed. M. Dalla Costa and S. James, pp. 19-54. Bristol, England: Falling  Wall Press.
- de Certeau, M. 1984. The practice  of everyday life. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- de Lauretis, T. 1982. Alice doesn't: Feminism,  semiotics,  cinema.  Bloomington,  IN:  Indiana University Press.
- Development and  the  sexual  division  of  labor. 1981. Signs:  lournal of Women in Culture a n d Society Special Issue 7(2):265-512.
- Dufield,  M. R.   1981. Maiurno: Capitalism and rural life in Sudan. London: lthaca Press.
- Ehrenreich, B.,  and English, D.  1975. The manufacture of housework. Socialist Revolution 26.
- Fortes,  M. 1938. Social and psychological aspects of education in Taleland. In From child to adult, ed. J. Middleton, pp. 14-74. Austin:  University o f Texas Press, 1970.
- Freire,  P. 1970. Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Seabury Press.
- Calal el  Din,  M. 1977a. The  economic  value of children in rural Sudan. In  The persistence  of high

- fertility in the Third World,  ed. J. C.  Caldwell,  pp. 617-32.  Canberra: University of  Canberra,  Department of Demography.
- . 197713. The  rationality o f high fertility  in urban Sudan. In The persistence of  high fertility in the Third World, ed. J. C. Caldwell, Canberra: University  of  Canberra,  Department  of  Demography.
- Cenovese, E . 1972.  Roll,  Jordan,  roll:  The world the slaves made. New York: Pantheon Books.
- Cramsci, A. 1971.  Selections from the prison notebooks, ed. and trans. by Q. Hoare and G. N. Smith. New York: International Publishers.
- Gregory, D. 1982.  Regional transformation and industrial revolution: A  geography of the Yorkshire woollen industry. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
- , and Urry, I., eds. 1985.  Social relations  and spatial structures.  New York:  St.  Martin's Press.
- Cruenbaum, E . 1979.  Patterns  of  family living: A case study of two villages on the Rahad river.  Monograph 12. Khartoum: Khartoum University, Development Studies and Research Centre.
- Haraway, D . 1984. Teddy  bear  patriarchy:  Taxidermy in the Garden of Eden,  New York  City, 1908-1936. Social Text  11:20-64.
- Hart, R. 1978.  Children's  experience of place. New York:  Irvington.
- Harvey, D. 1989. The  condition of postmodernity. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. - .
1990.  Between space and time: Reflections on the geographical  imagination. Annals  of the Association of American Geographers 80:418-34.
- el  Hassam,  1. S. 1980. On ideology:  The  case  of religion  in northern Sudan.  Ph.D.  dissertation, University of Connecticut.
- James, S,. 1975.  Sex,  race and working class power. In Sex,  race a n d  c l a s s ,   ed. S. James,  pp. 9-19.  London:  Falling Wall  Press and  Race Today  Publications.
- Johnson, K. 1977.  'Do  as the land bids':  A  study of Otomi resource use on the eve of irrigation. Ph.D.  dissertation,  Graduate School of  Ceography, Clark University.
- Johnson, R. 1979.  Three problematics: Elements of a theory of working  class culture. In  Working  class culture,  studies in  history and theory,  ed. J. Clarke, C. Crichter,and R. Johnson,  pp.  201-37.  London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
- Kaplan, A.,  and Ross,  K. 1987.  Introduction. Yale French  Studies  73:l-4.  Special  issue: Everyday life.
- Katz, C. 1984.  The social context of reforestation: Socio-economic and cultural profile of  project area with recommendations for a program of forestry  extension.  mimeographed.  New  York: CARE. - .
- 1986a. Children  and  the  environment: Work, play and learning in rural  Sudan. Children's hvivonments Quarterly 3(4):43-51.

- .

- .

198613.  'If  there  weren't  kids, there wouldn't be  fields': Children's environmental  learning, knowledge and interactions in  a changing socioeconomic context in rural Sudan. Ph.D.  dissertation,  Graduate  School  of  Geography,  Clark University.
2. . 1989a.  Herders, gatherers and  foragers: The emerging botanies  of  children in rural  Sudan. Children's  Environments Quarterly 6(1):46-53.
198913. 'You can't  drive a Chevy through a post-fordist landscape':  Everyday cultural practices of resistance and reproduction among youth in New York City. Paper presented at the Marxism  Now:  Traditions  and  Differences  Conference,  Amherst,  MA.
4. Koptiuch, K. 1985. Fieldwork in the postmodern world:  Notes on ethnography  in an expanded field. Paper presented at the 84th annual meeting of  the American  Anthropological  Association, Washington.
5. Lancy,  D. F. 1975.  The role of games in the enculturation  of  children.  Paper presented at  the 74th annual  meeting of  the American  Anthropological Association, San Francisco.
6. Landy, D. 1959.  Tropicalchildhood. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
7. LaPore, M., and Katz, C. 1983.  Children's workand play. Videotape.
8. Lefebvre, H. 1984.  Everyday life in  the modern  world. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
9. LeVine, R. A.,  and LeVine  B.  B. 1963.  Nyansongo: A Gusii community in Kenya. In Six cultures,  ed. B. B. Whiting,  pp. 19-202.  New York: John  Wiley and Sons.
10. Marcus, C.  E.,  and Fischer, M. J. 1986.  Anthropology as  cultural critique:  An experimental moment in the human sciences.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
11. Marx, K. 1967.  Capital,  3 vols.,  ed. F.  Engels. Trans. S.  Moore  and E.  Aveling. New York: International Publishers.
12. Mascarenhas, A. 1977.  The participation of children in  socio-economic activities: The case of  Rukwa Region. Dar es Salaam: University of Dar es Salaam, BRALUP. Research Report 20-1.
13. Mead, M. 1928.  Coming  of  age in  Samoa. New York: William Morrow. - .
1930.  Growing  up in  New  Guinea. New York: William Morrow.
15. Michaelson, K. L . , ed. 1981.  And the poor get children: Radical  perspectives on  population  dynamics. New York: Monthly Review Press.
16. Middleton, I., ed. 1970.  From  child  to  adult: Studies in  the anthropology of  education. Austin: University of Texas Press.
17. Modiano, N. 1973.  hdian  education in the Chiapas Highlands. New York:  Holt,  Rinehart and Winston.
18. Moraga, C.,  and Anzaldua,  C. 1981. This bridge

- called  my  back: Writings  by  radical  women  of  color. Watertown,  MA: Persephone Press.
- Morice, A. 1981. The exploitation of  children  in the 'informal  sector':  Proposals  for research. In Child work,  poverty and underdevelopment,  ed. G. Rodgers  and G. Standing,  pp. 131-58. Geneva: International Labour Organisation.
- Nag, M.; White, B.; and  Peet,  R.  C. 1978. An anthropological  approach to  the  study  of  the economic value of  children  in Java and Nepal. Current Anthropology 19:293-306.
- O'Brien,  J. 1978. How traditional is traditional agriculture? Sudan Journal of Economic and Social Studies 21-10.
- Peek, P. 1978. The education and employment of children:  A  comparative study of  San  Salvador and Khartoum. In  Labour force  participation  in  low income countries,  ed. G. Standing and G.  Sheehan,  pp. 177-90. Geneva:  International  Labour Organisation.
- Pied, A. 1984a. Structuration, biography formation and knowledge:  Observations on  port growth during the late mercantile period. Environment and Planning D:  Society and Space 2:251-75. .
- 1984b. Space as historically contingent process:  Structuration  and the time-geography  of becoming places. Annals  of  the Association  of American Geographers 74:279-97.
- Probyn, E. 1990. Travels in the postmodern: Making sense of the local. In Feminism/postmoderni s m ,   ed.  L.  J.  Nicholson, pp. 176-89. New York: Routledge.
- Raum, 0. 1938. Some aspects of indigenous education among the Chaga. In From child to adult, ed. J. Middleton,  pp. 91-108. Austin: University of the Texas Press, 1970. - .
1940. Chaga  childhood.  London:  Oxford University Press.
- Rodgers,  G.,  and Standing,  G.,  eds. 1981. Child work,  poverty and  underdevelopment. Geneva: International Labour Organisation.
- Rosensweig, M. R. 1977. The demand for children in farm households.  Journal  of Political  Economy 851123-46.
- Ruddle,  K.,  and  Chesterfield,  R. 1977. Education for  traditional food procurement in the Orinoco Delta. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Said, E. 1978. Orientalism. New York: Pantheon.
- Samuel,  R.,  and Jones, G.  S. 1982. Culture,  ideology and politics. London: Routledge &amp;  Kegan Paul.
- Sargent, L . , ed. 1981. Women and revolution:  A discussion  of  the unhappy marriage o f marxism  a n d feminism. Boston, MA: South End Press.
- Schildkrout, E. 1981. The employment of children in Kano (Nigeria). In Child work,  poverty and underdevelopment, ed. G. Rodgers  and C. Standing, pp. 81-112. Geneva: International Labour Office.
- Scott,  J.  C. 1985. Weapons of the weak:  Everyday
- forms of  peasant resistance. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Smith, N. 1984. Uneven development.  Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
- Soja,  E.  W. 1989. Postmodern  geographies. London: Verso.
- Spindler,  G. D., ed. 1974. Education and cultural process: Toward  an  anthropology  of  education. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
- Spivak, C. C. 1987. In  other  worlds: E s s a y s   in  cultural politics. New York: Methuen.
- . 1988. Can the subaltern speak?  In Marxism and the  interpretation of culture,  ed.  C.  Nelson and L. Grossberg, pp. 271-313. Urbana: University of  Illinois Press.
- Spradley, J. P. 1979. The  ethnographic interview. New York: Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston.
- Sudan, Democratic Republic. Ministry o f   Education and Guidance. 1981. Education in the Sudan: Sector review paper. Prepared for  UNICEF Preview Meeting, 22 October 1980. .
- Ministry o f   National  Planning.  Department o f Statistics. Second population  census, 1973: Population dynamics, vol. 2 (MS).
- Taussig, M. 1980. The devil  and  commodity fetishism in South America. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
- a1  Tayib, G. el D. 1970. The southeastern Funj  area: A geographical survey. Khartoum: University of Khartoum, Sudan Research  Unit. Funj  Project Paper l .
- Thompson, E. P. 1963. The  making of the English working class.  New York: Vintage Books.
- Thrift, N. 1983. On the determination of social action in  space and time. Environment and Planning D:   Society a n d  Space 1:23-57.
- -,and Pied, A. 1981. Time-geography: A new beginning. Progress in Human Geography 5:27786.
- Tienda,  M. 1979. Economic activity of children in Peru:  Labor  force  behavior  in rural and  urban contexts. Rural Sociology 44:370-91.
- Tothill,  J.  D.,  ed. 1948. Agriculture in the Sudan. London: Oxford University Press.
- Warf, B. 1988. Regional transformation, everyday life,  and  Pacific Northwest  lumber  production. Annals of  the  Association  of  American  Geographers 78:326-46.
- Watts, M. 1983. Silent  violence. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- . 1987. Powers of production-geographers among the peasants. Environment  and Planning  D: Society and Space 5:215-30.
- Whiting,  B.,  and Whiting, J. W. 1975. Children of six cultures: A  psycho-culturalanalysis.  Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
- Williams,  R. 1977. Marxism and literature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Willis, P. 1977. Learning to labor: How working class

kids get working classjobs. New York: Columbia University Press.

Wisner, B . 1970.  Learning to  be a farmer  in St. Vincent, W. 1.:  Report of some pilot observations.

Draft  MS.  Worcester,  MA:  Clark University, Graduate School of Geography. Submitted 4/89, accepted 11/90.