This article was downloaded by: [University of California Santa Cruz]

On: 20 November 2014, At: 23:10

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,

37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## Different Places, Different Stories: Infant Mortality Decline in England and Wales, 1851-1911

Ian N. Gregory a a Digital Humanities, Furness College , Lancaster University ,

Published online: 26 Sep 2008.

To cite this article: Ian N. Gregory (2008) Different Places, Different Stories: Infant Mortality Decline in England and Wales, 1851-1911, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 98:4, 773-794, DOI: 10.1080/00045600802224406

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045600802224406

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## Different Places, Different Stories: Infant Mortality Decline in England and Wales, 1851-1911

Ian N. Gregory

Digital Humanities, Furness College, Lancaster University

This article presents a substantive analysis using the Great Britain Historical Geographical Information System (GIS), one of the earliest national historical GISs. It develops exploratory techniques to explore local patterns of demographic change and applies these to the study of infant mortality in England and Wales from 1851 to 1911. The techniques developed could be applied to a wide variety of fields where the aim is to explore long-term spatio-temporal change using data published for administrative units that are affected by boundary changes. The Victorian and Edwardian eras saw the origins of the sustained infant mortality decline that characterized the entire twentieth century. Although the period has been extensively studied for a century and more, our knowledge of this vital phase is still surprisingly limited. In particular, much of the research to date has focused on urban areas and has thus stressed urban explanations as to why infant mortality began to decline. Because this article uses a comprehensive GIS database, we are able to challenge some of the orthodoxies that have emerged. It reveals that patterns of infant mortality decline in different parts of the country were more complex than has previously been described. Far from the national rate being driven by changes in urban areas, the largest declines and earliest declines in infant mortality were found in rural parts of the southeast of England, as the rural periphery lagged far behind. Urban areas were slow to decline due to the specific conditions that existed in them in this period. Key Words: core-periphery divide, historical GIS, infant mortality, spatio-temporal analysis, urban-rural divide.

本文报告利用英国历史地理信息系统（GIS）所作的一个实质性分析。该系统是最早的国家历史地 理信息系统之一。文章发展了用于分析局部人口变化模式的探索性技术并应用这些技术研究了英格 兰和威尔士从1851年至1911年间的婴儿死亡率。这些技术可用于多种旨在利用已发表的行政单位数 据来探讨长远时空变化的领域。行政单位受边界变化的影响。婴儿死亡率的持续下降始于维多利亚 和爱德华时代并也是整个二十世纪的特点。虽然该时期已在一个多世纪中得到了广泛的研究，但我 们对这重要阶段的知识仍出乎意料地有限。特别是，大部分研究迄今都针对城市地区，因此强调解 释市区婴儿死亡率为何会开始下降。本文使用了一个综合的地理信息系统数据库，所以我们可以挑 战一些已有的正统观点。它显示在该国不同地区的婴儿死亡率下降之模式比以往所描述的更为复 杂。英国的婴儿死亡率远不是受城市地区变化的驱使。婴儿死亡率最大幅度和最早的下降是在英格 兰东南部的农村里，而边缘农村地区却远远地落后。城市地区因为在这期间存在的具体情况婴儿死 亡率的下降来得较慢。关键词：核心-边缘分化，历史地理信息系统，婴儿死亡率，时空分析，城 乡分化。

En este art´ ıculo se presenta un an´ alisis substantivo usando el Sistema de Informaci´ on Geogr´ afica (Geographical Information System, GIS) hist´ orico de Gran Breta˜ na, uno de los GIS hist´ oricos nacionales m´ as antiguos. Desarrolla t´ ecnicas exploratorias para investigar patrones locales de cambio demogr´ afico y aplica estos patrones al estudio de la mortalidad infantil en Inglaterra y Gales de 1851 a 1911. Las t´ ecnicas desarrolladas se pueden aplicar a una amplia variedad de campos en los que el objetivo es explorar el cambio espaciotemporal a largo plazo usando datos publicados por unidades administrativas que son afectadas por los cambios de l´ ımites. Las eras Victoriana y Eduardiana presenciaron los or´ ıgenes de una reducci´ on sostenida de mortalidad infantil que caracteriz´ o a todo el siglo veinte. Aunque este periodo se ha estudiado extensamente por un siglo y m´ as, nuestro conocimiento de esta fase vital es a´ un sorprendentemente limitado. En particular, muchas de las investigaciones hasta la fecha se han concentrado en ´ areas urbanas, y por lo tanto han recalcado explicaciones urbanas de las razones por las cuales la mortalidad infantil comenz´ o a disminuir. Como en este art´ ıculo se usa una base GIS integral, podemos desafiar algunas de las ortodoxias que han emergido. El art´ ıculo revela que los patrones de reducci´ on de mortalidad infantil en diferentes partes del pa´ ıs fueron m´ as complejos de lo que se describi´ o anteriormente. Lejos de las tasas nacionales impulsadas por los cambios en las ´ areas urbanas, las mayores y primeras reducciones de la mortalidad infantil se sucedieron en las regiones rurales del sureste de Inglaterra, debido a que la periferia rural estaba muy

atrasada. Las ´ areas urbanas mostraron una reducci´ on m´ as lenta debido a las condiciones espec´ ıficas existentes en ellas en este periodo. Palabras clave: divisi´ on entre n´ ucleo y periferia, GIS hist´ orico, mortalidad infantil, an´ alisis espacio temporal, divisi´ on urbana rural .

I n their conclusion to the Population History of England 1541-1871 , Wrigley and Schofield (1981, 482) state that:

[T]he functioning of the national aggregate will never be well understood unless analyses or relations that appear to characterize the national entity are paralleled by similar work on a local scale. Only in this way can those aspects of English demographic and economic history in which there was homogeneity of behaviour throughout the country be distinguished from those where the national aggregate reflects an average condition that may prove to have been true of few individual communities, and that may therefore tend to lead to misguided conclusions about the relations between demographic and economic behaviour in the past. (Reproduced by permission of Edward Arnold [Publishers] Ltd.)

In the quarter century since this was written, remarkably little progress has been made on studying the different local experiences that make up the national aggregate. For researchers studying England and Wales during the Victorian era and more recent times, a lack of data cannot be given as a reason for this. From the 1850s to the 1900s the General Register Office (GRO) published Decennial Supplements that gave the numbers of births and age-specific deaths in each of around 635 registration districts (Nissel 1987; Szreter 1991). These are thought to be broadly reliable (Teitelbaum 1973). These data have now been in existence for a century and more and contain a wealth of detail about the changing patterns of mortality at a local level. Although large amounts of research have been done using them, to date much of it has either focused on the national aggregate or on the particular experience of urban areas because the complexity of the data has undermined researchers' abilities to explore its full detail. This is a limitation that modern computing techniques, in particular those associated with geographical information systems (GIS), have gone some way to easing.

To understand how the national aggregate functions weneedtounderstandchangeoverbothtimeandspace. As Massey (1999, 2005) argues, time is important because it provides us with the story of how a place developed. Without space, however, we only have one story, such as Wrigley and Schofield's national aggregate that potentially only represents the experiences of a few communities. Space is thus important because it provides us with different places. Studying these in ways that stress the differences between them allows us to tell the different stories that make up the national aggregate. Bringing space and time together, therefore, allows us to stress the diversity of experiences and avoid reaching misguided or oversimplistic conclusions.

The aim of this article is to apply this approach to infant mortality decline in England and Wales over the period from 1851 to 1911. This period marked the beginning of the decline of infant mortality rates (IMRs) from historic levels, which had fluctuated between 100 and 200 deaths per 1,000 live births for centuries (Wrigley and Schofield 1981), to modern levels, which are now fewer than 5 per 1,000 (Office for National Statistics 2007) and still declining. Figure 1 shows that the national aggregate IMR started a gradual decline in around the 1870s or 1880s. It suddenly

Figure 1. National aggregate infant mortality rates (IMRs) in England and Wales, 1850s to 2001. For the period until 1911 the thresholds for the highest and lowest population deciles are also shown; thus, in the 1850s 10 percent of the population lived in districts with an IMR less than 114, and 10 percent lived in districts with an IMR greater than 192. Source: Registrar General's Decennial Supplements to the 1900s, then the Annual Reports and their successors afterward.

<!-- image -->

increased again in the 1890s, dropped dramatically in the 1900s, and since then has declined more or less continuously throughout the twentieth century. As described later, the orthodox story of the pre-World War I decline is that the national aggregate was driven primarily by urban areas. These had horrendously high rates as a result of their rapid expansion driven by industrialization. Public health reforms started to drive these rates down in the late 1880s and by the 1900s had succeeded in making major improvements that would continue throughout the twentieth century. The 1890s increase was a temporary exception to this caused by a number of hot, dry summers that led to a resurgence of waterborne infections.

As we will see, although this 'urban story' has some validity, it is not the only story that makes up the national aggregate. Rural areas show the extremes of both improvements and of failure to improve. To identify the different stories that make up the national aggregate, the article uses GIS databases and techniques to answer two fundamental questions that have not been properly addressed to date: First, what were the patterns of infant mortality in this period? Second, how did different types of place experience changes over the sixty years after 1851? The article describes patterns but makes no attempt to explain them because, as the quote from Wrigley and Schofield points out, a lack of understanding of local patterns will lead to flawed explanations. Identifying and describing these patterns is in itself a major undertaking, but explaining them will require a significant amount of further work.

In addition to contributing to the debate about historical demography, this article has another aim. Recent years have seen a surge in interest in the use of GIS in historical research (see Knowles 2000, 2005a; Holdsworth 2002, 2003; Baker 2003; Fleming and Lowerre 2004; Gregory and Ell 2007; Gregory and Healey 2007). This field has become known as 'historical GIS.' The creation of national historical GISs is one of the manifestations of this (Gregory 2002a; Knowles 2005b). This field is still in its early stages and has yet to demonstrate the extent to which it can advance historiographical debates. This article critiques the extent to which GIS approaches to aggregate data of this type can, and cannot, advance our understanding of the past.

## The Data and Their Limitations

The core of this study uses data for the six decades from 1851 to 1911 taken from the Registrar General's

Decennial Supplements. These provide the total number of births and infant deaths in each registration district for each of the decades in which we are interested. The study starts in 1851 as there are no equivalent data before this date. It ends in 1911 because after this the data were published annually and with more spatial detail. This period will be the subject of a later study.

As described later, the data have been extensively studied; however, four problems can be identified that have, to date, undermined their use: the volume of data, their spatial and temporal complexity, the aggregate nature of the data, and a lack of explanatory variables available in consistent form. The volume of data no longer presents a significant challenge to modern computing power as six decades of infant mortality data at registration district level gives around 3,800 individual rates. It is worth remembering, however, that until the last decade or two the computing power to handle such a data set would have been beyond most researchers in the field.

Spatial and temporal complexity is a problem into which GIS allows us to make significant inroads. Subdividing England and Wales into 635 districts provides a wealth of information about the country's geography. The Great Britain Historical GIS (GBHGIS; Gregory et al. 2002; Gregory 2005) holds the boundaries of these units as they changed over the period in a form that allows them to be linked to the statistical data. The problem that remains is how to analyze the data in a manner that is sensitive to both their geographical and temporal complexity. This is a subject that has not yet been addressed well by either the historical GIS community or the GIS and spatial analysis communities; this article makes some initial progress toward that goal.

The two remaining problems, the aggregate nature of the data and the lack of consistent explanatory variables, still present limitations. Although the data contain, as close as we will ever know, every birth and infant death over the sixty years, they are aggregated in time into decades and in space into registration districts. This means that although we can describe the aggregate patterns for districts, two issues limit our interpretation of these data: Ecological fallacy makes it very difficult to draw conclusions about the individual behaviors that make up these patterns and the modifiable areal unit problem means that patterns found in aggregate data may reflect the shape and size of the administrative units used rather than the underlying population surface. This is a particular problem where techniques such as correlation (Openshaw and Taylor 1979) and regression (Fotheringham and Wong 1991) are used.

Table 1. The five most common causes of infant death in the 1850s, 1880s, and 1900s

|      | 1850s                        | 1850s      | 1880s                           | 1880s      | 1900s                  | 1900s      |
|------|------------------------------|------------|---------------------------------|------------|------------------------|------------|
| Rank | Cause                        | %of deaths | Cause                           | %of deaths | Cause                  | %of deaths |
| 1    | Other causes                 | 32 . 1     | Other causes                    | 33 . 3     | Other causes           | 58 . 3     |
| 2    | Diseases of brain            | 21 . 7     | Diseases of respiratory systems | 19 . 1     | Diarrhea and dysentery | 12 . 0     |
| 3    | Diseases of lungs            | 14 . 2     | Diseases of nervous system      | 17 . 1     | Pneumonia              | 8 . 7      |
| 4    | Cholera, diarrhea, dysentery | 9 . 2      | Diarrhea and dysentery          | 9 . 5      | Bronchitis             | 8 . 1      |
| 5    | Other zymotic diseases       | 4 . 1      | Diseases of digestive system    | 5 . 5      | Whooping cough         | 3 . 8      |

Source: Registrar General's Decennial Supplements.

Two aspects related to modifiable areal units that are perhaps less well publicized are also important here. First, urban units tend to have small areas but very large populations, whereas rural units often have large areas but only relatively small populations. According to the 1911 census, the two largest registration districts had populations one hundred times larger than the smallest two. Clearly, giving each of these four units equal weighting in an analysis is problematic. Second, the boundaries of administrative units change over time, making it difficult to compare one decade with the next. In this article, a solution based on areal interpolation, standardizing data on a single set of administrative units, is used in some parts of the analysis. An alternative approach that could have been used would have been to interpolate all of the data onto a raster surface. This approach has been used with some success for modern census data, from 1981 on, in England and Wales (see Martin 1989, 1996a, 1996b). Although serious consideration has been given to following this approach with historical data, there are a number of reasons for not doing so. Most fundamentally, Martin was able to use around 100,000 enumeration districts to create his surfaces. The data used here are only available for around 635 districts, units that frequently represent a town and its hinterland (Hasluck 1936). This lack of spatial detail and homogeneity means that to create a meaningful raster surface would either require very large grid cells or the results would be almost completely determined by the model used (Gregory 2001). Neither of these is desirable.

Our fourth and final problem is the lack of explanatory variables. As discussed in detail later, infant mortality has a wide variety of causes, including factors such as sanitation, nutrition, access to health care, and the education of parents. Data on these are extremely sparse and, even where available, vary in quality across the country and over time. Even where data have been routinely published, the data collected and their definitions change over time, and there are real risks in only analyzing data from these sources. As a result, a national-level quantitative analysis of readily available data is unlikely to provide reliable insights into the causes of infant mortality decline.

Even data on causes of death are limited. The Registrar General did attempt to classify causes of death, but these are of limited use. It is widely assumed that the major killers were infectious diseases, including waterborne diseases such as diarrhea and dysentery, and airborne diseases such as measles and whooping cough. Table 1 shows the five most common causes of deaths among infants for three of our six decades as recorded by the Registrar General. It highlights the two major problems with these data. First, the classification system used was changed, making it difficult to explore long-run trends. Second, the major killer in all three decades, and indeed the three not shown, was 'other causes,' which accounted for between one-third and two-thirds of all deaths. This means that making assumptions about what the main causes of death were is unsafe.

## Stories of Infant Mortality Decline: Orthodoxies and Challenges

In spite of the availability of data, our knowledge of the patterns and causes of infant mortality decline have remained controversial to the extent that even the timing of the start of the decline remains unresolved. Contemporary observers were particularly concerned by high rates of mortality in the urban centers that were growing rapidly as a result of the industrial revolution. Not unnaturally, they focused on these areas and their problems and introduced public health measures in an attempt to solve them. Thus the 'urban story' developed that explained the national aggregate by relating it to urban problems and the responses to them; rural areas were largely ignored.

This emphasis persisted throughout the twentieth century. Three recent pieces of research have

reexamined these conclusions. The first of these was published in two articles by Woods, Watterson, and Woodward (1988, 1989). This research stressed the urban story. The authors argued that forty-three urban registration districts contributed over half of the total numbers of deaths and thus 'developments in only a handful of places would have radically affected national trends' (1988, 358). They go on to say that 'what we term the 'urban effect' was a potent force in Victorian and Edwardian demography in that it served to keep British infant mortality . . . high by way of the level of urbanization' (1988, 359). This stress on the importance of urbanization appears throughout the two articles. They also argue that 'the timing of infant mortality decline was remarkably consistent throughout the country, regardless of district and social class' (1989, 129). Finally they claim that rates of decline were highest in the urban areas that had the highest rates to begin with.

Two more recent articles challenge these findings. Lee (1991) performs a longer term analysis of inequality in infant mortality from 1861 to 1971. He argues that in the mid-nineteenth century the highest IMRs were found in the north and midlands, and the lowest were found in the south and west. He goes on to say, 'More significantly, and contrary to conventional wisdom, is the pattern of change in these regional infant mortality rates. They did not fall uniformly, nor was there a clearly marked hiatus around the turn of the century' (56). Instead, he argues that regions with the lowest rates started to decline earlier than those with high rates. Williams and Galley (1995, 412) broadly agree with Lee's conclusions. They state:

the beginnings of the decline of infant mortality must now be extended back to at least the 1860s, if not before. The stability of infant mortality in London and its volatility in the large towns has tended to cloud the national picture, but in many places the risks to infants seem to have gradually declined throughout the second half of the nineteenth century.

Woods, Watterson, and Woodward's (1988, 1989) focus on the urban pattern leads them to stress urban explanations. In particular, they emphasize political and institutional factors such as the increased use of midwives and health visitors, improvements in the education of women that, in turn, led to better hygiene and care, improvements in sanitary conditions in towns, and improvements in the supply of clean cow's milk. Williams and Galley (1995), by contrast, argue that these factors, which would have the most signifi- cant impact in urban areas, have been overemphasized and that there was already an underlying decline in infant mortality across the whole country that was being driven by some other factor that, they suggest, may be fertility decline. Woods (1997, 82) is unconvinced by this, arguing that 'The key to understanding the causes of variations and trends in infant mortality in Britain, at least between 1850 and perhaps 1930 will not be found unless it is appreciated that even in 1850 Britain was an overwhelmingly urban country.'

The problem with these three pieces of research, and a major reason why they come to contradictory conclusions, is that they all suffer from key weaknesses in their data. Woods, Watterson, and Woodward (1988, 1989) use decennial data for the 1880s, 1890s, and 1900s, plus data for the year 1861. These are at the registration district level. Lee (1991) uses the average IMR for the three years around census dates. He aggregates his data to the county level, of which there were only fortyfive in England and Wales, to allow him to compare over a century of data on a single set of administrative units. As the data are so aggregate, it is very hard to interpret the results, particularly because urban and rural contrasts have been lost and because the population sizes of counties vary even more than that of registration districts. By contrast, Williams and Galley (1995) use a small sample of only twenty-four registration districts or aggregations of them. These have been deliberately chosen to give big cities, large towns, small towns, areas adjoining urban areas, and rural areas. For these they use annual data as seven-year moving averages. Their article suffers because it is unclear how representative these twenty-four districts are.

Thus, although comprehensive data have been available for almost a century, no one has yet managed to use these to examine comprehensively trends in infant mortality from the 1850s to the 1900s. As a result, there is no clear understanding of the spatio-temporal patterns of infant mortality decline. Without this, explanations of the causes of this decline can only be speculative.

## Stories of Urban and Rural, and Core and Periphery

The maps in Figure 2 show IMRs in each of the six decades. They are shaded using the same class breaks on each map to show how low rates increasingly spread across the country. Figure 3 shows the same data shaded

Figure 2. Absolute rates of infant mortality in the registration districts of England and Wales, 1850s to 1900s. The class intervals use nested means of the combined infant mortality rates (IMRs) for all six decades. Source: Registrar General's Decennial Supplements.

<!-- image -->

in a different way: Each map has been colored using population deciles, such that 10 percent of the population lives in each class at each date. To stress the extreme values, the middle four deciles have been aggregated to form one class. Thus, these maps stress the relative rates of infant mortality in each decade, as opposed to the absolute rates stressed by Figure 2. This relative approach that emphasizes the districts that are doing well or badly compared to other districts at the same date is used for much of this article. A key point that can be taken from both figures is that discerning patterns, and particularly patterns of change over time, from maps in this form is very difficult. Clearly, the spatial distribution of infant mortality is changing, but describing this change is difficult and subjective. This illustrates a broader problem when dealing with GIS data: Maps can be highly effective at illustrating a story, but they can rarely tell the story themselves.

To identify changing patterns in more detail, this section explores the main geographical divides in England and Wales, those between urban and rural and core and periphery, to see what contrasting types of infant mortality experiences these different types of places had. For the purposes of this analysis, a simple measure of rural and urban based on population density is used. The population densities for every district in every decade were brought together and subdivided into eight classes using nested means. In other words, the mean population density of all districts at every date was taken as the middle subdivision to create two classes. The averages of those above the mean and those below the mean were then used to further subdivide these, creating four classes, and this was repeated again to create eight. This provides a crude hierarchy of the degree of urbanization of each district, in which districts are allowed to become more or less

Figure 3. Relative rates of infant mortality (IM) in the registration districts of England and Wales, 1850s to 1900s. The class intervals use population deciles for each decade individually. Source: Registrar General's Decennial Supplements.

<!-- image -->

Table 2. An eight-way rural-urban classification

| Sample places                                                                                                                    | %of national population (1911)   | %of national births (1900s)   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| 1. Stow on the Wold (Glou.), Whitchurch (Hants.), Hexham (N'humb.), Oakham (Rutland), Northallerton (N. Rid.), Holbeach (Lincs.) | 9 . 4                            | 8 . 3                         |
| 2. Cockermouth (Cumb.), Chippenham (Wilts.), Bridport (Dorset), Bangor (Carn.), Alton (Hants.), Pembroke (Pembs.)                | 13 . 0                           | 11 . 7                        |
| 3. Guildford (Surrey), Redruth (Corn.), York (E. Rid.), Bucklow (Ches.), Chorley (Lancs.), Maidstone (Kent)                      | 17 . 8                           | 17 . 4                        |
| 4. Swansea, Canterbury, Hastings, Rochdale, Bolton, Wolverhampton                                                                | 18 . 7                           | 18 . 9                        |
| 5. Sheffield, Leeds, Oxford, Southampton, Coventry, Edmonton (M'dlsex)                                                           | 18 . 0                           | 18 . 9                        |
| 6. Exeter, Hull, Nottingham, Portsmouth, Leicester, Salford (Lancs.)                                                             | 11 . 9                           | 12 . 2                        |
| 7. Most of London, also Manchester, Liverpool, and Birmingham                                                                    | 9 . 1                            | 9 . 8                         |
| 8. Only London, mainly East End                                                                                                  | 2 . 1                            | 2 . 9                         |

Note: County abbreviations: Glou. = Gloucestershire; Hants. = Hampshire; N'humb. = Northumberland; N. Rid. = North Riding of Yorkshire; Lincs. = Lincolnshire; Cumb. = Cumberland; Wilts. = Wiltshire; Carn. = Caernarvonshire; Pembs. = Pembrokeshire; Corn. = Cornwall; E. Rid. = East Riding of Yorkshire; Ches. = Cheshire; Lancs. = Lancashire; M'dlsex = Middlesex.

urban over time. To give an indication of the types of places that fall in each category, Table 2 lists places within each class with population densities that fall around the median of each class. Examining these suggests that classes 1 to 3 were predominantly rural in character, classes 4 to 6 could be described as towns, and classes 7 and 8 only contain big cities. In 1851 approximately 60 percent of the population lived in rural areas, 30 percent in towns, and 10 percent in cities. By 1911 the rural population had declined to only around 45 percent of the total, towns had expanded to contain nearly 45 percent of the population, and the big city population remained roughly constant at around 10 percent. In both cases births follow a similar pattern.

Figure 4 shows the changing IMR of each type of district expressed as a percentage of the national IMR for that decade. It can be seen that the three most rural classes already had relatively low rates in the 1850s and improved significantly over the period. The more urban classes seem to be coalescing at values around 10 percent above the national rate.

This simple piece of analysis challenges some of the arguments advanced by Woods, Watterson, and Woodward (1988, 1989). It shows that the infant mortality decline did start well before the 1880s in much of the country; indeed, it is possible that this decline started in or before the 1850s. Although this decline was primarily a rural phenomenon, this does not mean that it was insignificant, as the areas affected contained over half of the country's population. The analysis therefore confirms Lee's (1991) and Williams and Galley's (1995) arguments that infant mortality decline started earlier than Woods, Watterson, and Woodward (1988,

1989) believed and develops it further as it is able to show that this was a primarily rural phenomenon.

Asecond geographical divide that is frequently identified in Britain is the north-south divide, or the 'coreperiphery' divide as it is more correctly known. Although much has been written about this (see, for example, Smith 1989, or the essays in Mohan 1999 and Baker and Billinge 2004), it is a notoriously difficult concept to define. A common approach is to put an arbitrary line across the country to separate the south and east from the north and west. This binary approach is clearly unsatisfactory.

Figure 5 shows an alternative solution. If there is a core-periphery divide in infant mortality, it follows that rates near the core, London, should be low and should rise with distance from London. To explore this, the country has been subdivided into buffers twenty-five kilometers wide centered on central London. The number of infant deaths, births, and the total population of the districts with centroids that fall into each buffer have been summed and the IMR calculated. The maps are shaded using deciles in the same way as Figure 3. They show that in the 1900s there clearly was a coreperiphery divide. Outside the inner buffer that includes London, there are two circles in the best decile followed by three in the next best decile. The worst deciles are all peripheral. The only peripheral buffers with low rates are the three in the far north, all of which have extremely small populations. There is, therefore, a clear core-periphery divide. The 1850s show a more complex pattern, with London being surrounded by good areas, then the area from Birmingham to northern industrial cities such as Liverpool, Manchester, and Leeds being bad, but further from this the areas are again generally

Figure 4. The rural-urban divide in infant mortality, 1850s to 1900s. Classes range from 1 (most rural) to 8 (most urban) as shown in Table 2. For each class the infant mortality rate (IMR) is shown as a percentage above or below the national rate. Over the period the national IMR dropped by 16.74 percent from 153.3 to 127.6 deaths per 1,000 births.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5. The core-periphery divide in infant mortality (IM), 1850s to 1900s. Buffers are 25 km wide and based on a point in central London. The total numbers of births and infant deaths have been calculated using the centroids of each district that lies in each buffer. Major cities are shown as points.

<!-- image -->

good. There is, therefore, far less evidence for a coreperiphery divide in this decade.

This suggests that although absolute levels of infant mortality fell between the 1850s and the 1900s, districts with relatively high or low values compared to the national rate became increasingly polarized, with the area around the core having increasingly low rates, and high rates increasingly found in the periphery. Figure 6 summarizes this by showing how the IMRs in each buffer changed from the 1850s to the 1900s relative to the national decline of 16.74 percent. Deciles are again used to show the uneven population distribution. The deciles that have declined the most are all south of Birmingham; the ones that have declined the least are almost all more peripheral than Liverpool. The pattern is unequivocal: From the 1850s to the 1900s there was an increasing core-periphery divide because the core improved rapidly and the pe- riphery lagged behind, sometimes completely failing to improve.

Between the 1850s and the 1900s, therefore, we can identify that there were differences between urban and rural and between core and periphery. The obvious explanation for this based on the urban story is that the pattern is driven by high rates in northern industrial cities such as Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds, Sheffield, and Newcastle. To test this, a hierarchical regional settlement (HRS) matrix is used (Skinner, Henderson, and Jianhua 2000). The article has already described how an eight-level rural-urban hierarchy was created based on population density. An eight-level core-periphery hierarchy can also be formed using distance from London by aggregating the buffers from Figures 5 and 6 to create buffers that are 50 km wide. Districts with centroids that lie within 50 km of central London are considered to be the most core, those with

<!-- image -->

Distancefrom London(kms.)

centroids between 50 km and 100 km from London are slightly more peripheral, and so on, until the most peripheral zone, with centroids that lie more than 350 km from London.

The urban-rural and core-periphery hierarchies are combined to form an HRS matrix as shown in Figure 7. The urban-rural hierarchy is shown on the y -axis with cells at the top being the most urban. The core-periphery hierarchy is shown on the x -axis with the most peripheral districts being in cells to the right of the matrix. Thus the cell at the top left corner contains the core-urban areas including much of inner London. The bottom right cell contains peripheralrural areas such as much of rural Northumberland and the Lake District in northern England, Anglesey in northwest Wales, and parts of Cornwall in the southwest of England. The bottom left cell contains very rural areas near London. The top right cell would be very dense urban areas in the periphery, but this cell contains no actual data. Instead, the northern industrial cities are found near, but not actually in, the top left corner in the urban-peripheral area. As discussed later, to create time-series for some types of district it has been necessary to aggregate some cells together such that they have at least one observation for each decade.

In Figure 8 each district has been allocated to a cell on the matrix based on its distance from London and population density. Using this, IMRs for each cell have been calculated for every decade and the values shaded using deciles as described in Figure 3. The pattern shows clearly that the urban-peripheral areas, northern

Figure 6. The changing coreperiphery divide, 1850s to 1900s. For each buffer the change relative to the national improvement of 16.74 percent is given. Those above zero have had declines above the national average. Population deciles are shaded in the same way as Figures 3 and 5. The text above the diagram shows the buffers that contain London, Birmingham (B'ham), Manchester (M'chester), Liverpool (L'pool), and Newcastle (N'castle).

industrial cities, consistently have the highest rates. Core-urban areas, densely populated parts of London, appear average, although this is somewhat misleading as this cell contains a wide range of values. The most interesting part of the diagram is what happens to the rural areas. In the 1850s, rural cells had consistently low rates in both the core and the periphery. By the 1900s, however, the low rates are concentrated in the core rural areas, whereas the rural peripheral areas have lagged far behind.

Figure 8 is limited in its ability to show change over time. Figure 9 uses time-series graphs of the data in a selection of individual cells. Figure 9A shows three time-series for the innermost buffer, the core region that includes areas within 50 km of central London. It does this for three levels of urbanization: the most rural class (class 1 from Table 2), cities (class 8), and towns (class 4). The national trend is also shown as a comparison. In Figure 9B the same data are given for a Midlands buffer, buffer 4, areas within 150 to 200 km of London. This includes the city of Birmingham. No data fall in the most urban cell of this buffer so the city class is urban class 7 as shown in Figure 7. Figure 9C shows a peripheral buffer for which there are two city classes. These are urban classes 7 and 8 for buffer 6, which includes Liverpool and Manchester, and urban class 6 for buffers 7 and 8, which includes Newcastle-upon-Tyne. The town and rural cells are all from buffer 8, the most peripheral. The data are also summarized in Table 3, which shows the change in the IMR for each cell from the 1850s to the 1900s.

Figure 7. The hierarchical regional settlement matrix. Labeled cells are those used in Figure 8. Darker cells have been merged to ensure that data are available for all years. Unshaded cells have no data.

Core

Periphery

<!-- image -->

Although the national aggregate IMR fell by 16.74 percent between the 1850s and the 1900s, Figure 9 and Table 3 show that there are major variations within this. In core areas, shown in Figure 9A, the rural and town rates show a large improvement over the period, both falling by over 30 percent, but city areas have only improved by 10 percent, meaning that they lagged behind the national aggregate. In rural areas, improvement had started by the 1860s, and towns lag slightly behind this, but the city class does not start to improve until the 1900s. Another interesting feature of Figure 9 is that the rise in the 1890s is most pronounced in the rural class. This appears to be at odds with the suggestion, advanced by Woods, Watterson, and Woodward (1988, 1989), that this increase was due to problems of infectious diseases in urban areas caused by a combination of hot summers and unsanitary conditions.

By contrast, the peripheral areas shown in Figure 9C present a very different pattern. The two city classes both show improvements at about the national rate, which starts in the 1870s and 1880s as is constituent with the urban story. These areas are, however, improving more rapidly and earlier than similar areas in the core. The town and rural areas show much lower rates of improvements of 3.1 percent and 7.0 percent, respectively, lagging well behind the national aggregate. In both cases there is little convincing evidence of the decline starting before the 1900s. Again there is no real evidence that the 1890s increase was more pronounced in town or city areas than in rural ones. The Midland buffer, shown in Figure 9B, shows elements of both patterns. Rural decline starts in the 1860s, if not before, by a total of 35.6 percent. The decline in towns also starts early but is not as pronounced as the rural decline, as it follows the national aggregate closely. The city class begins to decline weakly in the 1870s and 1880s and only declines by 8.2 percent, lagging noticeably behind the national aggregate.

In summary, therefore, the urban story does exist and is an important contributor to the national aggregate. There also seem to be at least two other stories that have not been well told: the story of rural areas in the

Figure 8. Hierarchical regional settlement matrices for infant mortality, 1850s to 1900s. IMR = infant mortality rate.

<!-- image -->

Table 3. Infant mortality (IM) change for selected cells from the hierarchical regional settlement matrix, 1850s to 1900s

| a Buffer   | b Urbanity   | c IM change (%)   | d IM change (%) compared to national   |
|------------|--------------|-------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Core       | City         | 10 . 2            | - 6 . 5                                |
| Core       | Town         | 30 . 9            | 14 . 2                                 |
| Core       | Rural        | 30 . 1            | 13 . 3                                 |
| Midlands   | City         | 8 . 2             | - 8 . 5                                |
| Midlands   | Town         | 19 . 7            | 3 . 0                                  |
| Midlands   | Rural        | 35 . 6            | 18 . 9                                 |
| Periphery  | City 1       | 19 . 6            | 2 . 9                                  |
| Periphery  | City 2       | 18 . 7            | 1 . 9                                  |
| Periphery  | Town         | 3 . 1             | - 13 . 6                               |
| Periphery  | Rural        | 7 . 0             | - 9 . 7                                |

Note: The changes in column c are declines shown as percentages of the 1850s rate. Column d compares this to the national decline of 16.74 percent, so negative values indicate places that are lagging behind the national aggregate.

country's core, which started to decline early and showed some of the biggest declines, and the story of the rural periphery, which, by contrast, saw some of the smallest improvements.

## Exploring Change Using Areal Interpolation

In the preceding analysis, arbitrary divisions were imposed between urban and rural and core and periphery to show that the stories of infant mortality decline were more complex than a national aggregate pattern driven by the urban experience. In this section, district-level data are used to further explore these divisions. As described earlier in the article, boundary changes have seriously undermined the utility of zone-based statistics such as the ones used here, as they make it impossible to compare data from one decade directly with data from the next. GIS allows data to be interpolated from

Figure 9. Time series graphs of cells from the hierarchical regional settlement matrix. (A) Core city, urban, and rural. (B) Midlands city, town, and rural. (C) Peripheral cities (two definitions), town and rural. See Figure 7 for descriptions of cells.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

a variety of sets of administrative units onto a single set of target units. This is done using a process termed 'areal interpolation.' The GIS enables this through the use of an overlay operation that calculates the degree of intersection between a set of source units, say the 1861 districts, and a set of target units, such as those for 1911. In its simplest form, known as 'areal weighting,' data for a variable y whose values for a source unit ys are known can be estimated for the target units based on the assumption that the data are evenly distributed across the source units. This uses the formula:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where As is the area of the source district, Ast is the area of the zone of intersection between the source and target units, and ˆ yt is the estimated value of the variable for the target zone (Goodchild and Lam 1980).

Areal weighting is easy to implement but is a very poor method of interpolation as the assumption of even population distribution across administrative units is rarely valid in human geography. A variety of au- thors have produced strategies to improve on this assumption by using ancillary data from other sources (see, for example, Langford, Maguire, and Unwin 1991; Flowerdew and Green 1994; Gregory 2002b; Norman, Rees, and Boyle 2003; Reibel and Bufalino 2005). Whatevertechniqueisused, however, the resulting data will inevitably be estimates, and these estimates will contain error. Gregory and Ell (2005, 2006) describe techniques to interpolate long series of British vital registration and census data in a way that not only allows consistent time-series to be produced with minimal error, but also allows individual data values that are suspected of containing errors to be identified. This opens up significant new potential as we can now explore time-series for individual administrative units with the impact of boundary changes removed. To implement this all of the data have been interpolated onto 1911 registration districts, the target districts. This enables us to create consistent time-series of IMRs for each target district.

This new data set enables us to explore which areas improved earliest and the most. Woods, Watterson, and Woodward (1988, 1989) claim that urban areas had the

Figure 10. The relationship between population density and change in infant mortality rates (IMRs), 1850s to 1900s. A change of 100.0 shows a district had the same value in the 1900s as it had in the 1850s. Changes of less than 100 indicate an improvement. Population densities for 1881 (in persons per km 2 ) are used to give a midpoint in the analysis.

<!-- image -->

Table 4. Infant deaths in Leighton Buzzard target district, 1851-1911

|                     | a IMR   | b Births   | c Actual deaths   | d Expected deaths   | e Deaths averted   |
|---------------------|---------|------------|-------------------|---------------------|--------------------|
| 1850s               | 160 . 6 | 6 , 701    | 1 , 076           |                     |                    |
| 1860s               | 148 . 6 | 6 , 870    | 1 , 021           | 1 , 104             | 83                 |
| 1870s               | 132 . 0 | 6 , 960    | 919               | 1 , 118             | 199                |
| 1880s               | 120 . 7 | 6 , 184    | 747               | 993                 | 247                |
| 1890s               | 126 . 6 | 4 , 762    | 603               | 765                 | 162                |
| 1900s               | 82 . 9  | 4 , 104    | 340               | 659                 | 319                |
| Total (1860s-1900s) |         | 28 , 880   | 3 , 630           | 4 , 639             | 1 , 010            |

Note: Leighton Buzzard target district is the registration district of Leighton Buzzard as defined in 1911. Columns a through c show the infant mortality rates (IMRs) and the numbers of births and infant deaths, respectively. Column d shows the number of infant deaths that would have been expected if the IMR had remained at its 1850s level of 160.64 given the numbers of births shown in column b. Column e gives the difference between the expected number of infant deaths and the actual number and is thus an estimate of how many deaths were averted in each decade by the decline in IMRs.

highest rates and steepest declines, whereas Lee (1991) claims that areas with low rates started to decline before those with high rates. Figure 10 shows little evidence to support the claim that urban areas had the biggest decline. There is actually weak evidence that districts with the lowest densities tended to actually get worse over the period; however, for areas that improved, there is little evidence of any relationship with population density. Figure 11 contradicts Lee's assertion that areas with low rates in the 1850s declined the most. In fact, areas with the lowest rates in the 1850s, below around 90 deaths per 1,000 births, usually got worse over the ensuing fifty years. For areas with rates above about 100, however, there is little evidence of any relationship between the rate in the 1850s and their subsequent change.

Figure 12 explores the core-periphery divide by comparing the relationship between change in infant mortality and distance from London. Here a relationship is apparent, and it supports the evidence given earlier. Within London there is a wide range of values. Beyond London, near areas show the biggest improvements, whereas those furthest away improve the least or get worse. This can be illustrated by the fact that of the areas in which IMRs were halved, the furthest from London is only 154 km away. By contrast, the districts that got worse are, with only one exception, all either in London or more than 200 km from it.

Figure 11. The relationship between infant mortality rates (IMRs) in the 1850s and their change until the 1900s. A change of 100.0 shows a district had the same value in the 1900s as it had in the 1850s. Changes of less than 100 indicate improvements.

<!-- image -->

Figure 12. The relationship between distance from London and change in infant mortality rates (IMRs), 1850s to 1900s. A change of 100.0 shows a district had the same value in the 1900s as it had in the 1850s. Changes of less than 100 indicate improvements. Distances are measured in kilometers from Trafalgar Square to the centroid of the target district.

<!-- image -->

There are two major problems with the preceding analyses: Each district is given equal weighting regardless of population, and they only compare the rates in the 1850s and 1900s with no account of the intervening period. Table 4 illustrates an approach that avoids both of these problems. It looks at the target district of Leighton Buzzard, one of the rural southern districts that showed major improvements. In the 1850s it had an IMR of 160.6, which was halved by the 1900s to 82.9. This is useful information in itself, as we can be confident that this is a real decline rather than a function of changing administrative boundaries. Knowing this allows us to ask what would have happened if this decline had not occurred. Columns b and c give the actual numbers of births and infant deaths. The number of births can be used to calculate the number of infants who would have died had the IMR remained at its 1850s level, the expected number of deaths shown in column d. Subtracting the actual number of infant deaths from this gives the numbers of deaths averted by the decline, shown in column e. This shows that in the five decades after the 1850s in Leighton Buzzard alone, 1,010 infant deaths were averted by infant mortality decline. This means that in this target district the actual number of infant deaths was 22 percent lower than would have been expected had the mortality rate not declined from its 1850s rate.

In Figure 13 these patterns are mapped for England and Wales. Figure 13A shows the total numbers of deaths averted. The striking thing about the pattern is that the districts where both the highest and lowest numbers of deaths were averted are in urban areas. The median urban class of districts in the decile where the most deaths have been averted is 5, a midranking town, and for those where the least number of deaths have been averted it is 7, big cities, perhaps suggesting that the larger urban areas struggled to cope with the difficulties of rapid urbanization more than the smaller ones. No districts in either decile are in classes less than 4, so no rural districts are included as either areas that have improved dramatically or have dramatically failed to improve. This suggests that the focus on urban explanations of infant mortality decline has more justification than has previously been indicated in this article. Figure 13B, however, shows deaths averted as a percentage of the numbers that would have occurred

Table 5. Infant mortality rates (IMRs) for seven classes of target district as defined by k means clustering. The class's IMR improvement from the 1850s to the 1900s (as a percentage and compared to the national improvement) is also given, along with the number of districts and that percentage of the national population in each class

|                                  |                                  |   Class number | Class number   | Class number   | Class number   | Class number   | Class number   | Class number   |
|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|
|                                  |                                  |            1   | 2              | 3              | 4              | 5              | 6              | 7              |
| Infant mortality rate            | 1850s                            |          109.1 | 111 . 3        | 135 . 3        | 147 . 6        | 158 . 2        | 180 . 2        | 207 . 0        |
|                                  | 1860s                            |          103.5 | 114 . 5        | 128 . 2        | 144 . 1        | 160 . 9        | 177 . 7        | 207 . 3        |
|                                  | 1870s                            |           99.7 | 114 . 5        | 119 . 1        | 136 . 1        | 155 . 0        | 171 . 3        | 202 . 6        |
|                                  | 1880s                            |           93.7 | 111 . 4        | 106 . 0        | 126 . 0        | 146 . 6        | 163 . 9        | 198 . 1        |
|                                  | 1890s                            |           97.4 | 122 . 5        | 108 . 1        | 133 . 0        | 155 . 5        | 177 . 7        | 210 . 5        |
|                                  | 1900s                            |           81.7 | 105 . 7        | 87 . 1         | 109 . 0        | 127 . 6        | 153 . 1        | 171 . 2        |
| Improvement                      | %                                |           25.1 | 5 . 1          | 35 . 6         | 26 . 1         | 19 . 3         | 15 . 0         | 17 . 3         |
|                                  | To national                      |            8.3 | - 11 . 7       | 18 . 9         | 9 . 4          | 2 . 6          | - 1 . 7        | 0 . 6          |
| No. districts in each class      | No. districts in each class      |          129   | 76             | 129            | 140            | 79             | 52             | 6              |
| Population (% of national, 1911) | Population (% of national, 1911) |            6   | 7 . 1          | 7 . 7          | 22 . 2         | 26 . 6         | 23 . 5         | 2 . 9          |

Note: National aggregate improvement was 16.74 percent (negative values indicate classes that lag behind the national trend). Classes are ordered by 1850s infant mortality rate.

had the IMR not declined from its 1850s level. It is a completely different pattern. The median urbanity of both classes is 1, so these are concentrated in the most rural districts. The difference, however, is that those that have improved the most are almost exclusively in the core, whereas those that have failed to improve are almost exclusively peripheral and spread across the north of England, western Wales, and Cornwall in the

Figure 13. Deaths averted by infant mortality decline, 1861 to 1911. (A) Total deaths averted. (B) Deaths averted as a percentage of the numbers of deaths that would have been expected had infant mortality not declined. The legend uses population deciles based on 1911 populations.

<!-- image -->

Figure 14. Series graphs of infant mortality decline by class, 1850s to 1900s; 100.0 is the national rate for each decade. IMR = infant mortality rate.

<!-- image -->

southwest of England. This reinforces the argument that infant mortality decline was in fact primarily a rural phenomenon but that areas in the far periphery failed to replicate the improvements shown by rural areas in much of the rest of the country, particularly those near the core.

Afinal piece of analysis allows us to explore the different trajectories that different types of areas followed in more detail. A GIS layer in which each polygon has attribute data for a number of different dates can be regarded as similar to a satellite image in which a number of values are recorded for each pixel representing a different part of the spectral response. The challenge is to simplify this into meaningful classes. One way of doing this involves using k means clustering to allocate each target district to a class of districts with similar values. This is the same idea as applying an unsupervised classification to a satellite image, except that in this case we are classifying places according to their IMRs at different dates.

To do this, the data were subdivided into ten initial classes, of which three were dropped as exceptional. These contained a total of four districts with a total population of only 312,000, less than 1 percent of the national total. The remaining classes are summarized in Table 5 and Figure 14. The patterns that this shows are in broad agreement with the analyses shown in Figure 11: Areas with high IMRs in the 1850s show improvements at around the national aggregate of 16.74 percent; those with lower values have more complex patterns. The second lowest class has the smallest decline, lagging behind the national rate by 11.7 percentage points, and the third lowest class shows the biggest improvement, 18.9 percentage points above the national rate.

Figure 15 maps the different classes. For cartographic reasons two maps are used: The first shows the three classes with the lowest rates in the 1850s (classes 1 to 3); the second map shows those with average and high rates in the 1850s. The particularly interesting trend from these maps is the contrast between class 2, those with low values that lagged behind the national trend, andclasses 1 and 3, which both improved faster than the national rate. Class 2 is highly peripheral, concentrated in Wales, the West County, and the north, whereas the other two classes are predominantly in the south of England. Class 3, the higher rates that improve the most, tends to be north of London, and class 1, which

<!-- image -->

A.Clusters 1to3

B.Clusters4to7

Figure 15. Maps of infant mortality decline by class, 1850s to 1900s. (A) Classes 1 to 3, clusters with the lowest rates in the 1850s. (B) Classes 4 to 7, average and high rates in the 1850s. The legend shows the class numbers, the infant mortality rates in the 1850s and 1900s indexed to the national rate (100.0 for each decade), and the decline from the 1850s to the 1900s expressed in percentage points above the national decline.

started lower but improved less, is primarily south of London. Class 4, which started average and showed fairly large improvements, is concentrated in the east and north Midlands, whereas the other three classes, all of which improved at about the same rate as the national aggregate, are mainly urban.

Again, this lends support to the 'urban story' in that urban areas show a similar trend to the national aggregate except that they have generally higher rates. Again, however, it confirms that rural areas behaved in a way that is markedly different to this. In general, they started lower, declined earlier, and declined further than urban areas. The exception to this is that rural areas in the north and west of the country which, although they started with low rates, showed the least improvement of any type of area.

## Conclusions

By using a comprehensive GIS database and a variety of approaches to analyzing spatio-temporal change, this article has been able to offer new insights into the patterns of infant mortality decline from the 1850s to the

1900s. The work confirms the basic snapshot pattern: Urban areas had high rates and rural areas had lower ones. Where the article has been able to offer significant new insights is in its exploration of how the patterns changed over time. We have shown that there is much to support the well-established urban story. Urban areas did indeed have high rates, they generally started to decline in the 1870s or 1880s, although there is variation within this, and their pattern largely mirrored that of the national aggregate. What we have been able to refute is that urban areas showed the biggest improvements; they did not. Their improvements were around the same as the national aggregate; thus, urban areas started with some of the highest rates in the country, improved noticeably over the ensuing five decades, but still finished with some of the highest rates. As urban areas contained around half of the country's population, this is an important story, but it is not the only one.

The change in IMRs in rural areas has been largely neglected and this has led to a lacuna in our understanding of infant mortality decline. It is clear that over much of the countryside, infant mortality decline started well

before the 1870s. Not only did these rural areas lead the way, they also showed the biggest decline. The pattern is not, however, entirely simple. The areas that showed the biggest declines were not necessarily those that started with the lowest rates, but were concentrated in the south of England, mainly to the north of London. Thebiggest exception, however, is that rural areas in the periphery of the country, the far north of England, west Wales, and the West Country, had a totally different experience than their more southern and eastern counterparts. Although these areas had low rates in the 1850s, they failed to improve as much as urban areas, let alone as much as rural areas in southern and eastern regions.

This means that to understand the functioning of the national aggregate, we must understand at least three stories: the urban story of high rates that start to decline in the 1870s and 1880s, the rural-core story of much larger declines starting much earlier, and the rural-periphery story of the areas that lagged behind the others. Within these there will clearly be many variations, but explaining these three patterns would mark a major step forward in our understanding of this period.

The conventional explanation for the urban story is that public health reforms drove the improvements. This remains believable. The mistake is to assume that this is also the case for the national aggregate. As rates across many rural areas started to decline well before the public health reforms of the 1870s and 1880s, clearly this explanation breaks down. Some other factor, or set of factors, must have been responsible for decline in these areas. Whether this was due to agricultural improvements, fertility decline, changes in disease patterns, or some other factor remains speculative at this point. A particularly intriguing question is why this factor failed to take hold in the periphery when it was so effective in much of the rest of the countryside? One might speculate that this was due to the prevalence of upland hill farming in the periphery as opposed to more intensive forms of agriculture in much of the rest of the country. The agrarian crises resulting from the arrival of cheap grain from the United States that lasted from the 1870s to the 1890s would seem to argue against this.

What seems clear is that an underlying process or set of processes started to drive infant mortality down far earlier and far more effectively than had previously been supposed. Urban areas, with their unique set of problems, did not follow this trend, requiring additional measures in the form of public health interventions. Peripheral rural areas also failed to improve. The key question is, of course, what was the underlying process or set of processes? Answering this remains problem- atic. Although we are lucky to have good data on vital statistics over time and space, as discussed earlier, data on cause of death are highly problematic, and there are few data sets with much to offer in terms of explanation. It seems, therefore, that quantitative GIS approaches, such as the one given here, may not be the way to proceed. A more productive approach is likely to involve the use of detailed local-level case studies that explore as much information as it is possible to gather about a few places. The traditional difficulty with this approach is that it is not easy to say how representative such studies are. At this point, the descriptive GIS work comes back in as it allows us to place detailed local case studies into the larger subnational stories identified here. In this way we will be able to identify the different ways in which different types of areas have contributed to the national aggregate story.

This article has focused on a single theme, infant mortality, using six decennial time periods. Using a GIS database and analytic techniques based on modern computing power it has been able to generate new insights into a subject that has been studied for more than 100 years. It should be clear that the approaches used could be applied to any topic for which there is suitable data, preferably using more temporal detail for longer time periods. By coming up to the present day we have the potential to ask this question: By what routes did we reach the situations that we are in today? Only by doing such work can we begin to justify the large investments in databases such as the GBHGIS. Doing this effectively still requires further methodological development, particularly in the field of spatio-temporal analysis. Nevertheless, this article demonstrates that national historical GISs do have the potential to allow us to gain new insights into the complex and changing local geographies that make up the national aggregate pattern. By exploring these patterns in detail we will be able to test where and when orthodox explanations of the relationships between demographic and socioeconomic behavior fit the observed patterns of change. Where they do not, new explanations will have to be developed, which will require more traditional scholarship to be integrated with the GIS approaches used here.

## Acknowledgments

The research reported on in this article was conducted as part of an Early Career Fellowship from the Leverhulme Trust (Ref: ECF/40115). Thanks to Dr. Graham Mooney (Johns Hopkins University) and Professor David Martin (University of Southampton)

for their advice on parts of this article. Much of the data used are from the Great Britain Historical GIS (http://www.gbhgis.org). Some of the cause-of-death data were derived from transcriptions done by Professor R. Woods (University of Liverpool). Many of the color schemes used for the maps in this article were taken from www.ColorBrewer.org by Cynthia A. Brewer (Geography, Pennsylvania State University).

## References

- Baker, A. R. H. 2003. Geography and history: Bridging the divide. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- Baker, A. R. H., and M. Billinge, ed. 2004. Geographies of England: The North-South divide, material and imagined. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- Fleming, R., and A. Lowerre. 2004. MacDomesday book. Past and Present 184:209-32.
- Flowerdew, R. F., and M. Green. 1994. Areal interpolation and types of data. In Spatial analysis and GIS, ed. A. S. Fotheringham and P. A. Rogerson, 121-45. London: Taylor &amp; Francis.
- Fotheringham, A. S., and D. Wong. 1991. The modifiable areal unit problem in multi-variant statistical analysis. Environment and Planning A 23:1025-44.
- Goodchild, M. F., and N. S.-N. Lam. 1980. Areal interpolation: A variant of the traditional spatial problem. GeoProcessing 1:297-312.
- Gregory, I. N. 2001. A historical GIS for England &amp; Wales: A framework for reconstructing past geographies and analysing long-term change. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of London.
- ---. 2002a. Time variant databases of changing historical administrative boundaries: A European comparison. Transactions in GIS 6:161-78.
- ---. 2002b. The accuracy of areal interpolation techniques: Standardising 19th and 20th century census data to allow long-term comparisons. Computers Environment and Urban Systems 26:293-314.
- ---. 2005. The Great Britain Historical GIS. Historical Geography 33:132-34.
- Gregory, I. N., C. Bennett, V. L. Gilham, and H. R. Southall. 2002. The Great Britain Historical GIS: From maps to changing human geography. The Cartographic Journal 39:37-49.
- Gregory, I. N., and P. S. Ell. 2005. Breaking the boundaries: Integrating 200 years of the Census using GIS. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 168:41937.
- ---. 2006. Error sensitive historical GIS: Identifying areal interpolation errors in time-series data. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 20:13552.
- ---. 2007. Historical GIS: Techniques, methodologies and scholarship. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- Gregory, I. N., and R. G. Healey. 2007. Historical GIS: Structuring, mapping and analysing geographies of the past. Progress in Human Geography 31:639-54.
- Hasluck, E. 1936. Local government in England. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- Holdsworth, D. W. 2002. Historical geography: The ancients and the moderns-Generational vitality. Progress in Human Geography 26:671-78.
- ---. 2003. Historical geography: New ways of imaging and seeing the past. Progress in Human Geography 27:486-93.
- Knowles, A. K. 2000. Historical GIS: The spatial turn in social science history. Social Science History 24:451-70.
- ---.2005a. Emerging trends in historical GIS. Historical Geography 33:7-13.
- ---, ed. 2005b. Reports on national historical GIS projects. Historical Geography 33:293-314.
- Langford, M., D. Maguire, and D. J. Unwin. 1991. The areal interpolation problem: Estimating population using remote sensing in a GIS framework. In Handling geographical information: Methodology and potential applications, ed. I. Masser and M. Blakemore, 55-77. Harlow, U.K.: Longman.
- Lee, C. H. 1991. Regional inequalities in infant mortality in Britain, 1861-1971: Patterns and hypotheses. Population Studies 45:55-65.
- Martin, D. 1989. Mapping population data from zone centroid locations. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 14:90-97.
- ---.1996a. An assessment of surface and zonal models of population. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 10:973-89.
- ---. 1996b. Depicting changing distributions through surface estimations. In Spatial analysis: Modeling in a GIS environment, ed. P. Longley and M. Batty, 105-22. Cambridge, U.K.: GeoInformation International.
- Massey, D. 1999. Space-time, 'science' and the relationship between physical geography and human geography. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers: New Series 24:261-76.
- ---.2005. For space. London: Sage.
- Mohan, J., ed. 1999. A United Kingdom? Economic, social and political geographies. London: Arnold.
- Nissel, M. 1987. People count: A history of the General Register Office. London: HMSO.
- Norman, P., P. Rees, and P. Boyle. 2003. Achieving data compatibility over space and time: Creating consistent geographical zones. International Journal of Population Geography 9:365-86.
- Office for National Statistics. 2007. National Statistics Online. http://www.statistics.gov.uk (last accessed 3 October 2007).
- Openshaw, S., and P. J. Taylor. 1979. A million or so correlation coefficients: Three experiments on the modifiable areal unit problem. In Statistical applications in the spatial sciences, ed. N. Wrigley, 127-44. London: Pion.
- Reibel, M., and M. E. Bufalino. 2005. Street-weighted interpolation techniques for demographic count estimation in incompatible zone systems. Environment and Planning A 37:127-39.
- Skinner, G. W., M. Henderson, and Y. Jianhua. 2000. China's fertility transition through regional space. Social Science History 24:613-52.
- Smith, D. 1989. North and South: Britain's economic, social and political divide. London: Penguin.

- Szreter, S. 1991. The GRO and the public health movement in Britain, 1837-1914. Social History of Medicine 4:43563.
- Teitelbaum, M. S. 1973. Birth under-registration in the constituent counties of England and Wales: 1841-1910. Population Studies 38:329-43.
- Williams, N., and C. Galley. 1995. Urban-rural differentials in infant mortality in Victorian England. Population Studies 49:401-20.
- Woods, R. I. 1997. Infant mortality in Britain: A survey of current knowledge on historical trends and variations. In Infant and child mortality in the past, ed. A. Bideau,
- B. Desjardins, and H. P. Brignoli, 74-88. Oxford, U.K.: Clarendon.
- Woods, R. I., P. A. Watterson, and J. H. Woodward. 1988. The causes of rapid infant mortality decline in England and Wales, 1861-1921. Part I. Population Studies 42:34366.
- ---.1989.Thecauses of rapid infant mortality decline in England and Wales, 1861-1921. Part II. Population Studies 43:113-32.
- Wrigley, E. A., and R. S. Schofield. 1981. The population history of England 1541-1871. London: Edward Arnold.

Correspondence: Digital Humanities, Furness College, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YG, U.K., e-mail: I.Gregory@lancaster.ac.uk.