<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rtpg20

## New Perspectives on Mapping Rural Settlements Using Google Hyperlinks for Appalachian Kentucky

Stanley D. Brunn

To cite this article: Stanley D. Brunn (2025) New Perspectives on Mapping Rural Settlements Using Google Hyperlinks for Appalachian Kentucky, The Professional Geographer, 77:3, 328-342, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2025.2468684

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2025.2468684

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 17 Mar 2025.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 79

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## New Perspectives on Mapping Rural Settlements Using Google Hyperlinks for Appalachian Kentucky

## Stanley D. Brunn

University of Kentucky, USA

Social scientists have studied rural settlements for the past sixty-plus years using data on population size and changes in retail service functions. Building on these interdisciplinary contributions, we explore new perspectives on rural settlements by creating a database of Google hyperlinks of communities and road networks in Appalachian Kentucky. When distinguishing features of the 396 communities and 338 roads in forty eastern Kentucky counties are mapped and analyzed, they reveal fresh insights into unevenness and diversity. Sharp differences exist between the northern and southern halves of the study area and places on and off major roads. The constructed database and methodology offer additional opportunities to study the spatial and temporal dynamics of rural settlements and networks in other regions. Key Words: Appalachia, digital gaps and maps, mapping, roads and places, rural diversity.

The motorist who follows the mountain parkway east of Lexington, Kentucky finds going easy if expensive, across the Bluegrass country until 100 miles after Lexington, where the parkway ends in a maze of valleys followed by winding roads. The one thing he cannot do is go straight. He has arrived in Appalachia.

-Rafferty (2002, 434)

Rural areas not connected to our emerging broadband network will suffer the same economic fate as many communities that were bypassed by the telephone network, the railroad or the interstate highway system.

-Parker (2000, 282)

The prospect is for a rural America marked by ever more diversity and inequality within and between places.

-Slack and Jensen (2020, 775)

Critical, reflexive, and place-based geography is well-equipped to offer discerning -and hopeful -research contributions to these struggles, to forge an expansive and dialogic intellectual space to collectively remember, recognize, envision, connect, and actualize abolitionist agrarian histories, geographies, and futures -in Kentucky and beyond.

-Graddy-Lovelace (2023, 1584)

S cholars and the public are accustomed to seeing maps of regions with common and familiar features, including political boundaries, major rivers, lakes, and large cities. Maps also show places and features that have a distinctive landscape or regional significance, such as national parks,

## ARTICLE HISTORY

Initial submission, May 2024; revised submission, January 2025; final acceptance, January 2025.

<!-- image -->

interstate highways, cultural heritage sites, or a major metropolitan area. Some distinct place features are associated with Appalachia, a region with distinctive physical features, but also economies and cultures different from surrounding areas. For many, Appalachia is associated with coal mining histories, Scots Irish traditions, scenic landscapes, rural depopulation, and deep poverty.

For some, the mental or cognitive map of Appalachia is a region of uniformity, but for others there are significant cultural and economic differences between what is considered Northern, Central, and Southern Appalachia. Both differences and similarities are evident when looking closely at population growth and decline, rural highways and interchanges, median age, income and education levels, urban and rural settlement patterns, major employment categories, religion preferences, voting patterns, and broadband access.

In looking at any region or subregion, it is useful to explore other perspectives and databases about a culture and economy. In this light, we constructed a database about a specific part of the Central Appalachian subregion to observe any significant or minor variations. The focus is eastern Kentucky or Appalachian Kentucky. Rather than using U.S. census data to examine demographic features, a digital database was created based on federal, state, and county roads, and all places (small and large) on the Kentucky State Highway Map and Google search engine hyperlink numbers, which were mapped, compared, and analyzed. The following section presents a conceptual framework based on previous research using Google hyperlinks in different contexts. Next, the study area is defined, followed by an analysis and maps of the major findings. A summary provides suggestions for subsequent research.

We are familiar with maps showing places, networks, and regions in absolute space; that is, major and minor roads as straight lines or with twists and turns, the longitude -latitude coordinates of small and large communities, community sizes indicated by symbols, and a scale to estimate the travel distance between places. These features are useful in examining places and roads in regional contexts, but they are less useful in showing the importance of a place in terms of travel time and virtual space. Although many places might appear close in physical distance on the map, the travel times between them could be long because some are on major roads and others on minor roads. What would be useful is to know something about the connections between places and roads in both digital and nondigital worlds; that is, where travel time between places might be more important than physical distance.

It is in the context of measuring a place ' s importance in ways other than population size and absolute location that we present innovative ways of looking at rural places, networks, and time -distance relations. These explorations do not eliminate or reduce the importance of previous studies but explore and map what those places and networks look like in a cyberworld context. In cyberworld maps, locational features (towns, hamlets, etc.) might be displayed differently. Travel direction is less important. For many individuals and places or communities of residence or work, the time to connect via the Internet (if that is even possible) overrides concerns about physical distances between places. On cybermaps, places might not appear in the same position as on a familiar highway map. It is important for scholars, businesses, government, and communities to explore what these new information and communication worlds might look like. These network maps would interest those who work and live in cyberworlds and communicate with family, friends, workplaces, businesses, and schools using social and visual media networks daily. This perspective is important in examining individuals and places in both cyberworlds and noncyberworlds at all scales as there remain vast areas of both worlds on all continents, in large and small countries and cities, and within cities that are not part of cyberworld economies, communities, and cultures.

Our major objective is to discuss rural places and networks and map these emerging cyber- and digital worlds in a section of a larger region. The subregion is the mountainous eastern portion of Kentucky, which is part of a larger cultural and physical region, Appalachia, that stretches from southern New York to central Mississippi and includes parts of eleven other states (most of Pennsylvania; all of West Virginia; southeastern Ohio; eastern Kentucky and Tennessee; western Maryland, Virginia, and South

Carolina; and northern Georgia and Alabama). It has several underlying common features including small towns and unincorporated communities, extractive economies (past and present, especially coal mining), rural and urban poverty, places long distances from major cities, prolonged population decline, high unemployment, lower educational levels than adjacent regions, acute health problems, deep heritage roots, and strong traditional religious and cultural values. Although the region is often associated with many similarities, scholars have identified differences in economies, culture, and wealth in Northern, Central, and Southern Appalachia.

## Literature Review

There is an extensive interdisciplinary literature on rural Appalachia that includes the pioneering geography volume by Raitz, Ulack, and Leinbach (1984), the maps and analysis by the Appalachian Regional Commission (2020), and the same by Pollard and Jacobson (2019b). A number of recognized writers have added to the knowledge base about places and place making in rural Kentucky. These include Berry (2010) and hooks (2008). Three familiar or overriding themes have been used by these and other scholars to explore rural areas. The first examines declining populations; changing economic functions; and church, hospital, and school closings in small towns and communities. These have been the focus of previous rural research by many rural sociologists, economists, and geographers in the past half-century. Examples are Chisholm (1962), Pacione (1984), Gilg (1985), Philo (1992), Cloke (1997), Hart (1975, 1998), and Woods (2005). The second group focuses on communities. These studies focus on specific communities in the region or a specific subregion (e.g., southeast Ohio and eastern Kentucky) as well as distinct features of towns and roads (Johnson 2006). A third theme has looked at cognitive maps related to Appalachia (Raitz, Ulack, and Leinbach 1984, 2019; Raitz and Ulack 1981). These three knowledge bases intersect to form the conceptual framework for this study, namely cyberspace measures based on the volume of hyperlinks associated with communities and towns, mapping hyperlink volumes, and measuring linkages between places. Although there are many previous studies in each category, representative samples were selected to familiarize readers with what has been studied and to inspire future research.

## Small Towns and Places

These settlements have been a major focus of rural and urban geographers, sociologists, economists, and anthropologists for more than seventy years. They include the classical works by Davis (1938) on

Michigan, Trewartha (1943) and Brush (1953) on Wisconsin hamlets, and McIntosh (1959) on sidetracked villages in central Illinois. These were followed by many social scientists exploring villages and towns within central place theory. Research continued with case studies on the Midwest (Daniels and Lapping 1987; Jacobson and Albertson 1987; Paradis 2000), and coal mining towns in Appalachia (Marsh 1987).

Three additional features emerged in studying towns and rural landscapes in recent decades. These include abandonment, ghost towns, and ' reading ' rural landscapes (i.e., interpreting and understanding the culture of the area and what circumstances might have caused it to change). Early studies were on lost towns and roads (Humphreys 1961; Greenberg, Popper, and West 1990; Fox 1993), mining in California (Reeves and Gibson 1974; DeLyser 1999), and the U.S. West (Prideaux and Timothy 2010). Other studies dealt with derelict landscapes (Jakle and Wilson 1992), towns bypassed by highways (Rogers and Marshment 2000), and digital divides (Parker 2000; Donnermeyer and Hollifield 2011; Reddick et al. 2020). How to visually ' read ' changes in rural features and road landscapes was another focus (Lewis 1976; Meinig and Jackson 1979; Jackson 1980, 1997; Schroeder 1989; Clay 1994; Brouws 1997; Jakle and Scully 2011; Wyckoff 2014; Acheson and McWhorter 2020; Brew 2020; Keeling 2020; Praskievicz 2020; Relph 2020; Shobe 2020; Wetherholt and Vandeberg 2020). A recent study integrated these features into a typology about changes in rural areas (Holcomb, Frederic, and Brunn 2020).

## Rural Appalachia

There are many studies about Appalachia as a region and specific subregions. These include rural livelihoods and settlements and extractive economies as backbones of many communities. These contributions include detailed studies on historical and contemporary places and landscapes; how to read the Appalachian landscapes (Towers 2006); the historical and contemporary importance of roads and highways (Widner 1990; Raitz 1996, 2010a, 2010b; Owens 2000; Eller 2008; Hofstra and Raitz 2010a, 2010b; Raitz and O ' Malley 2012); regional identities, isolation, and variations (Foster 1980; Raitz and Ulack 1981; Ulack and Raitz 1981; Bigham 1998; Keefe 1994; Gottlieb 2001; Sarnoff 2003; Palumbo 2021); mobility (Barcus and Brunn 2010); migration (Feather 1998; Adams 2002; Straw and Blethen 2004); family connections (White 1987; Partridge and Betz 2013); and rediscovering a rural community (Towers 2010; Coggeshall 2018).

## Cyberspace Worlds

Another regional perspective is gained by looking at electronic data entries or hyperlinks about a place or a road. Hyperlinks serve as a barometer about the importance of a specific feature, such as a town or road. Previous urban hyperlink research measuring the linkages of major world cities and European capitals (Brunn et al. 2010; Devriendt et al. 2011; Brunn 2016) suggests they could be applied to a rural region such as Appalachia.

In what follows, I address five issues: (1) the number or volume of hyperlinks for counties, places, and roads in a region; (2) the hyperlinks for places on the State Highway Map and unincorporated places listed in Wikipedia and not on the state map; (3) the distance and travel time between each place in a county and its county seat; (4) places on and off a projected broadband backbone; and (5) what the data and maps reveal about roads, places, and networks in eastern Kentucky -regional homogeneity or variations.

## Study Area, Methodology, and Databases

Study Area

The study area borders the Ohio River in the north, the West Virginia and Virginia state boundaries in the east, and the Tennessee border in the south. Most of the region is east of Interstate 75, which runs north -south (Figure 1). The counties, varying in size and shape, are defined by rivers and creeks, mountain ridges, and pioneer trails. The total number of roads in the forty counties on the Kentucky highway map (Drake 2018 -2019) is 338. They are federal highways, including interstates and parkways traversing a half-dozen counties, two-digit state highways, and three- and four-digit local roads. The threeand four-digit roads are less traveled. The official map does not show all county and local roads. The counties with the most numbered roads on the map are Pike (twenty-one), followed by Harlan, Laurel, and Letcher (twelve each), Knox and Perry (eleven each), and Morgan, Rowan, and Fleming (ten each). Counties with the fewest roads are Estill, Lawrence, Lee, McCreary, Martin, Nicholas, and Robertson (five each) and Owsley County (only three). If all local roads were included on the official map, it would be nearly impossible to read.

There are no large cities in the region, but Cincinnati, Ohio; Lexington, Kentucky; Knoxville, Tennessee; and Huntington, West Virginia are nearby. I-75 runs north -south and I-64 runs east -west. The largest communities are Winchester, Maysville, and London. Two parkways (Mountain Parkway and Hal Rogers Parkway) run east -west in the southern half of the study area. Federal and state

Parkway

Figure 1 Kentucky study area: County names and locations of county seats and major roads.

<!-- image -->

roads link some counties, but other counties are not connected to any major state or federal road. Some are one or two counties distant. Most county seats are near the center of each county and within a day ' s drive for most county residents. Pike, Floyd, Perry, Lawrence, and McCreary Counties have county seats in noncentral locations.

## Methodology

One basic objective is to measure and map distinctive features of places and networks in these counties in a cyberspace context to discern if there are any significant county differences between large and small places and roads traversing them.

Traditionally, scholars use U.S. census data on county populations, sizes of places within a county, and population changes. These data are less useful in learning about the economic, social, or political importance of a place or a road or network, and travel times between places in a county. A state highway map is useful in identifying the locations of places, the physical distances between them, and the names and numbers of major roads running through them. Google data, or hyperlinks, are useful in identifying the importance of a specific place, comparing places, and learning about the travel times between them. Digital information can be obtained about both major and minor roads and places within a county.

## Databases

Google data are obtained by entering a key word or words in the search box at the top of the computer screen (accessed 20 -28 March 2022 and 18 May -3 June 2022). The number identifies the number of entries or hyperlinks in the database. For example, one can enter Morehead, Kentucky; the number of a highway, such as Interstate 64 in Montgomery County; or the number of a highway running through a county, such as Highway 9 in Mason County. Each hyperlink page briefly describes features about the individual entry, such as some historical background, the business climate, agricultural and industrial data, tourist and leisure activities, and major news stories. Entries are ranked by an industry formula. The hyperlinks for a specific place can be compared with other places in the same county or another county. The same procedure can be used for roads. Hyperlink data were gathered for each place and each road in each county. Also, one can enter two places into the Google search engine, such as the county seat and another place in the county (e.g., Pikeville; Pike County, Kentucky þ Stopover; Pike County, Kentucky). The number of hyperlinks for the pair of entries, the roads linking those places, the travel time between them, and a small horizontal map showing the places in the search bar and the road linking them are all displayed on the screen. Time -distance data were collected for all places in a county to its county seat.

## Results

The constructed database included county population sizes, county seat populations, the hyperlink volumes of county seats, and the other communities within a county. For unincorporated communities, we used the U.S. Census and Wikipedia.

## County Populations

The total population of all forty counties is about 819,988. The three largest are Laurel (61,631), Pike (58,595), and Boyd (47,361). The next five range are between 30,000 and 37,000: Whitley (36,252), Clark (36,152), Floyd (35,931), Greenup (35,359), and Knox (31,288); they have 341,569 residents or 42 percent of the region ' s population -like Lexington (320,154). At the other extreme are ten counties, mostly in southern Kentucky. They have fewer than 12,000 residents each for a total of only 71,754. Owsley and Robertson are the smallest counties with 4,051 and 2,193, residents, respectively.

## County Seat Populations and Hyperlinks

The forty county seats together had a population of 123,000. The largest was Winchester in Clark

County with 18,368. It borders Lexington (Fayette County) and has 15 percent of the region ' s county seat population. Clark County is on both I-64 and the Mountain Parkway. The next two largest county seats were Maysville in Mason County (9,011) and London in Laurel County (7,993). Altogether, eight seats had more than 5,000 population; they had 66,523 or 54 percent of the study area ' s county seat population. Ten seats had a population of fewer than 1,000: Campton in Wolfe County (441), Hyden in Leslie County (365), Mt. Olivet in Robertson County (299), and Booneville in Owsley County (162) had the fewest. These numbers reflect the region ' s high degree of ' ruralness. '

The total number of hyperlinks for the forty county seats was 103 million. The county seats are usually the largest community and have the most hyperlinks. County seats have government offices and a school system along with banks, grocery stores, churches, gas stations, and perhaps other goods and services. It is the major economic node. The seat with the most hyperlinks was Winchester in Clark County. It had 16.9 million hyperlinks, which is more than double the second and third leading county seats, Greenup in Greenup County and Grayson in Carter County (each with 6.9 million hyperlinks). The other county seats in the top ten in ranking were West Liberty (Morgan County), Morehead (Rowan), Mt. Sterling (Montgomery), Louisa (Lawrence), London (Laurel), Harlan (Harlan), and Sandy Hook (Elliott). These ten had 59 million hyperlinks or 57 percent of all county seat hyperlinks. In the middle of the county seat rankings were Prestonsburg (Floyd County), Brooksville (Bracken), Carlisle (Nicholas), and Paintsville (Johnson), each with 1.1 to 1.3 million hyperlinks. Eight county seats had fewer than 500,000 hyperlinks each: Owingsville (Bath County) with 484,000; Beattyville (Lee) with 465,000; Jackson (Breathitt) with 409,000; Salyersville (Magoffin) with 396,000; Vanceburg (Lewis) with 346,000; Frenchburg (Menifee) with 269,000; Irvine (Estill) with only 185,000; and Williamsburg (Whitley) with 50,000. Most of the smallest county seats were in the southern half of the region; together they had 2.5 percent of all seat hyperlinks.

## Number of Communities in Each County

The number varied sharply with most in coal mining counties in the southeast. The leader was Pike County (thirty communities). Others were mostly in the same area: Harlan (twenty-one); Floyd (seventeen); Perry (sixteen); Greenup (fifteen); Lewis (fourteen); Bell, Fleming, McCreary, and Morgan (thirteen each); and Knox and Leslie (twelve; Figure 2A). The total number of hyperlinks for all 396 places on the State Highway Map was 419 million; major differences existed (Figure 2B). The ten

Figure 2 (A) Number of communities in each county; (B) number of hyperlinks of places in each county. Data from Kentucky State Highway Map and Google Scholar.

<!-- image -->

counties with the most hyperlinks (20 million1 -44 million) were Morgan, Floyd, Clay, Martin, Perry, Johnson, Pike, Bell, Carter, and Jackson. Most had lengthy histories in coal mining. Together these ten counties had 267 million place hyperlinks or 64 percent of the total. The combined total of the next ten leading counties had 112 million hyperlinks or 27 percent of the total. Six counties had fewer than 1 million each: Bracken, Letcher, Breathitt, Estill, Robertson, and Owsley. Robertson had 240,000 and Owsley 106,000.

## Unincorporated Places

These places do not have a governing or official administrative structure but are important as places of residence for rural populations. They are important not only because of their numbers and density in some parts of Appalachian Kentucky, but their importance in the region ' s long-standing culture and economic heritage. The State Highway Map only shows some unincorporated places: 228 of the 396 total. Pike County has thirty communities, of which seventeen are unincorporated. Harlan County has twenty-one communities, of which nine are unincorporated. At the other extreme are counties with very few incorporated places: In Breathitt County eight of the ten places are unincorporated, in Fleming County seven of thirteen, and in Clay County nine of ten. The number on the State Highway Map ranged from four for Lee and Owsley Counties to twenty-four for Pike County (Figure 3A). Eleven counties had between ten and fourteen and eight counties had five or six. According to the Kentucky Atlas and Gazetteer , Pike and Boyd Counties were the leaders (forty communities each), followed by Floyd (thirty-eight); Morgan and Whitley (thirty-four); Breathitt, Harlan, and Knox (thirty-two); and Letcher (thirty). Wikipedia (2022) listed 932 unincorporated places in the region (Figure 3B). Most were former coal mining communities. Perry County (seventy-three), Pike (seventyone), Harlan (sixty-two), Floyd (forty-six), Letcher (forty-three), and Bell and Johnson (forty-two each) were the leaders. Ten counties had ten or fewer unincorporated places: Many are close together, on minor county roads, and long distances (in time and miles) from the county seats.

## Roads

## County Roads

The road and highway network is also very diverse. Many counties had communities on major and minor roads. Some counties are large in size, whereas others are very small. In addition to the state roads, two interstate highways and two parkways traverse the region (see Figure 1). I-75 runs north -south through Laurel and Whitley Counties and I-64 runs basically east -west through Clark, Montgomery, Bath, Rowan, Carter, and Boyd Counties. The Mountain Parkway runs through Clark, Powell, Wolfe, and Magoffin Counties and the Hal Rogers Parkway through Laurel, Clay, Leslie, and Perry Counties. There are twenty-four one-digit roads in fourteen counties, eighty-five two-digit roads in thirty-eight counties, 150 threedigit roads in forty counties, and forty-eight fourdigit roads in twenty-four counties. Altogether there are 324 roads on the State Highway Map with the

Figure 3 Number of unincorporated places according to (A) Kentucky State Highway Map and (B) Wikipedia.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4 Number of roads in each county according to (A) Kentucky State Highway Map and (B) Kentucky Atlas and Gazetteer .

<!-- image -->

most in these counties: Pike (twenty-one); Carter and Letcher (twelve); Harlan and Perry (eleven); and Fleming, Knott, Morgan, and Rowan (ten; Figure 4A). Those counties with five or fewer are Estill, Lawrence, Lee, McCreary, Martin, Nicholas, Robertson, and Owsley. There were also differences between the number of roads on the State Highway Map (Drake 2018 -2019) and the Kentucky Atlas and Gazetteer (Elbon 2010; Figure 4B).

There is also much variation in the importance of individual roads and the county hyperlink totals. The counties with the most road hyperlinks are along major roads in the northern half of the region and coal-producing counties bordering West Virginia. The total volume of road hyperlinks in the region is slightly more than 1.3 billion. Most are in Mason (175 million), Lewis (140 million), Martin (112 million), and Carter (95 million) Counties; these four accounted for 41 percent of all county road hyperlinks. The fewest are in McCreary and Magoffin (1.4 million each), Menifee (1.3 million), Letcher (1.2 million), Owsley (684,000), and Estill (440,000) Counties; their combined total (6.4 million hyperlinks) was less than 1 percent of the region ' s total.

Figure 5 Roads in a county with more than 10 million hyperlinks and fewer than 100,000 hyperlinks.

<!-- image -->

County Roads with Most and Fewest Hyperlinks Sharp contrasts in road hyperlinks are evident (Figure 5): Thirty-nine roads had more than 10 million hyperlinks each. These are in sixteen counties, with thirteen in the northern half of the study area. The total number of road hyperlinks was 720 million. Distinct clusters were highlighted in major coal-producing counties. The combined total of these thirty-nine roads was 815 million hyperlinks. The individual roads with the most hyperlinks were Highway 40 in Martin County (70 million), Highway 10 in Lewis County (49 million), Highway 19 in Mason County (41 million), Highway 3 in Martin County (34 million), Highway 1 in Lawrence County (32 million), Highway 23 (29 million) and Highway 40 (27 million) in Johnson

County, Highway 10 in Mason County (41 million), Highway 10 in Bracken County (26 million), and Highway 9 in Lewis County (24 million). Bracken, Lewis, and Mason Counties border the Ohio River; others are three-and four-digit roads in the southern half of the region.

In contrast, there were thirty-six county roads with fewer than 100,000 hyperlinks each. The leaders were in twelve counties: Letcher (eight roads), Breathitt (five), Martin (four), and McCreary and Magoffin (three each). Twelve of the thirty-six had 20,000 or fewer hyperlinks; together they had 1.45 million hyperlinks. The roads with the fewest hyperlinks were Highway 1693 in Menifee County (16,000), Highway 25W in Whitley County (16,000), Highway 476 in Breathitt County (14,000),

Figure 6 Time -distance maps from selected communities to their county seat. Examples of long distances and times are shown on the left and examples of short distances and times are given on the right. Data from Google search engine, 5 June 2022.

<!-- image -->

Figure 7 Longest (A) distances and (B) times of places to county seats.

<!-- image -->

Highway 1635 in Magoffin County (14,000), Highway 89 in Jackson County (12,000), Highway 1571 in Estill County (12,000), and Highway 11 in Lee County (10,000). Most of these counties were in the southern half of the region.

Examples of the distances of selected communities to a county seat are shown in Figure 6. Thirtynine communities were more than thirty minutes from their county seat (Figure 7). Over half are in Pike and Floyd Counties where the county seat is not a central location. Many are in the mountains and on less traveled county roads. The estimated travel time from Wheelwright to Prestonsburg in Floyd County is forty-four minutes and from Majestic and Stopover in eastern Pike County it takes fifty minutes to reach Pikeville. The communities with the longest travel time from the county seat are on three- and four-digit county roads.

## Broadband Internet

Not surprisingly, there are differences in the percentage of households with broadband Internet access. In a study that included maps of the 423 counties in the thirteen states in the Appalachian region, many between-state and within-state variations were evident (Pollard and Jacobson 2019a, 2019b). Whereas the percentage of households with broadband Internet in the United States was 78 percent, for counties in Appalachia it was 72 percent. In our study area, five counties had between 70 percent and 78 percent broadband access, nineteen counties had access levels between 60 percent and 69 percent, and fourteen counties had levels of 60 percent or less (Figure 8). Kentucky had the largest concentration of households in areas with less than 60 percent connected. Many live on three- and four-digit roads that are long distances from major state highways.

## Discussion

The primary purposes of this rural settlement study were three. The first was to construct a population and hyperlink database that measures the importance of communities and road networks in ways other than population size and road connections and to construct maps showing the importance of places, roads, and the distance and travel time between each place and its county seat. These data, when mapped, provided some new insights into places and networks. They reveal, when the road systems and communities are mapped and analyzed, that the region, which is too often considered homogeneous in rural contexts, is much more complex. Major differences emerged between the county seats (usually the largest settlement and with the most Google hyperlinks), places on and off major interstate and state highways, places nearby and distant in time connections to and from the county seat, and households with broadband access. A summary of these results for the study area is illustrated in Figure 9. It is a region with much diversity in road types (federal to local) and Google hyperlinks of places on and off major and minor roads.

Second, regional variations cannot be discerned simply by looking at the State Highway Map. Clear regional differences exist between the northern and southern halves of the region. The counties with the most hyperlinks (more than 10 million) are in the northern half, whereas those with less than 50,000 are mostly in rural southeastern Kentucky, where there are many more threeand four-digit roads.

Figure 8 Percentage of households with broadband Internet access. Data from American Community Survey, 2013 -2017.

<!-- image -->

The most traveled roads, or with the most hyperlinks, are in counties along I-64 in the northern half of the study area and along the Ohio River. The least traveled roads are mostly in former and active coal-producing counties in southeast Kentucky with similar economies and declining populations akin to adjacent counties in West Virginia, Virginia, and Tennessee. Many places are unincorporated. North -south regional differences also emerged when looking at distances and travel times from communities to their county seats.

The third major finding is that the rural geographies are much more complex than initially expected. Eastern Kentucky is a key subregion in Central Appalachia, but the results suggest that when focusing on analyzing new subregional data, variations are likely to appear. For example, the road hyperlink data for counties connected to an interstate or a major parkway were higher than counties one or two ' layers ' away. Some counties and communities are not only isolated from nearby cities but are also distant from county seats both in travel time and distance. In short, some places on major state and county roads are well connected whereas others are poorly connected. Many of the latter are unincorporated places on threeand four-digit roads. Significant variations also exist within individual counties.

## Conclusions

Having discovered regional variations in the demographics, communities, and road networks of Appalachian Kentucky, there remain additional studies that merit research. We identify five. First, the conceptual framework and methodology used could be extended to other areas of rural North America and beyond. For example, are there sharp differences in Appalachian Pennsylvania, Ohio, West Virginia, and North Carolina? Are there regional differences between the northern, central, and southern Great Plains or between coastal and interior New England? One could explore similar questions looking at rural areas elsewhere.

A second research theme would focus on impacts of places experiencing severe population loss. Population declines result in school district

Figure 9 Conceptual digital map of Appalachian counties (gray lines) showing Rural County, with a small county seat and two unincorporated communities and Less Rural County, with many businesses, fast-food establishments, a community hospital, multiple schools, and a few unincorporated communities. In comparison, Very Rural County has only a single school, a government center (courthouse) and a gas and grocery store -residents must travel to another county to access most services and travel is complicated by curvy roads and the Appalachian Mountains.

<!-- image -->

boundaries being redrawn and post offices, hospitals, churches, and law firms closing. Losses of these functions and services are evident in redrawing administrative boundaries across multiple counties with multicounty regional centers emerging as growth nodes.

A third topic relates to human welfare (health, education, security, recreation, and social services) and access to services in digital worlds, not only in daily life of work but where physical distance means less and closeness is measured in time to connect. These ' time/place shrinking worlds ' emerged clearly in COVID-19 worlds where ' virtual ' has been applied to work, leisure, health, happiness, worship, security, and friendships.

A fourth topic would explore the heritage and contemporary ' worlds ' beyond the roads and places themselves. These places are rich in both ' cited and silent ' worlds of racism, exploitation, and ' abolitionist agrarian geographies ' (GraddyLovelace 2023). In this research, we need to recognize the efforts of artists, novelists, and film producers.

A fifth perspective, related to the previous point, would ' read ' places and landscapes through a series of ' photographic traverses ' across eastern Kentucky or other rural regions. These ' appearance ' transects could photograph business districts and main streets or road intersections that are thriving and places where derelict and abandoned features are the norm. One might compare places experiencing visual decline for two or three decades with places of recent abandonment and decline. In a similar vein, one can compare major differences between large and small communities on major state and county roads with those having easy access to an interstate highway or parkway. Such a comparative visual analysis would identify whether there is more ' regional sameness ' in the outward appearances in recycled places or significant differences.

It is important to continue researching the intersections between rural and urban areas rather than treating them as separate and independent spheres (Ward and Brown 2009; Schwerdtner et al. 2015; MacKinnon et al. 2022). What we discovered in examining places, roads, and broadband access in rural Appalachia is that there are variations or degrees of ' rural renaissance ' and ' rural relict-ness ' on a continuum, with some places and roads strongly linked to selected places within the region and outside the region whereas other places and roads are almost ' museum ' or places of sameness. These ' degrees of renaissance ' merit additional onsite research by scholars in various fields. /H17039

## Disclosure Statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

## Literature Cited

- Acheson, G., and C. McWhorter. 2020. Reading the American cemetery. In Handbook of the changing world language map , ed. S. D. Brunn and R. Kehrein, 2846 -70. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International.
- Adams, N. 2002. Far Appalachia: Following the new river north . New York: Delta-Random House.
- Barcus, H. R., and S. D. Brunn. 2010. Place elasticity: Exploring a new conceptualization of mobility and place attachment in rural America. Geografiska Annaler Series B: Human Geography 92 (4):281 -95. doi: 10.1111/j.14680467.2010.00353.x.
- Berry, W. 2010. The hidden wound . Berkeley, CA: Counterpoint.
- Bigham, D. E. 1998. Towns and villages of the Lower Ohio . Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.
- Brew, W. 2020. Roadside development as a biography: US highways speak. In Handbook of the changing world language map , ed. S. D. Brunn and R. Kehrein, 2921 -40. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International.
- Brouws, J. 1997. Highway: America ' s endless dream . New York: Stewart Tabori &amp; Chang.
- Brunn, S. D. 2016. Research in progress on constructing and mapping an EU knowledge/information base: Worlds of gaps and opportunities. Mitteilungen der € Osterreichischen Geographischen Gesellschaft 157:51 -70. doi: 10.1553/moegg157s51.
- Brunn, S. D., L. Devriendt, A. Boulton, B. Derudder, and F. Witlox. 2010. Networks of European cities in worlds of global economic and environmental change. Fennia: International Journal of Geography 188 (1):37 -49.
- Brush, J. E. 1953. The hierarchy of central places in southwestern Wisconsin. Geographical Review 43 (3):380 -402. doi: 10.2307/211754.
- Chisholm, M. 1962. Rural settlement and land use . London: Hutchinson.
- Clay, G. 1994. Real places: An unconventional guide to America ' s generic landscape . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
- Cloke, P. 1997. Country backwater to virtual village? Rural studies and ' the cultural turn. ' Journal of Rural Studies 13 (4):367 -75. doi: 10.1016/S0743-0167(97)00053-3.
- Coggeshall, J. M. 2018. Liberia, South Carolina: An African American Appalachian community . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
- Daniels, T. L., and M. B. Lapping. 1987. Small town triage: A rural settlement policy for the American Midwest. Journal of Rural Studies 3 (3):273 -80. doi: 10. 1016/0743-0167(87)90075-1.
- Davis, C. M. 1938. The cities and towns of the high plains of Michigan. Geographical Review 28 (4):664. doi: 10. 2307/210309.
- DeLyser, D. 1999. Authenticity on the ground: Engaging the past in a California ghost town. Annals of the
- Association of American Geographers 89 (4):602 -32. doi: 10.1111/0004-5608.00164.
- Devriendt, L., A. Boulton, S. Brunn, B. Derudder, and F. Witlox. 2011. Searching for cyberspace: The position of major cities in the information age. Journal of Urban Technology 18 (1):73 -92. doi: 10.1080/10630732.2011. 578410.
- Donnermeyer, J., and C. Hollifield. 2011. Digital divide evidence in four rural towns. IT &amp; Society 1:107 -17.
- Drake, S. 2018 -2019. Official highway map of Kentucky . Frankfort: Kentucky Transportation Cabinet.
- Elbon, D. 2010. Kentucky atlas and gazetteer . Yarmouth, ME: Delorme.
- Eller, R. D. 2008. Uneven ground: Appalachia since 1945 . Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.
- Feather, C. E. 1998. Mountain people in a flat land: A popular history of Appalachian migration to northeast Ohio, 1940 -1965 . Athens: Ohio University Press.
- Foster, G. S. 1980. Appalachian isolation in perspective. Appalachian Heritage 8 (1):34 -47. doi: 10.1353/aph.1980. 0047.
- Fox, W. L. 1993. The impossibility of ruins. In Approaching nowhere , ed. J. Brouws, 140 -45. New York: Norton.
- Gilg, A. W. 1985. Rural settlement and housing. In An introduction to rural geography , ed. A. W. Gilg, 47 -66. London: Edward Arnold.
- Gottlieb, E. E. 2001. Appalachian self-fashioning: Regional identities and cultural models. Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education 22 (3):341 -59. doi: 10.1080/ 01596300120094370.
- Graddy-Lovelace, G. 2023. Towards abolitionist agrarian geographies of Kentucky. Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space 6 (3):1561 -89. doi: 10.1177/ 25148486231187795.
- Greenberg, M. R., F. J. Popper, and B. M. West. 1990. The TOADS: A new American urban epidemic. Urban Affairs Quarterly 25 (3):435 -54. doi: 10.1177/ 004208169002500306.
- Hart, J. F. 1975. The look of the land . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
- Hart, J. F. 1998. The rural landscape . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Hofstra, W. R., and K. Raitz. 2010a. The Great Valley Road of Virginia: Shenandoah landscapes from prehistory to the present . Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.
- Hofstra, W. R., and K. Raitz. 2010b. Introduction. In The Great Valley Road of Virginia: Shenandoah landscapes from prehistory to the present , ed. W. R. Hofstra and K. Raitz, 2 -56. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.
- Holcomb, J. P., P. Frederic, and S. D. Brunn. 2020. A visual typology of abandonment in rural America: From end-of-life to treading water, recycling, renaissance, and revival. Land 9 (3):94. doi: 10.3390/land9030094.
- hooks, b. 2008. Belonging: A culture of place . London and New York: Routledge.
- Humphreys, J. R. 1961. The lost towns and roads of America . New York: Doubleday.
- Jackson, J. B. 1980. The necessity for ruins . Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
- Jackson, J. B. 1997. Landscape in sight . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

- Jacobson, G., and B. S. Albertson. 1987. Social and economic change in rural Iowa: The development of rural ghettos. Human Services in the Rural Environment 10 (4): 58 -65.
- Jakle, J. A., and K. A. Scully. 2011. Remembering roadside America: Preserving the recent past as landscape and place . Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
- Jakle, J. A., and D. Wilson. 1992. Derelict landscapes: The wasting of America ' s built environment . Savage, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
- Johnson, K. 2006. Demographic trends in rural and small town America , Vol. 1 . Durham: University of New Hampshire, Carsey Institute.
- Keefe, S. E. 1994. Urbanism reconsidered: A southern Appalachian perspective. City &amp; Society 7 (1):20 -34. doi: 10.1525/ciso.1994.7.1.20.
- Keeling, D. J. 2020. Alternative languages of landscape analysis: Visualizing geography through photography. In Handbook of the changing world language map , ed. S. D. Brunn and R. Kehrein, 3061 -75. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
- Lewis, F. P. 1976. Axioms of the landscape. Journal of Architectural Education 30 (1):6 -9. doi: 10.1080/ 10464883.1976.10758067.
- MacKinnon, D., L. Kempton, P. O ' Brien, E. Ormerod, A. Pike, and J. Tomaney. 2022. Reframing urban and regional ' development ' for ' left behind ' places. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 15 (1): 39 -56. doi: 10.1093/cjres/rsab034.
- Marsh, B. 1987. Continuity and decline in the anthracite towns of Pennsylvania. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 77 (3):337 -52. doi: 10.1111/j. 1467-8306.1987.tb00163.x.
- McIntosh, C. B. 1959. Side-tracked villages in east central Illinois. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 49 (2):197 -98.
- Meinig, D. W., and J. B. Jackson. 1979. The interpretation of ordinary landscapes: Geographical essays . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Owens, W. T. 2000. Country roads, hollers, coal towns, and much more: A teacher ' s guide to teaching about Appalachia. The Social Studies 91 (4):178 -86. doi: 10. 1080/00377990009602463.
- Pacione, M. 1984. Rural geography . London: Harper and Row.
- Palumbo, J. 2021. Challenging reductive stereotypes of Appalachian life in photos. CNN , June 27. https://www. cnn.com/style/article/rich-joseph-facun-black-diamondsswing/index.html.
- Paradis, T. W. 2000. Conceptualizing small towns as urban places: The process of downtown redevelopment in Galena, Illinois. Urban Geography 21 (1):61 -82. doi: 10. 2747/0272-3638.21.1.61.
- Parker, E. B. 2000. Closing the digital divide in rural America. Telecommunications Policy 24 (4):281 -90. doi: 10.1016/S0308-5961(00)00018-5.
- Partridge, M., and M. Betz. 2013. Country road take me home: Migration patterns in the Appalachia America and place-based policy. International Regional Science Review 36 (3):267 -95. doi: 10.1177/0160017612467646.
- Philo, C. 1992. Neglected rural geographies: A review. Journal of Rural Studies 8 (2):193 -207. doi: 10.1016/ 0743-0167(92)90077-J.
- Pollard, K., and L. A. Jacobson. 2019a. Appalachia ' s digital gaps in rural areas leaves some communities Behind . Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau.
- Pollard, K., and L. A. Jacobson. 2019b. The Appalachian region: A data overview from the 2013 -2017 American community survey chartbook. Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau.
- Praskievicz, S. 2020. ' Reading a river ' through Google Scholar hyperlinks: Comparing four major international river systems. In Handbook of the changing world language map , ed. S. D. Brunn and R. Kehrein, 3119 -40. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
- Prideaux, B., and D. Timothy. 2010. From mining towns to tourist haunts: The ghost town life cycle. In Mining heritage and tourism , ed. M. V. Cronin and L. Joliffie, 229 -33. London and New York: Routledge.
- Rafferty, M. 2002. Review of J.A. Williams ' Appalachia: A history . Arkansas Historical Quarterly 61 (4):434.
- Raitz, K. 1996. The national road . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Raitz, K. 2010a. The lay of the land. In The Great Valley Road of Virginia: Shenandoah landscapes from prehistory to the present , ed. W. R. Hofstra and K. Raitz, 17 -56. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.
- Raitz, K. 2010b. U.S. 11 and a modern geography of culture and connection. In The Great Valley Road of Virginia: Shenandoah landscapes from prehistory to the present , ed. W. R. Hofstra and K. Raitz, 239 -96. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.
- Raitz, K., and N. O ' Malley. 2012. Kentucky ' s frontier highway: Historical landscapes along the Maysville Road . Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.
- Raitz, K. B., and R. Ulack. 1981. Cognitive maps of Appalachia. Geographical Review 71 (2):201 -13. doi: 10. 2307/214188.
- Raitz, K., R. Ulack, and T. Leinbach. 1984. Appalachia: A regional geography. Land, people and development . Boulder, CO: Westview.
- Raitz, K., R. Ulack, and T. Leinbach. 2019. Appalachia: A regional geography: Land, people, and development. London and New York: Routledge.
- Reddick, C. G., R. Enriquez, R. J. Harris, and B. Sharma. 2020. Determinants of broadband access and affordability: An analysis of a community survey on the digital divide. Cities 106:102904. doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2020. 102904.
- Reeves, D. A., and L. J. Gibson. 1974. Town size and functional complexity in a disputed landscape. Yearbook of the Association of Pacific Coast Geographers 36 (1):71 -84. doi: 10.1353/pcg.1974.0010.
- Relph, E. 2020. Landscape as a language without words. In Handbook of the changing world language map , ed. S. D. Brunn and R. Kehrein, 3141 -54. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
- Rogers, C. L., and R. Marshment. 2000. Measuring highway bypass impacts on small town business districts. Review of Urban &amp; Regional Development Studies 12 (3): 250 -65. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-940X.2000.00080.x.

- Sarnoff, S. 2003. Central Appalachia -Still the other America . London and New York: Routledge.
- Schroeder, F. E. H. 1989. Types of American small towns and how to read them. Southern Quarterly 19 (1):104 -35.
- Schwerdtner, W., R. Siebert, M. Busse, and U. B. Freisinger. 2015. Regional open innovation roadmapping: A new framework for innovation-based regional development. Sustainability 7 (3):2301 -21. doi: 10.3390/ su7032301.
- Shobe, H. 2020. Graffiti as communication and language. In Handbook of the changing world language map , ed. S. D. Brunn and R. Kehrein, 3115 -72. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
- Slack, T., and L. Jensen. 2020. The changing demography of rural and small-town America. Population Research and Policy Review 39 (5):775 -83. doi: 10.1007/s11113-02009608-5.
- Straw, R. A., and H. T. Blethen, eds. 2004. High mountains rising: Appalachia in time and space . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- Towers, G. 2006. Reading the Appalachian landscape: Review of The Upland South: The making of an American folk region and landscape, Terry G. JordanBychkov; Appalachian folkways, John B. Rehder; Extracting Appalachia: Images of the Consolidation Coal Company, 1910 -1945, Geoffrey L. Buckley; the New Encyclopedia of Southern Culture, Richard Pillsbury. Geographical Review 96 (2):313 -17. [Mismatch ] doi: 10.1111/j.1931-0846.2006.tb00055.x.
- Towers, G. 2010. Rediscovering rural Appalachian communities with historical GIS. Southeastern Geographer 50 (1):58 -82. doi: 10.1353/sgo.0.0065.
- Trewartha, G. T. 1943. The unincorporated hamlet: One element of the American settlement fabric. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 33 (1):32 -81. doi: 10. 1080/00045604309357243.
- Ulack, R., and K. Raitz. 1981. Appalachia: A comparison of the cognitive and Appalachian Commission regions. Southeastern Geographer 21 (1):40 -53. doi: 10.1353/sgo. 1981.0003.
- Ward, N., and D. L. Brown. 2009. Placing the rural in regional development. Regional Studies 43 (10):1237 -44. doi: 10.1080/00343400903234696.
- Wetherholt, W. A., and G. S. Vandeberg. 2020. Reading the landscape in Antler, North Dakota: Repeat photography in an atrophying Northern plains town. In Handbook of the changing world language map , ed. S. D. Brunn and R. Kehrein, 3185 -207. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
- White, S. E. 1987. Return migration to eastern Kentucky and the stem family concept. Growth and Change 18 (2): 38 -52. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2257.1987.tb00454.x.
- Widner, R. R. 1990. Appalachian development after 25 years: An assessment. Economic Development Quarterly 4 (4):291 -312. doi: 10.1177/089124249000400401.
- Wikipedia. 2022. Unincorporated communities in Kentucky by county. Accessed March 7, 2024. https:// en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Unincorporated\_com-munities\_in\_Kentucky\_by\_county
- Woods, M. 2005. Changing communities: Restructuring rural services. In Rural geography: Processes, responses and experiences in rural restructuring , ed. M. Woods, 91 -109. London: Sage.
- Wyckoff, W. 2014. How to read the American West . Seattle: University of Washington Press.

STANLEY D. BRUNN is an Emeritus Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506. E-mail: stan.brunn@uky.edu. His research interests are broad and include sustainability, climate change, urban studies, languages, religion, philately, and many other topics.