## PLACING KANGWANE IN THE NEW SOUTH AFRICA*

## BRIAN H. KING

ABSTRACT. The South African  homelands were central to the  apartheid ideology  of  racial segregation and separate development and as a result became the location for large segments of  the African  population. Apartheid-era theorizations of the homelands tended to eniphasize their  importance to the state, with less attention directed  to the divergent  and  unique social formations that often existed within them. Recent geographical  research has been intent on evaluating the spatial imprint of these geographies  for resident  populations, as well as the varied class, gendered, and institutional formations that accompanied the democratic transition. Using a case study from the former KaNgwane homeland, this article  examines the diverse ways in which rural households access environmental and economic resources to produce livelihoods. It is argued that a focus on community variation is needed  to interrogate the differential encounters of these places with the local politics and development processes that are emerging in the new South Africa. Keywords: apartheid, democratic transition, homelands, KaNgwane, South Africa, trilml authorities.

S o u t h   Africa's transition since the 1994  democratic elections continues to be shaped by its unique history. Colonialism and apartheid created social and spatial patterns of segregation that impact the economic, political, and cultural processes emerging in the rural areas. Of particular importance are the former homelands, or bantustans, which were specific areas demarcated by the apartheid government for the African population. The homelands were part of grand apartheid's vision of racial segregation and separate development and as a result became the central location for many Africans. This article uses a case study from the  former  KaNgwane homeland  to examine the impacts of  colonialism  and apartheid on rural livelihoods and local perceptions  of  cultural identity and development in  the  post-apartheid  era. KaNgwane was adjacent  to the Transvaal Province, both of which  were incorporated into the Mpumalanga Province following the 1994 elections. The study area is located about 300 kilometers east of Pretoria in northeastern South Africa, close to Kruger National Park and the Mozambique and Swaziland borders (Figure 1).

The article first provides a brief history of segregation, with particular attention to the construction of the homelands during apartheid, as well  as a review of geographical  research  on the homelands. Although  these territories were effectively abolished prior to the democratic transition, the state's empowerment of tribal au-

* Research in South Africa from August 2001  to August zooz was supported by the Institute for the Study of World Politics, the Association  of American  Geographers (AAG), the Cultural  Ecology  Specialty Group of  the AAC;, and the Graduate School at the University of  Colorado, Boulder. The Gilbert White Dissertation  Fellowship supported the writing of earlier drafts of  this article. Additional research completed  in June and July zoo4 was supported by the Department  of  Geography  and the Environment at the University of Texas, Austin. The Mpumalanga Parks Board and the Centre tor Environmental Studies at the University of Pretoria provided institutional  and technical support, and my research  assistants, Erens Nguhane, Cliff Shikwambane. and Wendy  Khoza, provided  critical assistance. My thanks to Manuel Peralvo and Maria Lane, who helped create the maps. I  am also grateful to Doug Johnson,  Viola Haarmann, Erica King, Leo Zonn, and two anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments on earlier versions of this article.

% DR. KING is an assistant  professor of  geography at the University  of Texas, Austin, Texas 78712

MOZAMBIQUE

FIG. 1-Southern Africa (top left), with the study area highlighted; the study area, showing the border of the former homeland of KaNgwane (top  right); and the Mzinti community (bottom). Note the Reconstruction  and Development Programme ( RDP) housing project  on the eastern  periphery  of Mzinti. (Cartography by Manuel Peralvo, Maria Lane, and the author)

<!-- image -->

thorities, restriction  of  the majority  of  the population  to a fraction  of the landscape, and limitation  of movement  and production  capabilities continues to impact  society and space in the post-apartheid  era. As recent  publications  suggest, these factors are largely responsible for the slow pace of land reform and development  (Levin and Mkhabela 1997; Ntsebeza 2000; Cousins 2001; Davis 2001; Groenewald 2004; Merten 2004). Much research has concentrated on challenging apartheid-era representations  of  these spaces as uniform by critically examining

social differentiation from a class, gender, or institutional  perspective  (see, for example, Pickles and Woods 1992; Weiner, Levin, and Chimere-Dan 1997; Jones 1999; Bob 2001; Rangan and Gilmartin 2002). These studies demonstrate the importance of detailed research in these territories to understand both the lingering impacts of racial segregation and the emergence of new social processes that affect rural residents.

The focus of this article is a case study of  the Mzinti community, which is employed to understand  the degree of  social variation  that  exists within  the former KaNgwane homeland. In particular, two sections of the community have striking variations  in  livelihood  systems, demographic patterns,  and attachment to the Matsamo Tribal Authority.' The case study demonstrates that historical systems of segregation  continue  to have symbolic and material  meaning within  the region, although these meanings are contested and differentially experienced within rural communities. Specifically,  it is suggested that the former homelands contain places that  are constantly being renegotiated by residents with  diverse histories, varying livelihood-production systems, and localized politics. Focusing on local differentiation is therefore necessary to understand the divergent impacts of colonialism and apartheid on rural communities in the post-apartheid era.

## THE  HOMELANDS I N APARTHEID SOUTH  AFRICA

The victory of the National Party in the 1948 general elections resulted in the emergence of apartheid policies that reinforced  colonial systems of spatial segregation, control of movement and production, and empowerment of traditional governance systems. The Population Registration Act was an early piece of legislation that enforced the classification of the population  into four strict racial categories: White, Colored, IndiadAsiatic, and Native  (later Bantu  or African). As  Anthony  Butler notes, this classification provided the framework for the social and economic engineering of high apartheid that would follow in the 1960s (2004). The construction of the homelands was essential to this shift and involved the classification of  the African population into various ethnic categories that enabled the state to forcibly relocate  urban and rural  residents.'  The apartheid  government believed that  the homelands, which largely comprised the native reserves established by the British, to be the ideal location for independent black development. These territories were based on racist views of African cultural systems and organization that divided the diversity of the African population  into separate groups, each with its own distinguishing  characteristic^.^ As  the  South African  State Department of  Information explained, 'the main  Bantu-South  African peoples constitute  a distinctive  society desirous of maintaining its separate identity as an established ethno-political unit. .  .  . The main Black nations exist as distinctly disparate ethnic groups, each with a traditional homeland that serves as the geo-political nucleus of the relevant group's national  development' (1974, 26).

Although the apartheid government asserted that the homelands were ideal for separate development, the geographical organization of these spaces revealed their

true intent: to remove blacks from white areas and to undermine the black population's capacity for political and economic empowerment. The boundaries of the homelands were superficially constructed around existing settlements and were therefore fragmented and impossible to organize effectively.  These territories constituted only 13.7 percent of the country but became central locations for large segments of the population. Roughly  3.5 million people were relocated during apartheid (Unterhalter 1987; Pickles and Woods i992), and from 1960 to 1980 the proportion of the total black population  living in the homelands rose from 39  to 5 3   percent (Platzky and Walker 1985).4

In order to administer the homelands, the apartheid government extended the British  system of  utilizing  traditional  structures to rule. Traditional chiefs were deemed to be the authentic leaders of the African people, and, beginning in the i95os, steps were taken to establish tribal authority pyramids in the homelands. The initial impulse was to maintain  strict control over the traditional  authorities. Although they were placed in charge of local governments, they were directly linked to the central government through the Department of Native Affairs, which gave the minister of native affairs direct control. As Lungisile Ntsebeza explains,  the minister had the power to depose any chief, cancel the appointment of any councilor, appoint any officer with whatever powers he deemed necessary, control the treasury and budgetary spending, and authorize taxation. As with colonial control, the Department of Native Affairs appointed new, loyal traditional authorities and recognized and created new lineages. The Bantu Laws Amendment Act of 1952 made chiefs and headmen salaried governmental officials,  which fueled popular opinion that the tribal authorities were merely appendages  of  the apartheid government (Ntsebeza 2000).

In the late 1950s the apartheid government shifted its focus to 'separate development' and emphasized that the homelands would eventually become independent from the South African state. The South African government report (1955) was particularly important in arguing that segregation was necessary for racial harmony and depended on full-scale development of Bantu areas. The intention was to devolve power from the Department of Native Affairs to the bantustan governments, although they remained funded and directed by the state. In addition to political and economic development, the homelands were predicated on perceptions of cultural identity created by national and local leaders. As  Peris Jones argued, 'white supremacy was bound up with conferring a semblance of viability upon these peripheral  regions. This strategy was promoted  on the basis of economic development and also,  importantly,  the construction of ethnic and political identities within the homelands' (1999, 583). Four homelands-Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda, and Ciskei-were eventually granted independence by the apartheid government, although this was not internationally recognized. The gradual failing of apartheid policy in the 1980s resulted in a lifting of  some of  its restrictions. In 1986, South African citizenship was restored to the citizens of the formerly independent homelands, which effectively  ended the idea of separate development within the country.

## GEOGRAPHICAL RESEARCH  ON THE HOMELANDS

The impact of  racial  segregation  on rural communities and regions has been  a central theme of scholarship on South Africa prior to, and immediately following, the democratic transition.  Geographical research  has examined the legacy of the homelands to understand their lingering impacts on rural areas (Pickles  1991;  Weiner and Levin 1991;  Weiner, Levin and Chimere-Dan 1997; Jones  1999;  Bob 2001; Ramutsindela 2001; Francis 2002; Rangan and Gilmartin 2002; Slater 2002a, 2002b; Twine and others 2003). One theme that has emerged from this research is an interest in countering apartheid-era  representations  of the homelands as uniform, designed to meet  the objectives  of  the national  government. In this view, the homelands were artificial, and their construction  resulted solely from the state's need for capital  accumulation  through a steady supply of labor  (Desmond 1971; Wolpe 1972; Legassick 1974; Legassick and Wolpe 1976; Rogers 1976).  John  Pickles and Jeff  Woods suggested that this perspective was designed to challenge the apartheid  regime by attaching racial segregation to the political economy of underdevelopment  (1992). The consequence was that the homelands were presented  as uniform spaces that experienced change only in response to national processes. 'The homelands were viewed as the artificial  appendages  of  a dynamic capitalist  core economy:  static, undifferentiated, direct outcomes of decisions and actions in the core. Their population  was  seen  as largely homogeneous  and, with  the  exception  of  the security forces and limited bureaucracy of the puppet leaders, almost entirely opposed to the homeland  system' (Pickles and Woods 1992, 631). Although attention was directed to institutional development, economic restructuring, and class formation in the homelands (Innes and O'Meara 1976; Legassick and Wolpe 1976),  only a few case studies addressed these issues (Southall 1983; Martiny and Sharp 1984; Bank 1987).  Pickles and Woods concluded shortly before the democratic transition  that 'little attention has been  given  to the emergence of  the homelands as socially differentiated and economically structured geographies' (1992,631).  Similarly, John Pickles and Daniel Weiner argued that the transitional government directed little attention  to theorizing  rural class formation and contemporary forms of organization that would directly shape the trajectories of land reform and development in the post-apartheid  era  (1991).

A second theme of geographical scholarship on South Africa has been to examine social differentiation within  the  former homelands.  This arises from the concern  that,  immediately following the  1994 elections, understanding  of  social and economic variation  within  these territories remained  limited. In spite of research evaluating the  ongoing transformations  in  these territories  (Pickles 1991; Weiner and Levin i99i), rural residents continued to be  understood  largely as 'aspiring urbanites  and  as latent  peasants' (Weiner, Levin  and  Chimere-Dan  1997, 47). As Daniel Weiner, Richard Levin, and Orieji Chimere-Dan suggested: 'At the national scale, the bantustans were, of course, dumping grounds. Agricultural deskilling and off-farm wage dependence were and still are important. Rapid urbanization is also taking  place, simultaneously with  some smallholder agricultural  intensification.

These processes,  however, need to be fleshed out with real people and places. Broad generalizations  about rural regions within  the bantustans and assumptions  pertaining to the socio-economic condition of bantustan people are being too loosely employed' (1997, 47).

The representation of the homelands as uniform, coupled with superficial generalizations of rural peoples, has generated interest in local case studies to appreciate the material realities experienced by rural people. As Jones argued, 'In recent years  such  a  portrayal  of  supposedly homogenized  social formations of  the bantustans has been replaced with a focus upon local variation, social differentiation  and the politics of disjuncture and cleavage' (1999, 580). A growing body of research within the former homelands has begun to examine local diversification through livelihood production systems (Francis 2002; McCusker 2002; Slater 20028, 2002b; Twine and others 2003; King 2004), governance structures  (Ramutsindela 2001; King 2005), and gender (Bob 2001; Rangan and Gilmartin 2002). What these studies reveal is that the social processes unfolding  in these areas remain  uneven and contested. Rural livelihoods, for example, continue to depend on diverse sets of environmental resources and economic employment. Rachel Slater examines livelihood diversification in the former Qwaqwa homeland and shows that  residents combine wage labor, pensions, and livestock arrangements to produce livelihoods (2002a).  Other studies demonstrate the importance of gender in shaping opportunities for individuals. Urmilla Bob argues that black women in the former Kwazulu and Lebowa homelands experience class, power, and resource access patterns in fundamentally different ways that have implications for the effectiveness of rural development (2001). Research in the former KaNgwane homeland shows differential power dynamics experienced through local tribal authorities, because men are more successful than women in accessing communal space for commercial agriculture or pastoralism.  In  contrast, female-headed households  depend on seasonal wage labor on commercial farms and petty extractive activities as primary sources of income (Rangan and Gilmartin 2002). Although they involve different rural areas, these cases suggest the need for continued examination of the dynamics shaping the former homelands in order to understand  local differentiation  and social change in the post-apartheid era.

## MZINTI  PLACES, LIVELIHOODS, AND GOVERNANCE

The 1994 democratic elections erased the boundaries of the KaNgwane homeland by combining it with Transvaal Province to form Mpumalanga Province. The study area for this article comprises much of the eastern lowlands of Mpumalanga Province, extending south of Kruger National Park, west of Mozambique, and north of Swaziland. Urban  and peri-urban  areas include Nelspruit, the provincial capital about 60 kilometers west  of Kruger, Malelane, and Komatipoort  (see Figure 1). Malelane serves as an entry point to the southern end of Kruger; Komatipoort operates as the border gateway to Mozambique. The completion of the ~4 highway, a paved toll road that connects Johannesburg to Maputo, Mozambique, has increased

commercial activity within the region and facilitated an expansion of tourism, which national  and provincial  governments  consistently tout as a growth  industry. The provincial  government has pursued cultural tourism in the region and attempted to  use wildlife conservation  and other  initiatives  to stimulate both domestic  and international tourism.

The  African population is largely  concentrated in the township of KaNyamazane near Nelspruit and in former KaNgwane territory along the Swaziland border (Rangan and Gilmartin 2002). A variety of agricultural activities are pursued within the region, including subsistence cultivation and capital-intensive  cultivation of fruits, vegetables, and sugarcane. The government has promoted sugarcane growing as a viable activity for rural residents and facilitated it by developing irrigation and providing grants from the Department of Land Affairs and the Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Environment (King 2005). The Mzinti community contains a diversity of livelihood systems, for many households depend on a combination of environmental resources, pastoralism,  permanent  and temporary employment, pensions, and remittances as sources of income. Because of its proximity to urban areas such as Malelane, the Mzinti community has experienced a growth in population driven in part by migration from neighboring  communities. This has placed additional pressure on the natural environment and the ability of local residents to access resources critical  for livelihood  production.  Household  livelihoods  remain dynamic and change in response to seasonal fluctuations, demographic changes, and external political and economic pressures.

The case study from the former KaNgwane homeland is utilized here as an example of how the geographies of apartheid are being reworked  in the post-apartheid  era. In order to evaluate local diversification,  research was conducted in the Mzinti community in 2001/2002 and June/July 2004. Quantitative  and qualitative methods were combined  to address household  livelihood-production  strategies, access to environmental resources, and the role of historical and contemporary governance systems. A structured  survey of 478 randomly selected households from the entire community collected information on household demography, migration patterns, livelihood-production  systems, and views of  the multiple development agencies operating  in the  region.  The survey was supplemented with  qualitative data from fifty semistructured  interviews with  household heads from the Mzinti community that provided details on livelihood-production strategies and the role of diverse governance systems in shaping access to a variety of economic and environmental  resources.

The Mzinti community contains two distinct  places, whose construction  remains rooted  in the apartheid  and post-apartheid  eras. These two locations provided the framework used to examine how livelihood and governance systems are changing in the former KaNgwane homeland. One of the places is the Reconstruction  and Development  Programme ( RDP) housing project, completed  in 2001 as part of the national drive to improve the state of housing as identified in the African National Congress ( ANC) national election goals. The RDP, drafted by the ANC, the

South African Communist Party, and the Congress of South African Trade Unions, was the guiding policy framework for the democratic transition. In recent years it has been replaced by the Growth,  Employment and Redistribution Act (GEAR), which is more neoliberal in its orientation. The RDP  was important in articulating a national commitment to rural development and housing.' Even though the national government has created housing projects throughout the country, only a few studies have examined the local effects within specific communities (see, for example, Jenkins 1999; Huchzermeyer 2001).

Roughly 1,000 RDP houses in the northeastern periphery of the Mzinti community were built with government subsidies and distributed to the poorest residents of the region (Figure 1). Because of its origin as a government-funded project, the RDP housing differs significantly in appearance from the rest of the Mzinti community. The RDP houses consist of three rooms made of concrete blocks with a metal roof (Figure 2). They have no electricity or sanitation, although there is a standing water pipe at each house.

In comparison to RDP housing, non-RDP housing plots are larger and contain buildings made of concrete blocks, mud and sticks, and grasses. Typically each plot comprises multiple buildings  (Figure 3), including traditional-style houses  that are circular  with  thatch-grass  roofs  and more modern-looking,  Western-style houses. Families in this part of the community tend to be larger and multigenerational; hence the multiple  structures. Many of  these households  have electricity, which is not available in the RDP housing section at the present time. Residents of non-mp housing are more likely to have material amenities, such as cell phones and radios that are purchased with income derived from employment or remittances. They commonly have an enclosure for cattle, or a chicken pen, and a small agricultural  plot  for growing fruits and vegetables for sale or for domestic consumption.

Based on a variety of historical, demographic, and livelihood factors, the RDP section can be interpreted  as a location  distinct from the rest of  the community. One element that contributes to the construction of the RDP as a separate place is the novelty of the housing project. This contrasts with the rest of the community, which contains many households that have been in Mzinti for decades. The RDP is on the outskirts of the Mzinti community, removed from the center, and its relative proximity to the neighboring community of Tonga helps contribute to its perceived isolation by non-mp residents.  Additionally,  the Mzinti RDP is part of a larger project that includes roughly 600 houses in Tonga, only a few kilometers away. The construction  of the  RDP  houses has also significantly contributed  to migration  into Mzinti. Within the RDP, 80 percent of household heads reported moving to Mzinti from another village, compared with  48 percent in the rest of the community. A large percentage of residents, however,  were living only temporarily in their units. It appears that  RDP  owners are either working in other places and returning to the RDP weekly or monthly or do not possess enough capital to move into the residence permanently. Some RDP residents explained that, although their housing was subsi-

FIG.  2-Reconstruction and Ikvelopment Programme ( KDP) houses in Mzinti, South Africa. (Photograph by the mthor, June  2004)

<!-- image -->

FIG.  j-Traditional houses in Mzinti, South Africa. (Photograph by the author, May 2002)

<!-- image -->

FIG.  4-A resident of the Reconstruction and Development Programme ( RDP) housing project in Mzinti, South Africa. (Photograph by the author, June 2004)

<!-- image -->

dized by the government, the costs of purchasing  furniture and other household items restricted their ability to move into the unit. Residents of the RDP have migrated from more than twenty villages within the study area. Some have come from locations closer to the Swaziland border, where fewer services and employment opportunities are available than is the case around Mzinti.

In addition to differences in household history and migration patterns, demographic variations exist between the RDP and non-RDP community sections. Household heads in the RDP are generally  younger and have received more formal education than those in the rest of the community (Figure 4).  Only 12 percent have no formal education, and 43 percent have the equivalent of a U.S. high school diploma. In the rest of the community, 3 5   percent  have no formal education, and only 21 percent have a high school diploma. A number of reasons for these differences in educational training exist. One of the most important factors is the availability  of schools for residents: Although Mzinti has several elementary and secondary schools, interviews with older residents  revealed that these had not been  available when  they were children, indicating a close relationship between age and access to education in rural areas. The average respondent age in the RDP is thirty-one, compared with forty-six for the rest of  the community, and the average household  size is three, reflecting the fact that many of these households are young families.  This contrasts with the rest of the community, where the average household size is six, with individuals from multiple generations.

Diverse factors influence the expansion of the community into the RDP houses, which subsequently shapes the social geography of Mzinti. Because of the influx of new residents into the RDP, many individuals in the rest of the community  described them as 'outsiders' who were drawn to the community for a number of reasons. Specifically, Mzinti's  proximity  to  more urban locations  such  as Malelane  and Komatipoort has been a pull factor for people from other rural villages. There are seasonal labor opportunities on nearby commercial farms and manufacturing opportunities in  Malelane, which  is  accessible  by  public  transportation. Because Malelane is roughly 40 kilometers from Mzinti, some residents commute daily or weekly for employment. As  a lifelong resident  of Mzinti explained: 'As I am old, I see some changes, like we  have people from different  places  now staying here at Mzinti. The other thing is that the old people of this place are now dead and the dominating  people  are from outside. . . . Maybe they think they will get a job at Mzinti, and others want to be near the town  [Malelane].'

Migration into the RDP from neighboring areas is in direct contrast to the rest of the community: Most people in the non-RDP section have lived in the community all of their life. This contributes to the feeling that this section of the community comprises lifelong Mzinti  residents  who have personally  observed the changes to the community. Older residents have different memories of apartheid and the role of traditional systems in administering the homeland system than do younger community members. Several of these residents indicated that they were forcibly relocated to the Mzinti community prior to, and during, apartheid. As one respondent explained: ''I was born on Sibhojwane farm, which is near Malelane. After the death of  my father we  were chased away by the owner of  the farm because he said he wanted only young people who would work on his farm, and specifically  only strong people. I was very young at that time, only fourteen years old. Then my family came to Mzinti in 1945.'

Another older member of the community also detailed how his family migrated to Mzinti: 'I was born at One Tree Hill and came here in 1932. We were expelled by the white people who were putting their farms where we were staying. They brought many cattle and put them there and chased us away.. .  . We first stayed at Vlakbult and they also chased us. Finally,  we decided to come and stay here at Mzinti.' Differentiation in household histories and demographic patterns within the Mzinti community help shape the livelihood and development processes unfolding within the former KaNgwane homeland. Residents of the RDP and non-RDP sections of Mzinti pursue  varied  livelihood  strategies that  are linked  to the  political  and economic changes that accompanied the democratic transition.

## LIVELIHOODS AND ENVIRONMENTAL  RESOURCE USE

Recent research in rural South Africa demonstrates the continued reliance on environmental  resources for livelihood  production  (Shackleton and Shackleton 2000; Shackleton, Shackleton  and Cousins 2000; Francis 2002; Twine and others 2003). These studies document the various  resources  utilized  and their contribution to

household income but focus less on the degree of  livelihood variation in specific communities. Using the RDP and non-mp sections as a framework, Table I documents community variations in the use of environmental resources.

Of the two sections, RDP households are less dependent on environmental resources for livelihood production, for only 31 percent reported collecting wood for fuel and only 15 percent use wood as their primary cooking fuel. This contrasts with the non-RDP section, where nearly two-thirds of the households depend on wood as their  primary cooking fuel. Only 7 percent of RDP households grow fruit and vegetables in household gardens, and no households collect medicinal plants, graze livestock,  or gather thatch grass. In comparison, households in the non-RDP section of Mzinti are more likely to own cattle, utilize traditional medicine, and grow fruits and vegetables in gardens adjacent to the house. Older residents collect grasses and wood at higher rates than do residents of  the  RDP,  and these resources are often purchased by younger individuals for construction purposes. These differences are largely the result of  a disinvestment in environmental resource use for livelihood production and the realities of living within the RDP residential area, where immediate access to land and other resources are more constrained than in the non-RDP section of the community.

Younger residents, particularly those with a high school diploma, commented that they prefer full- or part-time employment, when available, to livestock or agricultural production. As a result, the RDP section of the community has become the site for shifts in community livelihood  systems as many of these households express an interest in engaging in formal and informal economic activities. The most common occupations are the selling of fruits and vegetables locally and in nearby markets, tailoring,  and  security work.  Because of  the limited  number  of  formal employment opportunities in Mzinti, many residents travel to Malelane and other towns for these jobs. The RDP and non-RDP sections differ measurably in the level of engagement in formal and informal economic activities (Table 11). RDP households are more dependent on part-time employment and remittances and are less likely to have access to full-time employment and pension support. This reinforces the selection  process of the RDP housing project, for owners were identified by the provincial government as being more economically vulnerable. Although little about the selection of  RDP owners is known, given the younger age and higher degree of formal education of those who were selected, the process appears to have been designed to target a specific type of individual for the houses.

In addition to demographic and livelihood variations between the RDP and the rest of the community, generational tension exists between traditional and modern representations of Swazi culture, which plays out specifically in the realm of nature and production. Cattle ownership retains its cultural and material importance to residents,  but it is generally the older community members, and only the residents of the non-RDP areas, who keep livestock. This is often due to the expense of  obtaining cattle and to younger community members'  uncertainty about the feasibility of investing in livestock. The shift for some of these residents into informal and

TABLE I-USE OF ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES I N  RDP AND NON-RDP  HOUS~HOLDS I N  MZINTI, SOUTH  AFRICA

\_ \_

| RESOURCE USE (%)             | RDP HOUSEHOLDS ( n = 128)   | NON-RDP HOUSEHOLDS ( n = 350)   |
|------------------------------|-----------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Cooking fuel                 | 81 (paraffin)               | 63 (wood)                       |
| Collecting wood for fuel     | 31                          | 70                              |
| Collecting wood for building | L                           | 22                              |
| Purchasing wood              | 5                           | 27                              |
| Purchasing sand              | 4                           | 93                              |
| Collecting thatch grass      | 0                           | 13                              |
| Purchasing grass             | 0                           | 14                              |
| Household gardening          | 7                           | 89                              |
| Grazing cattle               | 0                           | 10                              |
| Grazing goats                | 0                           | 5                               |
| Feeding chickens             | 4                           | 35                              |
| Collecting medicinal plants  | 0                           | 8                               |
| Visiting traditional healers | I0                          | 32                              |

\_\_  -  --

TABLE 11-HOUSEHOLD  INCOME  I N  RDP AND NON-RDP  HOUSEHOLDS IN MzINTI, SOUTH AFRICA

| SOURCE OF HOUSEHOLD INCOME (YO) .   |   RDP HOUSEHOLDS (n = 128) |   NON-RDP HOUSEHOLDS ( t l = 350) _ _ |
|-------------------------------------|----------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| Full-time job                       |                         13 |                                    42 |
| Part - t inie job                   |                         37 |                                    26 |
| Informal job                        |                         21 |                                    29 |
| Pension                             |                         29 |                                    43 |
| Remittances                         |                         23 |                                     9 |

formal economic activities translates  into a disinvestment  in traditional forms of livelihood  production.  Cattle retain  their  cultural importance  because  the brideprice custom is still practiced  in the region, although the bride price is increasingly exchanged as currency rather than as livestock. Younger community members are also more likely to speak of livestock in material, rather than cultural, terms. As one resident explained: 'This is too African. We can't separate our culture from the cow even if  we  want  to Westernize. But  the thing lives in us most because we want to have functions related to our ancestors. I don't do that as I have mentioned because I am Christian. Additionally, sometimes when you are in a bad financial situation they can bring  a  lot  of  money.' As  this resident  indicates,  the  interplay between traditional and modern  understandings of cultural and religious identity has implications  for the livelihood  strategies  being pursued  in  the  community. These intracommunity variations  impact  the governance  and development  processes emerging within the former KaNgwane homeland, specifically, the role of the traditional authorities and municipalities in shaping access to environmental resources and changing development discourses within the region.

## DISCOURSES OF DEVELOPMENT  AND GOVERNANCE

Variations between the RDP and non-Rm sections are contributing to the processes shaping cultural  identity and development  discourses for  rural households.  The democratic transition is having significant impacts on the micropolitics within the former KaNgwane homeland, as a number of apartheid and post-apartheid  organizations  are renegotiating  patterns  of  access to environmental  resources. Unlike the homelands that declared independence during apartheid, KaNgwane remained an artificial appendage of the white government but was in the vanguard in advocating for the democratic transition  (Niekerk 1990). KaNgwane is now part of the Nkomazi Municipality, one of the four that constitute the Ehlanzeni District  Municipality. Each local municipality has a municipal  mayor who is appointed by the executive council, and a mayor who is elected. The division of KaNgwane into  wards, finalized in 2000, attempts to link the councilors with village and land trusts and with the tribal authorities. In recent years the emergence of municipal ward structures has come into direct conflict with the traditional rule by the Matsamo Tribal Authority, which has jurisdiction  over the Mzinti community.

Although  representatives  of the tribal authority serve at the ward level within the municipality, the expansion of democratically elected structures has challenged their  position  and forced some community members to view them as irrelevant. The general consensus is that they have declined in power in many rural areas since 1994, and their future role is unclear. As  the former induna (headman) for Mzinti explained: 'During the time of apartheid, most of the oppressors were respecting the tribal  authority. .  .  . The indunas were  respected  as leaders by the apartheid government but the problem was the community at large was treated  badly. . .  . What I see now is that people are putting the tribal authority down, as if they don't play an important role in development.' In continuing to describe the changes since 1994,  the induna explained that the ANC was weakening the tribal authority by not giving it the appropriate respect.

The changing role of the tribal authority  is linked to local understandings about which structures are appropriate for pursuing development in the rural areas. The traditional role of the tribal authority was to manage communal lands by granting title  and access to resources, as well  as to settle disputes between  residents. The KaNgwane government was designed to oversee the apparatus of development in the homeland but was linked to the chieftaincy. The democratic elections, however, have created  new structures and opportunities  for development  through government that is impacting the ongoing role of the tribal authorities. Members  of the community, particularly younger people and residents of the RDP, complained about the decision-making procedures utilized by the tribal authority in executing development projects. One resident complained about the process of land demarcation when the location of his future dress shop was given away:

You know that area is a business area so there was no one occupying  any space there. I went to the chief with the induna, then after coming that time he never showed me

the place because it must be demarcated first.  So I waited for that. Later, I saw people demarcating  areas themselves,  and when I asked about that he said I am too late, the place is full.. .  . I  think if it is under the local government,  maybe proper planning can be done because there are areas that we see can be used for development. But because the tribal authority has said it will be used for this, you cannot change it.

The implication is that the future of local development rests on the ANC government rather than the tribal authority. The differing opinions in Mzinti  regarding the tribal authority  are partly attributable  to  the  factors  that created the  mP.Younger community members imbue the ANC  with  greater legitimacy than the tribal  authority and believe that the national  government and municipal ward system has the greatest potential for effecting change. These views are complex; however, they are shaped by younger  residents who identify with the ANC'S role in  resisting the apartheid government and moving the country toward democracy. As one younger respondent  explained: 'I don't like to stay in  a place where  it  is governed  by  the induna or kings because you have to pay for almost everything. Like say you want a stand, a place to bring your loved one and many things  in fact. I want it  to be a civilized area. .  .  . Recently, one of my brothers passed away and it was difficult for them to show us a place to dig a grave.' This resident was clearly frustrated with the tribal authority and concluded that its influence would have to end because people were not happy with their procedures. In his view, the tribal authority is an impediment to the effectiveness of local government in meeting the needs of the community. Other younger community members spoke of the tribal authority with respect but believed that the national and provincial governments were the preferable systems for managing political and economic change in the rural areas. The migration into the RDP section from other communities contributes to the community divisions about the role of the tribal authority. The high  rates of migration  to Mzinti from other areas mean that residents of the RDP have less attachment to the Matsamo Tribal Authority and appear more willing to engage with the provincial  governing structures. The implications of these changes could be significant throughout the region, as shifting demographic and livelihood patterns in rural communities like Mzinti contribute in reworking governance and development processes in the postapartheid era.

## PLACING THE HOMELANDS I N  T H E  NEW  SOUTH AFRICA

Colonial  and apartheid systems of racial categorization  and exclusion have had  a significant impact on the geographies of South Africa. Although these systems are changing in the post-apartheid era, they continue to shape the livelihood strategies and governance systems that developed  within  the former apartheid homelands. The tendency to represent the homelands as uniform geographical spaces has been challenged by various studies  that reveal significant social differentiation within rural communities and regions. Rural residents  are seeking out emerging political  and economic opportunities; however, their effectiveness remains conditioned by the political economy of the homelands as well as the sociocultural systems established

during apartheid. As the Mzinti case study demonstrates, households with different histories,  livelihood-production  patterns,  and access to  environmental  resources are creating distinct  places in the community. The RDP and non-mp sections are only two community locations, but their divergence reveals an ongoing social transformation within the former KaNgwane homeland.

In  addition  to the economic  and political  realities  for rural  populations,  the construction of the homelands resulted in specific governance systems in these locations. The apartheid  government extended the  British  practice of  indirect  rule and utilized  the tribal  authorities  to manage homeland  landscapes  and peoples. With the empowerment, and in certain cases creation, of tribal authorities, the homelands reflected and reproduced a specific spatial order that mediated the access and use of environmental resources for resident populations  in ways that continue to have symbolic and material meaning for rural households. But apartheid was not uniformly  experienced throughout the  country. Tribal authorities and homeland leaders engaged with the apartheid state in a myriad of ways that left lasting frameworks that are currently being reworked by a variety of institutions and actors. This suggests that, although colonial  and apartheid  systems of segregation  had  similar trajectories across space, the homelands should not be represented as uniform geographical spaces. As the case study demonstrates, residents of the RDP and non-mp sections have different views on the tribal authority and other processes shaping the region that result in locally specific understandings about the benefits of  development within the former places of apartheid.

## NOTES

- I.  The apartheid  era  is generally  cited  as beginning  with  the  1948 elections,  which  brought  the National  Party into power, and ending with  the  first fully representative  elections of 1994. One of the mechanisms utilized  by  the apartheid  state for controlling the homelands was the empowerment of tribal authorities, which tended to be comprised of the chief and his headmen, councilors, and a tribal secretary. The Matsamo Tribal Authority continues to have jurisdiction over several communities in the region and plays a role in shaping land-tenure systems and access t o   environmental resources in Mzinti.
2. It  is difficult  to discuss  race  within  South Africa without  resorting to the categories  utilized prior to, and during, apartheid. The Boers, the descendants of the Dutch settlers of the seventeenth century, broke off into their  own cultural  grouping. Also  known  as 'Afrikaners,' these settlers migrated east of Cape Town  in order to avoid Dutch and British persecution and are distinct from the white Europeans of British origin. Whites were believed to be 'pure'  descendants of  European settlers and were separated from the native  or African  populations in  the country.  Even  in  the  new South Africa, whites  do not generally refer to themselves as Africans. I use  the terms 'black and 'African' interchangeably  throughout this article. Because of centuries of racial niixing, the colored population represents  those of mixed ancestry who are generally descendants of  Dutch colonists and slaves from the Western Cape area. Other racial categories, whether Indian or Chinese, were separated from these groups during apartheid and often given more preferential  treatment than Africans were, a point that still sparks resentment  in the post-apartheid  era.
3. William Beinart suggests that Afrikaner  views of  cultural groupings and the legitimacy  of the chieftaincy fit  neatly with their unproblernatically simple views of their own racial purity (2001).
4.  Population estimates during this time are often unreliable  because  the government  willfully downplayed the size of the African population to minimize the perceived  negative effects of apartheid. Many scholars agree that the first reliable census was not completed until 2001, the results of which are only gradually becoming available.

5.  Although  the RDP has been replaced by GEAR, this article  refers to the housing project  as the 'RDP' because that is the term used  by community residents.

## REFERENCES

- Bank,  L.  J. 1987.  Traders  and Taxnien  in QwaQwa:  A Study of Class Formation in a South African Homeland. M.A. thesis, University  of Cape Town.
- Beinart, W.  2001. Twentieth-Century South Africa. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Bob, U.  2001.  The Intersection  of Gender, Race and Class: The Socio-Economic and Spatial Implications of  Differentiation  in  the  Former  Homelands of  South Africa. South African  Geographical Journal 83  (3): 190-197.
- Butler, A.  2004. Contemporary South Africa. New York Palgrave Macmillan.
- Cousins, B.  2001.  The New Land Laws Could Disempower the Poor: A Return to the Apartheid  Era? Mail eb Guardian, 23-29 November, 25.
- Davis, N. C.  2001.  Lessons from the New Land Redistribution Programme. Land  eb Rural Digest No. 21  (November/December): 30-31.
- Desmond, C.  1971. The Discarded  People:  An Account of African Resettlement  in  South  Africa. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin  Books.
- Francis,  E. 2002. Rural  Livelihoods,  Institutions and Vulnerability  in  North West  Province,  South Africa. journal ofSouthern African Studies 28 (3): 531-550.
- Groenewald, Y.  2004.  Government Trips over Land Targets. Mail Q Guardian Online, 10  September. [ www.mg.co.za/articlepage.aspx?articleid=i~~oi8&amp;area=/insight/insight~natio~~al/] .
- Huchzermeyer,  M.  2001. Housing for the Poor? Negotiated  Housing Policy in South Africa. Habitat International 25 (3): 303-331.
- Innes, D. , and D. O'Meara.  1976.  Class Formation and Ideology: The Transkei Region. Review ofAf rican Political Economy 3 (7): 69-86.
- Jenkins, P.  1999.  Difficulties  Encountered  in  Community Involvement  in  Delivery  under  the  New South African  Housing Policy. Habitat International 23  (4):  431-446.
- Jones, P .   S.  1999.  'To Come Together  for  Progress': Modernization  and  Nation-Building in  South Africa's  Bantustan Periphery-The Case of Bophuthatswana. Iournal of Southern African Studies 25  (4):  579-605.
- King, B.  H.  2004.  In the Shadow of  Kruger: Community Conservation and Environmental Resource Access in the Former KaNgwane Homeland, South Africa. Ph.D. diss., University of Colorado.
- . 2005. Spaces of Change: Tribal Authorities in the Former KaNgwane Homeland, South Africa. Area 37 (1): 64-72.
- Legassick, M.  1974.  South Africa: Capital Accumulation and Violence. Economy and Society 3 (3 ) : 253291.
- Legassick, M., and H. Wolpe.  1976.  The Bantustans and Capital Accumulation in South Africa. Review ofAfrican Political Economy 3 ( 7 ) : 87-107.
- Levin,  R.,  and  S. Mkhabela. 1997.  'The Chieftaincy,  Land Allocation,  and Democracy.  In 'No More Tears. . . ' : Struggles for Land in Mpumalanga, South Africa, edited by R. Levin and D. Weiner, 153173. Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press.
- Martiny,  J.,  and J. Sharp.  1984.  An  Overview  of QwaQwa: Town  and  Country in a South African Bantustan. Carnegie Conference Paper No. 286. Cape Town: University of Cape Town.
- McCusker, B.  2002.  The Impact of Membership in Communal Property Associations on Livelihoods in the Northern Province, South Africa. GeoJournal56 (2): 113-122.
- Merten, M.  2004.  Government out to Spur Land Transfer. Mail Q Guardian Online, 30 July. [www.mg .co.za/articledirect.aspx?articleid=i33789&amp;area=%2finsight%zfinsight\_national%2f] .
- Niekerk, P .   V.  1990.  Bantustan Politics. New Ground 1 ( 1 ) : 12-14.
- Ntsebeza, L.  2000. Traditional  Authorities, Local Government and Land Rights. In At the Crossroads: Land and Agrarian Reform in South Africa  into the 21st Century, edited by B.  Cousins, 280-305. Cape Town: University  of  the Western  Cape, School of  Government,  Programme for  Land  and Agrarian  Studies; Braamfontein: National Land Committee.
- Pickles, J. 1991.  Industrial Restructuring,  Peripheral Industrialization,  and Rural Development in South Africa. Antipode 23 (1): 68-91.
- Pickles, J., and  D.  M'ciner.  1991. Rural and Regional  Restructuring of Apartheid: Ideology, Development Policy, and the Competition for Space. Antipode 23  (1): 2-32.

- Pickles,  J., and J. Woods. 1992. South Africa's Homelands in the Age of Reform: The Case of QwaQwa. Annals of the Association of American  Geographers 82 (4):  629-652.
- Platzky, L.,  and C. Walker. 1985. The Surplus People: Forced Removals in South Africa. Johannesburg: Raven Press.
- Ramutsindela, M. F. 2001. The Bitter Harvest of the Bantustans. South African Geographical Journal 83  (3):  175-182.
- Rangan, H., and M. Gilmartin. 2002. Gender, Traditional Authority, and the Politics of Rural Reform in South Africa. Development and Change 33  (4):  6 3 - 6 9 .
- Rogers, B. 1976. Divide and Rule: South Africa's Bantustans. London: International Defense and Aid Fund for Southern Africa.
- Shackleton, C. M., and S. E.  Shackleton. 2000. Direct Use Values of Secondary Resources Harvested from Communal Savannas in the Bushbuckridge Lowveld, South Africa. Journal of Tropical Forest Products 6 (1): 28-47.
- Shackleton, S.,  C. Shackleton, and B. Cousins. 2000. The Economic Value of Land and Natural Resources to Rural Livelihoods: Case Studies from  South Africa. In At the Crossroads: Land  and Agrarian  Reform  in South Africa  into the 21st Century, edited by  B.  Cousins, 35-67. Cape Town: Programme for Land and Agrarian Studies, School of  Government, University of the Western Cape; Braamfontein: National Land Committee.
- Slater, R. 2002a. Between a Rock and Hard Place: Contested Livelihoods in Qwaqwa National Park, South Africa. Geographical Journal 168 (2):  116-129.
- . 2002b. Differentiation and Diversification:  Changing Livelihoods  in Qwaqwa, South Africa, 1970-2000. Journal o f Southern African Studies 28 (3):  599-614.
- South African Government. 1955. Summary Report for the Socio-Economic Development of the Bantu Areas within the Union of South Africa. Pretoria: Government Printer.
- Southall, R. 1983. South Africa's Transkei: The Political Economy of an 'Independent' Bantustan. New York: Monthly Review Press.
- State Department of  Information. 1974. Multi-National Development  in South Africa:  The Reality. Pretoria: State Department  of Information.
- Twine, W., D. Moshe, T. Netshiluvhi, and V .   Siphugu. 2003. Consumption  and Direct-Use Values of Savanna Bio-Resources Used by  Rural Households in Mametja, a Semi-Arid Area of Limpopo Province, South Africa. South African Journal of Science 99 (September/October): 467-473.
- Unterhalter,  E. 1987. Forced  Removal:  The Division, Segregation,  and  Control  of  the People  of  South Africa. London: International Defense and Aid Fund for Southern Africa.
- Weiner, D., and R. Levin. 1991. Land and Agrarian Transition in South Africa. Antipode 23  (1): 92-120. Weiner, D., R. Levin, and 0.  Chimere-Dan. 1997. Understanding the Bantustans through Socio-Economic Surveys. In 'NO  More Tears. .  . ' : Struggles for Land in Mpumalanga, South Africa, edited by R. Levin and D. Weiner, 45-71. Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press.
- Wolpe, H. 1972. Capitalism and Cheap Labour-Power in South Africa: From Segregation to Apartheid. Economy and Society 1  (4):  425-456.