<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/raag21

## Nine Processes That Have Shaped the U.S. National Park System

Lary M. Dilsaver

To cite this article: Lary M. Dilsaver (2025) Nine Processes That Have Shaped the U.S. National Park System, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 115:10, 2302-2315, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2024.2412178

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2024.2412178

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 29 Oct 2024.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 924

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

## Nine Processes That Have Shaped the U.S. National Park System

Lary M. Dilsaver

Department of Earth Sciences, University of South Alabama, USA

The U.S. National Park System began at Yellowstone in 1872 and the National Park Service (NPS) took over its management in 1916. That system has evolved through nine processes to 429 units in every state and most territories. Those processes include (1) the classification of units by natural, historical, and recreational purposes and resources while shifting from isolated sublimity to representation of U.S. environment and history; (2) the spatial expansion of the system from the rural West to the urban East; (3) the rise of science to dominate natural resource management; (4) evolution of socially conscious historical coverage that includes accurately researched places relevant to the entire population; (5) increasing congressional involvement in NPS management through laws like the National Environmental Policy Act and the Wilderness Act and direct control of studies for new units; (6) the legal triumph of resource preservation for future generations over potentially damaging uses including recreation; (7) NPS encouragement of equal rights by banning segregation, extending outreach to minorities, and employing more women; (8) facing management difficulties with a growing workload while coping with grievous understaffing, underfunding, and a waning interest among young people; and (9) external threats that are beyond its control including climate change and aggressive invasive species. The NPS considers itself the organization to protect and present U.S. heritage, but its responsibilities expand while its powers are contested. Key Words: ecological integrity, ethnic and gender inclusion, National Park Service, preservation, resource management.

T he U.S. National Park System began in 1872 when Congress established the world ' s first national park at Yellowstone. Over the last 153years it has dramatically expanded to 429 units through geographical, political, and social processes that make it a model of preservation for more than 170 other countries. It has an unusual mission -to preserve for future generations the ecological integrity and cultural legacy that have shaped the United States. It is not open to consumer uses and cultural practices that mold most human habitats. This article has two purposes: (1) to review nine processes that have shaped this extraordinary system and the National Park Service (NPS) that manages it; and (2) to suggest research areas and questions for geographers to contribute to a more refined and complete understanding of this unique program. The nine processes are establishing the system ' s contents and their classification; the evolving spatial distribution of its units; the growing power of science in natural resource management; the development of a more

<!-- image -->

inclusive collection for historic, social, and cultural stories; settling the debate over public use of the parks versus protection of all resources for future generations; adjusting to a changing relationship between the NPS and Congress; making sure all of the country ' s people enjoy the parks as visitors and employees; coping with functional issues including funding, staffing, the workload, and ensuring support from future visitors; and, finally, facing external threats to the parks including global climate change and invasive species. The interaction of these evolving procedures has been controversial at times and resulted in places that markedly contrast with the rest of the U.S. milieu (Figure 1).

The NPS is an organization that urges experts in academic fields to augment its data and improve its management. As an unusual system with a compelling purpose, the National Park System has drawn consistent attention and research since its inception. An enormous literature about the National Park System includes recent overviews of the system by

<!-- image -->

Figure 1. The 2024 distribution pattern of National Park System units. Cartography by Joe Weber.

<!-- image -->

Keiter (2013), Helman (2017); Runte (2021), Soukup and Machlis (2021), and Weber and Sultana (2023). These add new perspectives to classic works by Ise (1961), Foresta (1985), Rothman (1994), and Sellars (2009). Useful compilations that provide rich data such as Mackintosh et al. (2018) or excerpts from important laws, documents, and studies such as Dilsaver (2016a) also provide starting points for further research. Finally, a plethora of official foundation documents and administrative histories for many units are posted on NPS e-library Web sites.

Yellowstone ' s enabling legislation set it apart, ' as a public park or pleasuring ground for the benefit and enjoyment of the people. ' This action followed by eight years a similar act that granted the Yosemite Valley and a nearby grove of giant sequoias to the state of California for the same purposes. Landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted ([1865] 1952, 12 -25) warned in 1865, ' the duty of preservation is the first which falls upon the state under the Act of Congress, because the millions who are hereafter to benefit by the Act have the largest interest in it, and the largest interest should be the first and strenuously guarded. ' In 1916 Congress established the NPS to manage the growing collection of units. In a muchquoted passage, the law ordered the agency, ' to conserve the scenery and the natural and historic objects and wildlife therein and to provide for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such means as will leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations ' (39 Stat. 535). With committed idealists such as Stephen Mather and Horace Albright in charge and the enthusiastic backing of wealthy progressives, the system evolved quickly. The nine processes have altered the system in significant ways but have not challenged this fundamental purpose (Figure 2).

## The Formation and Classification of the System ' s Content

The federal government had a few protected areas before Yellowstone, but they were not named parks nor were they part of any system. It took many years and multiple initiatives to design today ' s diverse collection (Weber and Sultana 2023, 29 -47). Between 1890 and 1900, Congress created four more national parks: Sequoia, Yosemite, General Grant (now Kings Canyon), and Mt. Rainier. The U.S. National Park System in May 2024 has nineteen generic names for its 429 units, only four of which feature the word park. National also precedes monument, battlefield, recreation area, historic site, river, trail, seashore, preserve, and parkway, among others. In addition, eleven units fall into a separate category named other designations, such as Constitution Gardens

Figure 2. Among the resources protected by the National Park Service are giant sequoias, the world ' s most massive trees. Photo by author.

<!-- image -->

(NPS 2024). Both the specific and generic names for each unit are designated in enabling acts by Congress or proclamations by a president. In the system ' s early decades, the NPS used the term national park for the largest and most elite units. Despite current agency insistence that it no longer means that, it still prevails in the minds of the public. A relic of that concept remains as hunting is traditionally banned in units with that title.

Casa Grande Ruins National Monument, the first with that generic name, was authorized in 1889 to protect one of the country ' s most famous archaeological structures. To protect other sites from looting and destruction, Congress passed the Antiquities Act in 1906, giving the president unilateral power to preserve sites of historic and scientific interest on federal land as monuments. The first under the act was Devils Tower, a geological feature. The Departments of Agriculture and War also received national monuments over the ensuing twenty-seven years. By 1933 the U.S. Forest Service had twenty- one monuments including major sites later renamed national parks such as Olympic and Saguaro. The War Department had ten national monuments on military reservations including the Statue of Liberty. Franklin Roosevelt issued Executive Order 6166 ordering the Reorganization of 1933 that transferred all the national monuments to the NPS. Military parks and battlefields of the War Department including Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg plus their cemeteries and a group of forts also joined the park system. The Reorganization swelled the National Park System from sixty-seven units to 137. That number included fifty-eight natural units, seventyseven historical units, and one recreation site, the George Washington Parkway (Lee 1974, 21 -36; NPS 2024). Two years later, Congress passed the Historic Sites Act (49 Stat. 666) ordering the NPS to commemorate the human story in the United States by preserving and interpreting places, processes, and people of importance to the development of the nation. This expanded the ability of the agency to nominate historic places without depending on the Antiquities Act.

Attention also focused on the recreational needs of the nation. The NPS provided more national parkways, coordinated recreation demonstration areas with the Bureau of Reclamation (Lake Mead), and established national seashores and lakeshores (Cape Hatteras). Following the groundbreaking Outdoor Recreation Resources Review Commission report in 1962, Congress enacted laws in 1968 to identify and establish national trails (Appalachian) and national rivers (Buffalo). Both the trails and the rivers usually cross other government and private lands. Lawmakers also established major urban recreation areas in the New York and San Francisco regions.

As the system ' s classes of units diversified, management of all the resources became challenging. The problem, especially in the larger parks, was spatial overlap of different types of resources. Historic structures and landscapes can occur in rare and fragile ecosystems. At the same time, some visitors want to enjoy activities that threaten both. Over the years, the NPS wrestled with how to ensure that the three main programs -protect nature, preserve history, and ensure enjoyment by the public -should coexist. In 1968 the agency issued three handbooks entitled ' Administrative Policies ' for historical, natural, and recreation areas (NPS 1968). Each set its specific goal to be dominant, which exacerbated the

conflict. They further inflamed the argument over whether use or preservation was preeminent, a quandary seemingly stemming from the NPS Organic Act of 1916. Congress addressed the issue in 1970 by enacting what is called the General Authorities Act (U.S. Congress 1970, 84 Stat. 825). It rejected the handbooks ' convoluted prescriptions, stating that the NPS areas ' though distinct in character, are united through their interrelated purposes and resources into one national park system as cumulative expressions of a single national heritage. ' Each unit must comanage all the resources and purposes within its borders. It also stopped the NPS from stating that the national park designation meant a unit superior to a national monument.

The early units in all the categories consisted of sublime and scenic landscapes, compelling historic and archaeological sites, and places with ample recreation opportunities. In time, the NPS focused more on representing the U.S. diversity of geological and biological features, broadening the scope of inclusion in the historic story of the nation, and trying to match recreation with the country ' s population distribution. Elaborate system and individual unit planning policies became more complicated and expensive. With enactment of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA; 83 Stat. 852) in 1969 and its stipulation for public input in planning and management decisions, that complexity intensified.

The classification of NPS units has become an issue in recent decades. Many in the public do not recognize that the units without the name national park are part of the same system with the same values. This has led to a debate within the NPS about simplifying the nomenclature (Congressional Research Service 2023). A few NPS officials and scholars want every unit to be named national park (Harmon 2012). This would clearly distinguish them from U.S. Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management monuments and recreation areas, as well as from state parks and preserves. Others insist that Congress should keep the variety of names to ease the process of adding new units (Diamont 2021). Once Congress passes an enabling act, the name is part of the law. Increasingly, legislators have been ' upgrading ' (renaming) former monuments, memorials, and a lakeshore to national park status at the request of constituents anxious for the economic windfall they believe will accompany the elite name. The dictionary definition of the word monument as a structure to commemorate something seems a better fit for the Gateway Arch in St. Louis, for example, than the word park .

Most national park units have several natural, historical, or recreational resources but focus on one type to classify it. This might appear to be a vexatious detail, but solid reasons exist for solving this long-debated issue. Public support depends on brand recognition. Visitors planning their journeys need to understand what they are going to experience. Awareness of the breadth of the system ' s resources encourages better behavior and enhanced support among travelers in the parks. Would it work to name each a national park if it carried a classification modifier such as national historical park, national military park, or national seashore park? A limit on how many modifiers would be necessary, but all unit names would begin with word national and end with the word park . Each class of modifiers would have to explain its role in portraying the U.S. story. Geographers should help develop a refined classification system that will convey the necessary data for each unit.

## The Evolving Spatial Pattern of the National Park System

Over the forty-three years between the establishment of Yellowstone and the 1916 Organic Act, Congress established large natural resource parks plus a few compelling archaeological sites in the West. In the decades since, the spatial distribution of the majority of the system ' s units and the budget necessary to support them has shifted from west to east and from rural to urban. Table 1 presents chronological and spatial data that invite further exploration. In the first half-century Congress created western natural resource sites that fit the progressive era desire for awe-inspiring landscapes to counter urban malaise. The 1906 Antiquities Act, the 1933 Reorganization, and the 1935 Historic Sites Act saddled the agency with an almost impossible task of incorporating units representing the full human story in the United States. Historical units numerically predominate in the system today. The Organic Act gave the NPS the responsibility for recreation sites as the country urbanized and shifted to a tertiary economy. Agency planners have tried to match the recreation areas to the nation ' s demographic pattern.

Table 1. The establishment of National Park units through time and space as of May 2024

| Time           |   N-West |   N-East |   H-West |   H-East |   R-West |   R-East |   Total |
|----------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|---------|
| Pre-1916       |       22 |        1 |        9 |        1 |        0 |        0 |      33 |
| 1916 - 1933    |       16 |        4 |        7 |        3 |        0 |        0 |      30 |
| Reorganization |       11 |        0 |        7 |       35 |        0 |        2 |      55 |
| 1934 - 1951    |        5 |        1 |        9 |       34 |        2 |        4 |      55 |
| 1952 - 1972    |        8 |        5 |       27 |       31 |       14 |       15 |     100 |
| 1973 - 2004    |       20 |        6 |       25 |       46 |        4 |       15 |     116 |
| 2005 - 2024    |        4 |        1 |        6 |       26 |        0 |        3 |      40 |
| Total          |       86 |       18 |       90 |      176 |       20 |       39 |     429 |

Note: Table shows the evolving pattern of the 429 natural (N), historical (H), and recreational (R) units west and east of the Mississippi River as of May 2024. Although most units have several types of resources, their classification depends on the major purpose for which they are protected. Hence, Mesa Verde National Park is listed as a historical unit despite its considerable size and natural features. Those that focus on natural resources (N) include some named park , some named monument , plus preserves and reserves . Those in the recreation class (R) include places with that term in the name, as well as seashores. lakeshores, rivers, trails, and parkways. The remainder fall into the historical class (H) including those named park or monument with historical or archaeological resources. According to this classification, the NPS manages 104 natural resource units, 266 historical and archaeological units, and 59 recreational units.

Over the decades the pace of adding units accelerated due to changing priorities, increased popularity, and political and public influence.

Geographers are invited to refine and expand the simple data in Table 1. They could explore trends in park making and show how public and private agendas spatially shaped the system through time. Planning programs, particular events, and even single individuals spawned initiatives to identify and locate new units. Sometimes clusters of parks were established, such as those in Alaska. Efforts to balance proposals from multiple federal legislators led to omnibus acts that gratified enough of them to be enacted. Historical geographies of the system should explore how and why this amorphous collection of diverse places became the current spatial landscape of U.S. preservation.

## Science Evolves to Control Natural Resource Management

Managing natural resources in the national parks began with a primitive notion of protecting objects such as trees, animals, and geological features from active despoilation. Input from landscape architects turned NPS policy to protecting the ' atmosphere ' of a park, a holistic notion based on visual scenes. Not until the early 1930s did ecological ideas begin to shape natural resource management. George Wright and other students of University of California, Berkeley wildlife biologist Joseph Grinnell provided expert input. Wright personally funded and coauthored a seminal report colloquially called Fauna No. 1, which explained ecological principles for resource management (Wright, Dixon, and Thompson 1933). Shortly thereafter the NPS banned bear feeding shows, ended predator destruction, and curtailed the introduction of exotic fish and wildlife. Unfortunately, Wright died in a 1936 automobile accident and the agency largely ignored his expertise for nearly three decades thereafter (Sellars 2009, 87 -101).

Meanwhile science itself continued to mature and ecological ideas reappeared by the 1950s. When faced with elk overgrazing in Yellowstone, Interior Secretary Stewart Udall appointed a committee led by A. Starker Leopold to study the issue. The group issued a 1963 report decrying the inexpert handling of natural resources by the NPS and calling for biocentric management (NPS 1968, 90 -103). Udall ordered that the parks apply the Leopold Report policies as soon as possible. It takes a while for generations of rangers to retire and be replaced with newly trained ones and for changes based on a new paradigm to reach hundreds of units. One significant change was a reappraisal of fire policy and the use of prescribed burns, first in the Everglades and then among California ' s giant sequoias in the 1960s. A host of legislative acts including the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (87 Stat. 884) helped cement the new orientation. The Sellars (2009) book Preserving Nature in the National Parks goaded the agency to live up to its mandate, accelerate the

replacement of natural history specialists with scientists, and increase the proportions of a park ' s staff and budget devoted to natural resource management.

Coincident with the changes in natural resource management was a commitment to try to include in the system examples of the geological and biological resources of the entire country. The NPS used a physiographic map of the United States by geographer Fenneman (1928) for decades to identify sites that portray geological processes and their resulting landforms. The search for botanical diversity led directly to the addition of Joshua Tree National Park and Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument. Physical geographers can reevaluate the Fenneman map as a geological base and identify system gaps in biotic and paleontological coverage.

The most recent version of the NPS (2006) Management Policies states that natural processes are not to be interfered with, but if humans can be found to have influenced a natural process, then action can be taken. Coastal erosion is destabilizing Fort Massachusetts in Gulf Islands National Seashore. The agency has nourished the beach multiple times after blaming dredging at the port of Biloxi, Mississippi, for influencing the longshore current (Morton 2008, 1593 -96). A program of continuous inventory and monitoring of natural resources pioneered at Channel Islands became systemwide with Congress ' s 1998 Omnibus Parks Act (112 Stat. 3497). This led to a program of compiling natural resource condition assessments for many units (Dilsaver and Babalis 2023). Geographers can not only contribute to these documents for individual parks but can compare multiple sites with similar resources to gauge comparative success or failure. Are all these reports of equal validity and use? Critical reviews of this entire program will benefit the park system.

Removal of exotic species, sometimes by elimination, has become a major policy for all federal and most state land agencies. Considerable opposition to this policy is often encountered from former land users and animal rights advocates who dismiss science as meaningless abstraction (Dilsaver 2023). Occasionally some federal and state officials support the antiscience agenda. With more people and their increasingly heavy footprints, what steps should the NPS take to keep ecological integrity ' unimpaired for future generations? ' Should the agency exclude some visitors from fragile places as they already temporarily do in seasonal nesting areas?

## Social Conscience in Historical and Cultural Units

The earliest historic properties protected by the federal government are structures on the Washington Mall protected in 1790, at Hot Springs, Arkansas, in 1832, and Ford ' s Theater in 1866. They officially joined the National Park System between 1921 and 1933. Most of the twenty cultural and historical units in the park system before the Reorganization were archaeological sites in the Southwest. In 1930 the NPS added Virginia ' s George Washington Birthplace and Colonial National Monuments (Jamestown and Yorktown), answering calls for eastern historical units. Five years later Congress passed the Historic Sites Act, which laid the foundation for a planned investigation of nationally significant historic sites and attendant preservation policies. It also established an advisory board of qualified citizens to assist the NPS with evaluating potential additions to the system (Lee 1974, 12 -36; Hosmer 1994, 25 -38). In 1966 Congress passed the National Historic Preservation Act (80 Stat. 915), which established the National Register of Historic Places with grants to states and the National Trust for Historic Preservation to preserve or document historic resources. President Richard Nixon in 1971 issued Executive Order 11593, which requires federal agencies to maintain and preserve historical and cultural features on lands they manage (Nixon 1971). Subsequently additional programs for heritage areas and historic landmarks expanded the historic preservation initiative.

As with the program for natural resources, the NPS tries to include a diverse coverage of human experiences and events, but here there is no guiding framework like the Fenneman map. A 1972 NPS history plan broke down the human experience in the United States into hundreds of categories, most of which were unfilled (NPS 1972). In the halfcentury since that plan, its list of themes has been found woefully lacking in gender, racial, ethnic, social, political, and even technological coverage. Since the 1990s some of these gaps have received attention. Six of the thirteen sites that joined the system between 2016 and 2023 are devoted to civil rights. Other subjects with multiple new units are women ' s rights, Native American history, LGBTQIA þ rights, social and labor issues, and internment camps for Japanese Americans during

World War II. Conversely, the NPS rebuffs sites such as sports venues and halls of fame as well as activities with their own private museums. Other gaps are questionable. Park historians and legislators have proposed more than twenty-five precious-metal mining sites over the last century with no success. It is a glaring omission given its significance to the settlement of the U.S. West (R. Spude, personal communication 2015).

Within existing units, the NPS has welcomed research-based reappraisals of the stories presented to visitors. Military parks flatly explain the Civil War as the result of slavery. Little Bighorn and Horseshoe Bend now explain the Native American perspectives on the wars. Agency employees and a public looking for patriotic celebration actively discouraged inclusion of negative stories from U.S. history for decades. Input from research by professional historians has upended some cheery narratives.

According to the NPS (2006) Management Policies (Section 5.3.5), the agency must investigate its historic properties and landscapes to determine how to preserve and interpret them. Archaeological sites must be stabilized. The choices for a historic structure are rehabilitation, restoration, or reconstruction, depending on its condition on acquisition. Reconstruction is a last desperate chance to tell an important story. In some instances, policies and constituencies for different resources that spatially overlap can clash. In planning for Cumberland Island National Seashore, state historic preservation officials wanted the entire island designated a historic district. NPS natural resources personnel answered that this would hamper protection of the island ' s maritime oak forest ecosystems. As the state wrestled for a solution, the timeline for a response lapsed, ending the procedure. Historic preservation advocates were unhappy but could not challenge the procedure. The crux of the argument was whether the buildings were of national, regional, or local significance. Georgia said national and the NPS said local (Dilsaver 2004, 187 -91). Constant review of the human experience in the United States is necessary to keep the park system relevant and nationally significant. The NPS also comanages historic landmarks, heritage areas, and the National Register of Historic Places. These separate groups do not receive the level of protection and interpretation as do units in the official park system. How many places should the agency, with its high quality of preservation but concomitant expense, add to provide a thorough story of the U.S.

people? Can geographers help the agency identify existing sites or programs that might deserve inclusion in the future?

## Solving the Debate about Preservation versus Public Use

The mission statement of the NPS ' s Organic Act seemed to saddle the agency with two opposing purposes: preserve park resources unimpaired for future generations and encourage visitation and enjoyment by the public. Early policies by the first NPS Director, Stephen Mather, favored visitor use by opening roads to cars and establishing concession monopolies. It did not take long for problems of overcrowding, ever more infrastructure, and inappropriate activities to appear. NPS superintendents passed a resolution in 1922 encouraging more visitors and expanded development but warned against overcrowding (Toll 1922). One early solution was to develop additional visitor areas within existing parks to spread out the tourists. In the matter of what visitors should do in a national park, Superintendent John White of Sequoia urged closure of bars, dance halls, golf courses, and swimming pools because they were more appropriate and available outside the parks. Inspiration and education through outdoor activities is deemed proper (Tweed and Dilsaver 2016, 44 -47, 123 -30). NPS officials often clash with concession company executives who seek more visitors at their facilities and urge expanded recreational opportunities.

Winks (1997) provided an overview of this apparent conflict in the last century, and Orr and Humphreys (2012) studied the importance of this mission statement. In 1916 the National Park System welcomed 326,506 visitors to its units. In 1955 the number was 48,521,000. In 2023 it was 325,498,646. Limits on automobiles, backpacking permits, and overnight lodging and camping spaces are the new reality. Shuttle buses have replaced auto access in portions of Yosemite, Zion, and other crowded parks. Constant pressure to introduce or spread new forms of recreation such as jet skis in coastal units, hang gliding in Yosemite, off-road vehicles (ORVs) on trails, and drone flyovers draw anger and lawsuits when they are disallowed. Yet decisions by federal courts have demonstrated that unimpaired preservation is preeminent over use including some recreational activities. In a 2005

case, Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance v. NPS, a circuit court rejected the agency ' s decision to open a canyon trail in Canyonlands to ORV use, slapping down the argument that the NPS has an equal responsibility to preserve resources and provide recreation. The key term in every case is unimpaired .

Still, some politicians keep trying. In 2005 a former leader of the Cody, Wyoming, Chamber of Commerce hired by the Department of the Interior tried to replace the 2001 Management Policies document with one favoring consumptive uses, control of national parks by local communities, and vastly increased recreational activities. An organization called the Coalition of National Park Service Retirees including former senior leaders discovered the attempt, secured a copy, analyzed the changes, and alerted environmentalists and the national media. A firestorm of criticism erupted and the NPS committee charged to review the document dropped it and redesigned what became the Management Policies of 2006. It returned to the preservation emphases of the 2001 version and is still in use today (Smith 2013, 7). Each new development proposal, each new form of recreation, and each conflict with resource consumers challenges the protection status. Geographers are equipped to research how new factors will affect the quality of the unimpaired resources as time passes. Will the courts and the public continue to support the NPS as it struggles to keep its parks unimpaired within their evolving and crowded landscapes? Will NPS management priorities change in the decades ahead?

## The Evolving Relationship with Congress and Other Legislative Bodies

Congress and the president are the ultimate authorities for the existence of the National Park System and all the policies that govern it. The priority of power in managing parks and their uses descends from each unit ' s enabling act or proclamation to other federal laws, the 1916 Organic Act, general management plans, other specific resource plans, and the superintendent ' s compendium of local regulations. The Wilderness Act (78 Stat. 890) and many other federal laws strongly shape NPS management. Any park must obey other laws where it is located, stemming from the constitutional division of power between federal and state governments.

NEPA and other laws give the public rights to influence management decisions, and any citizen can appeal to legislators to shape policy.

The relationship between Congress and the NPS has changed through time (Sachatello 1990; Keiter 2020). Periodically federal authorities listen to their constituents or have ideas of their own. Secretary of the Interior James Watt tried to declassify multiple units of the park system in the early 1980s but met strong resistance from a concerned public. More than two dozen units have been delisted through the decades but generally at the urging of the NPS itself (Hogenauer 1991; Weber 2022). Occasionally Congress establishes a new unit that the agency does not want. Steamtown National Historic Site in Scranton, Pennsylvania, a railroad museum, is a frequently cited example. Decisions to ignore a proposal for a new park or to delist an existing unit depend on four criteria: significance to the entire nation; suitability to join the system including topical propriety and lack of duplication; feasibility in cost and land acquisition; and whether another agency or organization can preserve the resources for the public. The latter criterion was added by Congress in its 1998 Omnibus Parks Act (112 Stat. 3497). The same law ordered the NPS to only study proposals for new units that are ordered by Congress. The agency previously proclaimed its unique expertise in judging any proposed addition with assistance from qualified advisory board members or scientists. Congress at present is sharply divided on most issues including the funding, policies, and even the very existence of this federal system of parks. This insistence on micromanagement troubles some NPS planners.

Yet, as the main source of funding for the park system, Congress also is the last resort to protect existing units from development threats. Legislators in 2011 purchased ninety-five acres of private land in Gettysburg National Military Park saving them from development of 200 houses on part of the battlefield (Department of the Interior 2011). A comparison of proposals for new parks and their development plans from before 1998 with those established after the new omnibus rules might expose differences in the system ' s direction and design. Have recent Congresses subtly changed policies in newer units? Should the contents of the park system and management of their resources be in the hands of the trained experts of the NPS, continue to go through the NEPA process, or be left to Congress to manage?

## Social and Racial Inclusiveness

Yellowstone National Park had 121 permanent and temporary employees in 1925. Of those, just nine were women -four clerks, three telephone operators, and two temporary park rangers. All were White. Beginning in the 1960s, the NPS sought to redress this system-wide gender imbalance by increasing women ' s share of permanent positions to 20 percent of the jobs in 1975, 35 percent in 1991, and 38 percent in 2020. Among GS13 -15 senior officials in 2020, women held 42 percent of the positions (NPS 2023). Despite the minimal inclusion of women in those early years, their influence was significant. When the NPS sought a new park, women ' s societies were among the earliest allies. Joshua Tree National Park owes its existence to one woman, Minerva Hoyt. She became an international expert on xerophytic vegetation and used her wealth and political connections to overcome miners, garden thieves, and dismissive males to convince Franklin Roosevelt to proclaim the area a national monument (Kaufman 1998, 27 -55; Dilsaver 2016b, 103 -43).

Years of segregation and overt racism caused African Americans to disassociate the national parks with enjoyment and prospective employment (Weber and Sultana 2013; Moore 2022). Poverty, urban location, and a sense that they would be excluded from White spaces exacerbated the negative perception. Indeed, the national park units in the South actively segregated the races until the late 1940s. It took sustained civil rights campaigns, World War II, and a disgusted Interior Secretary Harold Ickes to order southern superintendents to stop overt discrimination in Shenandoah and other parks. The damage was done, however, and many African Americans do not see the parks in their recreational worldview (Young 2017, 173 -207).

The NPS has attempted to solve this problem with educational outreach, the establishment of urban recreation units such as Gateway National Recreation Area, and employment offers with limited success (Melton 2021).

In a system that once drew mostly rich White men, other minorities are also underrepresented both among visitors and employees. Decades of removing Native Americans from park lands; halting hunting, gathering, and religious activities in traditional territories; and removal of artifacts and bodies of ancestors nearly erased the original inhabitants. Successful legal challenges, efforts to include tribes in decisionmaking for preservation and interpretation, and more enlightened negotiations have improved the situation recently. One helpful program employs local ethnic people at park units located in their home region. Despite this, the employment picture still shows an imbalance between the U.S. population and NPS employment (Table 2).

Interpretation of the mission and stories of the park system is imperative to draw underserved peoples to the parks. Broadening and publicizing employment opportunities will help. How can the NPS and educators at every level convince minorities that they also own these places? Separation from Whites, due to discrimination or by personal choice, detracts from the mission of the park system. How should the spatial distribution of new units for the park system ensure racial and gender visitation?

## Four Issues That Complicate Management

The goals of the National Park System and the fundamental policies that govern them are problematic and sometimes controversial. Beyond the issues already described, NPS personnel encounter four

Table 2. National Park Service (NPS) employees and U.S. population by ethnicity

| Comparison of NPS workforce to U.S. population   | % of NPS workforce (2020)   | % of U.S. population (2019)   |
|--------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Hispanic                                         | 5.6%                        | 18.5%                         |
| Black                                            | 6.7%                        | 13.4%                         |
| Asian                                            | 2.3%                        | 5.9%                          |
| Native American                                  | 2.5%                        | 1.3%                          |
| Hawaiian or Pacific Islander                     | 0.7%                        | 0.2%                          |
| Two or more races                                | 0.4%                        | 2.8%                          |
| White                                            | 78.5%                       | 60.1%                         |

Note:

Data from NPS (2021).

difficulties in the day-to-day management of their units: (1) an expanding workload, (2) understaffing, (3) underfunding, and (4) a predicted disinterest from technology-focused young people.

## Expanding Workload

Congress established the NPS to manage the parks, but once it existed other responsibilities soon accrued. As concern for the country ' s recreation needs arose, the NPS advised the states in establishing their systems during the 1920s and 1930s. In addition, it managed the planning and execution of Civilian Conservation Corps projects during the Great Depression. Much of that work occurred outside the federal park system (Shankland 1970, 185 -90; Unrau and Williss, 1983, 106 -23). In 2024 the agency continues to provide technical and planning cooperation to states and private entities involved in environmental and historical preservation.

The NPS comanages many national rivers, trails, and affiliated areas and consults on major features such as the Columbia River Gorge. As noted earlier, the agency also has responsibilities for other categories of protected places. In 2024, the NPS advises and helps support sixty-two national heritage areas with another fourteen waiting for approval; 602 national natural landmarks; more than 2,600 national historical landmarks; and the more than 96,000 sites and landscapes listed on the National Register of Historic Places (see NPS Web sites for each category). How much influence does the NPS have in shaping the heritage of the country? The agency established an Office of International Affairs in 1961 to conduct relations with more than 150 other countries that have park systems. The office coordinates management training for foreign park officials, exchanges technical and procedural data, and participates in international conferences (Young and Dilsaver 2011, 269 -78). How far have the policies and methods of preservation developed in the U.S. penetrated the rest of the world? If the NPS transfers some of these duties to other bureaus or organizations to lighten the workload, which should go where and how should their budgets be divided?

One of the prime responsibilities of the NPS is interpreting to visitors the resources that justify the existence of a unit. This traditionally took the form of guided hikes, campfire programs, and person-to-person contacts with visitors. Beginning in the 1960s law enforcement became much more demanding and has led to enhanced training of rangers in urban police procedures, a conversion of positions to basic law enforcement, and a diminution of ranks for interpretation (Childers 2017). Has this eroded support for the parks and their rangers?

## Understaffing

The National Parks Conservation Association (2022) recently reported that ' nearly 3,500 park staff positions, or 16% of the Park Service ' s staffing capacity, have been eliminated over the last decade, due to inadequate investments by Congress. ' The results affect the entire system. At Rocky Mountain National Park, between 2011 and 2019, visitation increased by 58 percent, but staffing levels dropped by 13 percent. Zion National Park over the same period saw visitation increase by 68 percent, but staffing levels dropped by 16 percent. These are socalled crown-jewel parks. The Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island received 11 percent more visitors but staffing levels dropped by 27 percent. Between 2011 and that report in 2022, Congress and the presidents added twenty-nine new units to the system (NPS 2023). Congress seems oblivious to the agency workload, using its power to order a multitude of studies for new parks or upgrades to existing units. The staff at Ocmulgee National Monument hoped for national park status in 2023, but the agency had a backlog of thirty-two other studies it had been ordered to complete but too few employees to execute them (Hotakainen and Bogardus 2023). Park visitors in 2019 usually met many of the nearly 300,000 parttime, unpaid workers of the Volunteer-in-Park program (VIP). They outnumber the approximately 20,000 paid employees nearly fifteen to one (NPS 2022). Concession workers also help with interpretation and some maintenance projects.

## Underfunding

In the mid-1950s, the NPS initiated Mission 66 to address a funding crisis in maintenance and construction for visitor service and protection. Many in the agency hoped that its centennial in 2016 would bring a similar investment, but it did not. In 2018 the agency calculated the full scope of constructionrelated costs, which caused the reported maintenance deficit to rise sharply. At the end of fiscal

year 2022, it stood at $22.3 billion for repairs on roads, buildings, utility systems, and other facilities. Organizations such as the National Park Foundation and companies that provide grants offer help for research and other programs. Congress guaranteed funding the Land and Water Conservation Fund in 2020, yet maintenance still suffers. The 2023 budget from Congress was the largest ever but the deficit continued to rise.

Ansson (1999) exhaustively described measures to address the shortfall but many remain unused and others have not made appreciable impacts. Desperation has led to suggestions that commercial entities brand parks as they do with sports facilities or adopt a franchise model for expanding protected areas through independently managed national parks. Fretwell (2015) suggested that a franchise park would have to be self-sufficient, adding that ' the NPS and the franchisee would negotiate brand use and service fees ' (118). The NPS and most environmentalists reject privatization of the national parks. They argue that the culture and care that has made them the model of preservation and public inclusion for the world would be destroyed. Would visitors flock to AT&amp;T Yellowstone National Park? Would the standards of resource protection decline in privatized parks? What forms of money generation should the agency use to counter this perennial problem?

## Growing Disinterest Among Young People

NPS administrators and planners have noticed that visitors are aging as a group and wondered whether today ' s youth will care enough to support and visit the parks in the future. Statistics show that the proportion of young people visiting the parks is shrinking. Some have speculated that urban and technological activities are side-tracking them. Ruiz and Havlick (2023) found that a lack of knowledge about the park system, a perceived difficulty of access, and a fear of high cost hid real interest. Better education about the park system, competitive advertising of units accessible to population nodes, and more opportunities for student groups to visit can help overcome these negative impressions. Trained in a scholastic tradition based on field experience, geographers should be leaders in such programs.

## External Threats

It is easy to think of parks as islands of preservation, but all too often they lie within regions of consumptive and residential use. Outside NPS boundaries air, light, and noise emanate from multiple functions and water resources disappear into external wells and irrigation. Over time these threats have grown from adjacent irritations to worldwide conditions that threaten all the resources within a park. Great Smoky Mountains and Zion National Parks have noisy commercial hubs, erasing serenity and diluting park messages right next to their access gates. Motorists and ORV riders use Revised Statute 2477 to claim that long-abandoned routes in parks are still roads rightfully theirs to drive (Stump 2021). Expensive rehabilitation might partially restore water to the Everglades after decades of diversion for agricultural and residential use (see EvergladesRestoration.gov).

Of much greater concern are the worldwide prospects of climate change and rising sea levels. In 2010 the agency acknowledged that, ' Global climate change … challenges the NPS mission to leave park resources unimpaired for future generations unlike any threat in our history ' (NPS 2010, 3). Mitchell (2011) suggested that ' climate change may eclipse biodiversity conservation as the main threat around which programs and funding are organized ' (11). Global warming has increased the frequency and severity of fires that in 2021 killed or fatally injured at least 1,300 giant sequoias of greater than four feet in diameter in Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks (Sequoia Parks Conservancy 2022). Officials at Joshua Tree National Park report that the park might lose its namesake species entirely.

Rising sea level has claimed archaeological resources from many coastal parks and threatens historic structures as well. The NPS paid $11.8 million to move the Cape Hatteras Lighthouse to save it from erosive destruction in 1999. That amount was paltry compared to restoring Ship Island in Gulf Island National Seashore. After Hurricane Katrina widened a cut through the island caused by Hurricane Camille in 1969, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers spent more than $350 million to fill in the five-mile gap and reconnect island pieces. Completed in 2019, ostensibly for protection of the mainland from future hurricanes, the Corps admits it will last only twenty to thirty years (Brown, personal communication 2024). What can the NPS and the public do in the

face of these existential threats? Should researchers predict what will happen to resources under future conditions and take steps to relocate species and historic properties to where they will be safe? How shall the agency relate such a policy to its goal of unimpaired preservation? Does the National Park System meet the highest form of protection as classified by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature in view of these threats? Is the international goal to protect 30 percent of the land by 2030 a realistic goal for the United States?

## Conclusion

The National Park System has grown in content and complexity for 153years. The NPS controls nearly 85 million acres (34.4 million hectares) or 3.4 percent of U.S. land. Its influence as the premier preservation agency in the United States shapes environmental and historic policies of other land agencies at all levels of government and private protection. As the oldest and most emulated preservation (not conservation) system, it has seen decades of adjustments to change, not all positive.

The NPS has weathered nine varied and occasionally controversial processes that reflect the legacies of the past, the full spans of human and ecological parameters, and a unique mission that is critical for the future. The agency ' s path has defined the contents of the preservation system and its spatial expression, accepted domination of natural resource management by hard science, developed a commitment to including historical preservation of all U.S. stories, and encouraged all citizens to visit and help manage this geographical entity. Preservation for future generations has legally overcome incessant calls for uses that would undo the mission of the NPS and its units. The agency continues to struggle with internal problems of management such as underfunding, understaffing, declining public interest, and an angry component of the constituency who demand new recreation activities and individual rights harmful to its legal requirements. Finally, the NPS must deal with large-scale external threats that could cause unpredictable changes in the quality and distribution of natural and cultural resources. The idea of national parks is a popular one, but will its mission be able to withstand the changes to come?

To cope with these issues the NPS needs continued research and adaptive management prescriptions from both practitioners and scholars. During its centennial, many experts and committees focused on the future needs of the park system. The National Parks Conservation Association organized one called the National Parks Second Century Commission, which issued specific recommendations to be carried out by the NPS, Congress, and presidents (see Dilsaver 2016a, 431 -37). It is an ambitious list for politicians and the NPS. Geographers with their foci on the relationship between humans and the natural world, the historical and spatial aspects of people across the nation and the world, and the training to predict and plan for change must contribute more to the evolving operation of this singular experiment.

## Disclosure Statement

The map in Figure 1 was drafted by Joe Weber and used with his explicit permission. No other potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

## References

Ansson, R. 1999. Funding our national parks in the 21 st century: Will we be able to preserve and protect our embattled national parks? Fordham Environmental Law Review 11 (1):art. 1. https://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/elr/ vol11/iss1/1

Childers, M. 2017. The Stoneman Meadow riots and law enforcement in Yosemite National Park. Forest History Today , Spring 2017. https://foresthistory.org/ wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Childers\_Stoneman.pdf.

Congressional Research Service. 2023. National Parks System: What do the different titles signify? Accessed June 2, 2023. https://crsreports.congress.gov R41816.

Department of the Interior. 2011, March 25. Salazar announces important land acquisition in Gettysburg National Military Park. https://www.doi.gov/news/ pressreleases/americas-great-outdoors-salazar-announce s-important-land-acquisition-ingettysburg-national-mil itary-park.

Diamont, R. 2021. Climbing the ladder to park heaven. Parks Stewardship Forum 37 (2):283 -89.

Dilsaver, L. 2004. Cumberland Island National Seashore: A history of conservation conflict . Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.

Dilsaver, L. 2016a. National Park System: The critical documents . 2nd ed. Lanham, MD: Rowman &amp; Littlefield.

Dilsaver, L. 2016b. Preserving the desert: A history of Joshua Tree National Park . Staunton, VA: George F. Thompson.

- Dilsaver, L. 2023. Obstacles to removing non-native species from a national park. Parks Stewardship Forum 39 (1):83 -90. doi: 10.5070/P539159894.
- Dilsaver, L., and T. Babalis. 2023. Restoring nature: The evolution of Channel Islands National Park . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
- EvergladesRestoration.gov. n.d. Everglades restoration initiatives. http://www.evergladesrestoration.gov/restorattion-program-overview.
- Fenneman, N. 1928. Physiographic divisions of the United States. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 18 (4):261 -353. doi: 10.1080/00045602809357034.
- Foresta, R. 1985. America ' s national parks and their keepers . Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, Inc.
- Fretwell, H. 2015. The NPS franchise: A better way to protect our heritage. The George Wright Forum 32 (2):114 -22.
- Harmon, D. 2012. Beyond the 59th park: Reforming the nomenclature of the US National Park System. George Wright Forum 29 (2):188 -96.
- Helman, D. J. 2017. The National Park Service at 100. Akron Law Revue 50 (1):art. 2. http://ideaexchange. uakron.edu/akronlawreview/vol50/iss1/2.
- Hogenauer, A. 1991. Gone, but not forgotten: The delisted units of the U.S. National Park System. The George Wright Forum 7 (4):2 -19.
- Hosmer, C. 1994. Verne E. Chatelain and the development of the branch of history of the National Park Service. The Public Historian 16 (1):25 -38. doi: 10.2307/3378579.
- Hotakainen, R., and K. Bogardus. 2023, January 24, Frustrations mount as National Park Service studies pile up. https://www.eenews.net/articles/frustrationsmount-as-national-park-service-studies-pile-up/.
- Ise, J. 1961. Our national park policy . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Press.
- Kaufman, P. 1998. National Parks and the woman ' s voice: A history . Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Keiter, R. 2013. To conserve unimpaired: The evolution of the National Park idea . Washington, DC: Island.
- Keiter, R. 2020. The environmental politics and policy of western public lands . Corvallis: Oregon State University. https://open.oregonstate.education/environmentalpolitics/chapter/national-parks/.
- Lee, R. 1974. Family tree of the National Park System . Philadelphia: Eastern National Park &amp; Monument Association.
- Mackintosh, B., J. McDonnell, and J. Sprinkle, Jr. 2018. The national parks: Shaping the system. The George Wright Forum 35 (2):1 -132.
- Melton, M. 2021. US ranger on mission to attract more African Americans to national parks. Voice of America News, March 20. https://www.voanews.com/ a/usa\_us-ranger-mission-attract-more-african-american s-national-parks/6203926.html.
- Mitchell, B. 2011. Projecting America ' s best ideals: International engagement and the National Park Service. The George Wright Forum 28 (1):7 -16.
- Moore, A. 2022. Historic discrimination to blame for diversity gap in US Parks, expert says. North Carolina State University College of Natural Resource News, February 21. https://cnr.ncsu.edu/news/2022/02/discrimination-to-diversity-gap-in-parks/.
- Morton, R. 2008. Historical changes in the MississippiAlabama barrier-island chain and the roles of extreme storms, sea level, and human activities. Journal of Coastal Research 246 (6):1587 -1600. doi: 10.2112/07-0953.1.
- National Park Service (NPS). 1968. Administrative policies for historical areas in the National Park System.
- National Park Service (NPS). 1972. Part one of the National Park System plan: History . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior.
- National Park Service (NPS). 2001. The national parks: Shaping the system . Harpers Ferry, WV: NPS.
- National Park Service (NPS). 2006. Management policies 2006 . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior. https://www.nps.gov/orgs/1548/upload/Manage mentPolicies2006.pdf.
- National Park Service (NPS). 2010. National Park Service climate change response strategy . Fort Collins, CO: NPS Climate Change Response Program.
- National Park Service (NPS). 2019. Mississippi Coastal Improvement Program. https://www.nps.gov//guis/ learn/nature/mscip.htm.
- National Park Service (NPS). 2021. By the numbers. https://www.nps.gov/articles/000/by-the-numbers.htm.
- National Park Service (NPS). 2022. Frequently asked questions. https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/faqs.htm.
- National Park Service (NPS). 2023. Cultural landscapes 101. https://www.nps.gov/articles/cultural-landscapes-101.htm.
- National Park Service (NPS). 2024. About us. https:// www.nps.gov/aboutus/national-park-system.htm.
- National Parks Conservation Association. 2022. National Parks continue to set visitation records but remain underfunded and understaffed. https://www.npca.org/ articles/3070-national-parks-continue-to-set-visitationrecords-but-remain-underfunded-and-understaffed.
- Nixon, R. 1971. Executive Order 11593: Protection and enrichment of the cultural environment. CFR Title 3:1971 -75. Compilation 559 -562.
- Olmsted, F. [1865] 1952. The Yosemite Valley and the Mariposa Big Tree Grove. Landscape Architecture 43:12 -25.
- Orr, S. K., and R. L. Humphreys. 2012. Mission rivalry: Use and preservation conflicts in National Parks policy. Public Organization Review 12 (1):85 -98. doi: 10. 1007/s11115-011-0161-8.
- Rothman, H. 1994. Preserving different pasts: The American national monuments . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- Ruiz, T., and D. Havlick. 2023. A study of millennials ' attitudes toward U.S. National Parks. Journal of Outdoor Recreation, Education, and Leadership 15 (1):4. doi: 10.18666/JOREL-2023-11504.
- Runte, A. 2021. National parks: The American experience , 5th ed. Guilford, CT: Lyons Press.
- Sachatello, B. 1990. Political influences on the National Park Service: Past and present. MA thesis, University of Richmond.
- Sellars, R. 2009. Preserving nature in the National Parks: A history . 2nd ed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Sequoia Parks Conservancy. 2022. KNP complex fire recovery fund for Sequoia National Park. https://www. sequoiaparksconservancy.org.
- Shankland, R. 1970. Stephen Mather of the National Parks . 2nd ed. New York: Knopf.

- Smith, R. 2013. CNPSR and the management policies. The Coalition of National Park Service Retirees Newsletter, November. cnpsr-newsletter-11-2013.pdf.
- Soukup, M., and G. Machlis. 2021. American covenant: National Parks, their promise, and our nation ' s future . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance v. NPS, 387 F. Supp. 2d 1178 (D. Utah 2005).
- Stump, M. 2021. R.S. 2477 and the impact on the Western United States. Joule: Duquesne Energy &amp; Environmental Law Journal. https://sites.law.duq.edu/joule/r-s-2477-andthe-impact-on-the-western-united-states/.
- Toll, R. 1922. Superintendents ' resolution on overdevelopment . December 1, National Park Service Archives, Box K5410, Harpers Ferry, WV.
- Tweed, W., and L. Dilsaver. 2016. Challenge of the big trees: A history of Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks . 2nd ed. Staunton, VA: George F. Thompson.
- U.S. Congress. 1970. An act to improve the administration of the National Park System by the Secretary of the Interior, and to clarify the authorities applicable to the system, and for other purposes. General Authorities Act, 84 Stat. 825.
- U.S. Congress. 1998. An act to provide for improved management and increased accountability for certain National Park Service programs, and for other purposes. 3497 Stat. 112.
- Unrau, H. D., and G. F. Williss. 1983. Administrative history: Expansion of the National Park Service in the 1930s . Denver, CO: Denver Service Center, National Park Service.
- Weber, J. 2022. America ' s lost national monuments. Journal of Historical Geography 78:55 -68. doi: 10.1016/ j.jhg.2022.07.008.
- Weber, J., and S. Sultana. 2013. Why do so few minority people visit National Parks? Visitation and the accessibility of ' America ' s best idea. ' Annals of the Association of American Geographers 103 (3):437 -64. doi: 10.1080/00045608.2012. 689240.
- Weber, J., and S. Sultana. 2023. The parks belong to the people: The geography of the National Park System . Athens: University of Georgia Press.
- Winks, R. 1997. The National Park Service Act of 1916: A contradictory mandate? Denver University Law Review 74 (3):575 -624.
- Wright, G., J. Dixon, and B. Thompson. 1933. Fauna of the National Parks of the United States: A preliminary survey of faunal relations in National Parks . Washington, DC: General Printing Office.
- Young, T. 2017. Heading out: A history of American camping . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Young, T., and L. Dilsaver. 2011. Collecting and diffusing the world ' s best thought: International cooperation by the National Park Service. The George Wright Forum 28 (3):269 -78.
- LARY M. DILSAVER is a Professor Emeritus of Geography in the Department of Earth Sciences at the University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36688. E-mail: ldilsaver@southalabama.edu. His research interests include the historical geography of U.S. public lands, the National Park System, landscape studies, historic preservation, and natural resource management.