<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/raag21

## Patterns of Multidimensional Poverty in the United States

David C. Folch &amp; Matthew Laird

To cite this article: David C. Folch &amp; Matthew Laird (2024) Patterns of Multidimensional Poverty in the United States, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 114:2, 387-407, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2023.2265984

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2023.2265984

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 06 Nov 2023.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1282

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Patterns of Multidimensional Poverty in the United States

David C. Folch  and Matthew Laird †

 Department of Geography, Planning and Recreation, Northern Arizona University, USA † Department of Economics, Florida State University, USA

The accurate accounting of where and for whom deprivations occur is fundamental to addressing poverty. In the United States, the official poverty measure considers only a person ' s income, although poverty is increasingly understood internationally as a set of multiple, interlinked deprivations. This article introduces a decomposable multidimensional poverty (MDP) measure that addresses these shortcomings by using thirteen American Community Survey microdata indicators to identify education, health, housing, and economic security deprivations for individuals. In 2017, the national poverty rate was 13.7 percent when measured using MDP and 13.1 percent using official poverty. Although similar at the national scale, Hispanic, Asian, and older persons had higher poverty rates using the multidimensional measure, whereas Black and young persons had higher rates when using official poverty. MDP tended to be higher than official poverty in dense urban areas, whereas official poverty tended to be higher in rural areas. Further, MDP was a stronger correlate with COVID-19 death rates than official poverty through the first three waves of the pandemic. The design of MDP recognizes that individuals can experience poverty in different ways and provides a more holistic view of people and places. Key Words: census microdata, COVID-19, multidimensional poverty, poverty measurement, United States.

I n both a theoretical and methodological sense, how the United States measures poverty does not meet the challenge for understanding who is deprived in society. Currently, the official poverty measure, developed in Orshansky (1965), considers only cash income to define poverty, using poverty thresholds set with food budgets based on data now more than half a century old. The Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM) attempts to remedy this by bringing into consideration household expenses, taxes, government transfers, and local cost of living, and it is in line with recommendations from the National Academy of Sciences (Citro and Michael 1995). Although a marked improvement, the SPM fails to account for a person ' s capability in a holistic sense. The capabilities approach addresses this shortcoming by arguing that poverty is a lack of an individual ' s ability to lead a full functioning life. This approach was advanced by Amartya Sen (see Alkire et al. 2015 for further discussion) and served as the guiding framework for the Report by the Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress (Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi 2009), which outlines key dimensions for evaluating poverty. The report ' s recommendations include the consideration of a person ' s health, education, material well-being, personal activities including work, environment, political voice, governance, social connections and relationships, and insecurities of an economic or physical nature. These dimensions provide a broader range of areas in which an individual might be deprived, negatively affecting the ability to lead a fulfilled life. The consequences of the Commission ' s report have been far reaching; across the globe, states are beginning to take a more holistic approach to identifying the poor within their countries.

Beginning with the United Nations ' adoption of a multidimensional framework in 2010 (Alkire and Santos 2010; Sumner 2010), there has been an international emphasis on developing multidimensional measures to assess poverty. The approach set forth in Alkire and Foster (2011) (hereinafter AF approach) has been at the center of international efforts to redefine our understanding of poverty. The multidimensional poor can be identified by constructing an index of experienced deprivations built on the idea of capabilities. Yet, the United States continues to lag in this area with clear repercussions. As measures of poverty are integral for the accurate

targeting of antipoverty programs and for measuring these programs ' success, considerable effort should be undertaken to align measures with this modern understanding of poverty. Multiple attempts to rectify this have been made using a variety of methods, yet challenges remain to adequately address the issues. Between dimension selection, dimension weighting, and data suitability, serious burdens to effectively operationalizing the measurement of deprivation and multidimensional poverty (MDP) in the U.S. context remain. Further, little understanding exists of how MDP varies across space. If we are to develop programs that adequately address poverty, this understanding is vital.

This article focuses on the definition of MDP and the prospects for assessing deprivation in the United States through the AF method. Our method builds on microdata rather than aggregate data. This approach is vital to understanding how poverty varies within and across locations and for maintaining a focus on the capabilities of individuals. Further, we explain the role that space plays in influencing poverty by considering local cost of living and presenting results at the relatively fine Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA) scale (minimum of 100,000 persons). We also examine the logic and implementation of the AF method in the U.S. context to understand what future approaches to the measurement of MDP must improve on. An application to the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic shows the effectiveness of this approach at capturing the patterns of a crisis with diverse socioeconomic underpinnings. Measuring poverty in this way allows us to understand the multitude of ways that both individuals and places experience poverty.

## Motivation

Over the years, multiple frameworks have been developed to measure poverty. Both the official poverty measure and the more recent SPM could be considered measures of monetary poverty . This singledimension framework focuses on the relationship between a household ' s income and its ability to meet a minimum consumption level (Evans, Nogales, and Robson 2020). Callan, Nolan, and Whelan (1993) and others further refined this framework by defining low income as poverty and inability to meet a minimum consumption level as deprivation . MDP measures expand the concept of deprivation to domains beyond consumption such as education and health.

The framework set forth in the World Bank ' s Voices of the Poor report says, ' poverty consists of many interlocked dimensions ' (Narayan et al. 2000, 4). To meet this challenge, a measure of poverty must reflect the multifaceted and interlinked nature of poverty. To this end, a variety of approaches and definitions have emerged; however, this article focuses on the capabilities approach advanced in the work of Amartya Sen. Two concepts have particular importance to the capabilities approach, that of functioning and capabilities. ' Functionings are the beings and doings that people value and have reason to value, and capabilities are the freedoms to achieve valuable functionings … [M]easurement should focus on … [indicators] that people can actually achieve. … [C]apability measures use indicators that … can be justified empirically as proxies of functionings or capabilities ' (Alkire et al. 2015, 199). Poverty can then be understood as impediments to or deprivations in capabilities, and a poverty measure captures these impediments and deprivations empirically. These ideas are inherently multidimensional and require knowing more than a person ' s income or consumption pattens to adequately assess.

## Measuring Multidimensional Poverty

The concept of MDP has inspired myriad approaches to its measurement, with no clear consensus. All MDP measures are solving a data reduction problem: how to combine the complexities of poverty into a single number. From a data perspective, measures can be divided between those using spatially aggregated data and those using microdata on individuals. Aggregate data approaches can integrate business surveys, demographic surveys, crime data, satellite imagery, and so on, as the unit of analysis is a place, such as a neighborhood or county. This strength allows for poverty dimensions to be more precisely targeted using the best source available. The United Kingdom ' s Index of Multiple Deprivation (Noble et al. 2006) is an example of this approach. The microdata approach uses household-level surveys to gain a holistic perspective on individuals: Each person is identified as being in poverty or not. The approach avoids ecological

fallacy issues that can arise from aggregated data. If the household survey is a representative sample of the population or if weights are available for each respondent, broad statements can be made about the overall prevalence of poverty.

The privacy challenges of household microdata make the aggregate data approach appealing when fine spatial resolution is needed. Conversely, publicly accessible microdata paint a rich picture of individuals, but lack geographic specificity. Glassman (2017) provided an example of a MDP microdata approach implemented within a government agency, and so can leverage fine spatial scale information to understand each person ' s geographic context.

From a modeling perspective, MDP measures can be grouped as predominantly top-down or bottomup. Top-down measures such as those used by Montoya and Teixeira (2017) and Chen, Leu, and Wang (2019) leaned heavily on expert knowledge and demographic theory at all stages of index design. The researcher might identify a fixed deprivation threshold for each dimension (e.g., less than twelve years of education) and then aggregate the deprivations to determine an individual ' s poverty status. Bottom-up measures such as those used by Lucchini et al. (2018) and Betti, Gagliardi, and Verma (2018) leverage data distributions and statistical approaches to achieve the same goal. These methods apply clustering, principal components analysis, and so on, to multiple indicators such as education level, housing expenditure, household size, and more to identify poverty and nonpoverty individuals. Being expert driven, top-down approaches tend to be easier to explain but can be criticized for their subjectivity. The data-driven nature of bottom-up approaches makes them more adaptable to variations and imperfections in the data but can appear as black boxes to policymakers.

## Alkire -Foster Approach

In this article, we apply a variation on the AF approach, a top-down method, to measure individuals ' poverty situations using microdata. We chose this method for three reasons. First, substantive decisions in the method ' s implementation are explicit rather than implicit, which increases transparency. Second, the method can more easily integrate mixed-type data because statistical distributions play less of a role. Binary data (e.g., has health insurance or not), ordinal data (e.g., levels of educational attainment), and continuous data (e.g., annual income) might all be relevant indicators, but each have different statistical properties. Third, the method is stable over time. Because the method does not rely on data distributions, which change from year-to-year, the characteristics that determine poverty are also fixed.

Alkire and Foster (2011) provided the mathematical and axiomatic derivation grounding the core of the approach. As originally designed, AF is a dualcutoff approach. The first tier of cutoffs establishes whether the person is deprived in each measured indicator; the second tier uses a single cutoff based on the number of deprivations identified in the first tier to identify MDP. The cutoffs are based on normative evaluations of the indicators and when combined, give a binary determination of an individual ' s poverty status. Indicators are treated independently, meaning that a high level in one does not compensate or substitute for a low level in another. An optional weighting scheme can be applied when indicators are assumed to contribute unequally to poverty.

Empirical implementations of AF must bridge the gap between theoretical dimensions and available indicators. Dimensions are broad concepts such as nutrition, housing, education, employment, economic security, and so on. Indicators are socioeconomic measurements available for individuals and households such as body mass index, access to indoor plumbing, years of schooling, hours worked per week, household income, and so on. Ideally there is a one-to-one match between dimension and indicator, which was the case in the original AF design. Imprecise links, however, between the two have led many recent AF applications to use an ensemble of indicators to define each dimension from multiple perspectives.

## AF Applications in the United States

There have been multiple applications of AF to the U.S. population since 2011. We limit ourselves to those using the American Community Survey (ACS) because it provides the finest spatial resolution of MDP. A strength of the ACS is its many questions and the rigor behind its methodology; a weakness is that the questions miss some of the nuance ideally needed for measuring capabilities. We

have identified eleven applications that vary methodologically in their aggregation approaches and empirically in the dimensions and indicators chosen; these are summarized in Table 1. The applications can be broadly grouped into two methodological approaches for dealing with the challenge of aligning indicators to dimensions: the three-tier approach and the weighting approach.

The three-tier approach inserts a middle tier of cutoffs between the first and second tiers described earlier. When a dimension has multiple indicators, this intermediate tier determines if a person is deprived in that particular dimension based on rules for counts and combinations of deprivations at the indicator tier. The last tier, as before, determines overall MDP, but this time based on the number of deprivations by dimension instead of by indicator. For example, Glassman (2019) used thirteen indicators and six dimensions. He considered a person deprived on the housing quality dimension if they meet at least two of the following indicator deprivations: lack complete kitchen, lack complete plumbing, overcrowded housing unit, and high cost burden. A person is then considered to be experiencing MDP (in the last tier) if they have at least two dimension-level deprivations.

The weighting approach follows the original twotier approach for cutoffs but inserts a weighting step between the first and second tiers to reduce the impact of indicators within a dimension with multiple indicators. For example, Koohi-Kamali and Liu (2017) identified nine indicators spread across four dimensions. They assign equal weight to each dimension (0.25) and equal weight to the indicators within each dimension. The living standard dimension has three indicators: overcrowded housing, vehicle possession, and ownership of real estate. Because the dimension has three indicators, they are each worth 0.333 of the 0.25 for the dimension, or 0.083. The weighted indicators then pass to the last tier where they are summed, and a value greater than 0.30 determines if the person is in MDP.

The examples from Glassman (2019) and KoohiKamali and Liu (2017) also highlight how indicators and dimensions vary across implementations. They both include overcrowded housing, but group it with different indicators and under different dimensions. This changes how overcrowding contributes to a final determination of MDP. The grouping strategies of the eleven papers reviewed generally agree that education and health are key dimensions but begin to diverge as dimensions become more grounded in economic factors such as housing, standard of living and economic security. Because they all draw from the same source data, indicators can match exactly, whereas dimensions and indicator groupings are more variable.

Education and health have the most overlap across the eleven applications, likely due to clear non-economic-based indicators of these dimensions in the ACS. Nearly all agree that an education deprivation exists when a person over age eighteen does not have at least a high school diploma. The ACS also asks about disability status, ranging from the practical implications of having an impairment (i.e., challenges with self-care and independent living) to identification of specific impairments (i.e., vision, hearing, cognitive, and ambulatory). These health indicators exist largely outside of the economic realm. In contrast, lacking health insurance is difficult to disentangle from economic factors in the United States. Some research shows that people

Table 1. Papers using the Alkire -Foster approach with American Community Survey data

|                                       |   Indicators |   Dimensions | Method     | Overall cutoff   | U.S. poverty rate (%)   |
|---------------------------------------|--------------|--------------|------------|------------------|-------------------------|
| Dhongde (2017)                        |            9 |            4 | Three tier | 2 dimensions     | 12.27 (2013)            |
| Dhongde and Haveman (2017)            |           11 |            6 | Three tier | 2 dimensions     | 14.20 (2013)            |
| Dhongde, Pattanaik, and Xu (2019)     |           15 |            9 | Three tier | 4 dimensions     | 2.25 (2015)             |
| Glassman (2017)                       |           14 |            7 | Three tier | 2 dimensions     | 16.92 (2016)            |
| Glassman (2019)                       |           13 |            6 | Three tier | 2 dimensions     | 15.40 (2017)            |
| Koohi-Kamali and Liu (2017)           |            9 |            4 | Weighting  | 0.3 weight       | 7.60 (2006 - 2010)      |
| Kratzer (2018)                        |            9 |            3 | Two tier   | 3 indicators     | 14.23 (2015)            |
| Mitra and Brucker (2017)              |           10 |            5 | Three tier | 2 dimensions     | 15.28 (2012)            |
| Reeves, Rodrigue, and Kneebone (2016) |            5 |            5 | Two tier   | Multiple         | 23.00 (2014)            |
| White and Bailleul (2019)             |           17 |            4 | Weighting  | 0.333 weight     | 6.80 (2008 - 2017)      |
| White and Yamasaki (2017)             |           17 |            4 | Weighting  | 0.333 weight     | 9.48 (2010 - 2014)      |

without health insurance are less likely to seek out routine medical services, thus making them less healthy (Sommers, Gawande, and Baicker 2017) and other research shows they are more exposed to financial hardship if a major health issue occurs (e.g., bankruptcy; Kuroki 2021). Both hardships are possible, making health insurance difficult to categorize. A similarly entangled indicator is receiving Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP; i.e., ' food stamps ' ) benefits. SNAP eligibility is purely economic and does not include health screenings or food insecurity; however, the recipient must spend the benefit on food, which ideally improves the individual ' s health.

The housing dimension is also common. The existing applications employ three types of ACS housing indicators. First is lack of complete kitchen, complete plumbing, or both. Very few households face this situation in the United States, but either is a clear indicator of deprivation. Second is crowding measured as either number of people per room (greater than one) or per bedroom (greater than two). Third is the ratio of housing costs to household income; greater than 0.50 is the most common deprivation threshold. These again raise the issue of disentangling an economic security indicator from a housing indicator (Shamsuddin and Campbell 2022). A deprivation in one or both of the first two types without the third could signify a household that has chosen housing deprivation over economic security deprivation. One of the first two in combination with the third would be a strong indication of economic and housing deprivation (i.e., MDP).

All but one application use the official poverty threshold (or a more encompassing threshold) as an indicator of economic deprivation. Because official poverty uses a single threshold structure for the whole country, it tends to overestimate poverty in low-cost-of-living places and underestimate in highcost places (Citro and Michael 1995; Glaeser 2011). Unemployment, part-time employment, and jobseeking activity are also common indicators used to capture economic deprivation, none of which suffers from cost of living variation.

These applications all define MDP as an individual experiencing multiple deprivations. The choice of indicators and their grouping into dimensions is important. Many of these applications include economic hardship in multiple dimensions. A question then arises: Is it sufficient to designate people as experiencing MDP in the United States if they have economic hardship in multiple substantive areas of their life (e.g., health and housing), or should economic hardship be isolated in its own dimension? We take the latter view. MDP indicators are about capabilities, not simply access to financial resources. If economic deprivation is the focus, then marginal changes can be made to the official poverty measure to improve its effectiveness. A holistic view of poverty requires an approach that recognizes the diversity in individual experiences beyond finances.

## Context and Poverty

Individuals do not experience poverty in isolation from their surroundings and materially lacking environments could contribute to poverty. Broadly defined as neighborhood effects, the impact of environment on poverty has received interdisciplinary attention (see Dietz 2002 for a summary across disciplines). Fowler et al. (2020), however, cautioned against the broad application of contextual variables from aggregate data to individuals due to significant heterogeneity that can exist within areas. Additionally, any attempt to understand the role of place in MDP must consider the mutual influence of individuals and place on each other. The environmental justice literature demonstrates this feedback loop between negative contextual indicators and the presence of deprived communities (e.g., S. M. Wilson et al. 2012; Hajat et al. 2013).

Beyond theoretical concerns, a satisfactory implementation of neighborhood effects involves many methodological considerations. Glassman (2017) and Reeves, Rodrigue, and Kneebone (2016) considered anyone who lives in a geographic area with greater than 20 percent official poverty to be deprived on the neighborhood dimension. Glassman (2019) used non-ACS indicators on crime, air quality, and food access at the county scale to identify neighborhood deprivation. Because the poverty rate approach uses aggregated ACS data, it can match the spatial and temporal scales of the individual data. The nonACS approach integrates important environmental and societal factors. Both approaches suffer from spatial issues, however. ACS microdata are publicly available at a relatively coarse scale in most places and counties are often geographically large, making both options suboptimal units for capturing a person ' s local lived experience. Although there are clear

benefits to including contextual factors, the lack of spatial precision raises important questions about how representative these can be, at least when using publicly available data (Glassman 2020).

## Data

The literature is divided on the optimal data to analyze poverty in the United States. This is further compounded by the lack of data sources, such as those found in Mexico, which are designed specifically to aid in calculating MDP (Foster 2007). There remain several sources of data, however, that are useful for generating a measure for the U.S. context, including the National Health Interview Survey used in Alkire and Foster (2011), the Panel Study of Income Dynamics/Child Development Supplement found in Ciula and Skinner (2015), the Current Population Survey/Annual Social and Economic Supplement used in Brucker et al. (2015), the General Social Survey found in Wagl  e (2008, 2014), and the ACS. Of these, the ACS is chosen here due to its large sample size, making it suitable for estimates on smaller geographies.

The U.S. Census Bureau samples approximately 3.5 million households each year for the ACS. We use the Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS), which provides anonymized data on the surveyed individuals. Specifically, we employ the 2017 data for the fifty states and Washington, DC, excluding people living in group quarters. Table 2 shows that the sample includes 3,039,481 observations, which are then weighted to represent all 317,631,941

Table 2. Study sample from the 2017 Public Use Microdata Sample data

|              |    Sample |    Weighted |   Persons per sample |
|--------------|-----------|-------------|----------------------|
| All          | 3,039,481 | 317,631,941 |               104.5  |
| Male         | 1,472,382 | 155,468,506 |               105.6  |
| Female       | 1,567,099 | 162,163,435 |               103.5  |
| Renter       |   858,685 | 108,510,453 |               126.4  |
| Owner        | 2,180,796 | 209,121,488 |                95.89 |
| Child        |   653,886 |  73,356,594 |               112.2  |
| Adult        | 1,808,269 | 195,016,662 |               107.8  |
| Senior       |   577,326 |  49,258,685 |                85.32 |
| White        | 2,044,921 | 192,708,210 |                94.24 |
| Black        |   275,753 |  38,390,087 |               139.2  |
| Hispanic     |   444,198 |  57,748,621 |               130    |
| Asian        |   164,388 |  17,658,840 |               107.4  |
| Small groups |   110,221 |  11,126,183 |               100.9  |

people in the population. Because some demographic groups are more easily reached or more likely to respond, Table 2 also highlights that some groups are better represented in the sample than others. For example, each sampled senior (person sixty-five or older) represents 85.32 seniors in the population, and each sampled child (person under eighteen) represents 112.2 children. The implication is that data on seniors are more precise than for children. These types of discrepancies can be seen across racial groups and housing tenure. As will be seen in the results section, the groups with less precise data are often those that tend to be in higher poverty.

Question nonresponse further complicates these data. The Census Bureau uses a process called allocation to fill in missing values when a respondent does not answer particular questions. This allocation process is generally applied to between 6 and 13 percent of the indicators required for computing MDP. A particularly high allocation rate of 19.1 percent is needed for wage and salary income (U.S. Census Bureau 2017). Income is one of many contributors to the multidimensional approach, but it is the primary contributor to official poverty.

The finest spatial scale available for PUMS data is the PUMA. The 2,351 PUMAs are geographical areas nested within state boundaries containing a minimum of 100,000 people when defined after each decennial census, with few exceeding 200,000. Given the variation in population density across the United States, PUMAs in urban centers are geographically small and dense, whereas rural PUMAs are large and sparse. Table 3 highlights these patterns along with the sample size associated with PUMAs. Spatial files and land area data used here came from IPUMS (Minnesota Population Center).

These broad challenges with large survey data are of concern, but tend to attenuate as individual indicators are blended into composite measures (Spielman and Singleton 2015), when extremely

Table 3. Public Use Microdata Area characteristics, 2017

|         |   Sample |   Weighted |    Area (km 2 ) |   Density |
|---------|----------|------------|-----------------|-----------|
| Mean    |    1,292 |    135,105 |  3890           |   1269    |
| SD      |      390 |     28,730 | 26035           |   3119    |
| Minimum |      507 |     86,105 |     3.75        |      0.09 |
| 25%     |    1,025 |    113,393 |    97.3         |     55.4  |
| Median  |    1,217 |    128,089 |   347           |    379    |
| 75%     |    1,486 |    151,319 |  2447           |   1311    |
| Maximum |    4,434 |    287,773 |     1.13655e+06 |  40313    |

high and low values are not critical to the results (Bollinger et al. 2019), and when samples are pooled into larger geographic or demographic groupings (Folch et al. 2016). All of these are the case for the results presented here.

## Methods

We define MDP by following the dimension selection criteria outlined in Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi (2009) and by considering previous AF implementations using PUMS data. This is a threetier system with indicators combined into dimensions that are combined into overall MDP. We identify four poverty dimensions: education, health, housing, and economic security. A person meeting the criterion of any indicator in a dimension is considered deprived in that dimension. A person deprived in at least two dimensions is in MDP. Table 4 summarizes the criteria.

The education dimension comprises educational attainment and the presence of English speakers in the household. For those over age eighteen, educational attainment deprivation is defined as lacking a high school diploma or equivalent. Bureau of Labor Statistics data from 2019 show that people without a high school diploma earn 20.6 percent less than those with just a high school diploma and have a 45.9 percent higher unemployment rate (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2020). For those age eighteen and under, if no one in the household has attained a high school diploma, that person is considered deprived (see Rouse and Barrow 2006 for a review of intergenerational education outcomes). If no one in the household has the ability to speak English ' very well ' according to ACS definitions, then all members of that household are considered deprived. Language barriers are tied to lower earnings regardless of educational attainment (J. H. Wilson 2014) and lower access, equity, and quality of health care (VanderWielen et al. 2014), among other challenges. We maintain these criteria for seniors, who are presumably out of the workforce, due to the ever-increasing complexity of navigating banking, health care, and other common tasks in a changing world mediated by technology (Yu et al. 2016).

Table 4. Multidimensional poverty indicators

| Indicator                 | Criterion   |
|---------------------------|-------------|
| Housing                   |             |
| Crowding                  | Persons (NP  ) per bedroom (BDSP  ) > 2 (0 bedrooms (e.g., ' studio apartments ' ) coded as 0.5 bedrooms)             |
| Incomp hsing              |             |
| Incomp kitch              | Lack of complete kitchen facilities (KIT  )             |
| Incomp plumb              | Lack of complete plumbing facilities (PLM  )             |
| Health                    |             |
| Disability                |             |
| Self care                 | Self-care difficulty (DDRS  ) ( > 5 years)             |
| Ind living                | Independent living difficulty (DOUT  ) ( > 16 years)             |
| SSI (15 - 64 years)       | Received Supplementary Security Income in past 12 months (SSIP  ) (15 - 64 years)             |
| Education                 |             |
| No HS degree              | Lacks high school diploma or equivalent (SCHL  ) ( > 18 years); no one in household has high school diploma (  18) (SCHL  )             |
| Ling isol                 | No one in household ( > 13) speaks English at least ' very well ' (LNGI  ); if LNGI missing, substitute with person speaks English at least ' very well ' (ENG  ) ( > 4 years)             |
| Econ security Govt assist |             |
| SSI ( > 14 years)         | Received Supplementary Security Income in past 12 months (SSIP  ) ( > 14 years)             |
| Food stamps               | Received food stamps (FS  )             |
| No health ins             | No health insurance coverage (HICOV  )             |
| Hse cost burd             | Gross rent or selected monthly owner costs as a percentage of household income (GRPIP  or OCPIP  ) > 50%             |
| Un/underemp               | Hours worked per week (WKHP  ) summed for all household members ( > 15 years) < 35 hours (indicator applied to all members except those receiving retirement income (RETP  ) and those > 61 receiving Social Security income (SSP  ))             |

Note: Capital letter codes correspond to PUMS variable names; one asterisk (  ) indicates person-level variables; two asterisks (  ) are household-level variables. Household-level indicators apply to all household members.

For health, we consider those reporting difficulties with self-care or independent living, as well as those under the age of sixty-five and receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI) to be deprived. The World Health Organization ' s International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) would classify self-care as an ' activity limitation ' and independent living as a ' participation restriction ' (Erickson 2012). The other four ACS disability variables relating to hearing, vision, ambulation, and cognitive functions would fall under the ICF classification of ' impairment. ' Some disability advocates argue that the constraint on leading a full life is not the impairment itself, but ' the interaction between the [impairment] and the environment ' (Batavia and Beaulaurier 2001, 152). The two chosen indicators focus on this interaction. The SSI indicator is more straightforward: All younger people receiving SSI have a federally verified medical disability.

Housing deprivation occurs if the housing unit lacks complete plumbing or kitchen facilities or the household has over 2.0 persons per bedroom (PPB). The first two criteria represent basic characteristics of housing units in the United States. The third represents crowding, which can have negative effects in areas ranging from communicable disease to education. There is no single crowding measurement, however. Housing authorities often have complex criteria for housing unit allocation; for example, a mother, her twelve-year-old son, and her fourteenyear-old daughter might be considered crowded in a two-bedroom unit, whereas two bedrooms would be acceptable for a mother, father, and two teenage sons. Statistical analyses using persons per room (PPR) tend to use a threshold of 1.0 PPR but range from 0.75 to 1.5 PPR (note that kitchens, dining rooms, etc., are all counted as ' rooms ' ). We use PPB, which follows the pragmatic housing authority idea, and the typical 2.0 threshold found in the literature. See Blake, Kellerson, and Simic (2007) for a comprehensive review of crowding measurement.

For economic security, deprivation occurs if a person receives SSI, 1 receives food stamps, lacks health insurance, spends over 50 percent of their income on housing, or lives in a household with less than thirty-six total hours worked (applied to the nonretired population). This dimension views deprivation under three interrelated categories. The first is meeting government economic criteria for public assistance. The second is limited or no income from employment for the nonretired population. Moen (1980) noted that although unemployment is an individual variable, the impact is felt at the household scale. Jensen and Slack (2003) highlighted that underemployed people can live in well-off households and that underemployment is more impactful to the household when it involves the primary ' breadwinner. ' Although complex household measures such as that of Grad  ı n, Cant  o, and Del R  ı o (2017) exist, we use a modified version of the straightforward approach proposed in Glassman (2019). The third is economic instability from high housing expenditures or lack of health insurance. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development defines ' severe rent burden ' as spending over 50 percent of income on rent (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 2014). Shamsuddin and Campbell (2022) found that ' households that spend more than half of their income on housing are no more likely to experience material hardship than households who spend around 50% ' (2), further strengthening the 50 percent criterion. Health insurance is a binary indicator because the Affordable Care Act sets minimum insurance coverage levels. As discussed in an earlier section, these two are in the economic security dimension because paying a high percentage of income for housing does not mean the housing itself is inadequate; and lacking health insurance does not mean a person has health issues. Whatever the reasons behind deprivation in this third category, they put the person in financial peril from unexpected financial shocks. Concentrating all economic indicators, regardless of their specific domains, into one dimension allows for a truly MDP measure. Official poverty and income are not included due to distortions caused by cost of living variation across the United States.

## Results

In 2017, 13.7 percent of the U.S. population experienced MDP, and 13.1 percent were in official poverty. MDP and official poverty agree on the poverty status of 83.7 percent of the population. These similarities at the national level belie considerable spatial and demographic variation between who is

identified as being in poverty and where they live. This section describes the impact of a more holistic approach to poverty measurement.

## National Indicators and Dimensions

Economic security is by far the most common deprivation (see Figure 1); it is experienced by 31.9 percent of the national population. The most common indicator is the receipt of food stamps (14.6 percent), followed by housing cost burden

(12.7 percent). The fact that so many individuals face some form of economic security challenge highlights the precarious nature of much of society. Education is the second highest dimension at 12.9 percent, which is driven primarily by people without a high school diploma (10.1 percent). Third is the housing dimension, which is experienced by 7.0 percent of the population followed by health at 6.1 percent.

When considering the demographic variation in poverty, two columns in Figure 1 stand out for their relative lack of deprivation (blue shades): White

| Housing         | 7.0   | 7.1   | 6.9    | 13.3   | 3.8   | 12.3   | 6.1   | 2.8    | 3.4   | 7.7   | 17.2     | 11.0   | 9.6       |
|-----------------|-------|-------|--------|--------|-------|--------|-------|--------|-------|-------|----------|--------|-----------|
| Crowding        | 6.4   | 6.5   | 6.3    | 12.2   | 3.4   | 11.9   | 5.6   | 1.6    | 2.8   | 7.0   | 16.6     | 10.3   | 8.6       |
| Incomp Hsing    | 0.7   | 0.7   | 0.7    | 1.2    | 0.5   | 0.6    | 0.7   | 1.3    | 0.7   | 0.7   | 0.7      | 0.9    | 1.3       |
| Incomp Kitch    | 0.6   | 0.6   | 0.6    | 1.1    | 0.4   | 0.4    | 0.5   | 1.1    | 0.6   | 0.5   | 0.5      | 0.9    | 0.9       |
| IncompPlumb     | 0.3   | 0.4   | 0.3    | 0.4    | 0.3   | 0.3    | 0.3   | 0.4    | 0.3   | 0.4   | 0.4      | 0.2    | 0.8       |
| Health          | 6.1   | 5.4   | 6.8    | 7.1    | 5.5   | 1.2    | 5.6   | 15.0   | 6.4   | 8.3   | 4.4      | 3.8    | 6.1       |
| Disability      | 5.0   | 4.3   | 5.7    | 5.4    | 4.8   | 1.0    | 4.0   | 15.0   | 5.4   | 6.0   | 3.5      | 3.4    | 4.8       |
| Self Care       | 2.4   | 2.2   | 2.7    | 2.6    | 2.3   | 0.7    | 1.7   | 7.6    | 2.5   | 3.1   | 1.9      | 1.6    | 2.3       |
| Ind Living      | 4.5   | 3.7   | 5.2    | 4.8    | 4.3   | 0.4    | 3.6   | 14.0   | 4.9   | 5.3   | 3.1      | 3.2    | 4.1       |
| SSI (15-64 yrs) | 1.8   | 1.7   | 1.8    | 2.8    | 1.3   | 0.3    | 2.8   | 0.0    | 1.6   | 3.6   | 1.4      | 0.7    | 2.2       |
| Education       | 12.9  | 13.4  | 12.4   | 19.6   | 9.4   | 10.0   | 12.8  | 17.4   | 6.5   | 12.1  | 32.1     | 23.7   | 8.8       |
| No HS Degree    | 10.1  | 10.5  | 9.8    | 14.6   | 7.8   | 6.4    | 10.2  | 15.3   | 5.9   | 10.9  | 24.0     | 10.5   | 7.3       |
| Ling Ilsol      | 4.5   | 4.7   | 4.4    | 8.4    | 2.5   | 5.3    | 4.2   | 4.4    | 0.8   | 1.6   | 15.5     | 17.4   | 1.9       |
| Econ Sec        | 31.9  | 30.9  | 32.9   | 50.7   | 22.2  | 35.1   | 32.7  | 24.1   | 24.2  | 47.7  | 46.9     | 28.3   | 39.5      |
| Govt Assist     | 16.0  | 14.9  | 17.0   | 28.9   | 9.2   | 22.7   | 14.6  | 11.5   | 10.6  | 31.1  | 24.1     | 10.4   | 22.9      |
| SSI (>14 yrs)   | 2.5   | 2.2   | 2.7    | 3.7    | 1.8   | 0.3    | 2.8   | 4.4    | 2.2   | 4.5   | 2.1      | 2.2    | 2.7       |
| Food Stamps     | 14.6  | 13.6  | 15.6   | 27.4   | 7.9   | 22.5   | 13.1  | 8.6    | 9.3   | 29.3  | 23.1     | 8.9    | 21.6      |
| No Health Ins   | 8.7   | 9.7   | 7.8    | 13.6   | 6.2   | 4.8    | 12.2  | 0.8    | 5.9   | 9.9   | 17.7     | 6.6    | 9.8       |
| Hse Cost Burd   | 12.7  | 11.6  | 13.7   | 22.7   | 7.5   | 15.1   | 11.6  | 13.1   | 9.5   | 20.2  | 17.2     | 14.3   | 14.3      |
| Un/Underemp     | 8.9   | 8.1   | 9.6    | 14.5   | 6.0   | 10.2   | 9.6   | 4.3    | 7.7   | 15.6  | 8.5      | 7.1    | 12.2      |
| MD Poverty      | 13.7  | 13.4  | 13.9   | 24.0   | 8.3   | 13.3   | 13.8  | 13.9   | 7.8   | 17.4  | 29.7     | 16.8   | 14.2      |
| Official Pov    | 13.1  | 11.9  | 14.3   | 25.5   | 6.7   | 18.0   | 12.3  | 9.0    | 9.4   | 22.4  | 19.1     | 10.9   | 17.6      |
|                 | #     | Male  | Female | Renter | Owner | Child  | !     | Senior | White | Black | Hispanic | Asian  | Grps  Sma |

15

-10

-5

-0

--5

Figure 1. Multidimensional (MD) poverty rates and components, national by demographic group. Note: Numbers are percentages of the demographic group named on the x -axis. Color represents difference from the full population percent ( ' All ' column). SSI ¼ Supplemental Security Income.

residents and homeowners. In contrast, Black and Hispanic residents and renters experience relatively high levels of deprivation (red shades) in most categories, although driven by different factors. Hispanic residents on average have high rates of linguistic isolation (15.5 percent), lack of high school degree (24.0 percent), and crowding (16.6 percent); Black residents on average experience greater employment challenges (15.6 percent), qualify for government assistance (31.1 percent), and have more health issues (8.3 percent); and renters have high rates in most categories including crowding (12.2 percent) and housing cost burden (22.7 percent). The Asian population is below average for official poverty (10.9 percent), but above average for MDP (16.8 percent). This is largely driven by disparities in linguistic isolation (17.4 percent) and housing (11.0 percent), despite lower rates in most economic security indicators. The gender split does not result in large deviations from national averages, with MDP nearly identical for men and women (13.4 percent and 13.9 percent). Official poverty is higher for women (14.3 percent) than men (11.9 percent), likely driven by wage disparities between the genders. Age divisions show similar rates overall, but poverty is driven by different dimensions for each group. Children (under eighteen years old) tend to experience economic security (35.1 percent) and housing deprivations (12.3 percent), whereas seniors (sixty-five and older) are overrepresented in the education (17.4 percent) and health (15.0 percent) dimensions; adults generally follow the overall population averages.

We can also measure how intensely MDP is felt by different groups by looking at the distribution in the number of deprivations. Figure 2 largely follows the pattern seen in Figure 1, where groups with higher rates of MDP have higher rates of people with three and four deprivations. Also of note is that nearly 70 percent of White residents (68.3 percent) and homeowners (67.9 percent) have no deprivations.

## State Patterns

The distributions by state of MDP and official poverty further highlight their differences. Figure 3 shows that MDP is high in large states like California, New York, Texas, and Florida and states in the Southwest and South, whereas official poverty is primarily high in Southern states. This broad

Figure 2. Multidimensional poverty deprivation counts, national by demographic group. Note: The horizontal bar represents the two deprivation level for the national population. The four deprivations category is not visible at this scale (0.11 percent of the population).

<!-- image -->

pattern is likely driven by official poverty ' s single income scale for the entire country, which would tend to overestimate economic distress in places with lower cost of living and underestimate it in higher cost places. Figure 3 shows that states with high official poverty (e.g., West Virginia, Kentucky, Mississippi, and Louisiana) have relatively low rates of housing deprivation, whereas higher cost-of-living states have residents living in suboptimal housing at higher rates than the national average. This hints that on average people in higher cost-of-living places are sacrificing housing quality and quantity due to price constraints. Not surprisingly, official poverty (which is driven by a nationally fixed household income threshold) and economic security deprivation have the strongest correlation (0.771), whereas the weakest is with housing ( -0.022).

MDP is most strongly correlated with the education (0.913) and economic security dimensions (0.859). Health deprivation is the most stable across states having the lowest variation (standard deviation: 1.4 percent) and lowest correlation to MDP (0.343); it is, however, negatively associated with housing ( -0.292), meaning that states with healthier residents tend to experience worse housing conditions.

New York is the only state exceeding the national rates in all four dimensions. All eight states exceeding the national averages in three dimensions suffer

Figure 3. Multidimensional (MD) poverty dimensions by state. Note: States in the line plot are ordered by MD poverty; horizontal lines represent national rates. Map colors represent deviations from the national rate for MD poverty and official poverty, respectively.

<!-- image -->

in the economic security dimension. Washington, DC, also suffers from housing and health; Florida, Louisiana, and New Mexico from education and health; and Arizona, California, Nevada, and Texas from education and housing. Mississippi and Alaska are in the top ten for MDP (ahead of Washington, DC) with only two above-average deprivations: economic security and health for Mississippi and economic security and housing for Alaska. There are eighteen states lower than average in all four. Alaska and Hawaii are the only states where the number of people with a housing deprivation exceeds the number with an education deprivation. Like the split by demographic characteristics, different states experience poverty in different ways, and a multidimensional approach recognizes that poverty can look different in different parts of the country.

## PUMA Patterns

Poverty patterns by PUMA follow some of the same contours as those at the state level. Figure 4 shows that housing deprivation has a particularly high concentration of high values in large metro areas like New York, Washington, DC, Chicago, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Miami, Houston, Dallas, and Phoenix. Atlanta stands out as a large metro without many very high PUMAs. The Minneapolis area shows a pattern of a core area with high housing deprivation surrounded by PUMAs with low deprivation. Less dense areas also experience high housing deprivation; for example, northeastern Arizona and northwestern New Mexico (both home to the Navajo Nation reservation) and south Texas. Housing deprivation has a long tail with the highest quintile of PUMA rate spanning 9.6 percent to 52.9 percent. Housing also has the strongest spatial autocorrelation (0.59) of the four dimensions (as measured by Moran ' s I using a queen contiguity matrix on PUMA polygons). This tendency for housing deprivation (and lack thereof) to cluster for moderately sized polygons like PUMAs means that moving away from a problem area requires longer distance moves.

Health deprivation shows large pockets of low deprivation, often around larger metro areas, and many high-deprivation PUMAs throughout lower density areas in the South. There is moderate health deprivation in the low-density Mountain West. Combined, this results in the lowest correlation with population density of any of the indicators ( -0.031).

The education dimension is distributed more evenly across PUMAs, but high and moderately high values tend to concentrate in the Southwest, South, and some large cities. Lack of high school degree is the most influential indicator, but language deprivation is also important for the Hispanic and Asian groups and could be contributing to the spatial pattern. Economic security deprivation is also widely distributed throughout PUMAs. Health, education, and economic security have nearly identical values for spatial autocorrelation (0.453, 0.486, and 0.466, respectively).

PUMAs in the South tend to be relatively high for official poverty and mixed for MDP. The opposite can be said for California. The pattern in the Northeast is quite different between MDP and official poverty: MDP shows a strong concentration of poverty in the New York City to Washington, DC, corridor with poverty becoming more randomly distributed outside these areas, whereas official poverty shows a noticeable doughnut of relatively low poverty around the urban centers. The range of poverty is much wider at the PUMA scale than the state scale, ranging from 1.3 percent to 58.8 percent for MDP and from 0.9 percent to 50.7 percent for official poverty.

These broad spatial patterns are borne out in the demographic patterns. Figure 5 shows that PUMAs with lower median household income and higher non-White populations have higher poverty by both measures, but that income correlates more strongly with official poverty ( -0.733) and race more strongly with MDP (0.682). MDP ' s broader suite of inputs appears to better characterize challenges faced by underrepresented populations. Both measures agree that poverty tends to be lowest for moderately dense places that might be characterized as suburban or exurban. MDP, however, has stronger correlations with dense PUMAs (0.509), whereas official poverty has similar correlation (in absolute value) with low-( -0.355) and high-density (0.328) PUMAs. These results indicate that an MDP approach would identify more impoverished people in large cities and fewer in rural areas.

## Adjusting Official Poverty for Cost of Living

The issue of official poverty not adjusting for local cost of living has been raised previously (Citro and Michael 1995; Glaeser 2011). The SPM partially

Figure 4. Multidimensional (MD) poverty dimensions by Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA). Note: Each PUMA is represented by a point. In rural areas, the point is located at the PUMA centroid; in urban places points can be pushed from their PUMA centroid so that all the points are at least partially visible at a national scale. Each map is split into quintiles.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5. Demographic characteristics by Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA). Note: Each point is a PUMA; the horizontal and vertical lines represent PUMA medians. Correlations for density are split by PUMAs lower than the median density (379 people per km 2 ) and those higher. HH ¼ household.

<!-- image -->

addresses this challenge by computing a unique poverty threshold for most metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) and the nonmetro area of each state. Because SPM data are not available for PUMAs, we develop our own PUMA scale ' adjusted official poverty ' to investigate how an SPM-style cost-of-living adjustment relates to MDP.

We apply the published SPM thresholds to PUMAs using three rules. First, PUMAs with 50 percent or more of their population in a single MSA receive that MSA ' s SPM adjustment. Second, PUMAs with 50 percent or more of their population in any MSA get their state ' s small metro area adjustment (if available). Third, all other PUMAs get their state ' s nonmetro adjustment. 2 MSAs are collections of counties that approximate a cohesive economic region, so the regional adjustment is appropriate for its constituent parts. Our computation of adjusted official poverty is then based on a comparison of two ratios. The SPM adjustment is a ratio of local rental housing rates to the national rate and other factors, where 1.0 means no adjustment to the national poverty threshold (Renwick 2011; Renwick, Figueroa, and Aten 2017). PUMS reports poverty as a ratio of income to the official poverty threshold, where 1.0 means the person is at the poverty line. A person is then identified as being in adjusted official poverty if their poverty ratio from PUMS is below the SPM ratio for their location.

From a national perspective, the two measures are nearly identical, with the national official poverty rate at 13.1 percent and the adjusted official poverty rate at 13.3 percent. Variation emerges at the PUMA scale, however, with the difference between

Figure 6. Multidimensional (MD) poverty rates after removing components, national by demographic group. Note: Numbers are MD poverty rates for the group named on the x -axis after removing the component named on the y -axis. Color represents reduction from the MD poverty rate for that group (MD poverty row). SSI ¼ Supplemental Security Income.

| Housing         |   10.7 | 10.4   | 10.9      | 18.1   | 6.8   | 7.5   |   11.3 | 12.9   | 6.5   | 13.4   | 22.5     | 12.7   | 9.4           | 20.0   |
|-----------------|--------|--------|-----------|--------|-------|-------|--------|--------|-------|--------|----------|--------|---------------|--------|
| Crowding        |   10.9 | 10.7   | 11.2      | 18.6   | 7.0   | 7.7   |   11.5 | 13.4   | 6.7   | 13.7   | 22.8     | 13.0   | 10.0          |        |
| Incomp Hsing    |   13.4 | 13.2   | 13.6      | 23.6   | 8.2   | 13.1  |   13.5 | 13.5   | 7.6   | 17.1   | 29.5     | 16.5   | 13.8          | 17.5   |
| Incomp Kitch    |   13.5 | 13.3   | 13.7      | 23.7   | 8.2   | 13.2  |   13.6 | 13.6   | 7.6   | 17.3   | 29.6     | 16.6   | 14.1          |        |
| Incomp Plumb    |   13.6 | 13.4   | 13.8      | 24.0   | 8.3   | 13.2  |   13.7 | 13.9   | 7.8   | 17.3   | 29.7     | 16.7   | 14.1          |        |
| Health          |   10.8 | 10.9   | 10.7      | 20.3   | 5.9   | 12.7  |   10.6 | 8.6    | 4.8   | 12.8   | 27.9     | 15.4   | 10.9          | 15.0   |
| Disability      |   12   | 12.0   | 11.9      | 22.0   | 6.7   | 12.9  |   12.4 | 8.6    | 6.0   | 15.2   | 28.6     | 15.7   | 12.4          |        |
| Self Care       |   13.5 | 13.2   | 13.7      | 23.8   | 8.1   | 13.0  |   13.6 | 13.5   | 7.6   | 17.1   | 29.6     | 16.7   | 14.0          |        |
| Ind Living      |   12.8 | 12.7   | 12.8      | 23.0   | 7.5   | 13.2  |   13   | 11.3   | 6.8   | 16.3   | 29.2     | 16.2   | 13.3          | 12.5   |
| SSI (15-64 yrs) |   12.9 | 12.7   | 13.1      | 22.9   | 7.8   | 13.1  |   12.6 | 13.9   | 7.1   | 15.9   | 29.3     | 16.6   | 13.3          |        |
| Education       |    7.6 | 7.2    | 7.9       | 13.6   | 4.4   | 7.8   |    7.6 | 6.9    | 5.0   | 11.1   | 13.4     | 6.9    | 10.0          | -10.0  |
| No HS Degree    |    9.8 | 9.5    | 10.1      | 18.1   | 5.5   | 10.4  |    9.8 | 8.8    | 5.4   | 11.9   | 21.7     | 14.3   | 10.9          |        |
| Ling Isol       |   12.3 | 12.1   | 12.6      | 21.4   | 7.6   | 11.5  |   12.5 | 13.0   | 7.5   | 16.9   | 25.5     | 11.3   | 13.5          |        |
| Econ Sec        |    3.9 | 3.7    | 4.0       | 7.1    | 2.2   | 3.3   |    3.6 | 5.9    | 2.0   | 3.9    | 9.6      | 5.9    | 3.2           | - 7.5  |
| Govt Assist     |   10.7 | 10.6   | 10.8      | 19.4   | 6.2   | 9.4   |   11.2 | 10.7   | 5.9   | 13.0   | 24.4     | 13.8   | 10.3          |        |
| SSI (>14 yrs)   |   13.2 | 12.9   | 13.4      | 23.6   | 7.7   | 13.1  |   13.2 | 13.2   | 7.3   | 16.8   | 29.4     | 16.3   | 13.8          | - 5.0  |
| Food Stamps     |   11.4 | 11.3   | 11.6      | 20.2   | 6.9   | 9.6   |   12   | 11.8   | 6.6   | 14.1   | 25.0     | 14.5   | 11.0          |        |
| No Health Ins   |   12.1 | 11.6   | 12.6      | 21.5   | 7.2   | 12.5  |   11.6 | 13.7   | 7.1   | 16.5   | 24.6     | 15.3   | 13.0          |        |
| Hse Cost Burd   |   12.6 | 12.5   | 12.7      | 22.4   | 7.5   | 12.3  |   13   | 11.4   | 7.1   | 16.4   | 27.6     | 14.2   | 13.5          | - 2.5  |
| Un/Underemp     |   13.3 | 13.1   | 13.5      | 23.6   | 7.9   | 13.0  |   13.3 | 13.7   | 7.4   | 17.0   | 29.4     | 16.3   | 13.8          |        |
| MD Poverty      |   13.7 | 13.4   | 13.9      | 24.0   | 8.3   | 13.3  |   13.8 | 13.9   | 7.8   | 17.4   | 29.7     | 16.8   | 14.2          | -0.0   |
|                 |        | Male   | nale Fema | Renter | Owner | Child |        | Senior | White | Black  | Hispanic | Asian  | Grps  Small ( |        |

adjusted official poverty and official poverty ranging from -9.1 percent to 15.3 percent. PUMAs with increases in measured poverty tend to be in larger metro areas, especially along the coasts, whereas decreased poverty tends to be in inland and sparsely populated places.

The PUMA correlation between MDP and official poverty is 0.706 and strengthens to 0.802 for adjusted official poverty. Accounting for cost of living would be an important improvement to official poverty to better understand the distribution of poverty around the country, and better approximate the multidimensional perspective on poverty.

## Sensitivity Analysis

We evaluate the sensitivity of MDP to the choice of individual indicators and dimensions included in the calculation by systematically dropping them from the measure (see Figure 6). By construction, the effect will always be to reduce poverty.

Lack of a high school degree has the largest impact, reducing MDP from 13.7 percent to 9.8 percent. It is also the most influential for all demographic groups except children (crowding), Asian (linguistic isolation), and small groups (crowding). Removing crowding has the second largest overall

impact (10.9 percent), which accounts for nearly all the housing dimension. This is an encouraging result considering these both have conservative and wellestablished thresholds for defining deprivation.

The economic security dimension is the most influential despite its five indicators ranking from third to tenth in overall influence (out of thirteen). Removing this dimension entirely reduces MDP to 3.9 percent, meaning that most people experiencing MDP do so in combination with this deprivation. This dimension does not contain an individual indicator among the top two most influential for most demographic groups, however (owners, children, and White are the exceptions). The implication is that when people suffer in this dimension they tend do so across multiple indicators, so removing any one indicator does not drastically affect the overall MDP level. This highlights a robustness of the AF approach to redundant indicators within a dimension when the threshold is set to one indicator per dimension. It also highlights that redundant indicators spread across different dimensions can result in double counting.

## Comparison to COVID-19 Outcomes

The COVID-19 pandemic wreaked havoc on the world ' s population, but the impact was not spread equally across places, and that spatial distribution changed over time (Wong and Li 2020). Horton (2020) argued that these disparities are not simply a function of the virus ' s biology but are also linked to underlying social inequalities. We analyze monthly cumulative COVID-19 infection and death rates from 1 April 2020 to 1 May 2021 using county-level data from the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering COVID-19 data repository against the 2017 demographic data being used throughout this article. 3 Because the COVID19 data are aggregated to counties and the poverty data to PUMAs, we combine these two into what we call Public Use Microdata Area Counties (PUMACs). PUMACs are aggregations of PUMAs and counties such that neither requires splitting. In dense locations, there are multiple PUMAs in one county and in rural areas there can be multiple counties in one PUMA; it is also possible for a PUMA to span multiple counties and a county to be in multiple PUMAs. We defined 982 PUMACs from 3,143 counties and 2,351 PUMAs.

This time frame represents the pandemic ' s first three waves in the United States. The first wave, from March to June 2020, sees relatively low correlations to place-based demographic characteristics (Figure 7). The results still hint at a pattern: The highest correlations (in absolute value) are with population density, which corresponds to the early pandemic when larger (denser) cities saw the greatest impacts. Because these also tend to be higher costof-living places, higher income also correlates with greater COVID-19 impacts. We also see the seeds of other disparities with higher non-White and MDP concentrations leading to more COVID-19 infections and deaths.

The second COVID-19 wave in mid- to late summer 2020 saw large increases in infections along with a weakening of the correlation to density and a relatively smaller increase in deaths, which remained linked to denser places. During this period, MDP shows stronger correlations than official poverty. MDP in particular tracks closely to deaths in the non-White population throughout the first and second waves. MDP includes specific indicators like household crowding, which can increase transmission, and linguistic isolation and low education, which can reduce information acquisition about the disease. MDP ' s wider view on poverty appears to better reflect the inequality of the early COVID-19 spread than official poverty.

The third wave begins in about November 2020 for infections, corresponding to a convergence of the correlations presented here; and in December for deaths, which sees all but population density come close together. The third wave sees the steepest climb in infections and deaths, solidifying a reversal between income and race as the more dominant place-based factor, and reducing density as a strong factor. The correlations with MDP and official poverty nearly converge by the end of the third wave in March 2021, with MDP remaining slightly stronger. Although cumulative infection rate correlations eventually decline during the third wave and beyond, death rate correlations increase or level off. This indicates a trend toward equalizing the likelihood of contracting the disease in all places, but ongoing disparities in where deaths occur.

The correlation of MDP to death rates is the most telling throughout the three waves. It tracks nearly identically to the correlation of race to death rates through the first two waves, but when race correlation begins to decline, MDP correlation remains

Figure 7. Correlations to cumulative COVID-19 rates by Public Use Microdata Area County (PUMAC). Note: Lines represent correlations between monthly cumulative PUMAC COVID-19 rates and 2017 demographic characteristics. Multidimensional (MD) poverty, official poverty, and non-White are correlations with PUMAC rates. Low income is correlation with the negative of PUMAC median household income and low density is the correlation with the negative of log(population density). Shaded areas represent cumulative daily counts for the United States.

<!-- image -->

high and begins to track income correlation. Official poverty correlation follows the same general contours as MDP correlation, but at a lower level in all months. COVID-19, like environmental justice and other social challenges, is itself multidimensional, requiring a multidimensional measure to better capture its patterns. The results also show that caution should be taken when linking demographics to the pandemic because the relationships are quite different depending on when the snapshot is taken.

## Discussion

In this article we examine the logic and implementation of the AF approach in the U.S. context using the data set with the densest geographic coverage. A key strength of AF is its ability to make clear the normative assumptions employed in its construction, and hence its construct validity. This stands in contrast to related measures such as the Social Vulnerability Index, which combines census attributes using principal components analysis (PCA; Cutter, Boruff, and Shirley 2003). The PCA approach can result in counterintuitive contributions of the attributes, such as unemployment decreasing social vulnerability, and can result in unstable relative rankings depending on the geographic areas included in its computation (Spielman et al. 2020). The AF approach avoids these problems by using fixed criteria to identify individuals in poverty and then grouping them into geographic areas to compute poverty rates.

MDP remains constrained, however, by the data in the ACS. Because single ACS indicators cannot fully capture the dimensions, our approach uses a three-tier cutoff structure that uses multiple indicators to measure each dimension. The shocking and rapid impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has catalyzed efforts to address this. In April 2020, the Census Bureau along with other federal statistical agencies began the Household Pulse Survey (HPS) with the stated goal of understanding the pandemic ' s impacts on the U.S. population. This new survey asks detailed questions about hunger, health, education, transportation, and other factors at the core of understanding MDP. The HPS has a relatively small sample size; moving these types of questions into the ACS would provide dense geographic coverage of more targeted MDP indicators.

The relationship between poverty and place is well established, but neighborhood remains an infrequently used dimension in MDP measures in the

United States. The method presented here can only be resolved to the PUMA scale, which does not allow for sufficiently precise measurement of a person ' s lived environment in terms of population or geographic size (see Table 3). This challenge could be addressed with access to the full nonpublic location data on each respondent or the publication of specific ACS context estimates for individuals in the PUMS data set. This level of location data would further allow linkages to indicators such as air pollution, crime, school quality, and many others, although many of these are not consistently available nationally or at fine enough scales.

MDP reduces the many indicators of deprivation into a binary value representing an individual ' s experience. The approach is therefore adaptive to an individual ' s personal situation and when aggregating individuals, the MDP rate reflects the place ' s (or demographic group ' s) unique characteristics. This means that two places can arrive at similar overall poverty rates through different combinations of dimensions. This makes MDP a valuable tool for comparing the overall socioeconomic situation across places and groups as avoiding a high poverty rate implies doing well in many socioeconomic arenas. In contrast, policymakers should look to the individual dimensions driving high poverty rates when developing tailored poverty alleviation programs for particular places or groups.

## Conclusion

The development of a MDP measure for the United States offers renewed ability to identify those experiencing deprivation in ways meaningful to their experiences. It further challenges reliance on the official poverty measure on the grounds of its inability to consider the many dimensions of poverty that a person might experience. We introduce an application of the AF approach using ACS microdata that offers unique insight into the contours of U.S. poverty by considering a person ' s education, health, housing, and economic security. These dimensions measure poverty more holistically and update dated assumptions found in the official poverty measure. Our results largely align with official poverty at the national level but differ substantially when examining the demographic and spatial makeup of poverty.

In terms of demographics, we find higher poverty rates among Hispanic and Asian residents than measured in official poverty. For both groups, this divergence is driven by the education and housing dimensions. Black residents experience slightly lower rates of multidimensional than official poverty, however, due to not having large representation outside of the economic security dimension. MDP rates are similar across the life cycle; however, the dimensions contributing to MDP vary greatly among children, adults, and seniors. Spatially, we find higher rates of poverty in populous states and states in the Southwest and South, whereas official poverty is primarily high in Southern states. Official poverty ' s single national income threshold likely masks the true spatial distribution of poverty. PUMA level results largely follow the pattern of states, with MDP concentrated in large coastal and Sunbelt metropolitan areas. These spatial patterns tend to be connected to housing deprivation levels. Overall, an MDP approach identifies more impoverished people in large cities and fewer in rural areas. We further find that MDP largely outperforms other demographic indicators in its tracking with cumulative COVID19 death rates over the three waves through April 2021.

Further work is needed to better measure impediments to individuals ' potential for achieving a fulfilled life. Top-down measures like the one proposed here will always suffer from the subjectivity inherent to their design; however, this also brings transparency and interpretability to the results. These measures exist in a world of limited data availability. There are many appropriate attributes for measuring MDP in the ACS, but improvements could be made, especially for the health and housing dimensions. Merging household or person data from outside the ACS (e.g., tax data) could bolster our understanding of poverty. The value of including an individual ' s context (i.e., neighborhood effects) must be balanced against privacy protections. This could potentially be addressed through access to nonpublic data or publishing select context variables for each PUMS observation. Overall, more precise understandings of the challenges individuals face and their location would be a boon to social science research and policy in the United States.

Alleviating poverty is one part of achieving a just society. Systemic disadvantages resulting from institutional racism, sexism, and ableism, among others,

persist in ways that perpetuate poverty. Including variables such as gender and race is inadequate to the task of measuring the outcomes of systemic and institutional barriers, but as we attempt to provide remedy to their effects we must endeavor to find ways to study their relationship to poverty. We task ourselves and others to take up the difficult but necessary challenge of continuing to study these issues and find ways to make more systematic our understanding of poverty. We contend that the MDP approach presented here is a useful tool for understanding where and for whom deprivation is occurring and is a means to challenge the notion that the status quo tools are sufficient to meeting this challenge.

## Disclosure Statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

## Notes

1. SSI is an indicator for two dimensions because eligibility for this federal program depends on both health and economic hardship for the younger population. This means that fifteento sixty-fouryear-old SSI recipients are identified as being in MDP based on a single indicator.
2. PUMA to MSA crosswalk from IPUMS USA (University of Minnesota). SPM adjustments from the U.S. Census Bureau.
3. We also conducted the analysis using 2019 ACS data. There were slightly stronger correlations between COVID-19 outcomes and official poverty and MDP, but the substantive findings were unchanged.

## References

- Alkire, S., and J. Foster. 2011. Counting and multidimensional poverty measurement. Journal of Public Economics 95 (7 -8):476 -87. doi: 10.1016/j.jpubeco. 2010.11.006.
- Alkire, S., J. Foster, S. Seth, M. E. Santos, J. Manuel Roche, and P. Ball  on. 2015. Multidimensional poverty measurement and analysis . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Alkire, S., and M. E. Santos. 2010. Multidimensional Poverty Index 2010 . Oxford, UK: Oxford Poverty &amp; Human Development Initiative.
- Batavia, A. I., and R. L. Beaulaurier. 2001. the financial vulnerability of people with disabilities: Assessing poverty risks. Journal of Sociology and Social Welfare 28 (1):139 -62.
- Betti, G., F. Gagliardi, and V. Verma. 2018. Simplified jackknife variance estimates for fuzzy measures of multidimensional poverty. International Statistical Review 86 (1):68 -86. doi: 10.1111/insr.12219.
- Blake, K. S., R. L. Kellerson, and A. Simic. 2007. Measuring overcrowding in housing . Bethesda, MD: Econometrica.
- Bollinger, C. R., B. T. Hirsch, C. M. Hokayem, and J. P. Ziliak. 2019. Trouble in the tails? What we know about earnings nonresponse 30 years after Lillard, Smith, and Welch. Journal of Political Economy 127 (5):2143 -85. doi: 10.1086/701807.
- Brucker, D. L., S. Mitra, N. Chaitoo, and J. Mauro. 2015. More likely to be poor whatever the measure: Working-age persons with disabilities in the United States. Social Science Quarterly 96 (1):273 -96. doi: 10. 1111/ssqu.12098.
- Callan, T., B. Nolan, and C. T. Whelan. 1993. Resources, deprivation and the measurement of poverty. Journal of Social Policy 22 (2):141 -72. doi: 10. 1017/S0047279400019280.
- Chen, K.-M., C.-H. Leu, and T.-M. Wang. 2019. Measurement and determinants of multidimensional poverty: Evidence from Taiwan. Social Indicators Research 145 (2):459 -78. doi: 10.1007/s11205-01902118-8.
- Citro, C. F., and R. T. Michael, eds. 1995. Measuring poverty: A new approach . Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
- Ciula, R., and C. Skinner. 2015. Income and beyond: Taking the measure of child deprivation in the United States. Child Indicators Research 8 (3):491 -515. doi: 10.1007/s12187-014-9246-6.
- Cutter, S. L., B. J. Boruff, and W. L. Shirley. 2003. Social vulnerability to environmental hazards. Social Science Quarterly 84 (2):242 -61. doi: 10.1111/1540-6237. 8402002.
- Dhongde, S. 2017. Assessing multidimensional deprivation among the elderly in the USA. In Measuring multidimensional poverty and deprivation: Incidence and determinants in developed countries , ed. R. White, 255 -70. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Dhongde, S., and R. Haveman. 2017. Multi-dimensional deprivation in the US. Social Indicators Research 133 (2):477 -500. doi: 10.1007/s11205-016-1379-1.
- Dhongde, S., P. K. Pattanaik, and Y. Xu. 2019. Wellbeing, deprivation, and the great recession in the U.S.: A study in a multidimensional framework. Review of Income and Wealth 65 (Suppl. 1):S281 -S306. doi: 10.1111/roiw.12411.
- Dietz, R. D. 2002. The estimation of neighborhood effects in the social sciences: An interdisciplinary approach. Social Science Research 31 (4):539 -75. doi: 10.1016/ S0049-089X(02)00005-4.
- Erickson, W. 2012. A guide to disability statistics from the American Community Survey (2008 forward) . Ithaca, NY: Employment and Disability Institute, Cornell University.
- Evans, M., R. Nogales, and M. Robson. 2020. Monetary and multidimensional poverty: Correlations, mismatches and joint distributions. OPHI Working Paper 133 , University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

- Folch, D. C., D. Arribas-Bel, J. Koschinsky, and S. E. Spielman. 2016. Spatial variation in the quality of American Community Survey estimates. Demography 53 (5):1535 -54. doi: 10.1007/s13524-016-0499-1.
- Foster, J. E. 2007. A report on Mexican multidimensional poverty measurement . Oxford, UK: Oxford Poverty &amp; Human Development Initiative.
- Fowler, C. S., N. Frey, D. C. Folch, N. Nagle, and S. Spielman. 2020. Who are the people in my neighborhood?: The ' contextual fallacy ' of measuring individual context with census geographies. Geographical Analysis 52 (2):155 -68. doi: 10.1111/gean.12192.
- Glaeser, E. L. 2011. Measuring local poverty rates. In Cost of living and the supplemental poverty measure , ed. J. P. Ziliak, 34 -42. Lexington: University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research.
- Glassman, B. 2017. A multidimensional poverty measure using the American Community Survey . Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
- Glassman, B. 2019. Multidimensional deprivation in the United States, 2017 . Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
- Glassman, B. 2020. The multidimensional deprivation index using different neighborhood quality definitions. SEHSD Working Paper Number 2020-08. U.S. Census Bureau.
- Grad  ı n, C., O. Cant  o, and C. Del R  ı o. 2017. Measuring employment deprivation in the EU using a household-level index. Review of Economics of the Household 15 (2):639 -67. doi: 10.1007/s11150-014-9248-7.
- Hajat, A., A. V. Diez-Roux, S. D. Adar, A. H. Auchincloss, G. S. Lovasi, M. S. O ' Neill, L. Sheppard, and J. D. Kaufman. 2013. Air pollution and individual and neighborhood socioeconomic status: Evidence from the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA). Environmental Health Perspectives 121 (11 -12):1325 -33. doi: 10.1289/ehp. 1206337.
- Horton, R. 2020. Offline: COVID-19 is not a pandemic. Lancet 396 (10255):874. doi: 10.1016/S01406736(20)32000-6.
- Jensen, L., and T. Slack. 2003. Underemployment in America: Measurement and evidence. American Journal of Community Psychology 32 (1 -2):21 -31. doi: 10.1023/a:1025686621578.
- Koohi-Kamali, F., and R. Liu. 2017. US multidimensional poverty by race, ethnicity and motherhood: Evidence from Pennsylvania census data. In Measuring multidimensional poverty and deprivation: Incidence and determinants in developed countries , ed. R. White, 223 -54. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Kratzer, N. 2018. A multidimensional poverty index for the United States. PhD thesis, University of Kentucky.
- Kuroki, M. 2021. The effect of health insurance coverage on personal bankruptcy: Evidence from the Medicaid expansion. Review of Economics of the Household 19 (2):429 -51. doi: 10.1007/s11150-020-09492-0.
- Lucchini, M., C. Butti, S. Della Bella, and A. Lisi. 2018. The application of a topological clustering technique to capture forms and dynamics of deprivation in contemporary Switzerland. Quality &amp; Quantity 52 (1):227 -48. doi: 10.1007/s11135-016-0464-5.
- Mitra, S., and D. L. Brucker. 2017. Income poverty and multiple deprivations in a high-income country: The case of the United States. Social Science Quarterly 98 (1):37 -56. doi: 10.1111/ssqu.12291.
- Moen, P. 1980. Measuring unemployment: Family considerations. Human Relations 33 (3):183 -92. doi: 10. 1177/001872678003300303.
- Montoya,  A. J. A., and K. M. D. Teixeira. 2017. Multidimensional poverty in Nicaragua: Are femaleheaded households better off? Social Indicators Research 132 (3):1037 -63. doi: 10.1007/s11205-0161345-y.
- Narayan, D., R. Patel, K. Schafft, A. Rademacher, and S. Koch-Schulte. 2000. Voices of the poor: Can anyone hear us? Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Noble, M., G. Wright, G. Smith, and C. Dibben. 2006. Measuring multiple deprivation at the small-area level. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 38 (1):169 -85. doi: 10.1068/a37168.
- Orshansky, M. 1965. Counting the poor: Another look at the poverty profile. Social Security Bulletin 28:3 -29.
- Reeves, R., E. Rodrigue, and E. Kneebone. 2016. Five evils: Multidimensional poverty and race in America . Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
- Renwick, T. J. 2011. Geographic adjustments of supplemental poverty measure thresholds: Using the American Community Survey Five-Year data on housing costs . Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
- Renwick, T. J., E. B. Figueroa, and B. H. Aten. 2017. Supplemental poverty measure: A comparison of geographic adjustments with regional price parities vs. median rents from the American Community Survey: An update . Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
- Rouse, C. E., and L. Barrow. 2006. U.S. elementary and secondary schools: Equalizing opportunity or replicating the status quo? The Future of Children 16 (2):99 -123. doi: 10.1353/foc.2006.0018.
- Shamsuddin, S., and C. Campbell. 2022. Housing cost burden, material hardship, and well-being. Housing Policy Debate 32 (3):413 -32. doi: 10.1080/10511482. 2021.1882532.
- Sommers, B. D., A. A. Gawande, and K. Baicker. 2017. Health insurance coverage and health -What the recent evidence tells us. The New England Journal of Medicine 377 (6):586 -93. doi: 10.1056/ NEJMsb1706645.
- Spielman, S. E., and A. Singleton. 2015. Studying neighborhoods using uncertain data from the American Community Survey: A contextual approach. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 105 (5):1003 -25. doi: 10.1080/00045608.2015.1052335.
- Spielman, S. E., J. Tuccillo, D. C. Folch, A. Schweikert, R. Davies, N. Wood, and E. Tate. 2020. Evaluating social vulnerability indicators: Criteria and their application to the social vulnerability index. Natural Hazards 100 (1):417 -36. doi: 10.1007/s11069-01903820-z.
- Stiglitz, J. E., A. Sen, and J.-P. Fitoussi. 2009. Report by the Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress, Paris.

- Sumner, A. 2010. Global poverty and the new bottom billion: What if three-quarters of the world ' s poor live in middle-income countries? IDS Working Papers 2010 (349):1 -43. doi: 10.1111/j.2040-0209.2010.00349\_2.x.
- U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2020. Learn more, earn more: Education leads to higher wages, lower unemployment . Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
- U.S. Census Bureau. 2017. American Community Survey: Item allocation rates. https://www.census.gov/acs/ www/methodology/sample-size-and-data-quality/itemallocation-rates/.
- U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2014. Rental burdens: Rethinking affordability measures. The Edge . https://www.huduser.gov/portal/ pdredge/pdr\_edge\_featd\_article\_092214.html
- VanderWielen, L. M., A. S. Enurah, H. Y. Rho, D. R. Nagarkatti-Gude, P. Michelsen-King, S. H. Crossman, and A. A. Vanderbilt. 2014. Medical interpreters: Improvements to address access, equity, and quality of care for limited-English-proficient patients. Academic Medicine 89 (10):1324 -27. doi: 10. 1097/ACM.0000000000000296.
- Wagl  e, U. R. 2008. Multidimensional poverty: An alternative measurement approach for the United States? Social Science Research 37 (2):559. doi: 10.1016/j.ssresearch.2007.06.013.
- Wagl  e, U. R. 2014. The counting-based measurement of multidimensional poverty: The focus on economic resources, inner capabilities, and relational resources in the United States. Social Indicators Research 115 (1):223 -40. doi: 10.1007/s11205-012-0216-4.
- White, R., and T. Bailleul. 2019. Multidimensional poverty across the life cycle: The United States as an empirical example. In Routledge international handbook of poverty , ed. B. Greve, 49 -66. London and New York: Taylor &amp; Francis.
- White, R., and S. Yamasaki. 2017. Multidimensional poverty among the nativeand foreign-born in the United States: Evidence from the 2010 -2014
- American Community Surveys. In Measuring multidimensional poverty and deprivation: Incidence and determinants in developed countries , ed. R. White, 183 -222. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Wilson, J. H. 2014. Investing in English skills: The limited English proficient workforce in U.S. metropolitan areas . Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
- Wilson, S. M., H. Fraser-Rahim, E. Williams, H. Zhang, L. Rice, E. Svendsen, and W. Abara. 2012. Assessment of the distribution of toxic release inventory facilities in metropolitan Charleston: An environmental justice case study. American Journal of Public Health 102 (10):1974 -80. doi: 10.2105/AJPH. 2012.300700.
- Wong, D. W. S., and Y. Li. 2020. Spreading of COVID19: Density matters. PLoS ONE 15 (12):e0242398. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0242398.
- Yu, R. P., N. B. Ellison, R. J. McCammon, and K. M. Langa. 2016. Mapping the two levels of digital divide: Internet access and social network site adoption among older adults in the USA. Information, Communication &amp; Society 19 (10):1445 -64. doi: 10. 1080/1369118X.2015.1109695.

DAVID C. FOLCH is an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography, Planning and Recreation at Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011. E-mail: david.folch@nau.edu. His research combines geocomputation and large data sets to understand small area demographic change.

MATTHEW LAIRD is a Student in the Department of Economics at Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306. E-mail: mattrlaird@gmail.com. His research focuses on the political economy of poverty and use of data to drive policy interventions.