<!-- image -->

## SUSTAINING RURAL SYSTEMS: RURAL VITALITY IN AN ERA OF GLOBALIZATION AND ECONOMIC NATIONALISM

HOLLY R. BARCUS and WILLIAM MOSELEY

ABSTRACT.  The  key  organizing  theme  for  this  special  issue  is  'Sustaining  Rural  Systems: Rural Vitality in an Era of Globalization and Economic Nationalism.' The multiplicity of roles that rural communities play in economic and social systems are often overlooked in conversations  about  globalization  and  economic  nationalism.  Yet  rural  communities, economies and landscapes are closely tied to global industries, migrant flows and markets, while simultaneously subject to nationalist economic policies and strategies. These articles are drawn  from the 2019 International Geographical Union  Commission  on  the Sustainability  of  Rural  Systems  Colloquium  and  examine  the  interplay  between  rural places  and the  competing  narratives of  globalization  and nationalism.  The  studies come from Croatia, Belgium, Australia, the USA, Argentina, Bolivia, Ecuador, Mexico, Italy and Spain. In each article, the authors seek to elucidate the nuanced ties between people and industries that are at once intensely local and simultaneously tied to regional and global processes.  The  articles  challenge  us  to  critically  examine  oversimplified  messaging  of highly  complex  systems  and  provide  insights  into  processes  of  change  at  local  scales across major global regions, highlighting the contemporary status of rural change through the lens of sustainability and set within current competing narratives of globalization and economic nationalism. Keywords: rural, sustainability, globalization, economic nationalism.

T he terms globalization, economic nationalism, and sustainability often stand in  contrast  to  each  other.  While  critiques  of  globalization  have  highlighted  the danger  of  homogenization  of  cultures  and  places  for  several  decades,  contemporary shifts in popular sentiment toward economic nationalism have spawned increasing debate over the complexities of local, regional, and global economies (Myadar  and  Jackson 2019 ).  Aspects  of  rural  places  and  systems,  such  as  agricultural  production  and  community  viability,  are  often  left  out  of  these  largely urban-centric debates, neglecting the importance, complexity, and interlinkages of rural economies and peoples to national and global systems. Sustainability is also a contentious term, policy concept, and movement that frequently is framed as being in tension with globalization and nationalism.

This  special  issue  draws  together  a  collection  of  papers  addressing  two  key themes in rural places across the globe: recognizing demographic diversity, and land use transitions. The papers challenge us to think critically about the often oversimplified  messaging  of  highly  complex  systems  and  to  seek  to  provide insight  into  processes  of  change  at  local  scales  across  major  global  regions, highlighting  the  contemporary  status  of  rural  change  through  the  lens  of

HOLLY R.  BARCUS,  DeWitt  Wallace  Professor  of  Geography,  Macalester  College,  Saint  Paul,  MN; [barcus@macalester.edu].  WILLIAM  MOSELEY,  DeWitt  Wallace  Professor  of  Geography,  Macalester  College, Saint  Paul,  MN;  [moseley@macalester.edu].

324

sustainability  and  set  within  current  competing  narratives  of  globalization  and economic nationalism.

RURAL  GEOGRAPHIES  OF  GLOBALIZATION, ECONOMIC  NATIONALISM, AND  SUSTAINABILITY

Linking  the  terms  globalization,  economic  nationalism,  and  sustainability  calls for  both  a  recognition  of  contradictions  and  synergies  across  these  multiscalar and complex processes. Cawley notes that 'Globalization is a defining feature of recent decades. Places at great distances from each other throughout the world are  linked  together  through  flows  of  ideas,  people,  goods  and  investment, facilitated  by  advances  in  information  and  communication  technologies  (ICTs) and in transport . . . ' ( 2013 , 1 ). In this framing, the global flow of goods, services, and peoples extends beyond national boundaries. However, as a counterpoint to globalization,  economic  nationalism  suggests  the  prioritizing  of  one's  own national economy over that of other countries or regions. As noted by Baughn and Yaprak, 'The readiness to support nationalist economic policy is a function of  the  perceived  economic  threat  posed  by  foreign  competition.  Economic nationalism  is  linked  with  personal  job  insecurity,  authoritarianism,  and  intolerance of ambiguity' ( 1996 , 759 ).  Interestingly, rural places are often positioned at the intersection of these processes, needing to sustain or create economies that fulfil  nationalist  economic  agendas  while  maintaining  a  position  within  the global  market.  As  the  papers  in  this  special  issue  highlight,  industries  based  in tourism  and  resources  development,  including  heritage  tourism  and  national park  development,  among  other  industries,  often  struggle  to  find  balance between these competing agendas.

Further  integrated  into  these  narratives  is  the  desire  for  'sustainability'  of rural  communities.  Writing  in  a 2004 history  and  critique  of  the  concept  of sustainable  development,  Robinson  '  . . .  argue[d]  for  an  approach  to  sustainability  that  is  integrative,  is  action-oriented,  goes  beyond  technical  fixes,  incorporates a recognition of the social construction of sustainable development, and engages local communities in new ways' (Robinson 2004 , 369 ).  Robinson  both highlighted  the  criticisms  of  the  concept  of  sustainability  while  reinvigorating debate  about  how  the  principles  of  sustainability  could  provide  a  way  forward for  communities  and  policy  makers.  The  concepts  of  sustainable  development and sustainability, emerging with the Brundtland Report, Our Common Future , in 1987 (WCED 1997 ),  have,  as  Robinson  ( 2004 )  pointed  out,  received  heavy criticism, yet they are still embraced by the global community. For instance, the United  Nations  (U.N.),  established  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  in  the recent Transforming  Our  World: 2030 Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development (United  Nations 2015 ).  Further,  the  U.N.  is  joined  by  its  United  Nations' Educational,  Scientific,  and  Cultural  Organization  (UNESCO),  which  recently announced a social geographer as the UNESCO Chair in Global Understanding for Sustainability (IGU-UGI 2018 ). These actions exemplify the essential role and importance  that  geography  and  rural  environments  (as  opposed  to  a  singular

focus on urban environments) play in achieving sustainable development goals at local, regional, and global scales (Liverman 2018 ;  Moseley 2018 ).  Increasingly, such calls to action include frameworks for measuring change and focus attention  on  rural  regions  in  Global  North  and  Global  South  countries.  It  is  critical for governments and businesses to invest in rural regions by supporting knowledge sharing of rural challenges and opportunities for sustainable development, thereby  recognizing  the  interdependencies  of  local  and  global  rural  and  urban places.

This special issue grew out of a 2019 colloquium organized by the International  Geographical  Union  (IGU)  Commission  on  the  Sustainability  of Rural  Systems  (CSRS).  Papers  from 46 scholars  representing 16 countries  contributed to the colloquium and seven papers appear here in this special issue. An additional 12 papers  are  in  an  edited  volume  entitled Rural  Transformations: Globalization and its Implications for Rural People, Land, and Economies (Barcus et al. 2022 ). Although the colloquium was organized around four key subthemes, in  this  special  issue  we  focus  on  two  of  these  themes,  highlighting  the  importance  of  'local'  while  interrogating  the  relationships  between  local  social  and economic  vitality,  and  sustainability  in  the  context  of  nationalist  and  global trends and agendas.

## RECOGNIZING  DEMOGRAPHIC  DIVERSITY

The first subtheme, 'Recognizing Rural Demographic Diversity ,' highlights the rapidly  changing  demographic  landscape  of  rural  regions.  The  four  papers within  this  subtheme  focus  on  questions  of  changing  ethnic,  racial,  age,  and indigenous profiles for rural communities in four specific case studies centered in  Croatia,  Belgium,  the  United  States,  and  a  cross-country  comparison  from four Latin American countries (Argentina, Bolivia, Ecuador, and Mexico). Some rural  areas,  particularly  those  with  natural  amenities,  struggle  to  manage  the social  and  economic  disparity  created  by  second-home  ownership,  tourism economies,  and  seasonal  work  (Stedman 2006 ;  Amit-Cohen 2013 ;  Jones  and Selwood 2013 ).  In  other  places,  long-term  economic  decline  and  out-migration creates  challenges  for  rapidly  aging  populations  and  their  increased  need  for health-care options, rural poverty alleviation, and provision of services, such as schools,  and  employment  opportunities  for  youth  and  young  adults  (Woods 2005 ;  Long et al. 2013 ).  Further challenges arise when new industries relocate to rural places and bring with them new ethnically and socially diverse populations (Barcus  and  Simmons 2013 ;  Maher 2013 ),  creating  demands  for  rural  communities to provide education, housing, and health care for new populations while simultaneously opening opportunities for growth and diversity.

In  each  of  these  sets  of  papers  we  note  that  the  processes  contributing  to rural  change  are  multiscalar  and  multidimensional.  Although  we  categorize each  according  to  a  general  theme,  we  also  recognize  that  demographic

326

diversity and land use changes co-occur. For example, in the first paper in this section, Lukić et al. ( 2022 ) write about four alternative future scenarios for the postsocialist  countryside  in  the  newest  European  Union  member  state  of Croatia.  These  alternatives  include  'Growth  without  Development,'  'Rural Renaissance,' 'Road to Nowhere,' and 'Shift.' The authors provide a  systematic  review  of  the  evolution  of  rural  development  perspectives  and the  shortcomings  of  a  linear  development  trajectory,  arguing  that  to  fully understand  the  future  trajectories  of  rural  places,  a  multiplicity  of  factors must  be  considered.  This  includes  endogenous  assets  and  challenges,  such  as locally available social and natural capital, as well as exogenous factors such as '  . . .  endogenous development, bottom-up innovation, territorially based integrated development, social capital, sustainable development, information infrastructure,  consumption, small-scale  niche  industries,  valorization  of  tradition, and  local  embeddedness'  ( 2 after  Woods 2011 ).  Lukić  et  al.  ( 2022 )  walk  us through  the  complexities  of  rural  development  situations,  laying  the  groundwork for both understanding the potential future trajectories of rural Croatian communities  and  framing  the  complexity  of  rural  change  for  the  papers  that follow in this special issue.

The second paper in this section tackles the question of rural heritage in the countryside of Belgium. Noting that globalization forces seem to have eroded the sense  of  local  heritage  among  inhabitants  of  the  Belgian  countryside,  Schmitz and Pepe ( 2022 )  propose the importance of recognizing heritage as an evolving concept in which heritage landscapes, entities, and ideals are expanding beyond material and architectural elements to include natural and intangible elements of heritage  as  well.  The  authors  note  the  importance  of  changing  demographics and,  more  broadly,  how  globalization  has  changed  interests  within  new  demographic  groups,  thus  further  influencing  how  local  heritage  and  sense  of  local places may be lost or redefined in new contexts.

Importantly, in a multination study of young people's visions for rural living in  Latin America, in the third paper, De La Vega-Leinert et al. ( 2022 )  focus  on the significance of incorporating youth visions in sustainable transformation of local  livelihoods  and lifeways.  The authors argue that decisions for leaving and staying  in  the  countryside  can  have  long-term  consequences  for  rural  development  and  migratory  policies,  as  well  as  for  environmental  sustainability  practices.  The  studies  in  this  paper  come  from  Argentina,  Bolivia,  Ecuador,  and Mexico and explore how young people perceive past, present, and future countrysides,  arguing  that  the  aim  at  fostering  sustainability  pathways  needs  to embrace  young  people's  requirements,  aspirations,  and  visions,  and  support them  both  in  developing  their  countrysides  and  enabling  their  (im)mobilities through  broader  interconnected  communities.  Much  as  in  Schmitz  and  Pepe ( 2022 ), De La Vega-Leinert et al. ( 2022 ) find that new or emerging groups within rural  spaces  may  have  significantly  different  visions  for  the  future,  or  past,  of a particular rural place.

The final  paper  in  this  theme  creates  a  pivot  point  across  the  demographic and land use change themes. Weichelt and Zeitler ( 2022 )  provide  an  insightful untangling  of  second  home  ownership  and  public  funding  in  rural  Wisconsin, USA. They discuss the dynamic shift of funding for local communities, evolving from  primary  dependence  on  real  estate  taxes  from  year-round  local  residents to  second  home  owners  and  land  controllers.  They  tackle  the  sticky  and  often contentious question of land control, who owns the most valuable land, and the implications of this ownership on local taxes, and by extension, local institutions, such as schools, that are dependent on these taxes for survival. Collectively, these four papers illustrate the impacts of global processes and imaginations on local economies and demographics.

## LAND  USE  TRANSITIONS

The second theme in this special issue is 'Land Use Transitions.' The restructuring  of  global,  and  by  extension,  rural,  economies,  such  as  '  . . .  the  liberalization  of  global  trade  and  the  increasingly  'foot-loose'  nature  of  economic enterprises . . . .' (Woods 2005 , 63 ), creates new labor demands (or deficiencies), and  greater  requirements  for  both  physical  and  technological  infrastructure, fostering  different  sets  of  land  uses  and  land  valuing.  One  of  the  primary processes  of  restructuring  has  been  the  shift  from  production-oriented  rural economies to consumption-oriented rural economies (Woods 2005 ). Postproductive  rural  landscapes  in  the  Global  North  herald  less  favorable  economic prospects for production-based, or 'traditional,' rural economies such as mining, forestry, fishing, and agriculture. According to Woods ( 2005 ),  postproductive,  consumption-based  rural  economies  are  often  based  on  tourism  or other service-oriented development, such as telephone call centers. New economies and land uses are cause for a range of conflicts between different user and resident groups, as well as challenging questions of land ownership, historic land rights  and  voice  across  different  resident  groups  (Barcus  and  Smith 2015 ).  For example,  conflicts  over  rangelands  in  the  western  United  States  between  traditional ranchers and new residents has resulted in a range of new policy implications  for  these  areas  (see,  for  example,  Loffler  and  Steinicke 2006 ).  Globally, questions of tourism development and who benefits and loses from such development  have  also  garnered  attention  (see,  for  example,  Chio 2014 ).  Concerns over  the  conservation  and  preservation  of  natural  areas,  particularly  in  areas where such preservation might be perceived to impede other types of economic development, can lead to highly charged social environments. One such example is  the  recent  controversy  over  copper-nickel  sulfide  mining  in  the  Boundary Waters  Canoe  Area  in  the  northern  United  States  (Forgrave 2017 ).  The  traditional economies of northern Minnesota, including mining and logging, stand in contrast  to  a  view  of  nature  as  needing  protection  from  development.  Similar conflicts over preferred land uses arise between tourists or short-term, summer residents and  long-term, full-time residents, with summer  residents  often

328

favoring  recreation  amenities  and  conservation  of  wild  areas,  while  full-time residents may favor resource development with greater economic opportunities, such as logging or mining.

The  three  papers  in  this  section  (and  the  last  three  papers  in  this  special issue)  highlight  land  use  transitions  and  the  reimagination  of  land  purposes. Jones  et  al.  ( 2022 )  focus  their  work  on  land  use  transitions  occurring  along a 100 km section  of  the  Western  Australian  coast.  They  evaluate  the  historical evolution of land use from pre-European settlement to the present, highlighting ongoing  tensions  between  local  desires  for  stability  with  external  pressures  for change,  noting  that  each  category  also  includes  competing  or  conflicting  perspectives.  External  pressures,  they  describe,  come  in  the  form  of  pressure  for economic development, environmental conservation, acknowledgment and formalization of indigenous land ownership, and management rights. The authors adeptly walk readers through the historical transitions of the coastal area, drawing connections between achieving rural sustainability and vitality at a local scale and engaging global processes.

The  last  two  papers  take  aim  at  the  evolution  of  wilderness  narratives  and narratives  of  national  landscape  within  local  imaginations.  In  Italy,  Zanolin  and Paül ( 2022 ) explore the evolution of national park narratives from one of conservation  to  a  greater  focus  on  utilitarian  uses,  tourism  in  particular,  influencing  the national park's policy making, specifically focusing on Val Grande National Park. The  authors  seek  to  elucidate  the  competing  ideas  of  designating  wilderness,  or wild areas, with the development of such areas for tourism based on the designation of wilderness. They conclude that 'wilderness needs to be reconceptualized so that contemporary European protection policies might become more effective, and we may use our knowledge of nature to promote sustainable development.'

In  the  final  paper  of  this  special  issue,  Paül  and  Trillo-Santamaría  ( 2022 ) investigate  the  emergence  of  the  Galician  highlands  in  Spain  in  the  context  of nationalism and the geographic narratives that are often attached to the national imaginary of mountains. The authors evaluate the changing ways in which mountains  in  Western  cultures  are  envisioned,  probing  the  construction  of  national landscape imaginaries. In their paper, the authors utilize Spain's Galician Highlands to explore how national landscapes are embedded in historical understandings  of  place  and  idealized  visions  of  land  and  identity.  They  further  argue that in addition to shifts from coastal farming landscapes in Galicia to an inclusion of mountains in this same vision, a secondary branding of the Galician Highlands with  mountains  is  being  utilized  to  promote  tourism  for  nonlocal  tourists.  They conclude that ' . . . the ultimate construction of a new national landscape for Galicia based  on  mountains,  although  using  some  national  attributes  . . .  seems  more related  to  the  need  of  positioning  Galicia  internationally,  embracing  an  inherent global dimension.' Thus, this last paper forefronts the intersection of globalization

and landscape imagery to link local imaginaries of traditional landscapes with the desire to promote landscapes perceived to appeal to global tourism.

## CONCLUSIONS

Rural  vitality  in  an  era  of  globalization  and  nationalism  requires  continued examination  of  the  interconnectedness  and  sustainability  of  rural  places.  The papers  included  in  this  special  issue  bring  into  focus  the  complex  and  multiscalar  systems  that  create  opportunities  for  new  imaginations  of  rurality,  rural economies,  rural  infrastructure  development  and  the  shifting  and  sometimes contested identities of rural places. Strategies for embracing sustainability at the local level, nested within competing nationalist and globalization narratives, are described in each of these papers, exhibiting at once the unique socio-geographic context  of  each  place  while  underscoring  the  interconnectedness  and  interdependence of land use, demographics, and broader national and global processes.

Collectively, the authors presented these papers in July of 2019 , several months before  COVID19 emerged and imprinted itself on the evolution  and  development trajectories of all places across the globe, not the least rural places. In these past two years,  with  lockdowns,  work-at-home  orders,  and  new  ways  of  thinking  about space and place, the debates around globalization and nationalism have intensified and  underscore  the  imperative  for  understanding  the  multiplicity  of  ways  local communities are able to respond and adapt to such global shocks. While the effects of  COVID19 lockdowns  and  travel  restrictions  are  only  beginning  to  be  studied, these  measures  no  doubt  restricted  global  tourism  flows  to  rural  areas  while simultaneously  opening  opportunities  for  telework  and  the  use  of  once  seasonal homes  for  longer-term  residences.  As  such,  the  pandemic  has  been  another example of the dynamic interaction between globalization, economic nationalism, and sustainability that often plays out across rural landscapes.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We deeply  appreciate  all  the  contributors  to  this  special  issue,  the  reviewers,  and  Dave  Kaplan, Editor,  for  their  ideas,  insights  and  commitment  to  completing  the  project.  We  also  thank  our funders, NSF Award # 1853832 ,  Macalester College and the University of Wisconsin Eau Claire, for supporting the initial Colloquium from which these articles emerged.

## FUNDING

This work was supported by the Macalester College; NSF; University of Wisconsin Eau Claire.

## DISCLOSURE  STATEMENT

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

## ORCID

Holly R. Barcus http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3841-5725

William Moseley http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0662-962X

330

## REFERENCES

- Amit-Cohen, I. 2013 .  Heritage  Landscape  Fabrics  in  the  Rural  Zone:  An  Integrated  Approach  to Conservation.  In Globalization  and  New  Challenges  of  Agricultural  and  Rural  Systems: Proceedings of the 21 st Colloquium of the CSRS  of the  IGU , edited by D.-C. Kim, A. M. Firmino, and Y. Ichikawa, 79 -88 .  Japan: Nagoya University Press.
- Barcus, H. R., R. Jones, and S. Schmitz, editors. 2022 . Rural Transformations: Globalization and Its Implications  for  Rural  People,  Land,  and  Economies .  London:  Taylor  &amp;  Francis  Group. (forthcoming).
- Barcus,  H.  R.,  and  L.  Simmons. 2013 .  Ethnic  Restructuring  in  Rural  America:  Migration  and  the Changing  Faces  of  Rural  Communities  in  the  Great  Plains. Professional  Geographer 65 ( 1 ): 130 -152 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 00330124 . 2012 . 658713 .
- Barcus,  H.  R.,  and  L.  J.  Smith. 2015 .  Facilitating  Native  Land  Reacquisition  in  the  Rural  United States  through  Collaborative  Research  and  Geographic  Information  Systems. Special  Issue  of Geographical Research 54 ( 2 ): 118 -128 .  doi: 10 . 1111 / 1745 -5871 . 12167 .
- Baughn,  C.  C.,  and  A.  Yaprak. 1996 .  Nationalism:  Conceptual  and  Empirical  Development. Political Psychology 17 ( 4 ): 759 -778 .  doi: 10 . 2307 / 3792137 .
- Cawley,  M. 2013 .  Introduction:  Context  and  Contents.  In The  Sustainability  of  Rural  Systems: Global and Local Challenges and Opportunities ,  edited by M. Cawley, A. M. D. S. M. Bicalho, and L. Laurens, 1 -14 .  Galway, Ireland: CSRS of the IGU and the Whitaker Institute, National University of Ireland Galway.
- Chio,  J. 2014 . A  Landscape  of  Travel:  The  Work  of  Tourism  in  Rural  Ethnic  China .  Seattle: University of Washington Press.
- De  La  Vega-Leinert,  A.  C.,  J.  Kieslinger,  M.  Jiménez-Moreno,  and  C.  Steinhäuser. 2022 .  Young People's Visions for Life in the Countryside in Latin America. Geographical Review , 112 ( 3 ), 371 -395 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 00167428 . 2021 . 1925897 .
- Forgrave,  R. 2017 .  In  Northern  Minnesota,  Two  Economies  Square  Off:  Mining  Vs.  Wilderness. New  York  Times , October 12 .  https://www.nytimes.com/ 2017 / 10 / 12 /magazine/in-northernminnesota-two-economies-square-off-mining-vs-wilderness.html.
- IGU-UGI. 2018 .  UNESCO  Honours  Geography  and  Establishes  the  UNESCO  Chair  in  Global Understanding  for  Sustainability.  International  Geographical  Union.  https://igu-online.org/ unesco-honours-geography-and-establishes-the-unesco-chair-in-global-understanding-forsustainability/.
- Jones, R., T. Jones, and C. Ingram. 2022 . Re-Turning Inwards or Opening to the World? Land Use Transitions  on  Australia's  Western  Coast. Geographical  Review , 112 ( 3 ), 422 -443 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 00167428 . 2020 . 1856626 .
- Jones,  R.,  and  J.  Selwood. 2013 .  The  Politics  of  Sustainability  and  Heritage  in  Two  Western Australian Coastal Shack Communities. In Globalization and New Challenges of Agricultural and Rural Systems: Proceedings of the 21 st  Colloquium of the CSRS of the IGU ,  edited  by  D.C. Kim, A. M. Firmino, and Y. Ichikawa, 89 -100 .  Japan: Nagoya University Press.
- Liverman, D. M. 2018 . Geographic Perspectives on Development Goals: Constructive Engagements and  Critical  Perspectives  on  the  MDGs  and  the  SDGs. Dialogues  in  Human  Geography 8 ( 2 ): 168 -185 .  doi: 10 . 1177 / 2043820618780787 .
- Loffler,  R.,  and  E.  Steinicke. 2006 .  Counterurbanization  and  Its  Socioeconomic  Effects  in  High Mountain  Areas  of  the  Sierra  Nevada. Mountain  Research  and  Development 26 ( 1 ): 64 -71 . doi: 10 . 1659 / 0276 -4741 ( 2006 ) 026 [ 0064 :CAISEI] 2 . 0 .CO; 2 .
- Long,  H.,  Y.  Li,  Y.  Liu,  and  X.  Zhang. 2013 .  Population  and  Settlement  Change  in  China's Countryside:  Causes  and  Consequences.  In The  Sustainability  of  Rural  Systems:  Global  and Local  Challenges  and  Opportunities ,  edited  by  M.  Cawley,  A.  M.  D.  S.  M.  Bicalho,  and L.  Laurens, 123 -133 .  Galway,  Ireland:  CSRS  of  the  IGU  and  the  Whitaker  Institute,  National University of Ireland Galway.
- Lukić,  A.,  P.  R.  Kaufmann,  L.  Valožić,  I.  Zupanc,  M.  Cvitanović,  D.  Pejnović,  and  I.  Žilić. 2022 . Croatian Rural Futures in 2030 : Four Alternative Scenarios for Postsocialist Countryside in the Newest E.U. Member State. Geographical Review , 112 ( 3 ), 332 -352 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 00167428 . 2020 . 1871298 .

- Maher,  G. 2013 .  Attitudes  to  Brazilian  Migrants  in  Rural  Ireland  in  Conditions  of  Economic Growth  and  Decline.  In The  Sustainability  of  Rural  Systems:  Global  and  Local  Challenges and  Opportunities ,  edited  by  M.  Cawley,  A.  M.  D.  S.  M.  Bicalho,  and  L.  Laurens, 161 -172 . Galway, Ireland: CSRS of the IGU and the Whitaker Institute, National University of Ireland Galway.
- Moseley,  W.  G. 2018 .  Geography  and  Engagement  with  U.N.  Development  Goals:  Rethinking Development or Perpetuating the  Status  Quo? Dialogues  in  Human  Geography 8 ( 2 ): 201 -205 . doi: 10 . 1177 / 2043820618780791 .
- Myadar, O., and S. Jackson. 2019 . Contradictions of Populism and Resource Extraction: Examining the  Intersection  of  Resource  Nationalism  and  Accumulation  by  Dispossession  in  Mongolia. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 109 ( 2 ): 361 -370 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 24694452 . 2018 . 1500233 .
- Paül,  V.,  and  J.-M.  Trillo-Santamaría. 2022 .  The  Emerging  Mountain  Imaginary  of  the  Galician Highlands: A New National Landscape in an Era of Globalization? Geographical Review , 112 ( 3 ), 466 -492 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 00167428 . 2021 . 1897812 .
- Robinson, J. 2004 .  Squaring the Circle? Some Thoughts on the Idea of Sustainable Development. Ecological Economics 48 ( 4 ): 369 -384 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.ecolecon. 2003 . 10 . 017 .
- Schmitz, S., and L. Pepe. 2022 .  Does Local Rural Heritage Still Matter in a Global Urban World? Geographical Review , 112 ( 3 ), 353 -370 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 00167428 . 2021 . 1890996 .
- Stedman, R. C. 2006 .  Understanding Place Attachment among Second Home Owners. American Behavioral Scientist 50 ( 2 ): 187 -205 .  doi: 10 . 1177 / 0002764206290633 .
- United Nations. 2015 .  Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. A/RES/ 70 / 1 .  https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post 2015 /transformingourworld.
- WCED  [World  Commission  on  Environment  and  Development]. 1987 . Our  Common  Future . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Weichelt,  R.  D.,  and  E.  Zeitler. 2022 .  Second  Home  Property  Ownership  and  Public-School Funding  in  Wisconsin's  Northwoods. Geographical  Review , 112 ( 3 ), 396 -421 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 00167428 . 2020 . 1855583 .
- Woods, M. 2005 . Rural Geography .  London, UK: Sage Publications, Ltd. ---. 2011 . Rural .  Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
- Zanolin,  G.,  and  V.  Paül. 2022 .  Exploring  the  Sustainability  of  Wilderness  Narratives  in  Europe. Reflections  from  Val  Grande  National  Park  (Italy). Geographical  Review , 112 ( 3 ), 444 -465 . doi: 10 . 1080 / 00167428 . 2020 . 1869905 .

Copyright of Geographical Review is the property of Taylor &amp; Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.