- Steila, Donald.  1983.  Quantitative vs. qualitative drought  assessment. Professional Geographer 35: 192-94.
- Taylor, Jonathan G., Thomas R. Stewart, and Mary W. Downton. 1987. Perceptions of drought in the Ogallala aquifer region of the western U.S. Great Plains. In Planning for Drought: T oward a Reduction of Societal Vulnerability, ed. Donald A. Wilhite and William E. Easterling, with Deborah A. Wood, 409-21. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Wilhite, Donald A., and Michael H. Glantz. 1987. Understanding the drought phenomena: The role of definitions. In Planning for Drought: Toward a Reduction of Societal Vulnerability, ed. Donald A.
- Wilhite and William E. Easterling, with Deborah A. Wood, 11-27. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Woodrum,  Eric.  1984. 'Mainstreaming' content analysis in social science: Methodological advantages, obstacles, and solutions. Social Science Research 13: 1-19.

KENNETH DAGEL (Ph.D., University of Nebraska) is Assistant Professor of Geography at Missouri Western State College, St. Joseph, MO 64507. His research interests include the geography and use of sparsely populated areas and marginal environments, especially in regard to agriculture.

## A Pragmatic Study of Conventional and Alternative Farmers in Colorado

## Leslie Aileen Duram

Southern Illinois University at Carbondale

The adoption of alternative agriculture in the form of organic farming and Holistic Resource Management (HRM) ranching is controlled by individual farmer decision making. Drawing on pragmatism, a method of inquiry based on understanding peoples' experiences, this paper shows how agricultural land-use decisions are based on numerous factors, including sources of information, individual perceptions of agriculture, and attitudes about the environment that are narrowed to a farmer's practical range of choice. Descriptive statistics identify variations between groups of conventional and alternative farmers, while qualitative analysis details incremental variations among case study farmers. Based on 57 mail survey responses and 11 case study interviews in Colorado, 12 behavioral characteristics are identified that describe composite reactive and proactive farmers. Differences are linked to variations between an internal and external locus of control. Results indicate that there is a spectrum of attitudes and characteristics among conventional and alternative farmers that is displayed as an agro-ecological behavior continuum model. Key Words: alternative agriculture, environment/society, rural geography, behavior.

## Introduction

T he study of individual farmers is integral to understanding cultural and social relations in agriculture, while structural approaches reflect current political and economic influences onthe agricultural system (Friedland et al. 1991; Emel et al. 1992; Marsden et al. 1993; Whatmore 1993). Indeed, 'both structural processes andhumanagencyneedtobetakenintoaccount in explaining the activities of farming families' (Gasson and Errington 1993, 40). Individual agents, acting within the broader structural frame- work of policy incentives and commodity markets, may choose to adopt conservation methods or agricultural innovations even while continuing with their basic conventional production goals (Bowden 1965; Ilbery 1978; Napier and Forster 1982; Carlson and Dillman 1986; Francis  1994).  More uniquely, individual farmers maychoseto adopt alternative farming methods (e.g., biodynamic, permaculture, organic) that are somewhat outside the current structures of the conventional agricultural system but that reflect society's increasing concern with rural environmental degradation (Harper 1993).

All farmers act within the same broad structural framework of U.S. agriculture, yet some individuals are motivated to try alternative forms of production while others choose to operate under conventional methods. Variations in individual farmers' attitudes toward agriculture are key to understanding what influences some farmers to adopt alternative methods. Drawing on pragmatism, a method of inquiry based on understanding people's experiences, this paper outlines the characteristics that influence some farmers to adopt organic farming and alternative matic conceptual framework and study methods, I detail the results of my quantitative and qualitative analysis and introduce a model to describe farmer characteristics and attitudes that are influential in the decision to adopt alternative agricultural methods.

## Pragmatism as a Framework for Agricultural Geography

A pragmatic behavioral approach is useful in illuminating personal characteristics of alternative and conventional farmers. Pragmatic inquiry begins with the identification of a 'problematic situation'-a broad issue within the context of society as a whole (Wescoat 1992). In this case, the problematic situation is the sustainability of the U.S. agricultural system and the adoption of alternatives to this system. In order to understand farmers' attitudes and motivation in the adoption of alternative agriculture, I investigated the variations and similarities that exist between and among conventional and alternative farmers in Colorado. Some quantitative variations exist between the average values for groups of conventional and alternative farmers, but this oversimplifies the situation. Qualitative analysis shows that rather than two distinct groups of farmers, there is a continuum of attitudes and behaviors between conventional and alternative farmers.

Pragmatism is concerned with understanding and resolving problems that occur in our complex society (Jackson and Smith 1984). Thus pragmatists acknowledge that their inquiry will not lead to certainty because nothing in the world is certain. Pragmatist William James states that this philosophy 'turns away from abstraction . . . closed systems, and . . . the pretense of finality in truth' (James 1907, 51). Instead, a pragmatist 'defines meaning and knowledge in terms of their function in experience' (Beck 1969, 515). Further understanding of a situation must be gained through experiences or inferred from other people's experiences (Charon 1979).

By linking behavioral geography to pragmatism, geographers can deal with real-world environmental concerns by focusing on the practical consequences of ideas and actions. Literature and research in the pragmatic behavioral tradition are associated with the work of Gilbert White and his students, in the context of natural resource and natural hazards research (Emel and Peet 1991). Pragmatism is also appropriate for geographic research into agricultural land use decision making because farming relies on humans' perceptions of, and ability to work within, the natural environment. The pragmatic approach accepts chaos and the precariousness of existence and  seeks  to expand the scope for human adjustment (Wescoat 1987). Thus, notions of sustainable agriculture and questions of short-term versus long-term productivity goals can be fully encompassed in the investigation. Further, pragmatic  inquiry encourages deep questioning of our current system of industrial agricultural production, especially its ecological and social sustainability (Jackson 1980; Parr et al. 1990; Pimentel and Heichel 1991; Soule and Piper 1992; National Research Council 1993; Smolik et al. 1995). Some farmers adapt to these perceived problems by trying alternative methods of production. Survey research methods are particularly appropriate because the pragmatic behavioral approach assumes that people make decisions on a rational basis, using personal criteria to evaluate information in relation to the environment as they perceive it (Kates 1962).

## Quantitative and Qualitative Data

My survey approach  was  twofold, including quantitative analysis of mail questionnaire responses and qualitative analysis of detailed indepth interviews based on an interview guide. Both survey instruments investigated personal farmer characteristics (e.g., demographic, decision-making, and attitudinal factors) among Colorado farmers. Agricultural enterprises are varied in Colorado, but comparison of typical conventional and alternative farmers' attitudes and behaviors identifies some of the influential personal factors in the adoption of alternative agriculture. In addition, the surveys identified

characteristics or adaptive strategies that allow for individual success within the highly competitive structure of U.S. agriculture.

Conventional farmers and ranchers represent the majority of Colorado farming enterprises: wheat and corn are grown on the most farms and comprise the highest percentage of crop market value, while livestock ranching totals 74% of the total value of agricultural products in the state (U.S. Department of Agriculture 1992). I identified a sample of conventional farmers based on their location in a core study area where climate andtopographycreateanecologicalandlanduse gradient over a relatively short distance that includes irrigated farms, dryland farms and rangeland grazing (Fig. 1). This study area is south of the Central Plains Experimental Range, where ecological researchers are increasingly interested in understanding the human decision making that influences natural conditions in the region (Shoop et al. 1989; Burke et al. 1991). County Planning Commission maps and County Assessor's data were used to contact 141 farmers and ranchers in this core study area.

In order to obtain an acceptable comparative group of alternative agriculturalists, a statewide sample was necessary because of the low overall numbers of such farmers (Fig. 1). Although alternative agriculture includes several distinct methods, the focus of this research is on organic farming and alternative ranching; this sample was identified through the Colorado Organic Producers Association (COPA) and the Colorado branch of Holistic Resource Management (HRM). Current organic certification in Colo-

## Northeast Colorado . . Sterling

Figure 1: Core study area and location of surveyed farms. Note: The comparative mail survey of alternative farmers was statewide, based on membership in COPA/HRM.

<!-- image -->

rado is similar to upcoming national standards that require no synthetic pesticides or fertilizers be applied for three years prior to certification (Colorado Department of Agriculture 1993a, b; U.S. Department of Agriculture 1994). HRM ranches may also be COPA certified, but their management techniques are based on frequent grazing rotation and administration of no artificial growth hormones  or  antibiotics (Savory 1988). All 49 producers listed in the statewide 1993 COPA  Marketing Directory (Colorado Organic Producers Association 1993) and the four members of HRM located in northeastern Colorado were contacted. Mail questionnaires were returned by 31 of the 141 farmers in the core study area who represent conventional producers and by 27 of the 49 members of COPA/ HRMwhorepresent alternative farmers.

I conducted daylong to multi-daylong qualitative interviews with 11 farmers in order to expand the depth of analysis and explanatory power. Open-ended interviews were conducted with two dryland farmers, two irrigated farmers, two ranchers, one organic dryland farmer, three organic irrigated farmers, and one alternative rancher located in northeastern Colorado (Fig. 1). Interviews were not limited to specific question/answer responses; rather, a conversational approach evoked deeper responses regarding factors that influence farmers' land use decisions. Qualitative data reduction techniques were employed and prominent variables were thus delineated (Kirk and Miller 1986; Strauss and Corbin 1990).

In this pragmatic behavioral study, quantitative analysis reveals distinctions in the characteristics of conventional and alternative farmers, and qualitative analysis indicates how individual farmers construct their reality, based on their multiple goals and their perceptions of agriculture, ecology, and their socioeconomic situation. Combining these analyses, we reach the pragmatic goal of better understanding the complex real-world environment in which farmers make land use decisions.

## Farmer Characteristics

Alternative farmers started farming later in life but, as a whole, are younger than the conventional group. The mean length of time in farming was 31 years for the conventional group and 18 years for the alternative group. Experience is

tied to operators' ages. The mean conventional farmer's age was 57 years (range 32-75) and the alternative farmers' mean age was 46 (range 26-70), which contrasts with the statewide mean age of 54 years (U.S. Department of Agriculture 1992). In addition, 93% of conventional farmers surveyed were raised on a farm, while only 44% of alternative farmers were.

Both groups of farmers had high levels of educational attainment, with over 60% of each group having college degrees. There is a significant difference, however, in the fields of college study between the two groups. Over half (52%) of the conventional farmers and only 9% of the alternative farmers had studied agriculture in college. This finding supports literature that identifies distinct conventional and alternative agricultural paradigms between people with degrees in production agriculture versus nonagricultural fields, and it may also indicate different sources of information between the two groups (Bultena and Hoiberg 1986; Beus and Dunlap 1992).

Not surprisingly, the ability to define 'alternative agriculture' varied significantly between conventional and alternative farmers, which indicates differing perceptions of agriculture. Nearly half (49%) of conventional farmers stated that they 'don't know' how to define the term. Most (74%) of the alternative farmers, however, noted that alternative agriculture included 'nontraditional methods,' 'organic methods' or 'farm diversification.' These definitional variations suggest that the practical range of choice for many conventional farmers is limited to maintaining their current methods, while alternative farmers have a broader practical range of choice.

## Farmers' Attitudes

To investigate farmer  attitudes, I  developed paired statements that exemplify agreement with either a conventional or an alternative agricultural paradigm regarding attitudes about ecology, scale, and personal ideals (based on Beus and Dunlap 1991). Conventional attitudes are represented by the first statement and alternative attitudes are seen in the second statement; surveyed farmers indicated their level of agreement with one of the statements (T able 1).

Results indicate that alternative farmers have positive attitudes toward natural fertilizers and alternative production methods, while conventional farmers believe that synthetic fertilizers and pesticides should be used. Such differences reflect the actual farm production techniques, since most conventional farmers rely on agrichemicals, while such inputs are excluded from organic and alternative production that instead draw from intensive forms of management such as rotations, composting, timing, and biological pest control (Reganold 1988; Werner and Dindal 1990). Farmers had differing opinions about individual responsibility and farm size, as alternative farmers believe that individuals should farm only as much land as they can personally care for. Conventional farmers, on the other hand, tended to agree that farmers should farm as much land as they profitably can. This indicates a fundamental split between the conventional U.S. agriculture system, in which average farm size  is  continuously increasing (U.S. Department of Agriculture 1992), and alternative critiques, which express concern about corporate land agglomeration and the demise of family farms (Berry 1986). Conventional farmers believe that U.S. agriculture is successful, while  alternative farmers are concerned that ecological problems inhibit the success of U.S. agriculture. This finding suggests a basic question about how agriculture should be judged; i.e., is consumer food cost or ecological sustainability the basis of success? Perceptions of the environmental impacts caused by agriculture also varied statistically between the two groups. Conventional  farmers  mildly  agree  with the statement that agriculture is fundamentally ecologically sustainable, while alternative farmers lean toward the statement that current methodsneedtobegreatlyaltered.Thisfindingagain exemplifies societal divisions between advocates of the current agricultural system and those who seek changes (Beus and Dunlap 1993).

Regardless of these variations between conventional and alternative  attitudes, their  responses were similar with regard to the importance of rural communities, stewardship in agricultural production, and a desire for profitability (T able 1). All surveyed farmers strongly value rural social sustainability. Farmers perceive the 'disappearing middle' as mediumsized family farms decline and large corporate and small part-time farms increase (Buttel and LaRamee1991).Theseattitudesreflectanenduring populist spirit among farmers (Kloppenberg

andGeisler1985).Bothgroupsstatetheiragreement with attitudes toward land stewardship, a recurrent theme in historical nature-society relations (Glacken 1967). Responses do not indicate preservationists' attitudes, but rather stress utilitarian  goals  of productivity  from nature (Nash 1990). Both groups have businesslike attitudes that reflect the current highly competitive structure of agriculture and  underscore important economic and social concerns with regard to the declining number of family farms (Miller 1982; Strange 1988).

Such economic attitudes are substantiated by the fact that alternative farm enterprises were doing well in economic terms. In fact, the mean gross operational income for alternative farms was $60-80,000 and for conventional farms was $40-60,000. Moreover, the distribution shows

Table 1 Farmers' Attitudes toward Agriculture: Survey Responses

| Farmers indicated with which of the two statements they most agreed. 1= STRONGLY AGREE 2= MILDLY AGREE WITH VIEW IN LEFT-HAND COLUMN 3= UNDECIDED 4= MILDLY AGREE 5= STRONGLY AGREE WITH VIEW IN RIGHT-HAND COLUMN   | Farmers indicated with which of the two statements they most agreed. 1= STRONGLY AGREE 2= MILDLY AGREE WITH VIEW IN LEFT-HAND COLUMN 3= UNDECIDED 4= MILDLY AGREE 5= STRONGLY AGREE WITH VIEW IN RIGHT-HAND COLUMN   | Farmers indicated with which of the two statements they most agreed. 1= STRONGLY AGREE 2= MILDLY AGREE WITH VIEW IN LEFT-HAND COLUMN 3= UNDECIDED 4= MILDLY AGREE 5= STRONGLY AGREE WITH VIEW IN RIGHT-HAND COLUMN   | Farmers indicated with which of the two statements they most agreed. 1= STRONGLY AGREE 2= MILDLY AGREE WITH VIEW IN LEFT-HAND COLUMN 3= UNDECIDED 4= MILDLY AGREE 5= STRONGLY AGREE WITH VIEW IN RIGHT-HAND COLUMN   | Farmers indicated with which of the two statements they most agreed. 1= STRONGLY AGREE 2= MILDLY AGREE WITH VIEW IN LEFT-HAND COLUMN 3= UNDECIDED 4= MILDLY AGREE 5= STRONGLY AGREE WITH VIEW IN RIGHT-HAND COLUMN   | Farmers indicated with which of the two statements they most agreed. 1= STRONGLY AGREE 2= MILDLY AGREE WITH VIEW IN LEFT-HAND COLUMN 3= UNDECIDED 4= MILDLY AGREE 5= STRONGLY AGREE WITH VIEW IN RIGHT-HAND COLUMN   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Inputs                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Inputs                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Inputs                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Inputs                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Inputs                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Inputs                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Farmers should use primarily synthetic fertilizers and pesticides to maintain adequate levels of production.                                                                                                         | 1 2 3 4                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Farmers should use primarily natural fertilizers and production methods such as manure, crop rotations, compost, and biological pest control.                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| *Conventional Mean 3.7; Alternative Mean 4.7                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 3.7; Alternative Mean 4.7                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 3.7; Alternative Mean 4.7                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 3.7; Alternative Mean 4.7                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 3.7; Alternative Mean 4.7                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 3.7; Alternative Mean 4.7                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Farm Size                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Farm Size                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Farm Size                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Farm Size                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Farm Size                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Farm Size                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Farmers should farm as much land as they profitably can.                                                                                                                                                             | 1 2 3 4                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Farmers should farm only as much land as they can personally care for.                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| *Conventional Mean 3.1; Alternative Mean 4.3                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 3.1; Alternative Mean 4.3                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 3.1; Alternative Mean 4.3                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 3.1; Alternative Mean 4.3                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 3.1; Alternative Mean 4.3                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 3.1; Alternative Mean 4.3                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Measuring Success                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Measuring Success                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Measuring Success                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Measuring Success                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Measuring Success                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Measuring Success                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| The abundance and relatively low price of food in the United States are evidence that U.S. agriculture is the most successful in the world.                                                                          | 1 2 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 4 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | High energy use, soil erosion, water pollution, etc. are evidence that U.S. agriculture is not as successful as many believe.                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| *Conventional Mean 1.9; Alternative Mean 3.7                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 1.9; Alternative Mean 3.7                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 1.9; Alternative Mean 3.7                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 1.9; Alternative Mean 3.7                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 1.9; Alternative Mean 3.7                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 1.9; Alternative Mean 3.7                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Environmental Impact                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Environmental Impact                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Environmental Impact                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Environmental Impact                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Environmental Impact                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Environmental Impact                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Modern agriculture is a minor cause of ecological problems and needs to be only fine-tuned periodically in order to be ecologically sound.                                                                           | 1 2 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 4 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Modern agriculture is a major cause of ecological problems and must be greatly modified to become ecologically sound.                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| *Conventional Mean 2.0; Alternative Mean 3.5                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 2.0; Alternative Mean 3.5                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 2.0; Alternative Mean 3.5                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 2.0; Alternative Mean 3.5                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 2.0; Alternative Mean 3.5                                                                                                                                                                         | *Conventional Mean 2.0; Alternative Mean 3.5                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Similarity among Conventional and Alternative Farmers' Attitudes                                                                                                                                                     | Similarity among Conventional and Alternative Farmers' Attitudes                                                                                                                                                     | Similarity among Conventional and Alternative Farmers' Attitudes                                                                                                                                                     | Similarity among Conventional and Alternative Farmers' Attitudes                                                                                                                                                     | Similarity among Conventional and Alternative Farmers' Attitudes                                                                                                                                                     | Similarity among Conventional and Alternative Farmers' Attitudes                                                                                                                                                     |
| Rural Communities:                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Rural Communities:                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Rural Communities:                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Rural Communities:                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Rural Communities:                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Rural Communities:                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| The future success of American agriculture will NOT be affected if rural communities continue to decline.                                                                                                            | 1 2 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 4 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Healthy rural communities are absolutely essential for American agriculture's future success.                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Conventional Mean 4.6; Alternative Mean 4.6                                                                                                                                                                          | Conventional Mean 4.6; Alternative Mean 4.6                                                                                                                                                                          | Conventional Mean 4.6; Alternative Mean 4.6                                                                                                                                                                          | Conventional Mean 4.6; Alternative Mean 4.6                                                                                                                                                                          | Conventional Mean 4.6; Alternative Mean 4.6                                                                                                                                                                          | Conventional Mean 4.6; Alternative Mean 4.6                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Stewardship:                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Stewardship:                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Stewardship:                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Stewardship:                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Stewardship:                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Stewardship:                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Farmland should be farmed so as to maximize annual profits, even if this threatens the long-term productive capacity of the land.                                                                                    | 1 2 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 4 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Farmland should be farmed so as to protect the long-term productive capacity of the land, even if this means lower production and profits.                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Conventional Mean 4.3; Alternative Mean 4.4                                                                                                                                                                          | Conventional Mean 4.3; Alternative Mean 4.4                                                                                                                                                                          | Conventional Mean 4.3; Alternative Mean 4.4                                                                                                                                                                          | Conventional Mean 4.3; Alternative Mean 4.4                                                                                                                                                                          | Conventional Mean 4.3; Alternative Mean 4.4                                                                                                                                                                          | Conventional Mean 4.3; Alternative Mean 4.4                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Profitability:                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Profitability:                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Profitability:                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Profitability:                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Profitability:                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Profitability:                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| A successful farmer is one who earns enough from farming to enjoy an above-average standard of living.                                                                                                               | 1 2 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 4 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | A successful farmer is one who truly enjoys farming even if it provides a below-average standard of living.                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Conventional Mean 2.9 Alternative Mean 3.2                                                                                                                                                                           | Conventional Mean 2.9 Alternative Mean 3.2                                                                                                                                                                           | Conventional Mean 2.9 Alternative Mean 3.2                                                                                                                                                                           | Conventional Mean 2.9 Alternative Mean 3.2                                                                                                                                                                           | Conventional Mean 2.9 Alternative Mean 3.2                                                                                                                                                                           | Conventional Mean 2.9 Alternative Mean 3.2                                                                                                                                                                           |

that a large percentage (48%) of alternative producers had gross operational incomes over $150,000, compared with 15% of conventional respondents. These economic factors contrast with commonly held notions that alternative farms are necessarily small 'gardens' that are tangential to the U.S. agricultural system. This survey  shows  that alternative farms are economically viable. Indeed, recent literature suggests that with  reduced  agrichemical inputs costs, higher prices paid for organic products, and higher reliability of organic yields under climatic and pest  stresses, organic farms are equal to or more profitable than conventional operations (Benbrook 1995).

Some attitudes vary, as conventional farmers have a more positive view of the current U.S. agricultural system while alternative farmers believe that the use of synthetic agrichemicals, increasing farm size, and ecological problems are negative aspects (T able 1). Yet both groups of farmers value rural sustainability, stewardship, and economic viability in farming. These results indicate  the complexity of variations among  conventional  and alternative farmers that were further addressed through in-depth qualitative interviews and analysis.

## The Agro-Ecological Behavior Continuum

On-farm interviews lasted between 4 and 16 hours, often requiring two visits in order to gain the trust of the farmer and to fully understand their operation (i.e. seasonal variation, crop rotations). In gathering the interview data, I saw the rich variety of farmer attitudes, especially with regard to the 'locus of control.' The locus of control refers to individuals' perceptions of howmuchthey control their own destiny versus how much others exert control (Palm 1990). Through my analysis, I discovered that some farmers have a strong external locus of control, as they perceive outside forces (e.g., government policy, prices, markets) controlling their farm operations. These farmers tend to maintain conventional operations and then react to the numerous outside influences they perceive. Other farmers, however, have an internal locus of control, because they feel more in control of their farms. These farmers are proactive in the management of their operations. Personal experience, sources of information, and views of agriculture all acted to further narrow a farmer's theoretical range of choice to a practical range of choice (based on White 1961). Reactive farmers often exclude alternative production methods from their practical range of choice and thus continue to practice conventional forms of production. Alternative farming methods are more likely chosen by proactive farmers who include it in their broader practical range of choice.

Although research is often framed as a contrasting comparisonof conventionalandorganic farms, there are inherent faults with such dichotomous categories (Lampkin 1994). Indeed, I found that rather than only two groups of farmers, it is useful to describe a range or continuum of farmers' attitudes. The multiple dimensionsoffarmers'attitudes and behaviors can be illustrated with 12 main characteristics that are described below. The 'star diagram' is used here to display different patterns of attributes that define a continuum from conventional to alternative agriculture  in  Colorado (Fig. 2). Eachaxis represents one of the 12 characteristics and is positioned so that the center represents reactive responses within conventional agriculture and the outer edge represents proactive responses to conventional agriculture. Characteristics are measured on a 0-1 scale with infinite positions on the continuum. The strongest reactive characteristics are scaled as '0' and the strongest proactive characteristics are '1' on the scale.

Based on mail survey and interview data, results indicated that no surveyed farmer exhibits all extreme characteristics (either reactive or proactive), but these hypothetical composites help delineate the boundaries of the continuum along which each farmer can be placed. Extreme reactive farmers accept the conventional agricultural system, in which they seek security because they are risk averse. Agricultural specialization is necessary for reactive farmers because they believe that large mono-cropped farms are most profitable. In this type of operation, farmers sell their products to conventional markets, such as corporate grain elevators and meat processing plants. Reactive farmers choose to utilize government programs as income stabilizers, and believe that science and technology (based on government and private industry supported research) will provide them with the best farming techniques. Reactive farmers are unfamiliar with ecological terms such as 'ecosystem'

and believe that humans can control the environment, and that farming specifically requires mastery over nature. They feel trapped by outside influences that do not understand agriculture: government,  environmental policy, and urban public opinion. They feel manipulated by commodity markets and regulations they feel are beyond their control. Reactive farmers are distrustful of outsiders who, they believe, have too much influence over agriculture in general and their individual farm in particular.

Examples of these reactive  characteristics were obvious in some farmers' interviews. As one farmer noted, 'Most people in America don't know anything  about agriculture;  and someofthesepeopleare the environmentalists.' Another farmer noted, ''Environmentalist' is a dirty word. They just cause problems.' And a third farmer said, 'It bears down on you when everybody is so negative about what you do. But their food is always there, so they don't stop to think 'where does this all come from?'' A rancher expressed his admiration for current technology: 'I like the cows. The genetic improvements mean bigger and better cows. That's appealing to packers and consumers.'

At the other extreme of the spectrum are proactive farmers who welcome change and alternative approaches to farming. In fact, they enjoy the challenge of proving wrong those who say, 'Farming cannot be done that way.' They are risk takers, and they worry less about what their neighbors think of their farming techniques. They find their own market niches as they market or retail their range of products to smaller processing companies or directly to consumers. Proactive farmers strive for diversity in their operation because this provides a reasonable yield that is sustainable over the longterm. Proactive farmers do not participate in govern-

<!-- image -->

7

Figure 2: The agro-ecological behavior continuum: Reactive and proactive characteristics.

ment programs, but instead rely on operational diversity to maintain their income. They enjoy the challenge  of experimenting with  unique methods and believe that personal experience rather than established channels of public and private research is the best guide for their farm decisions. Proactive farmers talk freely about ecosystems and agro-ecology. They tend to believe that humans have an interdependent relationship with the environment and that farming should harmonize with nature. They seek new farming techniques and adopt methods that are unusual for other farmers in their community. Theyfeel more in control of their decision making, and thus more in control of their operation. Although proactive farmers are unique in their communities, they are more likely to play an active role in organizations. Proactive farmers are proud of agriculture and their farming techniques, so they want to share their experiences and show their operation to others.

Proactive characteristics were displayed in some farmers' interviews. One farmer noted, 'Some neighbors think we are loony-toon for doing organic!'  But  her family's 3,500-acre grain farm is doing well and, she noted, 'You can't argue with success!' Another alternative farmer said, 'If somebody tells me that it can't be done I will prove that it can be done. I'll try all avenues before giving up.' He also stressed that for information on alternative agriculture, 'Extension, universities and government don't help. They don't know anything! I call distributors, and then grow what they need.' A farmer compared organic to conventional production: 'If you depend on one crop, you need chemicals to save the crop. You need chemicals for security.' He continued, 'I have carved out a specialized market and crops. It changes from year to year.' Another alternative farmer believes that 'in sustainable, organic or any agriculture, the #1 thing is profitability. You must stay in business. Given that, the #2 emphasis is on diversification.' These comments from individual farmers provide specific examples of the incremental variation between reactive and proactive farmers that can be displayed in the agro-ecological continuum model.

## Placing Farmers on the Continuum

Anindividual farmer's attitudes are identified by his or her location on the continuum for each of the 12 scales. The composite attitudes for the 11 farmers interviewed are presented in Figure 3. The star diagrams  are arranged  from most proactive to most reactive, and these attitude models are closely linked to actual farm operations, with more alternative farms represented by proactive characteristics, transitional farms represented in the middle of the continuum, and more conventional farms represented by reactive characteristics.

Farmer 1 is 57 years old and operates an 8,000-acre organic dryland grain farm, having converted from conventional to organic in the early 1980s. He displays many strong proactive characteristics but does not have a highly diverse operation (variable 4), as he relies primarily on wheat and millet for cash crops, which reflects the production limitations of the low precipitation received on this dryland alternative farm. Farmer 2 is a 36-year-old conventional farmer who has an 800-acre 'split' operation of separate conventional and certified organic fields on which he grows wheat, corn, pinto beans, barley, sugar beets, and cattle. He displays many proactive characteristics, except that he does actively participate in government programs (variable5), because he was influenced by parents and siblings, who remain in conventional farming. Farmer 3 is 38 years old and operates a small (8-acre) irrigated organic farm on which he produces and actively markets herbs, flowers, and salad greens. He displays proactive characteristics, except that he is distrustful of outsiders and newcomers to his community (variable 12).

Farmers 4, 5, and 6 are in the middle of the continuum, but they display  some proactive characteristics that depict their transition to alternative agriculture. Farmer 4 is 72 years old, and now jointly manages a 2,000-acre organic fruit, vegetable, grain, and tree farm with his son.Hedisplaysstrongproactivecharacteristics: he is a risk taker (variable 2), has found his own markets for alternative produce (variable 3), is extremely diversified (variable 4), and knows ecology terms (variable 7) due to his career in education. Farmer 5 is a 60-year-old HRM alternative rancher who operates 8,000 acres. He is clearly in the middle of the continuum, as his scaled scores indicate. Farmer 6 is age 53 and operates an 8,000-acre conventional dryland operation that produces wheat, millet, and sunflowers using conservation-tillage. He is in the middle of the continuum, as he is proactive in

seeking new ways (variable 9) and is knowledgeable about ecology (variable 7), but he shows strong reactive characteristics in his trust of science and technology (variable 6). He is an advocate of minimum-tillage because he believes it reduces soil erosion, but he is concerned that it requires the use of chemical herbicides to kill crop residues.

Farmers 7, 8, and 9 are also in the middle of the continuum but tend to display more reactive characteristics. Farmer 7 is a 55-year-old conventionalrancherwhorentspublicgrazinglands and holds approximately 4,000 acres of his own. He displays mostly reactive attributes, as he has not identified his own market, but rather relies on large food corporations to buy his cattle (variable 3). He is also highly specialized (variable 4). At the same time, he is overwhelmed with the sense of being trapped in the current system (variable 10), which leads to his distrust

Figure 3: Case study farmers and farm types along the agro-ecological behavior continuum. Note: The upper vertical axis is variable 1; the others are arranged clockwise from there (see Fig. 2).

<!-- image -->

of outsiders (variable 12). Farmer 8 is 60 years old and has a 3,000-acre conventional dryland wheat farm. He questions some aspects of science and technology (variable 6), particularly the use of agrichemicals, which he believes have caused his wife's health problems. Farmer 9 is age 40 and operates a 500-acre conventional irrigated corn and alfalfa farm with cattle breeding. He fits within the reactive group except that he and his wife are very open and welcoming of outsiders (variable 12).

Farmers 10 and 11 each display  primarily reactive characteristics. Farmer 10 is 71 years old and has a 100-acre conventional irrigated farm that produces onions, corn, and soybeans. He believes that agrichemicals are necessary because he remembers the poverty and crop failures growing up on a farm in the 1920s with no chemicals. Farmer 11, age 55, operates a 7,000acre conventional ranch with some wheat in cropland. He displays nearly all reactive characteristics, as he fully participates in government programs, relies on conventional markets, and trusts technology to solve agricultural problems.

## Discussion and Conclusion

While many conventional and alternative farmers state goals of rural sustainability, stewardship, and economic viability, there is variation in how individual farmers perceive and act within the current agricultural system. Some farmers see alternative methods as an opportunity, and they may adopt organic farming or HRM ranching. These individuals are motivated by a strong internal locus of control and maintain a broader practical range of choice for their management decisions. They are proactive in confronting problems they perceive in the current agricultural system. Thus the influence of proactive characteristics  is  evident in two ways.  First, proactive characteristics have led some people, who are not from a farming background, to personally decide to go into alternative farming. Second, proactive characteristics  have  influenced some farmers to shift from conventional to alternative methods because they deem this the best way to solve the problems that they perceive in conventional farming. In either case, the same proactive characteristics are present in many of the individuals who adopt alternative agriculture, but it is the decision to make the transition from their conventional methods that requires a closer look.

Inconsistent attitudes may act to push some farmers toward alternative methods. Reactive farmers, for example, tend to accept the current agricultural system, but at the same time feel manipulated by policies and regulations. Reactive farmers think that outsiders (e.g., environmentalists, urban dwellers, and the government) have too muchcontrol, but at the same time they demand the security of the current system. The use of agrichemicals is another factor that may influence  reactive  farmers to  draw  on more proactive ideas. Many reactive farmers believe that synthetic agrichemicals are needed to 'feed the world,' but at the same time they question the safety of these products. They tend to continue applications only because of their overriding faith in technology and their perception of economic returns. Their attitudes may change, however, due to personal experience with chemicals, fear of illness, or changes in financial gain. Such changes could influence a shift to more proactive attitudes and possibly the movement to more alternative methods.

Individual farmers may also feel torn between their personal conflicting reactive and proactive attitudes. For example, farmers may believe that diversification is an important goal for farm sustainability, but they continue to obtain advice from sources that stress the need for crop specialization and its accompanying agrichemical applications. Diversification is also inhibited by participation in government commodity support programs that require base acreage and specialization (although the current farm bill may drastically change this policy and reduce federal supports). In balancing such variations in attitudes, some farmers may eventually try alternative farming techniques to fit with their ingrained (but perhaps suppressed) proactive ideals. These internal conflicts could push farmers from reactive to more proactive attitudes, which may open up their range of choice to include the option of trying alternative methods.

A pragmatic study welcomes the individual variety and the entire spectrum of farmer attributes between conventional and alternative agriculture, as displayed in Colorado by reactive and proactive characteristics. This variety of farmer characteristics, attitudes, and behaviors collectively demonstrates an agro-ecological behavior continuum-a pragmatic means of describing the conflict and complexity in farmers' decision making. Each farmer possesses a unique chron-

icle of attitudes and behaviors that draws upon reactive or proactive characteristics. More specifically, however, results indicate that reactive attitudes and characteristics seem to constrain farmers to maintaining their conventional methods of production. On the other hand, the adoption of alternative methods is accomplished by farmers whose proactive attitudes drive them to adapt to current uncertainties in U.S. agriculture by trying alternative methods of production. n

## Literature Cited

- Beck, R. N. 1969. Perspectives in Philosophy . New York: Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston.
- Benbrook, C. 1995. Healthy Food, Healthy Farms: Pest Management in the Public Interest . Washington, DC: National Campaign for Pesticide Policy Reform.
- Berry, W. 1986. The Unsettling of America: Culture and Agriculture . San Francisco: Sierra Club.
- Beus, C., and R. Dunlap. 1991. Measuring adherence to alternative vs. conventional agricultural paradigms: A proposed scale. Rural Sociology 56(3):432-66.
- ---. 1992. The alternative-conventional agricultural debate: Where do agricultural faculty stand? Rural Sociology 57(3): 363-80.
- ---.1993. Agricultural policy debates: Examining the alternative and conventional perspectives. American Journal of  Alternative Agriculture 8(3): 98-106.
- Bowden, M. 1965. The Diffusion of the Decision to Irrigate . Department of Geography Research Paper No. 97. Chicago: University of Chicago.
- Bultena, G., and E. Hoiberg. 1986. Sources of information and technical assistance for farmers in controlling soil erosion. In Conserving Soil: Insights from Socioeconomic Research , ed. S. Lovejoy and T. Napier, 71-82. Ankeny, IA: Soil Conservation Society of America.
- Burke, I., T. Kittel, W. Lauenroth, C. Yonker, and P . Snook. 1991. Regional analysis of the central Great Plains. BioScience 41:685-92.
- Buttel, F., and P . LaRamee. 1991. The 'disappearing middle': A sociological perspective. In Towards a New Political Economy of Agriculture , ed. W. Friedland, L. Busch, F. Buttel, and A. Rudy, 151-69. Boulder, CO: Westview.
- Carlson, J., and D. Dillman. 1986. Early adopters and nonusers of no-till in the pacific NW: A comparison. In Conserving Soil: Insights from Socioeconomic Research , ed. S.  Lovejoy  and T. Napier, 83-92. Ankeny, IA: Soil Conservation Society of America.
- Charon, J. M. 1979. Symbolic Interactionism. NewYork: Prentice Hall.
- Colorado Department of Agriculture. 1993a. Organic Certification Act . Title 35, Article 11.5. September
16. Lakewood, CO: Colorado Department of Agriculture, Division of Plant Industry.
- ---. 1993b. Rules and Regulations Pertaining to the Administration and Enforcement of the Organic Certification Act . Title 35, Article 11.5. December 30. Lakewood, CO: Colorado Department of Agriculture, Division of Plant Industry.
- Colorado Organic Producers Association. 1993. Colorado Organic Producers Association Marketing Directory . Denver: COPA.
- Emel, J., and R. Peet. 1991. Resource management and natural hazards. In New Models in Geography: The Political Perspective , ed. R. Peet and N. Thrift, 49-76. Boston: Unwin and Hyman.
- Emel, J., R. Roberts, and D. Sauri. 1992. Ideology, property, and groundwater resources. Political Geography 11(1): 37-54.
- Francis, D. 1994. Family Agriculture: Tradition and Transformation . London: Earthscan.
- Friedland, W., L. Busch, F. Buttel, and A. Rudy. 1991. Towards a New Political Economy of Agriculture . Boulder: Westview.
- Gasson, R., and A. Errington. 1993. The Farm Family Business . Wallingford, United Kingdom: CAB International.
- Glacken, C. J. 1967. Traces on the Rhodian Shore: Nature and Culture in Western Thought . Berkeley: University of California.
- Harper, S., ed. 1993. The Greening of Rural Policy . London: Belhaven.
- Ilbery, B.W. 1978. Agricultural decision making: A behavioural perspective. Progress in Human Geography 2(3):448-66.
- Jackson, W. 1980. New Roots for Agriculture . Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska.
- ---. 1987. Altars of Unhewn Stone . San Francisco: North Point.
- Jackson, P., and S. J. Smith. 1984. Exploring Social Geography . London: George Allen &amp; Unwin.
- James,W.1907. Pragmatism: A NewNameforSomeOld Ways of Thinking . New York: Longman, Gree.
- Kates, R. 1962. Hazard and Choice Perception in Flood Plain  Management . Department of  Geography Research Paper No. 78. Chicago: University of Chicago.
- Kirk, J., and M. Miller. 1986. Reliability and Validity in Qualitative Research . Qualitative Research Methods Series No. 1. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
- Kloppenberg, J., and C. Geisler. 1985. The agricultural ladder: Agrarian ideology and the changing structure of U.S.  agriculture. Journal  of Rural Studies 1: 59-72.
- Lampkin, N. 1994. Researching organic farming systems. In The Economics of Organic Farming , ed. N. Lampkin and S. Padel, 27-43. Wallingford, United Kingdom: CAB International.
- Marsden, T., P . Lowe, and S. Whatmore, eds. 1993. Rural Restructuring . Critical Perspectives on Rural Change. London: David Fulton.

- Miller, W. 1982. The farm business perspective and soil conservation. In Soil Conservation Institutions and Incentives, eds. H. Halcrow, E. Heady, and M. Cotner, 151-62. Ankeny, IA: Soil Conservation Society of America.
- Napier, T., and D. Forster. 1982. Farmer attitudes and behavior associated with soil erosion control. In Soil Conservation Institutions and Incentives, eds. H. Halcrow, E. Heady, and M. Cotner, 137-50. Ankeny, IA: Soil Conservation Society of America.
- Nash, R. 1990. American Environmentalism: Readings in Conservation History. 3rd ed. NewYork: McGrawHill.
- National ResearchCouncil.1993. Soil and Water Quality: An Agenda for Agriculture . Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
- Palm, R. 1990. Natural Hazards: An Integrative Framework for Research and Planning . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University.
- Parr, J., R. Papendick, I. Youngberg, and R. Meyer. 1990. Sustainable agriculture in the United States. In Sustainable Agricultural Systems, ed. C. Edwards, R. Lal, P . Madden, R. Miller, and G. House, 50-67. Ankeny, IA: Soil and Water Conservation Society of America.
- Pimentel, D., and G. Heichel. 1991. Energy efficiency and sustainablility of farming systems. In Soil Management for Sustainability , ed. R. Lal and F. Pierce, 113-24. Ankeny, IA: Soil and Water Conservation Society.
- Reganold, J. 1988. Comparison of soil properties as influenced by organic and conventional farming systems. American Journal of Alternative Agriculture 3(4): 144-55.
- Savory, A. 1988. Holistic Resource Management . Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Shoop, M., S. Kanode, and M. Calvert. 1989. Central Plains Experimental Range: 50 years of research. Rangelands 11(3):112-7.
- Smolik, J., T. Dobbs, and D. Rickerl. 1995. The relative sustainability of alternative, conventional, and
- reduced-till farming systems. American Journal of Alternative Agriculture 10(1):25-35.
- Soule, J., and J. Piper. 1992. Farmingin Nature's Image: An Ecological Approach to Agriculture . Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Strange, M. 1988. Family Farming: A New Economic Vision . Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska.
- Strauss, A., and J. Corbin. 1990. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques . Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
- U.S. Department of Agriculture. 1992. Census of Agriculture: Colorado State and County Data. Washington, DC:U.S.DepartmentofCommerce,Bureauofthe Census.
- ---.1994. National Organic Standards Board: Final Recommendations for Organic Crop Production Standards . Adopted June 1-4. Washington, DC: USDA/AMS/TMD.
- Werner, M., and D. Dindal. 1990. Effects of conversion of organic agricultural practices on soil biota. American Journal of Alternative Agriculture 5(1): 24-32.
- Wescoat, J. 1987. The 'practical range of choice' in water resources geography. Progress in Human Geography 11:41-59.
- ---.1992.CommonthemesintheworkofGilbert White and John Dewey: A pragmatic appraisal. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 82(4): 587-607.
- Whatmore, S. 1993. Agricultural geography. Progress in Human Geography 17(1): 84-91.
- White, G. 1961. The choice of use in resource management. Natural Resources Journal 1: 23-40.

LESLIE AILEEN DURAM is Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale, Carbondale, IL 629014514. Email: duram@siu.edu. Her research interests include organic agricultural regulations, alternative markets for agricultural products, and the behavioral aspects of organic agricultural production.