## Wind and Waves:  Influence of Local and Non-local Waves on Mesoscale Beach Behavior in Estuarine Environments

Nancy L. Jackson

Department of Social Science and Policy Studies,  New Jersey Institute of Technology he world's  coastlines consist  of a variety of environments  that range  from  exT posed ocean shorelines to sheltered  estuaries  and  lagoons  on the  landward  side  of barrier  islands. In the United States,  more than half of the nation's  coastline adjoins  estuaries, bays,  and lagoons (CERC 1984). In these shallow  environments,  wave  energies  are  lower and  water  temperatures  are  warmer  than  in exposed ocean environments,  and these conditions make ideal sites for  recreational  activities  such  as  boating and  wading  (Nordstrom 1992). Estuaries also afford a habitat and stopover  for  many  migratory  birds  (Burger  1986) and a spawning ground for  certain  species of fish  and crab  (Botton and  Loveland 1989). As a glance at almost any map  of  estuarine shorelines  reveals, are exceedingly  complex  and  their  ecological/geomorphological contexts vary  remarkably over relatively  short  shoreline  reaches.  Given  the importance of and the variability within estuaries,  it i s  not surprising that many scholars have attempted to classify these  environments  (for example,  Fletcher et al.  1992) and to identify the  important processes and  controls that account  for  their spatial  distribution  and  their long-term changes (Rosen 1977; 1980; Phillips 1986).

These  studies  tell  us, among other  things, that the morphology  of  estuarine beaches emerges from  a suite of  multiscalar  processes and controls. Perhaps the most critical of these involve landforms and meteorology.  Landform controls  such  as  beach  slope  and  sediment characteristics  (Rosen  1980)  influence  sediment entrainment  and transport  while  shoreline configuration  (Phillips 1986), nearshore topography, tidal range (Sakalowsky 1975; Rosen 1973, and  shoreline  orientation (Jackson and Nordstrom 1992) affect the magnitude of wave energy  and the extent of sediment  reworking on the beach.

Meteorological controls  also  exert  a  major influence on estuarine-beach morphologies via wind and waves. Wind and the waves that they generate  within  an  estuary  are  the  principal source of energy for mobilizing and transporting estuarine  beach  sediments.  Wind  speed, direction,  and duration  influence wave heights and  the  periods  of  local  a s   well a s   non-local (ocean) waves that enter an estuary. The presence of ocean swell in estuaries is not unusual, having been noted in a variety of places including  Raritan  Bay (Nordstrom 1977;  Jackson 1989),  Chesapeake  Bay  (Ludwick  1987),  and Newport Bay in the United States (Moory and Osborne 1992),  Lough  Foyle in Northern Ireland (Carter  1980),  and  Bay  of Plenty  in New Zealand (deLange and Healy 1990).

The provenience of waves, whether local or non-local (ocean),  at  a  site  within an  estuary may change rapidly in association with changes in wind speed, direction,  and duration that  accompany  the  passage  of weather  systems.  Beach  response  to  these  changes  in wind and waves depends,  in turn,  on the sitespecific  characteristics  of  the  beach  itself-its shoreline orientation, its  distance from  the mouth of the estuary,  and its sediment characteristics  (Nordstrom 1977;  Jackson and  Nordstrom  1992).

Investigations of beach response to changing meteorological  conditions  focus  on  seasonal differences  in weather  conditions in the longterm (Clarke and Eliot 1988) and storm cycles in the short-term  (Fox and Davis 1976;  Nordstrom  1980;  Kahn and  Roberts 1982;  Roberts et  al.  1987). This  paper  focuses  on beach  response to one phase of the storm cycle known as post-storm  recovery.  Under  these  conditions  of  low  wave  energy  in  both ocean  and

estuarine  environments,  beaches  recover  as deposition  ensues.  More specifically,  this  paper documents: l ) the rate and spatial extent of estuarine  beach recovery after  storms;  and 2) the controls influencing the contribution of local (estuarine) and non-local (ocean) waves to  that recovery  following  the passage of weather systems.

## Wind and Waves in Estuarine Environments

Beaches that form  on the bayside of ocean barriers and spits,  on uplands surrounding estuaries,  or  on estuarine  barriers at marsh margins  are  characterized  by  a  relatively  steep foreshore  slope and a  broad low-tide terrace (Figure 1). Sediments  on  the  foreshore  are coarser than those on the  low-tide terrace or on low-amplitude  bars  offshore. Landward of the foreshore,  dunes may develop with heights and  widths  that  depend  on  the  supply  and characteristics  of  both  sediments  and  local winds. Smaller  dunes are  susceptible to overwash during storm conditions.

Waves that  rework  sediments on estuarine beaches may be local and non-local in origin. In the case of non-local ocean waves,  the extent of reworking hinges on the interaction of several  variables:  local wind  speed  (Ludwick 1987), local wind direction  (Nordstrom 1977, and proximity and orientation of the beach to the  mouth of the estuary  (Carter 1980; Smith et al. 1985; Jackson  and Nordstrom 1992). The hypothetical estuarine  sites (A and  B)  in  Figure 1 highlight the relative importance of local and non-local (ocean) waves  when winds  of the same speed come from different directions

## Estuarine Beach Environment

Figure 1. Profile of an estuarine sand harrier locating key morphologic units and relative contributions of local (estuarine)  and non-local (ocean)  waves at two sites during similar wind speeds hut different wind directions.

<!-- image -->

and  when  sites  located  at  similar  distances from the  mouth of the estuary have different orientations. When  winds  come  from  the northwest,  locally  generated  waves  prevail at both  sites  owing  to  the  fetch-distance  over which such waves are generated. When winds come  from  the  northeast, by  contrast,  the influence of  non-local  ocean  waves, while increasing  at  both  sites,  is  of  greater  relative importance  at  site  A  owing  to  a  shoreline orientation  that limits local wave generation.

The presence of non-local (ocean) waves is evident in many other estuaries. At Willoughby Spit (Figure 2),  some 28 km from the mouth of Chesapeake Bay, Ludwick (1987) reports ocean  wave  heights  of  0.08  to  0.18  m  with periodicities  of 8.0 s  when  low-speed  local winds (2.1 to 3.6 m  s-') blow from the bay to the ocean.  Ludwick attributes  the dominance of the long period (ocean) waves to low wind speeds that  prevent  the  generation  of  locally generated  waves  (typically  ranging  between 2.0  t o 5.0 s). In another  venue-a bayside site at the terminus of Sandy Hook Spit (Figure 2)ocean  waves  are  also  dominant  when  lowspeed offshore winds prevail; the periodic entry  of these  ocean waves  into Raritan Bay  results in sand deposition on the foreshore of the site (Nordstrom 1977).

The  height  of  ocean  waves  that  enter  an estuary  are  usually  lower  than  the  height  of ocean waves that strike an exposed coast. This reduction in wave height reflects, among other things, energy  dissipation  by  shoals  at  the mouth of the  estuary  and  the  refraction  and diffraction  of waves  as  they  pass through  the estuary (Carter 1980). The  reduction may also reflect physical controls such as  the proximity and orientation of a particular  site to the estuary's  mouth. All else being equal, the influence of ocean waves generally varies inversely with distance from the mouth of the estuary (Carter 1980). For a given distance from the mouth of the estuary,  the effectiveness  of ocean  waves is greater on beaches that face the mouth than beaches  that  are  oblique  to  it  (Jackson and Nordstrom  1992).  In sum,  the effects of nonlocal  ocean  waves  on  estuarine  beaches  will depend  on  interrelationships  between  meteorological  conditions  and  landform  controls. This  paper  examines  these  interrelationships on an estuarine beach located in close proximity and obliquely oriented to the mouth of an estuary.

## Field Site:  Green Creek, Delaware Bay,  New Jersey

This  paper  examines  a  sand  beach  on  an estuarine barrier on the east side of Delaware Bay  (Figures 2 and 3)-in a region that  may be classified  as  a  headlandibeach barrier  system (Fletcher  et  al.  1992). The field  site  is  located 15 km north of the mouth of the estuary in the community of  Green  Creek, New  Jersey. Mesoscale  and  microscale  topographic  features are rare on the foreshore of the field site. Low  amplitude  bars  occur  on  the  low-tide terrace,  and  the  nearest bar  is approximately 100  m  from  the  pronounced  break  in slope that  separates  the  low-tide  terrace  and  the foreshore  (Hidu 1978). The foreshore  slope is planar and averages 6.2"' and the slope of the low-tide terrace averages less than 0.5" (Nordstrom  and  Jackson  1990).  There  is  a vegetated dune 0.50  m in elevation above the backbeach.  A  dense  cover  of woody  shrubs lies landward of the dune. Tides are semi-diurnal,  with  a mean range of 1.6  m  and a mean spring range of 1.9 m (NOAA 1992). Prevailing winds at the field site are  from  the northwest and these blow with the greatest velocity over a 48 km fetch.

Local winds change in response to the passage of low-pressure centers or associated cold fronts.  During the  passage  of a  low-pressure center, strong northeast winds are followed by strong northwest winds and later by low-speed winds from the west.  During the passage of a cold  front, strong  northwest  winds  are  followed  by  low-speed  northwest  winds.  The passage of low-pressure systems or cold fronts over the field site averages one every four days in the  month of  October.  These  frontal  passages  influence  cycles  of  beach  erosion  and deposition  at  the  field  site. As we shall  see, erosion  of the  profile is  greatest when strong northwest winds generate local waves  over a 48 km fetch and post-storm beach recovery is greatest  when:  1) a  low-pressure  center  advances  to  the  south  of  the  site, i . e . , when winds  are  from  the  northeast  and  non-local waves  are  dominant;  or  2)  the  low-pressure system or cold front has moved  out of the area, i.e.,  when wind speeds decrease and shift to the westinorthwest and local waves are dominant.

Figure 2. Location of the field site and wind  roses of daily  wind speed and  direction. The latter data are for 1990 from the Wilmington,  Delaware airport (NOAA 1990).

<!-- image -->

## Measuring Winds, Waves,  and Beach Change

The cross-shore  boundaries of the field-site proper  extend  from  the  swash  limit  on  the foreshore  to near the break  in slope  between the  low-tide  terrace  and  the  foreshore  (Figure 4). Cross-shore and longshore flow velocities  are  measured  with two  Marsh  McBirney model 511 electromagnetic current meters positioned approximately  0.1 2 m above the bed.

Figure 3. The shoreline reach looking north toward the field site.

<!-- image -->

These velocities are collected at mid-foreshore (5 m  landward of  the break  in  slope) and  on the upper  portion  of  the low-tide terrace (4 m bayward of  the break  in  slope). Water-surface elevations are measured with pressure transducers  located  with  each  current  meter (WCI and  WC2). To determine  the direction of wave  approach,  two  additional  pressure transducers (W3  and W4) are deployed on the low-tide terrace to form a triangular array. Wind conditions are monitored with an anemometer and  a  wind  vane  mounted 6.0 m  above the ground on a tower located just landward of the backbeach  on the dune crest  (Figure 4).

Wave and flow velocities are measured  at a semidiurnal interval near the time of  high  tide, save for during storms when  the frequency of monitoring  increases  to  at  least  every  hour over the tidal  cycle. Data are gathered  at 0.5  s intervals  for  17.1  min  bursts,  i.e.,  2048  data points. Water-surface elevation and crossshore  and  longshore  velocities  are  analyzed using the BMDP software program for univariate and bivariate spectral analysis (Dixon 1985). Significant  wave height is defined as four times t h e  standard  deviation of  the recorded  water- surface  elevation;  wave  period  is  defined  as the peak  frequency of  the spectral estimate of the water-surface elevation record. Wave angle i s   calculated  from  the  bivariate  spectral  estimates  of  the  water-surface  elevation  records (Esteva 1977). All data  reported  here  come from the high-tide monitoring  periods  of  October  20,  October 25,  and  October  27,  each of which  was  preceded by  strong  onshore winds.

Morphology and sediment elevation changes  are  monitored  using  standard  beach surveying techniques  (transit, stadia  rod,  and tape)  and  depth-of-activity  rods  (Greenwood and  Hale  1980). Three  shore-normal  profile lines are run between a baseline, 2 m  landward of  the upper limit of  swash (Figure 4)  and 12 m beyond the break in  slope on the low-tide terrace; rods are inserted at 2 m  intervals. All rods are tied  into a temporary datum located at the crest of  the dune. The profile data reported  in this  paper  are  drawn  from  the middle profile, and these are cross-checked against data from the  north  and  south  lines.  Measurements  of elevation  changes  from  unsubmerged  depthof-activity rods are subject to a margin of  error

Figure 4. Block diagram  of  the  study  site  showing the  location of  instruments  and  monitoring  stations  for sediment sampling and beach-elevation measurements.

<!-- image -->

of  +/-0.50 mm,  a  critical factor  in  estuarine environments where the magnitude of beach change  is small. Rod measurements are taken at successive low tides during two of the storm sequences reported  in this paper.  In the case of the third storm sequence (October 20), the post-storm profile is derived differently. Instead of using measurements taken at low-tide in the early  morning hours  of that  day,  I used measurements from  the previous tidal  cycle when wave conditions were more energetic.

Sediment characteristics  come from  surface samples  (at  stations  12  and  16  m  from  the baseline) gathered  after  storm  waves  had  reworked the beach (Figure 4). Six samples from each station were washed,  dried,  sieved at 0.5 phi intervals, and analyzed using graphic measures (Folk 1974).

Analyses of wave and flow data during high water following strong onshore winds (&gt; 8.0  m s-') permit an assessment of the role of wind direction  on  post-storm  beach  recovery.  By controlling  wind  speed, water depth, and wave  height,  the analysis also affords  a comparison of the effects  of different wind directions  on nearshore  processes and  profile  responses.

## Wind, Waves,  and Beach Response

## Wind and Wave Characteristics

Figure 5 presents wind and wave data from the  17.1  minute daily  records.  The  dominant winds approach  the field  site from the  northwest,  and  the  highest  average  wind  speeds occur at these times (Figure 5a). Mean onshore wind speed ranges from 1.1 to 14.2  m s-'; offshore winds range from zero to 4.6  m s-'. As for  significant  wave  heights  on  the  low-tide terrace  (at W3), the  highest  reaches  0.52  m

<!-- image -->

Figure 5. Plots  of  wind  and  wave  characteristics, controlling for wind direction, gathered daily at W3 durin high water.  Plot A depicts mean wind speed (m s) gathered  6 m above the dune crest; the highest wind speeds occurred when winds are onshore. Plot B reports significant wave  height (m) with  the greatest wave heights occurring when winds are onshore. Plot C  shows peak-wave period(s) with  the longest periods generated during offshore winds. F

with  maximum wave  periods of 4.9 s. These maxima  occur  when  winds  blow  from  the northwest with the greatest speed (Figure 5b). The  lowest  significant  wave  heights, about 0.05  m,  are  associated with  the  lowest  wind speeds  regardless  of  wind  direction. Peakwave periods, measured from the spectral estimates  of the  water-surface elevation records, range  from  2.4  to  16.0  s  (Figure  5c). Waves with periodicities longer than the  locally generated waves (~5.0 s)  are visible in most of the water-surface elevation  records,  but lack  statistical significance during strong onshore winds.  Long-period  waves  achieve  statistical significance  when  winds  are  of  low  speed (&lt;3.0  m s-').

## Effects of Wind Direction on Distribution of Wave and Current Energy

Seven storm events  (average onshore wind speeds &gt; 8.0 m s-') occurred  at the field  site during  the  29-day  study.  In  all  cases, these events are associated with the passage of lowpressure  centers  across  the region.  During these passages, wind speeds range from 8.7 to 14.2 m s ' and significant wave heights (measured at WC2) range from 0.36 to 0.52  m with periodicities between 3.6  and 4.9 s. The highest wave heights are associated with the highest wind speeds, and these occur when winds approach  from  the  south  of  shore-normal. Dominant waves are  locally generated during all storms.

This  paper analyzes the  storms of October 19,  October  24, and  October  26  (the  other storms are discussed in Jackson 1992). These three storm events are selected for  study because mean wind directions during post-storm recovery come in one case from the north,  in

Table 1. Wind and Wave Conditions Monitored at the Low-Tide Terrace (WC2) during Strong Onshore Winds at  High Water.

| Date          | Tidal Cycle   |   Wind Speed (m s-l) | Wind Directiona (magnetic azimuth)   |   Wave Height (m) |   Wave Period(s) |
|---------------|---------------|----------------------|--------------------------------------|-------------------|------------------|
| October 18-19 |               |                      |                                      |                   |                  |
|               | 1st           |                 6.65 | 316                                  |              0.4  |              3.8 |
|               | 2nd           |                14.18 | 296                                  |              0.5  |              4.6 |
|               | 3rd           |                 8.74 | 326                                  |              0.26 |              3.4 |
| October 24    |               |                      |                                      |                   |                  |
|               | 1st           |                 9.27 | 288                                  |              0.37 |              3.6 |
|               | 2nd           |                 9.11 | 293                                  |              0.32 |              3.6 |
| October 26-27 |               |                      |                                      |                   |                  |
|               | 1st           |                 9.75 | 01 5                                 |              0.28 |              3.2 |
|               | 2nd           |                12.7  | 335                                  |              0.56 |              3.7 |
|               | 3rd           |                 8.97 | 331                                  |              0.32 |              3.6 |

another from  the  west,  and in the third from the northeast. Two of the low-pressure centers (October 19 and 24) passed to the north of the field  site,  tracking in a northeasterly direction. The  passages  of  these  cold fronts  resulted in strong  northwest  winds.  The  third  low-pressure center passed to the south of the field site on October  25.  Its  passage resulted in northeast  winds  for  one  tidal  cycle  followed  by strong north-northwest winds  on October 26 (Table 1  ).

Post-storm data on winds  and waves  were collected  during  high  water  after  strong  onshore winds on October 20,  October 25,  and October  27  (Figure  6).  Wind  conditions  for these  days are  presented in Table 2.  Onshore wind  speed  varies  less  than  offshore  wind speed,  which  is  expected  due  to  the  disturbance of windflow from the east by vegetation landward of the  site.  Mean wind  speeds  are lower during north winds on October  20,  but this event provides the most  comparable wind-speed  and wave  conditions  to those of October 25  and October 27 during the 29-day period  of  the  investigation.  The  variability  in wind direction is similar for north  and northeast winds; winds  are  more  stable  during  west winds.

Data gathered at WC1 and presented in Table 3 reveal differences in wave characteristics when winds blow onshore (from the north and west) and offshore (from the northeast) at the site.  Significant wave  heights are  higher  and peak  wave  periods  are  shorter  when  winds approach from the  north and west  (onshore) than when winds approach from the northeast (offshore). The  magnitude and distribution  of wave energy revealed by the spectral estimates of the water-surface  elevation records gathered at  WC1  is  presented in Figure  6.  During onshore  winds  from  the  north  and  west,  the dominant energy is within the frequency range of waves generated in the estuary (2.0 to 5.0 s). When  winds  approach  from  the  northeast, there is a statistically significant peak centered at  0.11  Hz  (9.1 s) and  a  secondary  peak  at 0.27  Hz (3.7 s), with the  greater  energy variance at the lower frequency (9.1 s).

Table 2. Wind Speed and Direction during Recovery at  High Water.

|                |            | Wind Speed (m s-')   | Wind Speed (m s-')   | Wind Directiona (magnetic azimuth)   | Wind Directiona (magnetic azimuth)   |
|----------------|------------|----------------------|----------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Wind Direction | Date       | Mean                 | Standard Deviation   | Mean                                 | Standard Deviation                   |
| North          | October 20 | 2.96                 | 0.89                 | 359                                  | 14.36                                |
| Northeast      | October 25 | 3.90                 | 1.21                 | 064                                  | 19.84                                |
| West           | October 27 | 4.20                 | 0.55                 | 272                                  | 5.44                                 |

ashoreline azimuth is 038.

Figure 6. Distribution of wave and current energy variance during post-storm recovery under north, west, and northeast winds  of similar speed at  high water.  The  maps show  the direction of the wind and location of the field site. The line graphs depict wave-energy variance with changes in frequency while the bar graphs depict the  percent of the total energy  variance for cross-shore and longshore current velocities  within the frequency intervals of 0.02-0.2 Hz and 0.2-0.5 Hz. Locally generated energy is dominant during onshore winds (north and west) and non-local (ocean) energy i s dominant during offshore winds  (northeast).  Bandwidth o f the  spectral estimates is 0.01 86.

<!-- image -->

Hindcasting the maximum wave  period that could be generated within the estuary  reveals that the waves present during northeast winds are  non-local (ocean) in origin. The  maximum wave  period that can  be generated  in the estuary  is  2.4  s  based  on  the  maximum fetchdistance at  the  site  (48 km), a wind speed of 3.9  m s-', and an  average water  depth of 4 m (CERC 1984). This wave period is comparable to the wave periods recorded during onshore winds from the north and west. The 3.7 s wave recorded during offshore  winds from the northeast,  though of a period similar to that of locally generated bay waves during strong onshore winds (&gt; 8.0 m s-'), varies  in the direction of approach,  23" from the south of shoreparallel,  which  suggests that  it was  not locally generated by these winds. The waves present at the field site during northeast winds are of a period common for ocean swell on the Atlantic

Table 3. Wave Parameters Measured  0.12 m Above the Bed  on the Foreshore (WCI)  and the Low-Tide Terrace (WC2) during Recovery at High Water.

| Wind Direction   | Date       | I         | h         | H S       | Tok     |
|------------------|------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|---------|
| North            | October 20 | wc1       | 0.30      | 0.16      | 2.7     |
| Northeast        | October 25 | w c 2 wc1 | 1.65 0.50 | 0.10 0.10 | 2.7 9.1 |
|                  | October 27 | w c 2     | 1.64 0.52 | 0.09      | 9.1     |
| West             |            | wc1 w c 2 | 1.83      | 0.20 0.14 | 2.5 2.6 |

Notes on the headings: I is the Instrument; h is the Water depth (m); H , is the Significant wave height (m); Tpk is the peak frequency based on the spectral estimate of the water-surface elevation record (seconds).

Ocean (Thompson 1977)  and near the mouth of   Delaware Bay  (Hubertz et al. 1994), and all are believed to be o f   ocean origin.

Comparison  o f the  variance of the  crossshore and  longshore  velocity  spectra  at  lowand  high-frequency  ranges  allows  an  assessment  o f the  dominance o f locally  generated and non-locally  generated energy on the foreshore at high  water. The fact that the percentage o f   the cross-shore and  longshore  energy variance  at  the  locally  generated wave  frequency range of   0.2 to 0.5  Hz  (2.0 to 5.0 s) is greater  than  at  the  lower-frequency  range  o f 0.02  to 0.2  Hz  (5.0  to  50.0  s) during onshore winds  (Figure 6) demonstrates  the  dominant contribution  o f locally  generated  waves.  The influence  o f non-locally  generated  waves  on the cross-shore velocities, meanwhile, increases  both  relatively  and  absolutely  during northeast  winds.  There  appear  to  be  similar proportions  o f energy  at  both  low  and  high frequency ranges (Figure 6), but this  is  due to the  inclusion  o f   non-locally  generated  energy within  the  higher  frequency  range.  The 9.1  s peak and 3.7 s peak account for 94 percent o f the  cross-shore  energy  variance  and 93 percent o f   the  longshore  energy variance for the frequency  range  of 0.02  to  0.5  Hz (2.0  to 50.0  s).

Sediment  movement on the foreshore  is  a function  o f the  ability  o f waves  to  mobilize sediments and of a  current sufficient  to move them. The potential for mobilization and movement o f   sediment at the study site during post-storm  conditions under local and non-local (ocean)  waves can be assessed by examining the statistical  properties  o f   the cross-shore and  longshore  velocity  records  presented  in Table  4.  The  magnitudes  o f   the  wave  orbital velocities  (us) are  low  but  maximum  instantaneous velocities are sufficient to mobilize sediments on the foreshore during all three recovery  periods  (Komar and  Miller  1973).  Mean flows in  the cross-shore direction  (u) are near zero during the three monitoring periods. The skewness (usk)  o f   the cross-shore flows, an indication o f   wave asymmetry,  are directed  onshore during recovery on October 20 and October  25  and  offshore  during  October  27. These data indicate that conditions existed for the  mobilization  and  movement  o f   sediment under  both  local and non-local waves.

## Profile Changes

The greatest profile changes at the field  site occur  in  response  to  high-speed  winds  from

Table 4. Statistics of Cross-Shore and Longshore Current Velocity Records Monitored at WC1 during Recovery at High Water.

| Wind Direction   | Date       |   Urnax-on |   Urnax-off |     U | US    |   usk |    V |
|------------------|------------|------------|-------------|-------|-------|-------|------|
| North            | October 20 |      -0.41 |        0.45 |  0.01 | 0.14  | -0.05 | 0.03 |
| Northeast        | October 25 |      -0.34 |        0.29 | -0.01 | 0.11  | -0.04 | 0.06 |
| West             | October 27 |      -0.49 |        0.57 |  0.02 | 0.1 7 |  0.06 | 0.02 |

Notes on the headings: urnax  is the maximum cross-shore velocity ( m s-') for  onshore and offshore flows;  u is the mean cross-shore flow ( m s-'); us is the standard deviation of cross-shore velocity record (m s- ' 1 ; u,k i s  the skew of the crossshore velocity record; and v is the mean longshore flow (m s-'). Negative values are onshore and to the north.

Figure 7. Profiles,  from  beach-elevation  measurements  for  the  entire  study  period.  Areas  of  greatest  beach change are  located  on the foreshore  near  mean high water  (MHW) and mean low water  (MLW). Net bedelevation  changes  across  the  profile during post-storm  conditions  show  sediment  removed  from  the  upper foreshore  and  deposited  lower  on  the  foreshore.  During  recovery,  a  swash  bar  is  stranded  on the  upper foreshore.

<!-- image -->

the northwest. Sediment  is  removed  from the upper  foreshore  and  deposited  as  a  thin  veneer  on  the  lower  foreshore  (Figure 7). This response i s a  type of geomorphic  change found  on  high  micro-tidal and  low  meso-tidal estuarine beaches (Nordstrom  and  Jackson 1992).  The quantity of  sediment removed from the upper foreshore (0 to 14 m  from the baseline)  during  these northwest winds equals 0.497 m3 m-'  of  shoreline during the  October 19 storm, 0.433 m3 m-'  of  shoreline during the October 24 storm, and 0.470 m3 m-'  of  shoreline during the October 26 storm. The quantity of sediment  removed  from  the  upper  foreshore  is  more  than  the  quantity  forming  the thin  veneer  on  the  lower foreshore.  This discrepancy  is  due to  the  transport  of  sediment in  the  longshore  direction,  particularly on October  26 when  winds from the north  resulted in  waves  breaking  at  an  acute  angle  to  the shoreline orientation. With  respect  to deposition, the quantity of  sediment deposited on the lower foreshore (14 to 22 m from the baseline) equals  0.382  m3  m-' of shoreline  during  the October  19 storm,  0.206  m3 m-' during  the October 24  storm,  and  0.090  m3 m-I during the October  26  storm.

During  post-storm recovery a  swash bar forms  on  the  lower  foreshore  and  migrates landward with the breakerlswash  zone in  the tidal  cycle  immediately  following  strong  onshore  winds.  These  linear  depositional  features, less than 0.1  0 m  in  height, are deposited between  8 and  10 m  from the  baseline in  the region  landward of  wave  breaking at high tide (Figure 8). Net  changes  in  sediment  elevation in  response  to  post-storm  process  conditions are presented  in  Figure  7. The landward  limits of  net change  (Figure 7) coincide with the upper swash limits. These limits are 9 m  from the baseline  during  north  winds  on  October  20, 7  m  during  northeast  winds  on  October  25, and  5.8 m  during west  winds  on  October 27. The  higher  swash  limits  during  the  northeast and  west  winds  are  due  to  the  higher  water levels  (Table 3). The  general  form  of  the  net change  is  similar  across  the  profile  during  all three  monitoring periods.  Maximum elevation of  the  swash  bar  is  0.06  m  on  October  20, 0.04 m  on  October 25,  and  0.07 m  on October 27. The greatest net change involves deposition between  5 and  15 m  from  the  baseline. Deposition  is  greater  during  north  and  west winds.  The  quantities  o f sediment  deposited

Figure 8. A swash bar stranded on the upper foreshore at high water during the first tidal cycle of recovery on November 7,  1992. The swash bar is similar to those which occur during the recovery phases (Figure 7).

<!-- image -->

on the upper foreshore  equal 0.199  m3  m-I of shoreline  during  north  winds  (October  20); 0.21  5  m3  m-'  during west winds (October 27); and 0.133  m3  m-?  during northeast winds (October  25).  Note, however,  that  these  differences in deposition may reflect the fact that full recovery was not achieved after the storms on October 24 and October  26 owing to the recurrence of storm  conditions on October  26 and October 28. Conversely, in the case of the storm  of October 19, while non-storm conditions  lasted for  three  days  after the  storm,  90 percent  of  the  sediment  deposited  on  the upper  foreshore  during this  period  occurred on  October  20.  Thus, there  was  probably sufficient  time  after  the  other  two  storms  for recovery to occur.

## Beach Recovery and the Role of Non-local Waves

Beach Recovery

Beach  recovery  remains  a  poorly  understood phenomenon in estuarine environments. Few  studies  monitor  estuarine  beach-profile response (Sakalowsky 1975; Nordstrom 1977; Smith  et  al. 1985;  Jackson  and  Nordstrom 1992),  and  even  fewer  monitor  beach  processes  through  storm  and  post-storm  conditions.  The  results of this  investigation support previous findings  that  document cyclic  beach response and swash bar migration during poststorm  recovery  in ocean  and  lacustrine  environments  (Davis et at. 1972; Sonu  1972; Owens and Frobel 1977), and they  clarify the reasons for  the  absence  of cyclic  change  on some  estuarine beaches (Nordstrom  1975; 1980).  Nordstrom  (1  980)  attributes the  absence of cyclic change on  the estuarine beaches that he has studied to a lack of energy in  post-storm  waves,  although  he also  notes that  the  availability  of  sediment  sources  is  an important control. Based on daily data gathered during  storm  and  non-storm  conditions  at  a site on the bayside of Sandy Hook spit (some 3 km from the tip of the spit and oriented 175" relative to the mouth  of the estuary) and during storms  with  magnitudes  similar  to  those  reported  for  Delaware  Bay,  Nordstrom  reports that  the  quantity  of  sediment  removed  from the foreshore averaged 0.377 m3  m-I of shore- line.  During the first  day  of post-storm recovery,  with mean onshore wind speeds of 4.3 rn s-', sediment deposited on the foreshore averaged just 15 percent of the amount eroded. At the Delaware Bay  site,  by contrast an average of 43 percent of the post-storm deposition occurred on the first day of recovery during lowspeed onshore winds. I suspect that the slower rate  of  recovery  at  Sandy  Hook  probably reflects  the  site's  location  in  the  middle  of  a shoreline compartment  which  is  less than 700  m  in  length.  The  Delaware  Bay  site,  by contrast,  occupies an unrestricted reach, 4 km in length,  which does  not restrict  the  updrift supply  of sediment to the  beach system. The fact that the quantity of sediment deposited on the  upper  foreshore  on  October  27  exceeds by 2.4  fold  the  quantity  that  formed  the  thin veneer  on the lower foreshore after the storm of October 26 implies that sediment availability in  the  longshore  direction  may  play  a  more important  role  in  the  development  of  cyclic beach  response  than  does  the  magnitude of wave energy.

Onshore  movement  of  sediment  is  more likely  under waves of low height and long period (King and Williams  1949). This study thus demonstrates  that  the  depositional sequence of cyclic beach response can occur under local and non-local ocean waves and that the absolute volume of sediment deposition on the upper  foreshore will  be  greatest  during  lowspeed  onshore  winds  (from  the  north  and west)  that  generate  waves  with  higher  wave heights  and  shorter  wave  periods  than  the non-local ocean waves. Indeed, the quantity of sediment  deposited  under  non-local  waves (October 25) represents just 67 percent and 62 percent of the quantity of sediment deposited under locally generated waves on October 20 and October 27,  respectively (Figure 7). Sediment  deposition  also  reflects  longshore  exchanges  of  sediment.  The  larger  quantity  of sediment  deposited on  October  20  as  compared to October 25 can be attributed,  in part, to the longshore transport  of sediment  that  is a function  of  wave  height,  wave  period,  and wave angle. All of these parameters are influenced by local wind characteristics in the case  of  locally  generated  waves.  Calculations of longshore sediment transport rates based on measured wave parameters reveal that the rate on October 20 is 4.5  times greater than the rate on October 25.

Rates  of  swash-bar  migration  were  similar under local and non-local waves on the Delaware  Bay  beach  but  both  rates  were  higher than rates reported for  other sites.  In a fetchlimited,  non-tidal environment  in Lake Michigan,  Davis et al.  (1972) report a recovery rate of seven to ten days. On the Magdalen Islands of Quebec,  Owens and  Frobel (1977) report two  different  swash  bar  systems-one that develops in the  swash  zone  and  migrates  in two to three days and another that forms on the  low-tide terrace and  migrates  at  an  even slower rate. The more rapid migration rates on the beach in Delaware Bay may be due to the location  of  post-storm  sediment  deposition (low on the foreshore) and the smaller size of the  swash  bars  (Figure  7).  Most  of  this  deposition  occurs  near  mean  low  water  at  the break in slope. The swash bar that forms then migrates  up  the  foreshore  at  rates  that  are closer to the  faster  rates  reported  by Owens and Frobel (1977). Deposition in response to storms reported  by Nordstrom  (1977) is  also low on the foreshore, but sediment  starvation suppresses the cyclic recovery process.

## Controls Influencing  the Contribution of Non-local  Waves

Non-local ocean waves  can  play an  important role in the long-term dynamics  of estuarine beaches. These waves are dominant at the field site when low wind speeds from  offshore result in suppression of local wave generation as noted  by  previous  investigators  (Nordstrom 1977; Ludwick  1987).  The  height  of  these waves  is  influenced  by  site-specific controls such  a s   orientation  to  and  distance from  the mouth of the estuary. The full effects  of these site-specific controls are clearly evident in the case of the highest waves of ocean origin ever reported  on  an  estuarine  beach-the 1.5  m high waves generated by a northeasterly  storm at  a site in Raritan Bay  located 9  km from  and facing directly on a 9 km wide opening to the Atlantic Ocean (Smith et al. 1985).  Ocean wave heights  reported  by  Ludwick  (1987) at  Willoughby  Spit  in  Chesapeake  Bay  during  offshore  winds  (from  the  west) are  higher than those  on the  Delaware Bay  site  when  winds come  from  offshore  (northeast). This  difference probably reflects variations in site orientations. Whereas his site is oriented 101  " rela- tive to the mouth of the estuary, the Delaware Bay site is oriented 153" relative to the mouth oriented  at  a more obtuse angle to the mouth of the estuary, seems  to  decrease  the  likelihood  of  wave-

of  the  estuary.  Ludwick's  site, height reduction.

When non-local ocean wave heights at the field  site  (0.10  m) are  compared  with  mean ocean wave  heights (1.1  m) recorded at  the mouth of Delaware Bay  in October  (Hubertz et al.  1994), I estimate a 91 percent reduction in the height of non-local ocean waves at  the field  site.  This  result compares favorably with the  findings  of  Nordstrom  (1977) and  Carter (1 980) who studied sites  with similar  orientations  but  that  were  closer  to  the  estuarine mouth. Carter (1 980) documents a 68  percent reduction  in the  height of  ocean  waves  at  a bayside site as compared to their height on the ocean side. This reduction reflects  wave refraction around the distal end of a foreland at the mouth of the estuary  before reaching his site 0.3  km from the mouth and oriented 163" relative to it. Nordstrom (1 977) also reports oceanwave  heights  on the  bayside of  Sandy  Hook spit  (0.64  km from  the  mouth of the estuary) that  are  80  percent  less  than  the  height  of waves on the ocean side of the spit. The shoreline orientation at his site is 160" relative  to the mouth of the estuary. The heights of non-local ocean waves  on an  estuarine  beach thus appear to be a function of site orientation to the estuarine  mouth.  In  large  estuaries,  such  a s Delaware Bay,  a site's orientation to the mouth seems to have more influence on the height of ocean  waves than  does proximity  to the mouth.

Owing to the complex configuration of estuarine shorelines, the passage of weather systems  results  in  local changes  in  wind  speed and direction  and spatial differences  in wave and current  characteristics between estuarine sites  (Nordstrom 1980). This study documents the  temporal  variation  of  local and  non-local (ocean) wave dominance at one site in an  estuary. This variation is evident in the temporal sequence between October  24  and October 27 when the passage of a cold front on October  24,  bringing strong northwest winds  and attendant erosion of the upper foreshore of the beach profile,  is  followed  by  the  onset  of  a low-pressure center  on  October  25  bringing northeast winds and deposition on the  upper profile. As the low-pressure center leaves the

I

area on October 26,  the cycle is repeated; local waves  generated  by  strong  northwest  winds on the  26th  erode the  upper  profile  and  low speed onshore winds from the west on October  27  effect deposition. in sum  the  geomorphic contribution of non-local ocean waves to beach dynamics is greatest after the passage of a weather system due to the depositional character of the non-local waves.

## Conclusions

Mesoscale weather  patterns  strongly  influence the  contribution  of  local and  non-local ocean waves to estuarine beach change. Controls such as shoreline orientation, proximity to the  mouth of the  estuary,  and dissipation and defraction affect the  height and angle of nonlocal ocean waves approaching the shoreline. Shoreline orientation appears to  be the  more important  control on the  height  of  non-local ocean waves  that  rework  estuarine beaches. Beach  recovery  is  greatest  under  non-local ocean  waves  during  the  depositional  phase that follows the  passage of a cold front when strong onshore (northwest) winds generate local waves that erode the beach profile.

## Acknowledgments

Support for this project was provided by the Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences,  Rutgers University.  I  thank  K. F .   Nordstrom for reviewing an earlier draft of this paper.

## References

- Botton,  M. L. , and Loveland, R.  E. 1989. Reproductive Risk: High Mortality Associated with Spawni ng Horseshoe Crabs  (Limulus  polyphemus) in Delaware  Bay, USA.  Marine  Biology 101:143151.
- Burger, J. 1986. The  Effect  of  Human  Activity  in Shorebirds  in Two Coastal Bays in Northeastern United States. Environmental Conservation 13:123-I 30.
- Carter, R. W. G. 1980. Longshore  Variations  in Nearshore Wave  Processes at  Magilligan  Point, Northern Ireland. Earth Surface Processes 5:8189.
- Coastal Engineering Research Center  (CERC). 1984. Shore Protection Manual. Vicksburg,  Mississippi:
- U.S.  Army  Corps  of Engineers, Waterways  Experiment Station.
- Clarke,  D. J., and  Eliot,  I.  G. 1988. Low  Frequency Variation  in  the  Seasonal  Intensity  of  Coastal Weather  Systems and Sediment Movement on the Beachface  of a Sandy Beach. Marine Geology 79:23-39.
- Davis, R. A., Fox, W. T., Hayes, M.  O., and Boothroyd, J. C. 1972. Comparison  of  Ridge and Runnel Systems in Tidal and Non-tidal Environments.  Journal of  Sedimentary  Petrology 2:413-421.
- delange,  W., and Healy,  T. 1990. Wave Spectra for a  Shallow  Meso-tidal  Estuarine  Lagoon:  Bay of Plenty, New Zealand. Journal  o f   Coastal  Research 6:189-199.
- Dixon,  W. J. 1985. BMDP: Biomedical  Computer Programs. Berkeley, California: University of California Press.
- Esteva, C. D. 1977. Evaluation of the Computation o f Wave Direction with  Three-Gage Arrays. Technical paper 77-7. Fort Belvoir, Virginia: U.S.  Army Corps  of  Engineers, Coastal  Engineering  Research Center.
- Fletcher,  C.  H., Harley, J. K. , and  Kraft, J. C. 1992. Holocene Depocenter  Migration and  Sediment Accumulation  in  Delaware  Bay:  A  Submerging Marginal Marine Sedimentary Basin. Marine Geology 103:165-183.
- Folk,  R. L. 1974. Petrology  o f  sedimentary  Rocks. Austin,  Texas:  Hempill Publishing Company.
- Fox,  W. T., and Davis,  R. A., Jr. , 1976. Weather  Patterns and Coastal Processes. In Beach and Nearshore Sedimentation,  ed.  R.  A.  Davis and  R. L. Ethington, pp. 1-23. Special  Publication 24. Tulsa,  Oklahoma: SEPM.
- Greenwood, B.,  and Hale,  P . B. 1980. Depth of Activity, Sediment Flux and Morphological Changes in  a  Barred  Nearshore  Environment.  In  The Coastline of Canada,  ed. S.  B. McCann,  pp. 89109.  Paper 80-1 0.  Ottawa,  Canada:  Geological Survey of Canada.
- Hidu,  H. 1978. Setting  of  Estuarine  Invertebrates  in Delaware  Bay,  New Jersey, Related to IntertidalSubtidal Gradients. Internationale Revue  des Cesmaten Hydrobiologie 63:637-661.
- Hubertz, J. M., Brooks,  R.  M.,  Brandon,  W.  A.,  and Tracey,  B.  A. 1994. Hindcast Wave  information for the US. Atlantic  Coast. Journal of Coastal Research 10:79-100.
- Jackson, N.  L. 1989. Wave  and  Current  Data from Plumb Beach and Great  Kills,  New York  under Southwesterly  Wind  Conditions.  Technical  Report 1045. New Brunswick,  New Jersey: Rutgers University Center for Coastal and Environmental Studies.
- . 1992. The Effect of Wind Speed and Direction  on  Nearshore  Processes  and  Cross-shore Sediment  Mobility on an Estuarine Beach, Dela-

- ware  Bay,  New Jersey. Unpublished  Ph.D.  Dissertation, Department  of  Geography, Rutgers University,  New Brunswick,  New Jersey.
- Jackson, N. L., and Nordstrom, K. F . 1992. Site-Specific Controls on Wind and Wave Processes and Beach Mobility on Estuarine Beaches. Journal of Coastal Research 8:88-98.
- Kahn, J. H.,  and  Roberts,  H.  H. 1982. Variations in Storm Response along a Microtidal Transgressive Barrier-Island  Arc. Sedimentary Geology 33:129146.
- King,  C. A. M., and Williams, W. W. 1949. The Formation and  Movement of Sand  Bars  by Wave Action.  Geography journal 11  3:70-85.
- Komar, P .   D.,  and Miller,  M. C. 1973. The Threshold of Sediment Movement under Oscillatory Water Waves. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 43:llOl-1110.
- Ludwick, j. C. 1987. Mechanisms of Sand Loss from an Estuarine Groin System following an Artificial Sand Fill. Technical Report 87-2. Norfolk, Virginia: Old Dominion University Department of Oceanography.
- Moory,  R., and Osborne, R.  H. 1992. Causes for the Short-Term Periodic Erosion of an Artificial Beach,  Lower  Newport Bay,  CA.  Bulletin of the Association  o f  Engineering Geologists 29:355369.
- National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration (NOAA). 1990. Local Climatological Data.  Wilmington,  Delaware: National Weather Service.
- . 1992. Tide  Tables:  East Coast of North and South America. Washington,  D.C.: U.S.  Department of Commerce,  National Ocean Service.
- Nordstrom, K. F . 1975. Beach Response Rates to Cyclic and Seasonal Wave Regimes at Sandy Hook, New Jersey. Technical Report 75-3. New Brunswick, New Jersey:  Rutgers University Marine Sciences Center.

- .

1977. Bayside Beach Dynamics: Implications for  Simulation  Modelling on Eroding Sheltered Beaches. Marine Geology 25:333-342.
2. . 1980. Cyclic and Seasonal Beach Response: A Comparison of Ocean and Bayside  Beaches. Physical Geography 1 :I 77-1  96.
3. . 1992. Estuarine  Beaches.  London:  Elsevier Science Publishers.
4. Nordstrom, K. F., and Jackson, N. L. 1990. Migration of Swash Zone, Step and Microtopographic Features during Tidal Cycles on an Estuarine Beach,

- ,

- Delaware  Bay,  New Jersey, USA. Marine Geology 92:147-154.
- and -. 1992. Two Dimensional Change on  Sandy  Beaches  in  Estuaries.  Zeitschriff  for Geomorphologie 36:465-478.
- Owens,  E.  H., and  Frobel, D. H. 1977. Ridge  and Runnel Systems  in the  Magdalen Islands,  Quebec. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 47:191198.
- Phillips, J. P . 1986. Spatial Analysis of Shoreline  Erosion,  Delaware Bay,  NJ.  Annals of the Association of  American Geographers 76:50-62.
- Roberts,  H. H.,  Huh, 0.  K . , Hsu, S.  A., Rouse, L. J., Jr. , and  Rickman,  D. 1987. Impact  of  Cold-Front Passages on Ceomorphic  Evolution  and  Sediment Dynamics of the Complex Louisiana  Coast. In Coastal  Sediments '87. Volume 1 1 :   Proceedings of a Specialty Conference on Advances in Understanding Coastal Sediment  Processes  (New Orleans, LA;  May 12-14,  1987), ed. N. C. Kraus, pp. 1950-1963. New York: ASCE.
- Rosen, P. S. 1977. Increasing Shoreline Erosion Rates with Decreasing Tidal Range in the Virginia Chesapeake Bay.  Chesapeake  Science 18:383386.
- . 1980. Erosion  Susceptibility  of  the  Virginia Chesapeake  Bay  Shoreline. Marine  Geology 34:45-59.
- Sakalowsky,  P . P. , Jr. 1975. Beach Morphology and Nearshore Processes on a Sheltered Beach-the Case of Napatree Beach,  Rhode Island.  Marine Geology 18:M35-M43.
- Sonu,  C. J. 1972. Bimodal Composition  and Cyclic Characteristics  of  Beach  Sediment  in  Continuously  Changing Profiles. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 42:852-857.
- Smith,  L.  B.,  jr., Brosius, J.  E., Nordstrom,  K.  F . , and Psuty, N. P . 1985. Reconnaissance of Beach Dynamics  and Sediment  Transport  at  Great  Kills Bathhouse,  Gateway National Recreation  Area. Report CA 1600-3-0005. New Brunswick,  New Jersey: Rutgers UniversitylNational Park  Service Cooperative Research Unit.
- Thompson, E.  F . 1977. Wave Climate at Selected Locations along U.S. Coasts. CERC Technical Report 77-1. Fort Belvoir,  Virginia:  U.S.  Army  Corps of Engineers.

Submitted 7/93, Revised 5/94, Accepted 8/94.

Jackson, Nancy L. 1995. Wind and Waves: Influence of Local and Non-local  Waves on Mesoscale Beach Behavior in Estuarine Environments. Annals of the Association of  American Geographers 85(1):21-37. Abstract.

A 29-day field investigation  was conducted on a meso-tidal sand beach in Delaware Bay,  New Jersey to document the  contribution  of  local estuarine and  non-local ocean waves  to  beach

recovery following  storms.  Data were  gathered on winds,  waves,  flow  velocities,  and  profile changes during three  storm  sequences.  During the  passage of  low  pressure  centers,  strong northwest winds  (&gt;8.0  m s-') generated local waves with significant heights of 0.36  to 0.52  m and periodicities of 3.6  to 4.9  s.  Sediment was eroded from the upper foreshore and deposited as  a  thin  veneer  (&lt;0.10  m) on  the  lower  foreshore  near  mean  low  water.  Profile  recovery occurred  during either  locally  generated  estuarine  or  non-local  ocean  waves  depending  on tracks  of  pressure  centers.  Locally  generated  significant  wave  heights,  ranging from  0.1 0  to 0.14  m  with  periodicities  from  2.6 to  2.7  s, occurred  during the  retreating phase  of  a  low pressure system passing to the south of the site or when pressure centers passed to the north and the site came under the influence of a retreating cold front. Significant heights of non-local ocean waves were 0.09  m with a periodicity of 9.1  s  when low pressure centers advanced to the south of the site.

Rates of swash bar migration were similar  under  local estuarine and non-local ocean waves. Deposition on  the upper foreshore during non-local  ocean waves was less than measured during local waves due to lower wave heights and lower potential for longshore transport of sediment. Orientation  of  a  beach to  the  mouth of  the  estuary  seems  to  have  more  influence on the magnitude of ocean-wave energy reaching the shoreline than does proximity to the mouth. The greatest  geomorphic  contribution  of  non-local  ocean  waves  to  beach  dynamics  is  after  the passage of a weather system. Key Words: Delaware Bay,  estuarine beach, ocean waves,  swash bar migration,  weather  systems.

Correspondence:  Department  of  Social  Science  and  Policy  Studies,  New Jersey Institute  of Technology,  Newark, New Jersey, 071  02.