## Personal Contacts,  Subcontracting Linkages,  and Development in the Hong Kong-Zhujiang Delta Region

Chi Kin Leung

Department of Geography,  California State University, Fresno, CA 93740-0069 FAX 209/292-9206, e-mail cleung@zimmer.csufresno.edu

Abstract. This paper examines the locational structure  and  economic consequences  of Hong Kong's  production  subcontracting  activities in  the Zhujiang Delta,  China. Based on a comprehensive investigation of firms in the three  major  Hong Kong industries, I found that the subcontracting activities from the territory  were  widely  distributed  in the  Delta, with Shenzhen,  Dongguan, and Guangzhou as the three major centers of concentration. This pattern is attributable mainly to the extensive use  of  preexisting  kinship  and  Hong Kong business  ties to  establish  linkages. Other causes are closeness between Hong  Kong  and the Delta,  the efforts of Chinese authorities to attract foreign  investments to the Delta,  and the locational advantages or specialization of individual  locales.  The  locations  of subcontracting  linkages vary  with  different  transactional channels. Linkages  based on preexisting kinship or Hong Kong business ties orient to the rural,  those based on other contacts  to the urban,  areas  of the Delta.  The incorporation of  preexisting kinship and  business ties  insured exchange reliability and facilitated further  cooperation  between  firms, which  encouraged Hong  Kong  firms to subcontract and provide equipment and training supports to their  Chinese  subcontractors.  The  development  of  subcontracting  activities  h a s   promoted  rapid  industrial  development  in the Zhujiang Delta, and led to production integration and economic interdependence between the two places.  The study shows the relationships  between firms,  both preexisting socialinstitutional and subsequent transactional, are important  locational  and  structural  determinants  of  vertically  disintegrated  activities.  It also shows the structure of transactions,  while complex,  is organized.  A  detailed  examination  of  such structure  will  provide an  integrated and context-specific framework for industrial organization and location research.

Key Words: personal contacts, kinship, production subcontracting,  development,  Hong  Kong,  Zhujiang Delta, China.

TICAL disintegration represents a ma'  strategy  of corporation  organization major  market economies during the past two decades (Clutterbuck 1985;  Lash and Urry 1987). It is an arrangement of production wherein firms  externalize their  manufacturing activities  to  other  independent  firms.  Also  it represents a system in which firms assume different positions or functions in a chain of production.  In  major  developed  market  economies  such  a s the  U.S., the  rise  of  vertical disintegration  is  attributable  to  the  performance problems caused by capital redundancy and  labor  militancy  (Cooke  1988;  Piore  and Sabel 1984).  It  is also attributable  to the strategic responses  of firms toward rapid market changes,  increased international competition, and  the  corresponding  worldwide  development of new modes of corporate competition, based  on  interfirm  consultative  coordination and continuous improvement in product, process,  and organization (Best 1990). Vertical disintegration provides firms the benefits  of reduced investment risks,  strengthened control over the labor process, and faster  response to technological and  market changes  (Donaghu and Barff 1990;  Holmes 1986;  lmrie 1986). In addition,  it  provides  production  systems  increased viability for long-term growth and development  (Sato  1984;  Saxenian  1990),  and

promotes exchanges between firms  in many forms,  including production subcontracting, liand  joint  ventures  (Contractor  and censing, Lorange 1988).

The development of vertical disintegration is not confined to developed market economies; a number of major developing market economies,  including Hong Kong,  have also experienced similar changes in recent years. In Hong Kong,   unlike its developed counterparts, these changes are attributable mainly to the strategic needs of firms to expand production or to reduce cost pressures  associated  with labor shortages  (Chen  7983; Federation  of  Hong Kong Industries 1990).  A  major  location  of Hong Kong's vertically disintegrated  activities is the  Zhujiang  Delta  in  southern  Cuangdong, China; the primary form of exchanges  between the  two pfaces is production  subcontracting. From 1979-89,  the  Zhujiang Delta accounted for approximately 75 percent of cumulative realized foreign investments, mostly from  Hong Kong, in  Cuangdong;  about  one-fifth  were production subcontracting investments&gt; Since Hong Kong's  subcontracting investments  involve  primarily  manufac~ring activities,  they have had a major impact on the development o f industries  in  the Delta, and have made Hong Kong-Zhujiang Delta one of the world's fastest growing regions and major export economies during the past  decade. In 1989 this region was the world's  tenth largest exporter,  accounting for  2.69 percent  of  the  value  of  total  world exports,  a figure second only to Japan in Asia (derived from General Economy Division 1991; Cuangdong  Province Statistical  Bureau  1990; Trade Analysis Section 1990).

Despite this  extensive development,  a detailed  understanding  of  the locational  and structural characteristics of  Hong Kong's  subcontracting  activities  in  the  Zhujiang  Delta is lacking. There  is  no  systematic  information concerning  the locational  distr~bu~ion and transactional characteristics  of the subcontracting activities of different types of firms and different industries. The locational and structural determi~ants  of  the  subcon~racting  activities are  also  unknown. A few  studies  generally agree  that  the  social  relationships  between firms are the major  factors underlying  development,  but the specific regional economic consequences of these  relationships with respect to  production subcontracting remain unexamined (Leung 1990; Smart and Smart 1991  ). This lack of detailed understanding hampers efforts to assess the  regional economic  relations between Hong  Kong and the Zhujiang Delta, and the  development  impacts of the  subcontracting activities on both places. Based on a comprehensive investigation of firms  in the  three major Hong  Kong industries  (garments, textiles, and electronics), this  study has  three  primary objectives.  The  first  is  to  reveal the  characteristics of Hong Kong's su~contracting activities  in China,  especially in the Zhujiang Delta: the distribution of the subcontracting activities, the nature of the transactional  relationships,  the stability and  contents  of  exchanges,  and the interfirm  contractual and  extracontractual arrangements with respect to different types  of Hong  Kong  manufacturers  and  to  different channels of  subcontracting transactions.  The second objective is to examine the major bcational  and  structural  determinants  of  Hong Kong's subcontracting  activities in China, especially in the Zhujiang Delta, giving specific emphasis to the significance of social and institutional  relationships between  firms.  The  theoretical  implications  of these relationships  on  the locational  and economic consequences of vertical disintegration  are also examined. The final objective is to evaluate the regional economic relations between  Hong Kong and  the  Zhujiang  Delta  and the development impacts  of  the subcontracting activities on  both  places.  The development prospects of the regional industrial system  will also be highlighted.

This paper has six  sections.  In the first section,  t  review the current theoretical perspectives and the significance of social and institutional relationships between firms a s   major locational and  structural  determinants of vertically disintegrated activities. The second section sets forth the research  context and the historical  and contemporary factors underlying the development of Hong  Kong's subcontracting activities in China.  The third section outlines my research design, followed by a section describing the transactional structure for  subcontracting  exchanges. In the  fifth  section, I detail the  locational and  transactional characteristics.  Finally I assess the regional economic relations  between  and  the  development  impacts of the  subcontracting activities. The paper concludes with a discussion of the theoretical and empirical implications of the  study for  future  industrial organization and  location research.

## Theoretical Perspectives

Production subcontracting is a form of vertical  disintegration  of  production,  commonly defined  as  a  business  arrangement between two  independent firms-one (the contractor) provides the orders and the other (the subcontractor) furnishes the work or  services for the processing of  materials  or  the  production  of parts,  components,  subassembly  or  assembly of products according to the production specifications and the  marketing arrangements of the  contractor  (United  Nations Industrial Development Organization 1974).  Subcontracting has three primary forms based on the contractor's  needs:  specialized,  due  to  inadequate technological know-how  or equipment;  concurrent,  due to inadequate capacity to meet a delivery schedule; and economic, due  to lower-cost  inputs  of  other  firms.  Watanabe (1980) further  identifies two types of subcontracting  based  on  the  contents  of  the  work performed: industrial (process or componen?, which involves manufacturing processes or intermediate  products,  and  commercial (product), which relates to finished commodities.

Theoretical  explanations  of  the locational and economic  consequences of subcontracting or  of vertical disintegration of  production are  based  primarily  on  the  transaction  costs perspective  defined by  Scott (1  983, 1986, 1988a). This  perspective,  which  follows  the work  of Coase (1 937) and Williamson  (1 975, 1979, 1984,  1985), states that vertical disintegration promotes locational agglomeration because external transaction costs between firms in  the  market,  including  transportation  and communication  costs,  increase with distance. The propensity to agglomerate (locationally)  increases further  when the transactions include small-scale,  irregular,  unstandardized,  or  contact-intensive activities that have high unit linkage  costs;  or  when firms  seek  to reduce demand fluctuations by increasing  their customer base  through  locational clustering. This  locational tendency, according to Storper and Scott (1989), is associated with a flexible  regime of capital accumulation or mode of corporate organization  characterized  by  intense  external transactions  between  firms  (external economies  of  scale)  a s   a  result of unstable  market conditions. On the other  hand,  the  locational dispersal  of production occurs when the trans- actions involve bulky, stable,  standardized,  or easily  manageable activities that have low unit linkage costs. These activities contain primarily routine deskilled production processes  and are dispersed to  peripheral areas  where  labor or land costs are low (Scott 1988a, 21 0). This locational tendency,  as  stated  by  Storper  and Scott (1  989), is associated with a Fordist regime of capital accumulation typified  by deepened internal transactions within firms (internal economies of scale) as a result of stable market circumstances. Spatial  and  international  divisions of labor therefore result, with the centers dominating in unstandardized  skilled labor and the hinterlands  depending on routine unskilled activities (Scott and Storper 1986).

Scott's elaboration  provides  important  insights  into  the  general dynamics  of  industrial organization  and locational  processes.  His elaboration,  however,  concerns  primarily  the effects  of  linkage  costs  on  the  industrial agglomeration process; the other major locational and structural determinants of vertically disintegrated activities,  especially  in the  hinterland or over distance,  remain unexamined. An examination of the related literature suggests that vertical disintegration of  production  does  not necessitate  locational agglomeration. The spatial distribution  is affected not only  by  linkage costs,  but also by a number of macroscale POlitical-economic  factors at or above the regional level and microscale managerial-behavioral  factors at the firm level. The macrofactors include regional  factor supply structure, local entrepreneurial  characteristics,  and  regional  or national industrial policies. Locational dispersal of vertically disintegrated activities  is  likely to occur  when  industrial agglomerations experience labor shortages (Linge 1991), when central  locations  lack  suitable  suppliers  (Harper and Goodner  1990), when  peripheral locales possess  an entrepreneurial  culture  (Hansen 1991), or when regions or nations adopt certain domestic sourcing industrial  policies (Jones and  North 1991). This  locational tendency  is also  likely to occur when firms implement inbound transportation planning, using specialist freight services and electronic shipment tracking  systems  (Ramsdale and  Harvey 1990) or when firms adopt specific purchasing management  strategies  (Ahmed  et  al. 1991; Porter 1991  ).  The  recent development  in  producercarrier strategic  alliances and  in service-sensitive  interregional and  international  deliveries

I

~

~

further facilitate the dispersal o f   vertically disintegrated activities (Bradley  1991,1992; Ettlinger

1992).

These macro and microfactors aside, the development o f   vertically  disintegrated  activities in  the hinterland  or over distance requires the presence or the establishment  o f   certain  relationships  between firms as a  contractual  governance structure.  The  relationships  between firms  not  only  affect the process o f   dispersal, they  also  affect the  detailed  distribution.  The relationships  between  firms,  especially  preexisting social and institutional relationships, are a major d~terminan~ o f   hinterland or distant linkages because these relationships provide firms confidence  in the reliability of remote  exchanges (Walker 1988). This reliability  is important to  firms because o f   the prohibitive costs o f supervision  and  replacement of distant  counterparts and  o f production  disruption.  This  is especially true for  linkages that traverse social or  political space because o f   differing business practices  or  legal  arrangements  (Hakansson 1982),  and for linkages that have stringent quality or delivery requirements or both (Willis and Wuston  1990). Preexisting  social  and  institutional  relationships  further enable firms to reduce the costs of  establishing hinterland or distant linkages, especially  in  environments with considerable informational or transactional constraints.  Under these  circumstances,  firms are likely  to transact  with the remote counterparts familiar to them (Beije and Groenewegen 1992; Granovetter 1985). The iocations of the socially  or institutionally  linked  transactional counterparts will therefore determine the spatial linkage patterns o f   the focal firms (Hamilton 1974). At a regional  level, the social and institutional networks between a center and its hinterland  will  in  part  define the  locational characteristics o f   the center-hinterland  linkage systems.

The  relationships  between  firms  are  also a major  structural  determinant  o f hinterland  or distant  linkages. A transactional  relationship, once established, will gradually develop through time as the reliability o f   successive exchanges  is  assured.  This  relationship  enables firms  to  strengthen  control over  their  operational environment, thereby securing access to needed resources for performance or development  (Burt  1989; Hakansson  1989). A devetoped relationship is usually stable because linkage change can incur high linkage replacement costs, reduce  exchange  efficiency,  and increase operational uncertainty (Egan and Mody 1992; Pfeffer and Salancik 1978). This is  especially true for  relationships  involving close  social or  institutional ties,  entailing  recurrent exchanges, or containing  firm-specific  physical assets (Hakansson 1982; johannisson  1987; jo hanson and  Mattsson  1987; Rosson and Ford 1982). A developed relationship  also tends to be cooperative,  facilitating contractual and extracontractual arrangements  between firms, which  can  have significant development consequences  for  the  firms  involved  (Landeros and Monczka 1989; Mead 1984; Melin 1987). In  subcontracting,  the  contractuai  and  extracontractual arrangements include various kinds of assistance  that contractors provide  to their subcontractors.  This  assistance,  according  to L a 1 1   (1980), is  of seven  major types,  including plant establishment, production planning, technical, financial, material sourcing, managerial,  and  client  development.  The  continuing development o f   a  subcontracting relationship can  further  lead to technology or  product  research  cooperation  between  contractors and subcontractors,  strengthening  the  long-term development capabilities  o f the  latter,  as the Japanese  relational contracting  system demonstrates  (Dore 1986; Sat0  1984). At a  regional level, the development of cooperative subcontracting  relationships  with  the center can promote the technological capabilities and development of   the hinterland  or individual locales (Fredriksson and Lindmark 7979; Russo 7989). The development o f   cooperative subcontracting  linkages  internationally  can  similarly  promote the development of countries as studies o f   the Asian  Productiv~y ~rganization fl978), Germidis (1 9801, and UNIDO  (1  974) illustrate.

A detailed investigation o f   the locational and structural  characteristics o f vertically  disintegrated activities and the resultant center-hinterland  economic  relations  therefore  must  consider,  among  others,  the  subtle  relationships between  firms and the detailed  characteristics of   the transactions. Given the complexity o f   a production system,  the  investigation needs to examine the  interfirm  relationships  and transactional characteristics of different  types  o f firms  constituting  that  system  (Walker  1988). Firms  vary  in  their  internal  organizational  and functional constraints, channel selection strategies,  interfirm  transactional  relationships,  and exchange characteristics (Glasmeier 1990; Kim

l

and Daniels 1991 ;  Taylor  and Thrift 1982a, b). Small firms,  for example, tend to transact with the local  firms they already know because they lack the abilities to search for alternative counterparts  and  to  supervise  activities  over  distance.  The  relationships  between  small firms and their transactional counterparts are usually personal, and  the  exchanges  are  generally small-scale and irregular (Dias 1986; Taylor and Wood 1973). Large firms,  on the other  hand, tend  to  transact  with  nonlocal firms  because they have greater abilities not only to establish and supervise distant linkages, but also to fulfil the requirements of regional or national transactional  channels. The  relationships  between large firms and their transactional counterparts are usually formal,  and the exchanges are generally  large  scale  and  stable  (Egan  and  Mody 1992; Marshall  1 979).2 The composition of firm segments and transactional channels of a production  system,  along with the  resultant patterns  of  contacts,  is  place-specific. Together they reflect the combined effects of firm characteristics  and strategies, sectoral  attributes and industrial  practices, social  rules  and  cultural traits,  and the political-econom  it and historical organization of production of a particular locality  (Sayer 1985, 1989). An examination of  interfirm  relationships and transactional characteristics  with respect  to  the  segmental  and channel composition  of a production  system will therefore provide a context-specific mesoscale  explanation  of  the  locational and economic consequences of vertical disintegration of production,  thereby  enabling a better understanding of the resultant economic relations between a center and its hinterland.

## Research

## Context

Hong Kong is a British colony on the eastern fringe  of  the  estuary  of  the  Zhujiang  (Pearl River) Delta in South China (Fig. I). Under the 1984 Sino-British agreement,  the  sovereignty of  the  territory  will  revert  to  China  in 1997 (Hong Kong Government 1984). Hong Kong has a predominant Chinese population, composed of migrants and their  descendants with hometowns mainly in the  Zhujiang Delta and in  the  Chaozhou  area  in  Guangdong (Vogel 1989). Approximately  half  a  million  migrants (about 25 percent of Hong Kong's 1949 population) came to the territory during 1948-49 to escape  communist  rule  in  mainland  China (Geiger and Geiger 1973). Among them were some textile and garment entrepreneurs from Shanghai who  have  been instrumental in developing  the  territory's industries  since  the mid-1950s (Wong 1988). In the two and a half decades that followed,  Hong Kong underwent rapid industrialization and gradually  became a major  world  exporter  of  inexpensive textile, garment, and electronic products (Cheng 1982; Youngson 1982). This success, however, created labor shortages and heightened labor and  other  production  costs,  which  began  to weaken  the  international competitiveness of Hong Kong manufacturers by the  late 1970s (Advisory Committee on Diversification 1979; Economist Intelligence Unit 1983).

Nevertheless,  China's  adoption  of an  open policy  since 1978 has  provided  Hong Kong manufacturers with a major means to maintain their  export  competitiveness through  decentralizing  their  production  activities there.  The average  monthly wage  of a factory worker  in China in 1980 was approximately US$45 (State Statistical Bureau [SSB] 1981), whereas that  in Hong Kong was  about US$ 272 (Employment and Earning Statistics Section 1981 ).   To  attract capital from  Hong Kong and from other countries,  China provides foreign firms five  major forms of investments  including sole proprietorship, equity joint venture, contractual  joint venture, joint exploration, and production subcontracting (including compensation trade and industrial processing by Chinese definitions) (Ho 1990; Kemp 1987). These five  major forms of investments  differ  mainly  in the  structure  of ownership,  the  scale  of  investment,  and  the length of the period of cooperation. Sole proprietorships,  for  example, are wholly  foreignowned subsidiaries with relatively large capital and long-term commitments, whereas production subcontracting enterprises are fully Chinaowned firms  with  generally small  and  shortterm investment  requirements.  In  addition, China designated several coastal areas as special economic  zones  (SEZ),  open  cities,  and open regions (Phillips and Yeh 1990)? These special areas  provide foreign firms various  investment incentives, such as lower income tax and land use fees than other locations in China; they  also  provide  local  Chinese  enterprises more autonomy in business dealings with foreign firms.  In Guangdong, these  special areas include  the  SEZs  of  Shenzhen,  Zhuhai,  and

Figure 1. Hong Kong and the Zhujiang Delta. Major city areas are shi (an administration unit with  city or urban status  in China) at the prefectural level or with Special Economic Zone status  in  1986. Minor city areas  had a county-level shi or county status in 1986. The county includes areas that have a current county status.

<!-- image -->

Shantou;  the  open cities  of  Cuangzhou  and Zhanjiang;  and  the  open  region  of  Zhujiang Delta. The investment incentives provided for foreign firms usuaily  vary between special  areas because of national strategies or local initiatives or both (jahiel  and Diamond 1986; Khan 19511). The  Shenzhen SEZ, for  example,  has  lower income tax  rates  for  foreign  high-technology ventures and  greater  local autonomy  to  approve foreign investments, as the central government seeks to attract technology- and capital-intensive ventures to this location. The Zhu-

-

jiang Defta  open region, on  the other hand, has no preferential treatments for  specific  industries  and  lacks greater  local autonomy  to approve  foreign  investments,  but local governments are allowed to attract small-scale foreign ventures  and  production  subcontracting  investments  through  various local initiatives. These initiatives include an exemption of local income surtax,  improvement of tran~portation and telecommunication systems, development of  export  processing zones,  training o f local workers,  and provision of financial and other

assistances  to  local  firms  engaging  in  export processing  and  related  activities  (Han  1988; Yang,  et al. 1988). I n   addition  several  Delta locales, including Dongguan and Baoan, have established  offices  within their respective  city or county areas and in  other major  Delta city locations  to  hasten  the  processing  o f subcontracting  investment  agreements  and related operational documents (Zhou 1988, 1989). To further  attract  investments  from  the  territory and from other countries,  most provincial and local  organizations, both  public  and  private, along with many state-owned trading and specialized  corporations  such  as  Huarun  Jituan (China Resources Company), have maintained their subsidiaries or offices in  Hong Kong, providing  assistance  to  Hong  Kong  and  foreign firms intending to invest in  China. These trading and investment organizations  usually  differ in  the  geographic  coverage and sectoral affiliation  o f their  production  and  business  networks,  with  Yuehai  Qiye  (Guangdong Enterprises),  a  business  consortium  o f   Guangdong province, having  a  network  o f major  stateowned and private firms in  the province  (Linn 1986; Salem 1988).

The  needs o f   Hong Kong  manufacturers to reduce production costs and the efforts o f   Chinese authorities to attract foreign  capital have resulted  in  a  significant flow  o f   Hong  Kong's investments into China. From  1979-89,  Hong Kong was  China's  most  important  foreign  investor, accounting for 28 percent o f   cumulative realized  foreign  investments  in  China  in  that period  (compiled from  SSB  1981  -90; Editorial Board  o f   the Almanac 1984-90).  Given the social  affinity  and  physical  proximity o f   the two places and the special investment incentives  in the  area,  Hong  Kong's  investments  are  geographically concentrated in  Guangdong, especially in  Zhujiang Delta. I n   1989 Zhujiang Delta shared approximately  72 percent o f   total realized foreign  investments i n Guangdong,  o f which about four-fifths were from Hong Kong.4 Structurally, the small capital  requirement  and simple  establishment procedure,  along  with the  initiatives  o f various  locales,  have  made production  subcontracting  a  major  form o f Hong  Kong's investments in  the Delta. This is especially  true  for  medium  and  small  Hong Kong firms because o f   their size constraint and unstable  market  conditions.  Production  subcontracting  accounted  for  approximately 88 percent o f   the total  number o f   foreign  invest- ment agreements and about 20 percent o f   cumulative realized foreign investments i n Guangdong  from  1979-89 (compiled  from Guangdong Province  Statistical Bureau  198590).  The  proclivity  o f Hong  Kong's  industrial system to decentralize production activities to China  is  extensive,  with  most o f   the  industrial sectors in  the territory  having varying degrees of subcontracting  activities across  the  border (Chen 1988; Ng 1988; Walden  1987).

## Data and Methodology

This  study is  a  detailed  investigation  o f the locational structure and economic consequences o f   Hong Kong's subcontracting activities  in  China,  especially in  the Zhujiang  Delta. I t   focuses  o n   the  locational  distribution  and transactional  characteristics  o f these  linkages, with the segmental composition of Hong Kong's  industrial system  and  the subcontracting channel structure between  the two places as the analytical framework. I  selected the three major  Hong  Kong  industries-garments, textiles,  and  electronics-as the targets o f   investigation. To  fully  reveal the segmental organization  o f   the three industries, I included the sectors  o f wearing  apparel  (HKSIC  [Hong  Kong Standard  Industrial  Classification] 320),  wearing  apparel accessories  (322), spinning  (325), weaving (326), knitting  (327), textile  finishing (328), made-up textile  goods  except wearing apparel  (329), electrical  and  electronic  consumer products (383), and electrical and electronic  parts  and accessories (384) as the basis of analysis.  Together  these  nine  sectors  accounted for 56 percent o f   the territory's manufacturing workforce and approximately 49 percent o f   total  Hong  Kong-China  manufacturing trade  in  1989 (Industrial Production  Statistics Section  1991; Trade Analysis Section 1990).

The study employs personal interview as the primary  data  gathering  device.  A  systematic stratified sample, which comprised 1,243 firms i n   the  three  industries,  was  constructed from the  1986 central  registry  o f all  manufacturing establishments  o f   the Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department (CSD). The sample uses industrial sectors at the 4-digit HKSIC  level and employment size o f   individual establishments as  the  stratification  criteria.  Given  the  dominance o f   small firms in  Hong Kong's  industrial system,  the  sampling  fraction  increased  with

the size category o f   the establishments  to  insure an  adequate number  o f   responses from medium  and large firms for  subsequent analyses. The central registry o f   the Hong Kong CSD is the single most complete source o f   information  containing  the sectoral classification, employment size, and the names and addresses o f all  registered  manufacturing  establishments in  the territory;  it  serves as the  basis for conducting industrial censuses and surveys in  the territory  by  the department. The registry contained the records o f   50,099 manufacturing establishments in  1986, o f   which  17,202 were in the three  industries  (Central  Registry  Section 1986).

My  survey  was  conducted  in  Hong  Kong during 1986-87,  with  supplementary data obtained  from other sources from  1988-89.  The data  gathering  process  began  with  a  letter o f notification to the owner or manager o f   a sampled establishment, describing the purposes o f the study and the date o f   visit,  a week before the scheduled interview. For large firms, a telephone  call  was  made  two  days  before  the scheduled interview to confirm the time o f   visit and  to  identify  the  person  or  persons  to  be interviewed.  The  interview  was  conducted through a structured  questionnaire for systematic collection  o f   data. Open questions related to the study were  asked whenever appropriate. The key  questions asked included  the internal  organizational  and operational attributes of the firm,  the  characteristics  o f its  products and  markets,  the  locationaf  distribution  o f its subcontracting linkages in  China, the preexisting  social  and institutional  relationships between the firm and its Chinese subcontractors, the  transactional  relationships  between  firms, and  the  characteristics  o f exchanges and  interfirm arrangements. Most o f   the interviewees were owners or  senior  managers. Junior staff accounted for less than  13  percent o f   the total number o f   responses, The respondents were generally  cooperative  (mean  rank  7.54  on  a scale of 10 based  on an  on-site  postinterview assessment)  and had an adequate  understanding o f the  questions  asked  (mean  rank 7.1  8).  They also  provided  adequate responses to the questions asked except for those related to sales and profits (mean rank 6.79). In  some cases,  the  respondents answered with  enthusiasm, providing detailed information concerning  the  locational  and  structural  dynamics of Hong Kong's  subcontracting  activities in  China.

The  information  gathered  from  a  firm  was then  carefully examined with  respect to data consistency and its comparability with those o f other firms of similar size and operational characteristics. Unreliable data were discarded. The survey generated 383 responses,  representing a response rate  of 31 percent. There were 48 responses excluded from  subsequent analyses because of unreliability (24 responses) and inappropriate  sectoraf  attributes  (24 responses). The  remaining  335  effective responses  accounted for  2  percent o f all  registered  manufacturing establishments in the three industries in  1986. The sample o f   responding firms covered all major sectors in the three industries at the 4-digit HKSlC level. The key export sectors, which  included outer  garments  (3201  1, knit outerwear  (32751,  and all electronic  sectors (3831  -3849)' were adequately represented (Table I), as were the large and medium firm categories. The below-average representativeness  ratio  o f the  small-firm  category did  not inhibit subsequent anatyses, as most o f   the responding  small  firms  exhibited strong  functional and  operational  similarities. The sample therefore provided an adequate representation of   the complex sectoraf and segmental organization o f the  three  industries and  o f   Hong Kong's  industrial system in general. The lack o f information about Chinese subcontracting firms did not hinder a proper assessment o f   the regional  economic  impacts  o f tjong  Kong's subcontracting activities on the Zhujiang Delta, as  the  development  processes  in  the  Delta hinge primarily on the strategies o f   firms in the territory  to  maintain  their  international  competitiveness  (Feng 1990).

To reveal the interfirm relationships and transactional characteristics o f   different types o f firms, I classified the  respondents into several groups  by  means  o f industrial  segmentation analysis.  This  technique classifies a  system  o f firms into several functionally-related  industrial segments  according  to  certain criteria,  with each segment representing a group o f   firms o f similar structural attributes and functional characteristics. The criteria used to classdy a system o f   firms vary with  the objectives  o f   individual studies  (Averitt 1968;  Taylor  and  Thrift  1983; Wilkinson 1981 ). The major criteria used in this study  include  variables  related  to the  internal organizational, product, and marketing characteristics  o f the  firms.  The  Chinese  firms  to which Hong  Kong manufacturers subcon-

Table 1. Sectoral and Size Distribution of Firms Responding  to Survey

|                                          |   Total no. registered establishments 1986 |   No. responding firms |   Representativeness ratioa |
|------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Sectorb                                  |                                            |                        |                             |
| Garments (320-322)                       |                                       9677 |                    158 |                        1.63 |
| Outer garments (3201 )                   |                                       6578 |                    128 |                        1.95 |
| Leather and fur clothing (3209)          |                                       1239 |                      7 |                        0.56 |
| Handbags (3223)                          |                                        554 |                      9 |                        1.62 |
| Wearing apparel nec. (3229)              |                                        597 |                      5 |                        0.84 |
| Textiles (325-329)                       |                                       5365 |                     82 |                        1.53 |
| Knit outerwear (3275)                    |                                       1958 |                     32 |                        1.63 |
| Bleaching and dyeing (3280)              |                                        394 |                      7 |                        1.78 |
| Textile stenciling (3281 )               |                                        537 |                      5 |                        0.93 |
| Electronics (383-384)                    |                                       2160 |                     95 |                        4.4  |
| Electrical appliances (3833)             |                                        235 |                      8 |                        3.4  |
| Consumer electrical products nec. (3839) |                                        227 |                      7 |                        3.08 |
| Electronic parts (3844)                  |                                        515 |                     31 |                        6.02 |
| Electronic accessories nec. (3849)       |                                        349 |                      9 |                        2.58 |
| Size'                                    |                                            |                        |                             |
| Large                                    |                                        102 |                     27 |                       26.47 |
| Medium                                   |                                       2579 |                    128 |                        4.96 |
| Small                                    |                                      14521 |                    180 |                        1.24 |
| Totald                                   |                                      17202 |                    335 |                        1.95 |

~~

aNumber of responses divided by total number of registered establishments multiplied by a factor of 100.

bFor garments and textiles industries, sectors with more than 350 registered firms in 1986 are listed. For electronics industry,  sectors with more than 200 registered firms in 1986 are listed. Numbers are HKSIC.

: L a r g e (at least 500 persons engaged), medium (50-499  persons engaged), small (&lt; 50 persons engaged). nec. = not else classified. Total refers to the respective column sum under the sector or the size category.

Sources: Survey data and Industrial Production Statistics Section (1  988).

tracted were also classified into several groups. The preexisting social and institutional relationships between the subcontractors  and contractors, along  with  the internal  organizational characteristics of the  Chinese firms,  were the primary  classification criteria. I  then  tabulated the  survey  data  with  respect to  the  various segments of Hong Kong firms and groups of subcontractors  identified  in  the  classification processes; these constituted the primary framework of analysis in the following  sections.

## Find  ings

## The Segmental Organization of the Three Industries

Five segments compose the production system of the three industries studied. As Table 2 shows, these segments are large firm,  medium export,  medium nonexport,  small export,  and small nonexport. The large firm segment comprises mostly multiplant corporations with more than 500 employees. Most firms  in this segment have in-house R&amp;D and direct overseas  marketing capabilities;  they form the core of  indigenous export  development  efforts  of the three industries.  The relationships between most large firms and their overseas buyers are cooperative and longstanding. This segment of firms,  therefore,  has  high  degrees  of  export stability. The large firm segment has three subsegments  which  differ  mainly  in  the  spatial scale  of  operation. These  three  subsegments are global firms that have a worldwide production  network,  regional firms  that  have a production network in Asia,  and local  firms with a production network in the territory.

The medium export and medium nonexport segments  comprise  mostly  single-plant firms with 100-200  employees. The export segment contains two  subsegments,  product  development and international subcontracting, of which the latter predominates. Product development firms are those that develop, manufacture, and market their products mostly on their own accord,  but their  product  development and  marketing  capabilities  are  limited  compared to those of large firms  because of their

I

1

Table 2. Segmental Organization of the Three Hong Kong Industries

| Segmentisubsegment           |   Garments | Textiles   | Electronics   |   Total |
|------------------------------|------------|------------|---------------|---------|
| Large firm                   |         18 | 5          | 3             |      26 |
| Global                       |          7 | 1          | 2             |      10 |
| Regional                     |          4 | 0          | 0             |       4 |
| Local                        |          7 | 4          | 1             |      12 |
| Medium export                |         65 | 19         | 23            |     107 |
| Product development          |          6 | I          | 13            |      20 |
| subcontracting International |         59 | 18         | I0            |      87 |
| Medium nonexport             |          3 | 13         | 7             |      23 |
| Local sales                  |          1 | 0          | 1             |       2 |
| Local support                |          0 | 1          | 1             |       2 |
| Local subcontracting         |          2 | 12         | 5             |      19 |
| Smaft export                 |         33 | 8          | 26            |      67 |
| Product development          |          7 | 3          | 19            |      29 |
| International subcontracting |         26 | 5          | 7             |      38 |
| Small nonexport              |         39 | 37         | 36            |     112 |
| Local sales                  |         17 | 1          | 3             |      21 |
| Local support                |          0 | 4          | 14            |      18 |
| Local subcontracting         |         22 | 32         | 19            |      73 |
| Total                        |        158 | 82         | 95            |     335 |

Source:

Survey data.

size  constraints.  International  subcontracting firms are those whose operations  follow mainly the production specifications  and marketing  arrangements of their buying counterparts. These firms lack indigenous product development and overseas marketing  capabilities. These firms are also dependent upon intermediaries  in  export  and  have  lower  degrees  of export stability  than their product  development counterparts. The nonexport segment,  on the other hand,  comprises firms that have a local market orientation.  Most  of these  firms  similarly lack indigenous product development capabifity;  they either produce  ordinary  finat goods for  local consumers (local saies)  or furnish  standard  intermediate goods  (local support) or subcontracting services for other local man~acturers (local subcontracting~~

The small export and small nonexport segments comprise firms employing mostly 10-20 persons. The firms  have similar characteristics as  their  medium  export  and medium  nonexport counterparts. Small firms are further limited in their indigenous product development and  overseas  marketing  capabilities,  because most of them are strongly dependent on local manufacturers  for subcontracting work or locat trading agents for export.

Sectorally, the  garments  industry  contains mainly international subcontracting firms, reflecting the  traditional role  of  Hong Kong's garments industry in overseas trade (Richards 1981 1, The textiles and the electronics industry, on the other hand, comprise mostly local subcontracting  firms, because  they  have  higher degrees of p ~ o ~ u c t ~ o n speciaiization. The electronics industry further comprises product development firms  because of the technological nature of this  industry.

## Channels for Hong Kong Firms Subcontracting to China

With  respect to  the  preexisting social and institutional  relationships  between  firms  and the internal organizational characteristics, Hong Kong firms have four major channels to subcontract to China. These are  insh hip,  participating, affiliated,  and  other  local Chinese factories. Kinship factories  are those that have connections with or are owned by the mainland relatives or close friends of the owners of fhe  respective Hong Kong contractors. These factories usually provide  their  Hong  Kong transactional counterparts greater  confidence in exchange reliabil~y, because preexisting kinship or close social relationships establish mutual trusts between  the  transacting  parties. These  factories  further provide  their  Hong

Kong counterparts with  better  local connections to resolve operational problems or to develop  production  networks  (Smart and Smart 1991 ).  Participating  factories are those that are fully or partly owned by  other Hong Kong  firms besides the respective Hong Kong contractors. These factories are a direct extension of Hong Kong's industrial  system, endowed with preexisting  social and business relationships  and customary business practices of the territory; they similarly provide their Hong  Kong counterparts greater confidence in exchange  reliability. These factories further  reduce the investment needs of their  Hong Kong counterparts,  because the respective Hong Kong investors usually furnish the required production equipment and  technical  training.  Affiliated  factories  are those that  have business affiliations with various  Chinese  state-owned  trading or  specialized corporations. These factories do not have preexisting social or institutional ties with their respective Hong Kong contractors. The confidence  they  provide to  their  Hong Kong counterparts rests upon the perceived reputation  of  the state-owned  corporations  with which they affiliate and upon the formal contractual agreements between firms. Other local factories are those that do not have any preexisting  kinship  or  institutional  ties  with their Hong Kong contractors or affiliations  with Chi- nese  state-owned  corporations. The  transactional relationships  with their Hong  Kong counterparts  were  established through ordinary business contacts,  such a s   company  visits,  or through  remote  social  ties.  The  confidence they provide to their Hong Kong counterparts varies between pairs of firms and depends on the  particular situations concerned.  Organizationally, kinship  and participating  factories tend to  be  medium-sized  private  firms.  Affiliated factories  tend  to  be  large  and  state-owned, whereas other local factories have mixed size and ownership characteristics.

As regards  the structure  of  transactions among  responding firms,  subcontracting exchanges  with  kinship  or  other  local factories contained exclusively direct linkages (exchange relationships involving no intermediaries).  Exchanges  with  participating or  affiliated factories,  on the  other  hand,  comprised  both direct and indirect (exchange relationships involving intermediaries) linkages.  The intermediaries for participating  factories included Hong Kong trading firms and manufacturers with investments  or  business connections  in China, whereas those for  affiliated factories included the mainland and Hong Kong offices of various state-owned corporations. The overall transactional structure  for responding  firms to subcontract to China is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2. The transactional  structure  for subcontracting to China among firms  responding to the survey.

<!-- image -->

## linkage Development and Contact Patterns

Of the 335 responses, 54 firms established  a total of 108 subcontracting linkages in China in 1386, representing an increase of 37 firms and 70 linkages  since 1981 (Table 31. Linkage  is defined here as an  exchange relationship between a Hong Kong contractor and a Chinese subcontractor.  The  propensity to subcontract t o   China increased  with the increase  in  the size of a firm,  reflecting the  greater  organizational capability of large and medium firms to establish and supervise linkages over distance. The propensity also increased with the increase in export orientation  and  product development capability of a firm,  as they actively sought the cost  advantages of  Chinese firms  to increase their export competitiveness.  lnterna~onal subcontracting  firms  had  a  lower  propensity  to subcontract to China because of the transactionai  constraints with  their  buyers,  whereas that af nonexport  firms was attributable  to their functional constraints as local subcontractors  in Hong Kong's  industrial system.  Garment and textile firms were further confined by the rules of origin and quota restrictions in international trade,  which forbid them to use Hong Kong's quotas for  export if the  regulated garment or textile products were not made in the territory (Aggarwal 1985).

With  respect to  the  patterns o f contacts, large firms were inclined to associate with affili- ated and kinship factories. As  Table 4  shows, of the seven large firms that responded, three had an affiliated and the other three had a kinship  factory a s   their  key Chinese subcontractor,  the Chinese firm that had the largest share of  the  total  processing fee  payments of  the respective Hong Kong manufacturer in 1986. The propensity of large  firms,  of which most were garment firms,  to associate with affiliated factories was attrib~tab~e to the better availability of China's  export quotas in these factories, whereas those with kinship factories were due to personal  connections in Shanghai, the hometown of the owner of most large Hong Kong  garment  manufacturers.  Medium  and small firms,  on the  other  hand,  tended  to associate with participating  factories and, to a less extent, with  kinship  factories, because  their limited organizational  capability confined them to use preexisting Hong Kong business or kinship ties a s   the primary means to establish linkages and insure exchange reliabi~ity. The higher propensity to transact with  participating than with kinship factories reflected the investment constraints of most medium and small firms, a s the former  subcontracting channel had lower capital  requirement  than  the  latter  because most  participating factories  were,  in  general, adequately equipped by the respective Hong Kong investors. There was a  general lack  of search  for  alternative  subcontractors  among medium and  small firms,  with  only  two  me-

Table 3. Development of Hong Kong's  Subcontracting  Linkages in China

|                              |   firms Total no. responding | No. responding firms to China   | No. responding firms to China   | NO. ~ubcon~~ac~ingsubcontracting linkages   |   NO. ~ubcon~~ac~ingsubcontracting linkages |   Propensity to subcontract to Chinaa | Propensity to subcontract to Chinaa   |
|------------------------------|------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| Sectorlsegment               |                              | 1981                            | 1986                            | 1981                                        |                                        1986 |                               1981    | 1986                                  |
| Sector                       |                              |                                 |                                 |                                             |                                             |                                       |                                       |
| G armenis                    |                          158 | 6                               | 22                              | 10                                          |                                          46 |                                  0.04 | 0.14                                  |
| Textiles                     |                           82 | 4                               | 10                              | I0                                          |                                          19 |                                  0.05 | 0.12                                  |
| Electronics                  |                           95 | 7                               | 22                              | 18                                          |                                          43 |                                  0.07 | 0.23                                  |
| Segment                      |                              |                                 |                                 |                                             |                                             |                                       |                                       |
| Large                        |                           26 | 4                               | 9                               | 7                                           |                                          21 |                                  0.15 | 0.35                                  |
| Medium export                |                          107 | 5                               | 23                              | 12                                          |                                          46 |                                  0.05 | 0.21                                  |
| Product development          |                           20 | I                               | 9                               | 2                                           |                                          17 |                                  0.05 | 0.45                                  |
| International subcontracting |                           87 | 4                               | 14                              | 10                                          |                                          29 |                                  0.05 | 0.16                                  |
| Medium nonexport             |                           23 | 0                               | 0                               | 0                                           |                                           0 |                                  0    | 0.00                                  |
| Small export                 |                           67 | 4                               | 11                              | 13                                          |                                          26 |                                  0.06 | 0.1 6                                 |
| Product development          |                           29 | 4                               | 6                               | 13                                          |                                          18 |                                  0.14 | 0.21                                  |
| International subcontracting |                           38 | 0                               | 5                               | 0                                           |                                           8 |                                  0    | 0.1 3                                 |
| Small nonexport              |                          112 | 4                               | I1                              | 6                                           |                                          15 |                                  0.04 | 0.10                                  |
| Total                        |                          335 | 17                              | 54                              | 38                                          |                                         108 |                                  0.05 | 0.16                                  |

aNurnber of responses with subcontracting linkages divided by total number of responding firms Source: Survey data.

Table 4. Subcontracting Contact Patterns

|                  | Subcontracting channelsb   | Subcontracting channelsb   | Subcontracting channelsb   | Subcontracting channelsb   |        |
|------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|--------|
| Respondingfirmsa | Kinship                    | Participating              | Affiliated                 | Other local                | Total' |
| Sector           |                            |                            |                            |                            |        |
| Garments         | 8                          | 2 (1)                      | 5 (2)                      | 4                          | 19     |
| Textiles         | 1                          | 6 (6)                      | 0 (0)                      | 2                          | 9      |
| Electronics      | 4                          | 8 (2)                      | 3 (1)                      | 4                          | 19     |
| Segment          |                            |                            |                            |                            |        |
| Large            | 3                          | 0 (0)                      | 3 (1)                      | 1                          | 7      |
| Medium export    | 3                          | 8 ( 5 )                    | 3 (2)                      | 5                          | 19     |
| Small export     | 3                          | 7 (3)                      | 0 (0)                      | 1                          | 11     |
| Small nonexport  | 4                          | 1 (1)                      | 2 (0)                      | 3                          | 10     |
| Totald           | 13                         | 16 (9)                     | 8 (3)                      | 1 0                        | 47     |

aBased on the key subcontracting linkage of firms. Unit is number of firms.

bFigures in parentheses are number of indirect links, those outside number of all links. Kinship and Other local contain only direct links.

'Seven firms did not provide data for this question.

dTotal refers to the respective column sum under the sector or the segment category.

Source: Survey data

dium  export firms  undertaking  limited  search while establishing linkages. This lack of linkage search was further attributable  to the mediating roles of various Chinese state-owned corporations,  which  introduced  suitable affiliated factories  to  or  arranged  transactions  for  Hong Kong  firms when requested. In some cases, the Chinese parties  undertook the subcontracting initiatives for  technology  transfer,  as  reflected by the  subcontracting linkages of a women's outerwear  firm, which  were  originally  instigated  by the  Guangdong Silk  Import and  Export  Corporation.  The  establishment of  linkages  in these  situations was  passive,  and the search for  alternative counterparts was  therefore unnecessary.

## Locational Distribution

The propensity of firms to transact with kinship  and  participating factories  highlights the importance  of  preexisting  social  and  institutional  relationships between firms  in subcontracting  exchanges  between  Hong Kong and China.  These  preexisting  relationships,  along with  China's  efforts  to  attract  foreign  investments, led to a concentration of Hong Kong's subcontracting activities in the  Zhujiang Delta (Fig. 3),  the  home area of the owners of most responding firms;  the  kinship  and  social  networks  provide a trusted environment  (Fig. 4). The Delta is also the area where most of Hong Kong's nonsubcontracting  manufacturing  investments  are located (Leung 1990); their pres- ence provides  Hong Kong firms  another reliable channel to subcontract to China. The importance of preexisting  kinship and Hong  Kong business ties was  reflected by the frequent use of  the  terms  xiangxia  (hometown), shuren (close  acquaintances), and  guanxi  (relationships) a s   replies to the  survey questions concerning their criteria for primary subcontractor and  location  selection.  The  concentration  of subcontracting linkages  in the  Zhujiang Delta was  further  attributed to the  closeness of the two places, which enables Hong Kong firms to reduce transportation and delivery  problems, and also to supervise the production quality of their  subcontractors.  The  Delta locations that received most of the  subcontracting activities were Shenzhen, Dongguan, and Cuangzhou. Together  these  three  locations accounted for 66 percent  of  the  subcontracting linkages of the firms in the Delta.

Besides the general regional effect,  preexisting kinship and Hong Kong business ties  between firms also had specific locational consequences.  Subcontracting  linkages  associated with kinship or participating  factories tended to locate  in  the  hometowns of the  respective Hong Kong contractors or the locations of the respective  Hong  Kong  investments.  Of  the eleven  kinship-based linkages  in the  Delta in Table  5, seven  were  in  the  hometowns  and two in the  immediate neighboring counties of the  contractors.  The  locations  with  kinship linkages included Shunde (5 links), Guangzhou (31, Zhongshan (I), Dongguan (I), and Huizhou (I), most of which were major home-

Figure3. The distribution of  subcontracting  linkages in China among firms. Exact locations  in 1. Fujian province and 2. Zhejiang province were not given by respondents.

<!-- image -->

town focations of Hong Kong residents in the Deffa. The linkages associated  with  participating  factories,  on  the  other  hand,  tended  to concentrate in  Dongguan (1 2 links) and Shenzhen ifif.  The € ~ n ~ e n t r a ~ j ~ ~ in  Dongguan was caused in part by the refocafion o f   several major  Hong  Kong  knitted-fabrics  manufacturers, which were  the  primary  subcontractors  o f most medium and smalf  knitwear firms, to this pface.  Although  the study did  not specificaliy investigate  the  factors  underlying  such  location,  responses suggested that the preexisting kinship  or close social ties between  investors and their Chinese counterparts  were an important ~ e t ~ r m ~ n ~ n ~ . Responses 05 manufacturers also suggested that the close social or business relationships  among the Hong Kong investors of   par~j€j~~tjng factories were another important determinant, as the e s ~ a b ~ j s ~ ~ e n ~ o f   several participating factories in Dongguan was apparently  due  to  the  presence  o f other  such factories there. The clustering of participationbased Iinkages i n Shenzhen was due primarily to the concentration o f Hong Kong's electronic ventures there,  a result o f   the central  govemment's  efforts to attract foreign technobgy-in-

Figure 4. Place  of origin of  the  owner or  key decision  maker  of  firms. The  large number of  occurrences in Chaozhou may reflect the use of this  place name to mean the  Chaozhou area rather than Chaozhou shi. The number of firms with Cuangdong (detailed location not given), Hong Kong, and foreign countries as  the place of origin of their owners or key decision makers were 50,  3,  and 9,  respectively.

<!-- image -->

tensive investments to this  location. O f   the 35 kinship and participation-based subcontracting linkages in  the Delta, 26 lay  in  six rural (county and minor city) locations. Although the specific sites of these rural linkages were generally not given,  the detailed  locational  information  provided  by a  few  respondents,  which  included places such as Shilong (a  town in  northeastern Dongguan)  and  Dongpu  (a  village  near  the town of Mayong in  northwestern  Dongguan), indicated  that Hong Kong's subcontracting activities  were scattered within  individual county and  minor  city  areas  (also  reported  in  many newspapers;  see Renmin Ribao, 19 Feb. 1988, for Dongguan, and 4 Feb. 1988, for Baoan).

The establishment of linkages through preexisting kinship  and  business ties has con- tributed  to a dispersal o f   Hong Kong's subcontracting  activities  in  the  rural  Zhujiang  Delta. The effect o f preexisting  kinship  relationships on  the location of subcontracting linkages tended to increase with  distance. This was especially  true for  linkages  in  Shanghai ( 3 links) and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  in  Zhejiang  (1) and Fujian  (I),  as  reflected  by  an  electronics firm which subcontracted specifically to a factory in Zhejiang, the home province o f   the owner o f that  firm,  after  it  failed  t o  secure quality  production from its  prior  subcontractor in  nearby Shenzhen.  That  reliability  of exchanges  as  a primary  linkage and location selection criterion reflects the economic significance o f   preexisting  relationships, as the savings in  linkage supervision  and replacement and the benefits o f

Tabte 5. Locationaf Characteristics  and Number of Hong Kong's  Subcontracting Linkages in China

|                       | Locations          | Locations          | Locations    | Locations   |
|-----------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------|-------------|
|                       | In ~ u a n ~       | In ~ u a n ~       |              |             |
|                       | In Zhujiang Deltaa | In Zhujiang Deltaa | Outside      | Outside     |
| Linkages              | Rural              | Urban              | Zhujiang Deb | Cuangdong   |
| Channel               |                    |                    |              |             |
| Kinship               | 8                  | 3                  | I            | 5           |
| P a ~ ~ c i F a ~ i n | 18                 | 6                  | 1            | 0           |
| Affiliated            | 3                  | f                  | 4            | 6           |
| Other local           | 9                  | 10                 | 0            | 3           |
| Sector                |                    |                    |              |             |
| Garments              | 13                 | 12                 | 5            | 14          |
| Textiles              | 12                 | 2                  | 2            | 2           |
| Electronics           | 16                 | 22                 | 1            | 2           |
| Segment               |                    |                    |              |             |
| Large                 | 3                  | 4                  | 4            | 9           |
| Medium export         | 19                 | 17                 | 2            | 6           |
| Small export          | 13                 | 9                  | 2            | 2           |
| Small nonexport       | 8                  | 6                  | 0            | 1           |
| Totalb                | 41                 | 36                 | 8            | 18          |

aRural Zhujiang Detta includes minor city areas and counties as described in  Figure 1. Urban Zhujiang Deka includes major cit areas.

'The column sums under the channel category are smaller than the corresponding cobmn sums under either the sector or the segment category due t o   nonresponse;. Source: Survey data.

operational stability  can  outweigh  the  higher transportation  and  ~ommunication  costs of hinter~nd  or distant linkages. In  most  instances, these i~terprov~nc jal linkages involved only product subcontracting. Hong  Kong contractors usually arranged  for the materials  to be shipped directly to,  and the finished products exported directly from,  these  locations. Nearness to Hong Kong was therefore unnecessary.

I t should be noted that the dispersal  of Hong Kong's  subcontracting  linkages  in  the  rural Zhujiang Delta  was also attributed  to several area-specific factors a s   indicated by the manufacturers that  responded.  These  factors were usualiy of secondary importance as  most firms constantly stressed the primary significance of preexisting social and ~nsti~tional re ationships between firms.  These  factors  included  larger labor supply,  greater labor stability, better land or factory availability,  and simpler documentationai requirements for  more ruraf than urban areas  in the  Deita.  In some counties or rural areas,  better labor quality in certain traditional industries was also a locational factor.  The importance  of  these  factors  usually  varied  between firms, with one garment firm ~ndjcating larger  labor supply  and another garment firm expressing better labor quality as a determinant of  their  partici~tion-~ased linkage  in  Dongguan and kinship-based linkage in Shunde respectively-

By  contrast,  subcontracting linkages associated with affiliated or other local factories were oriented to urban locations in the Delta and in other provinces. This orientation  was  attributable to the interurban production networks of most state-owned corporations, as reflected by the  emergence of  aff~liation-b~ed linkages in Wuhan and Tianjin.  It was  also att~ibutable  to the better industrial infrastructure and accessibility  of  major  city  locations  in the  Delta,  a s exemplified by the clustering of affiliation and other  local-based linkages  in  Guangzhou  (9 links) and Shenzhen (41,  the two primary  industria) centers situated along the major transportation arteries in Zhujiang Delta. As an SEZ intended for technology-~ntensive  investments,  Shenzhen has  become  the center  of electronics  industry  in  the  province,  sharing approximately  45 percent of  Guangdong's gross value of industrial output (GVIO) in that industry in 1986 (Cuangdong Province Statistical  Bureau 1987). The  technology  firms  E n Shenzhen  comprised  not  only  foreign  ven-

tures  but  also  major domestic  manufacturers, for at least three electronic subcontracting  linkages there involved affiliated or other local  factories,  such a s   Shenzhen Radio Manufacturing Corporation. On the other hand, a s   the capital of Guangdong, Guangzhou was the province's most important and diversified industrial tenter,  sharing 25 percent  of  Guangdong's  total CVlO in 1986 (Guangdong Province Statistical Bureau 1987).  Guangzhou, along  with its neighboring Foshan City and Shunde County, was also the center of the garment industry in the  province.  Together  these  three  areas  accounted for approximately 48 percent of Cuangdong's GVlO in the garment industry in 1986  (Guangdong Province Statistical Bureau 1987). Given their  better  industrial infrastructure  and  functional  specialization,  electronic subcontracting linkages were  concentrated in Shenzhen,  whereas  garment  subcontracting linkages  were  clustered  in  the  GuangzhouFoshan-Shunde  area.  The  relative  concentration of textile linkages in Dongguan,  a s   stated previously, was  attributed to the relocation of several  domestic knitted-fabrics subcontractors t o   this  place. A s   a result of  the differing contact patterns between segments,  the  subcontracting linkages of large  and  medium firms  were oriented to urban locations, whereas those of small firms were oriented to the rural areas of the Delta.

## Transactional Characteristics and Interfirm

## Arrangements

The use of preexisting kinship and business ties and the  proximity of the two places have enabled  Hong Kong firms  to  secure  reliable exchanges from their Chinese subcontractors. There was a general absence of major transactional  problems  between the  firms  and  their subcontractors; only two  firms expressed strong dissatisfaction,  while the  other thirteen indicated minor concerns about the work quality or punctuality of delivery. Most of the minor concerns did not hamper the normal functioning and continuing development of the transactional relationships. The relative reliability of exchanges has  encouraged Hong Kong firms to develop a cooperative transactional  relationship with their Chinese subcontractors for  securing access to dependable labor supplies or export quotas. The relatively  concentrated flow of work  between firms reflected this co- operation. Each responding firm subcontracted an  average of 30 percent of its total output to only  two  subcontractors. The  stability  of  the relationships and exchanges also  showed  cooperativeness.  Only three firms  had their  key Chinese subcontractors replaced during 1981  86;  most subcontracted at least once a month to their Chinese subcontractors with an average order size of US$l,OOO in processing  fees.

The extent of subcontracting and the size of subcontractor base varied slightly between different  types  of firms  (Table 6).  Garment and textile  firms  usually  subcontracted  a  smaller portion of their output to China than electronic firms because of the rules of origin and export quota constraints. Large and medium firms also subcontracted a smaller portion of their output to China because of their relatively large base volume of production,  but the absolute size of their subcontract orders was usually larger than their small-firm  counterparts.  There was no significant difference in the size of subcontractor base between the three  industries. Except for three  small export firms that  had a large subcontractor base in order to gain flexibility, small firms generally had only one Chinese subcontractor because of their limited ability to coordinate  production  over  distance. The  stability of exchanges varied slightly between different types of firms.  Firms that had a stable flow of production orders or  plans for  constantly utilizing  China's  labor or quotas generally subcontracted  a  set  amount  of  work  regularly.  This was especially  true  for several  large  firms, which had formal agreements with their  subcontractors for regular, fixed amounts of work. Firms that had a less stable flow of production orders,  i.e., medium  and  small  export  firms, usually  subcontracted on a  variable  size  and frequency basis. This practice was reflected by the variable subcontract order characteristic of a  small manufacturer of light bulbs,  which,  on an  individual order  basis,  ranged from  several hundred to a thousand US dollars in processing fee  and  from  three  days  to  a  month  in  frequency,  depending on the  demand  fluctuations  in  its  North  American  and  European markets. In some cases,  the variability in order characteristics  was attributed to the practice of concurrent  Subcontracting,  as  exemplified  by the occasional small rush orders of a headgear manufacturer due to its inability to meet certain delivery  schedules.  The  relative  variability  of the  orders  indicates that  hinterland or  distant linkages  do  not  necessarily  involve  bulky  or

Table 6. Transactional Characteristics  of Subcontracting  Linkages in China among firmsa

|                 |                                       |                     |                         | Percentage of links                       | Percentage of links     | Percentage of links     |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
|                 | Percentage total output subcontracted | No. su~con~r~ctorsb | Stability of exchangesc | with similar technotogical soohistication | with equipment transfer | with technical traininn |
| Sector          |                                       |                     |                         |                                           |                         |                         |
| Garments        | 20 (18)                               | 2.1 (22)            | 6.4 (19)                | 43 (21)                                   | 55 (20)                 | 75 (20)                 |
| Textiles        | 21 (9)                                | 2.2 (10)            | 6.2 (7)                 | 70 (10)                                   | 30 (10)                 | 50 (10)                 |
| Electronics     | 43 (20)                               | 2.0 (221            | 6.4 (19)                | 62 (22)                                   | 50 (22)                 | 68 (22)                 |
| Segment         |                                       |                     |                         |                                           |                         |                         |
| Large           | 6 (7)                                 | 2.3 (9)             | 7.6 (7)                 | 38 (8)                                    | 63 ( 8)                 | 88 (8)                  |
| Medium export   | 20 (19)                               | 2.0 (23)            | 5.9 (19)                | 50 (23)                                   | 32 (22)                 | 64 (22)                 |
| Small export    | 40 (lo)                               | 2.6 (11)            | 5.9 (9)                 | 64 111)                                   | 46 (21)                 | 46 111)                 |
| Small nonexport | 54 (31 )                              | 1.4 (11)            | 6.6 110)                | 73 (11)                                   | 73 (13)                 | 82 (11)                 |
| Channel         |                                       |                     |                         |                                           |                         |                         |
| Kinship         | 33 (13)                               | 1.8 (13)            | 6.4 (13)                | 67 (12)                                   | 77 (13)                 | 77 (13)                 |
| Participating   | 19 (14)                               | 1.9 (16)            | 5.8 (11)                | 67 (15)                                   | 6 (16)                  | 25 (16)                 |
| Affiliated      | 43 (6)                                | 2.6 (8)             | 6.3 (7)                 | 25 (8)                                    | 57 (7)                  | 86 (7)                  |
| Other local     | 47 (7)                                | 2.3 (10)            | 6.9 (8)                 | 60 (10)                                   | 67 (9)                  | 89 (9)                  |
| Totap           | 30 (47)                               | 2.1 (54)            | 6.3 (45)                | 56 (53)                                   | 48 (52)                 | 67 (52)                 |

aUnit is percentage unless otherwise stated. Calculations were based on the key subcontracting  linkage o f responding firms. Figures in parentheses are the nuniber of firms included in the calculation.

bunit is number of firms.

'Stability o f exchanges was measured on a scak of 10, with &lt;2 representing  very unstable, 2-&lt;4 unsrable,  4 - 6   mcderately unstable or moderately stable, 6 4 8 stable,  and 8-10  very stable.

dTotal refers t o the respective column weighted average under the sector or segment category. The total number of firms included in the calculation for respective columns under the channel category is Smaller than that under the sector or segment category due to nonresponses. Source: Survey data.

stable  transactions.  The  transactional characteristics  of  vertically  disintegrated activities  in the hinterland or over distance are determined not  only  by  the  costs  of  transportation  and production coordination, but also by the external market environment and the internal production needs of the focal firms.

As regards the strength of the subcontracting relations,  transactional relationships that  were exclusive  and  central  to  both  parties  were close and  highly  cooperative. This  was  especially true for several small electronics  firms that had only  one Chinese subcontractor a s   their sole branch plant catering  to all or most  of  their production  needs.  Transactional  relationships that  were based  on  preexisting  kinship  or Hong Kong business ties were also more cooperative than the  others,  as  the  established mutual trusts or customary business practices promoted  understanding  and  reduced  conflicts between firm  s.  Transactional  relationships that were based on other  contacts tended to be loosely cooperative, as  most were  formal and  limited  in  scope.  The  differences in the strength o f the  relationships can  be reflected by two specific examples.  The first  is a small manufacturer of handbags that had a kinship- based  subcontracting relationship in Shunde. The  relationship was  close  and  cooperative; the manufacturer subcontracted for all its production work to the Shunde factory; both  firms worked  together  to  resolve any  operational probkms. The owner of the firm was satisfied with the Shunde subcontractor and expected the  relationship to  continue.  By  comparison, the relationships  between  a  small  adaptor manufactur~r  and its three subcontractors were  loosely  cooperative. The  lack  of  close collaboration was attributable  to the absence of preexisting kinship or  business ties  in the exchange  relationships  and t o the  subsequent strategy of the firm to avoid overdependence on subcontractors. The provision of work to a particular subcontractor,  as  the  owner  of  the firm stated,  was dependent upon the available capacity of that subcontractor and its relationship  with the firm.  Subcontractors who were willing to meet the demands of the firm were awarded more work, given the available capacity. The  loose  cooperativeness  was  further reflected by the lack of plans for future cooperation between the firms, as the owner of the firm was dissatisfied with the short-term profit orientation  of  the  three  subcontrac~ors.  Al-

though  this  study  did  not  specifically  gather information on the subcontractors, the  manufacturers suggested that the strength of the relationships  had  little  effect on the  short-term performance of the  subcontractors. The  performance was  related primarily to the  export success  of  their  contractors.  The  strength  of the  relationships had significant effects on the long-term development potentials of the subcontractors, as close  cooperation  facilitated greater diffusion and better  absorption of managerial know-how and technology.

Given the lower  labor costs in China,  Hong Kong firms  generally  subcontracted labor-intensive  assembly  activities  to  their  Chinese subcontractors. These activities,  while routine, contained  a  significant amount  of  work  that was technologically and functionally similar to those  conducted in  the  territory.  Approximately  56  percent of the  key  subcontracting linkages of the firms contained the same types of work  that  these firms  undertook  domestically. The technological and functional similarity of the subcontract work was due to the lack of process or product differentiation and of functional diversity of most firms,  a  result of their small operational scale or international or local subcontractor status. This situation was typified by a small electronic manufacturer, which itself was an international subcontractor assembling telephones for foreign buyers; it subcontracted the  same  production process to  factories  in Dongguan and  Huizhou.  Large  and  medium firms,  on the other hand, usually subcontracted work  that  was  technologically  less  sophisticated than their  domestic  production  mix,  as most of them  had higher degrees  of process or  product  differentiation  and  were  increasingly oriented to high value-added production in  the territory. This was especially true for large and medium garment firms a s   they had to upgrade their  production  lines  in the territory to maintain profitable use of their domestic export quotas. It should be noted that the subcontract work of large or medium firms was  in general technologically  more  sophisticated than  their small-firm counterparts because of the  higher value-added contents  of  their  products.  The similarities  of the work subcontracted to China and that performed in  the territory indicate  that hinterland or distant linkages are not necessarily more routine or less skilled than center linkages.  The technological and functional characteristics  of  vertically  disintegrated activities  in the  hinterland  or  over  a  distance  are  deter- mined not only  by the  costs of  communications and management, but also by the position of  the  center  in  the  international  production system  and  the  production  strategies  of  the

firms in the center.

The subcontracting  of technologically similar work  required  Hong  Kong firms  to  provide needed  production  equipment  and  technical training  to  their  Chinese  subcontractors  because of the backwardness of China's  industrial system. The propensity to provide equipment and training was  high among  garment firms, especially large ones,  because most undertook product  subcontracting,  which  generally  had greater equipment  and  operational  requirements than  process subcontracting. The  propensity was  also  high  among the  electronics firms, o f which  most  were  small  nonexport firms,  because of the technological  nature of this industry. Among the four types of Chinese subcontractors, kinship, affiliated, and other local  factories  received  strong  equipment  and training supports from  their  Hong Kong contractors.  Participating  factories  had  relatively weak  equipment  and  training  supports, as most  were  generally  well  equipped  by their respective Hong Kong investors. The types of equipment  provided  ranged from  sewing  to garment  finishing  machines  and  from  electronic  component to computer manufacturing equipment, with approximately half of the support linkages containing new equipment.

The  provision  of  other  supports  or  knowhow was limited. Responding  firms maintained their  product  development,  marketing,  and other advanced managerial functions in  the territory. This  lack of provision of other  supports or know-how was attributed to the inadequacy of local physical and human infrastructures in China,  and  to  the  needs to  retain these  advanced functions in the territory for  maintaining  established  local  and  overseas  contacts. The inadequacy of infrastructures  further led to the lack of local input linkages associated with Hong Kong's subcontracting activities in China. Hong Kong manufacturers  were usually unable to obtain quality or reliable supplies from  local Chinese sources,  as  reflected by the failed attempt  of  an  electronics manufacturer to  purchase  painting  materials  from local  Chinese firms for its mainland  subcontractors.  This finding  confirms  the  results  of  other  studies that  local supply  problems  are  an  important factor  constraining the  development  of  local input linkages of nonlocal activities (Kli-

masewski 1978;  McDermott 1976). Of the 54 responding  firms subcontra~ting to China, only four  had some of their materials supplied from local Chinese sources.

## Regional Economic Impacts

The development  of Hong Kong's  subcontracting activities  contributed  in  part to  rapid industrial growth in the Zhujiang Delta. During 7983-89 the  Delta  had  an  average  annual CVIO growth rate of  27  percent,  which was higher than  the  provincial average o f 26 percent  and  the  national  average  of 12 percent (Fig.  5).  The  rural  area  of  the  Delta  had  an average  GVlO growth  rate above  the  overall Delta average because of the dispersal o f Hong Kong's  subcontracting activities there and because  of  the  corresponding  income  growth, which promoted further  expansion of local industries in the area. The average annual GVlO growth  rate was  especially high in Baoan  (67 percent) and in Dongguan (45 percent), where most of Hong Kong's subcontracting  activities were located?  The growth rate was also high

Figure 5. Regional  industrial growth differential in the  Zhujiang  Delta,  1983-89.  The  average  annual  GVIO growth rate o f rural Zhujiang Delta was 37 percent,  urban Zhujiang Delta 21 percent,  Zhujiang Delta 27 percent, non-Zhujiang Delta (Guangdong) 23 percent, Guangdong province 26 percent, and China 12 percent. Sources: Guangdong Province Statistical Bureau (1985,  1990), State Statistical  Bureau (1984, 1990).

<!-- image -->

in Sanshui (48 percent) and Gaoming (46 percent), a result of the active initiatives of Foshan City,  which  administered these  two counties, to  promote foreign  investments and  local industries in its county areas (Foshan City Policy Research Office and Foshan City Statistical Bureau 1989). Except for  Shenzhen and Zhuhai, the urban areas in the Delta had GVlO growth rates below the Delta average. The high GVlO growth  rates o f Shenzhen  (59  percent)  and Zhuhai (67 percent) were attributed mainly to their S E Z   status,  which encouraged the development  of  equity  and  contractual joint  ventures at these locations. The low GVlO growth rates of other urban locations, especially Guangzhou,  were  attributable  mainly  to  the complex  bureaucratic  structure  or  capital or other  factor  shortages  in  these  places  (Vogel 1989;  Zhu 1988). These  problems prevented an extensive development of not only subcontracting  but also  other  industrial investments, both foreign and domestic,  in these  urban areas.  The  rapid  industrial growth  in  the  rural areas therefore reduced the spatial disparity in industrial production  between the  urban and rural Zhujiang Delta. The urban proportion of Guangdong's  GVIO  decreased from  45  percent  in 1983 to 36  percent in 1989, whereas the rural proportion increased  from 20-33  percent  in the  same  period.  There  were  no significant differences between the urban and ru- ral Zhujiang Delta with respect to the extent of subcontracting, the size of subcontractor base, the stability of exchanges, the technological sophistication of subcontract work,  and the extent  of  technical training  support  among the responding  firms  (Table  7).  The  rural  areas, however,  received  significantly  more  equipment support than their urban counterparts because of their comparatively poor industrial infrastructures. The development of Hong Kong's subcontracting  activities  contributed further to a significant improvement of the industrial infrastructures in the  rural Delta. Nevertheless,  the concentration of subcontracting activities in the Delta accentuated the disparity in industrial  production between the Delta and the  rest  of  the  province.  The  proportion  of Guangdong's GVlO accounted for by the Delta increased  from 65-69 percent  during  the 1983-89  period.

The  development of Hong Kong's  subcontracting  activities  also  contributed  in  part  to gradual structural changes in Guangdong's  industrial system.  During 1985-89, the  Guangdong  industries  that  had  extensive  subcontracting links with Hong Kong, e.g.,  the electrical  and  the  electronic  equipment  industries, underwent rapid growth (Fig. 6). The proportion  of  Guangdong's  GVlO  shared  by  these two  industries  increased from  18  percent  in 1985 to 21 percent in 1989, replacing  food and

Table 7. Differences in Transactional Characteristics between Urban and Rural Subcontracting Linkages in Zhujiang Deltaa

|                 |                                       |                     |                         | Percentage of links                       | Percentage of links     | Percentage of links     |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
|                 | Percentage total output subcontracted | No. subcontractorsb | Stability of exchanges' | with similar technological sophistication | with equipment transfer | with technical training |
| Zhujiang Deltad | 36 (36)                               | 2.2 (40)            | 6.2 (32)                | 69 (39)                                   | 70 (40)                 | 70 (40)                 |
| Urban           | 30 (15)                               | 2.5 (17)            | 6.7 (15)                | 50 (16)                                   | 35 (17)                 | 71 (17)                 |
| Rural           | 40 (21)                               | 1.9 (23)            | 5.8 (17)                | 74 (23)                                   | 65 (23)                 | 70 (23)                 |
| Teste           | x2 = 0.02                             | U = 139             | u = 99                  | X2 = 0.02                                 | X2 = 3.84               | X2 = 0.01               |
| df              | 1                                     | 17,23               | 15,17                   | 1                                         | 1                       | 1                       |
| Significance    | P>0.05                                | P>0.05              | P>0.05                  | P>0.05                                    | P<0.05                  | P>0.05                  |

<!-- image -->

tracting activities, Chinese firms received limited direct gains in product development and marketing  know-how,  but  they  nevertheless had  extensive  exposure  to  product  design, work  organization,  and  production  management.  Along  with  local  ingenuities  and  the open policy, Guangdong firms were gradually able  to  fashion  certain  product  development and marketing capabilities for  export. The  impact of Hong Kong's  subcontracting activities in these  areas  increased further  as  the  stable transactional  relationships  promoted further cooperation between firms, a s   reflected by the recent  rapid  increase o f Hong Kong's  direct (sole  proprietorship, equity  and  contractual joint ventures)  investments  in  Guangdong province.

With respect to the  impact on the territory, subcontracting  to  China  has  enabled  Hong Kong to  maintain  its  export  competitiveness and  continued  export growth.  The  domestic exports of Hong Kong grew at an average annual rate of 14  percent during 1980-89  (Fig. 7). The  rate  of  export  growth  increased further when the subcontract manufactures exported from China via Hong Kong, which constituted part of  Hong Kong's  re-exports and total exports,  were  included. The  decentralization of labor-intensive production  activities to  China has  further led  to  a  restructuring  of  Hong Kong's  industrial system,  which is increasingly oriented toward component supply, final processing, and advanced technology sectors. The

## Including exports to China

<!-- image -->

restructuring  is reflected  by  the increasing GVlO and employment shares of the electrical and electronic parts (HKSIC 384), textile finishing (328), machinery (382), and the computer equipment (3838) sectors;  and  by the  corresponding decreasing shares of the labor-intensive sectors,  especially garments (320 and 322) and general  consumer electronics (3831  3835), from 1983-89 (Fig. 8). The decentralization of labor-intensive activities has only led to limited  increase  in product  development  and marketing capabilities of Hong Kong firms,  a s most  firms lacked significant  employment growth and functional changes in these areas. This lack of significant increase in product development and marketing capabilities was due to  the internal  organizational  and  external transactional constraints,  a result of their  small operational scale or  international or local subcontractor status. Large firms and product-development firms remained the primary sources of indigenous product development and marketing capabilities in the territory.

The mutual adaptation of the two industrial systems  has resulted  in  economic interdependence and production integration between Hong  Kong  and  the  Zhujiang  Delta.  Hong Kong firms are dependent on China's low-cost labor to maintain their export competitiveness, whereas Chinese firms in the Delta rely on the territory's production  and  marketing  knowhow  to  reach  overseas  markets.  Given  the functional  complementarity between the  two

' ' 1

'0°

400-

300-

200-

100-

10

（18.50)

(28.50)

(11.74)

1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989

Figure 7. Export devebpment of Hong Kong, 1980-89.  Figures in parentheses,  Rom top to bottom, represent the average annual growth rates of total exports (domestic exports plus re-exports), re-exports,  and domestic exports during 1980-89.  The unit f o r the average annual growth rate is percent. Source: Trade Analysis Section (1  9 8 1   -90).

## Excluding exports to China

0

Reexports

Dornestx exports

HKS billions

<!-- image -->

Sector

Figure 8. Industrial  structure of  Hong Kong,  1983 and 1989. Wood products include cork products, furniture includes fixtures, paper products refer to paper and paper products, nonmetallic products refer to nonmetallic mineral products, fabricated metals  refer to fabricated metal products,  and  electronic parts  include electrical parts. Figures in parentheses in the legend are the absolute amount of total CVlO in HK$ billion (bottom diagram) and the total number of manufacturing  employment in 1,000  persons (top diagram)  for the corresponding years. Figures  in parentheses along the  horizontal axis  are  HKSIC for  the  corresponding sectors.  Source: Industrial Production Statistics Section (1 985,  1991).

places and the cooperation between firms,  the regional interdependent  relationship will persist.  The  short-term  development  of  the  regional  industrial system  will  continue  to  depend  on the  ability  of  Hong  Kong firms  to maintain their export competitiveness, and on further  decentralization of  production,  especially those  activities that  are  free  of  international transactional constraints, from  the terri- tory to the Delta. The long-term development of the system will require a major increase in the indigenous product development and marketing capabilities of  Hong Kong firms,  especially  in  advanced technology  sectors,  and  a corresponding increase of the local production and export know-how of Chinese firms in the Delta. This is necessary because of the increasing competition not only from the neighboring

newly  industrialized countries  such  as  South Korea,  but  also  from  regional  ones  such  as Thailand. Nevertheless,  in light of 1997 when the  sovereignty  of  Hong Kong will  revert  to China,  it is likely that firms  in the territory  will not undertake large  investment  risks for  furthering their  product  development  and  marketing capabilities. In fact,  several  key manufacturing and nonmanufacturing firms,  both local and foreign, have already relocated their headquarters to other countries (Guyot 1991  ).  The steady  exodus  of  professionals further  compounds  the  problem,  a s more  than  50,000, mostly  managerial  and  technical  personnel, have emigrated overseas annually in the  past several years (Shelton and Adams 1990; Stanford Research Institute International 1990). It is also likely that social stability in the territory will be  weakened  as the local  populace  lacks confidence  in  China's  policies  toward  Hong Kong (Mushkat 1990; Rafferty 1991). The continuing  existence  of  the  territory  a s a  major economic center for South China and the Zhujiang Delta is being threatened;  the long-term development  prospect  of the  regional industrial system is therefore uncertain.

## Conclusion

Based  on a comprehensive investigation of firms  in  Hong Kong's  three  major  industries, this study found that the subcontracting activities of Hong Kong were widely  distributed in Zhujiang  Delta,  with  Shenzhen,  Dongguan, and Guangzhou as  the three major centers of concentration.  The widespread distribution was  attributed mainly to the  extensive use  of preexisting kinship  and  Hong Kong business ties to establish linkages, and to a lesser extent, the locational proximity of the two places, the efforts of Chinese authorities to attract foreign investments to  the  Delta,  and  the  locational advantages  or  specialization of  individual locales  in the  area.  Subcontracting linkages  established through  preexisting kinship  or  business ties tended to be in county or minor city locations in the Delta, whereas those based on other  contacts generally were  in major urban locations. The extensive use of preexisting social and  institutional ties  to  establish linkages has  promoted  rapid  industrial  growth  in the rural Zhujiang Delta and has reduced the spatial  disparity  in  industrial production  between urban and rural areas. In terms of transactions the incorporation of preexisting  kinship  or business ties has enabled Hong  Kong manufacturers to secure  reliable exchanges from  their Chinese  subcontractors,  which  encouraged further  cooperation  between the firms.  Hong Kong firms were  willing to  subcontract a significant amount of work and to provide equipment and training supports. The work subcontracted to China contained a vast array of products  and  processes,  which  were,  to  a  significant extent, technologically and functionally similar  to those  in the territory.  The  development of Hong Kong's  subcontracting activities has therefore contributed to significant qualitative  improvement  of the  industrial system  in the Zhujiang Delta. The regional economic relationship between  Hong Kong and the  Delta i s interdependent, with Hong Kong relying on China's  low-cost  labor  to  maintain  its  export competitiveness and the  Delta depending on the territory's production and marketing knowhow to reach overseas markets.

Given the  uncertain future  of the  territory, the long-term development of the regional industrial system will require concerted efforts of the  Chinese  and  the  British  government  to maintain the confidence of the people in Hong Kong. The  efforts  need  to  include a positive and unequivocal interpretation of the Basic Law (a  special  constitution  governing  the  people and the society of Hong Kong after  1997) by the  Chinese government,  and  sincere cooperation between the two governments on major  political and  economic  issues  concerning the  future  development  of  the  territory.  The long-term  development  will  also  require  the Hong Kong government  to actively  promote the indigenous product development and marketing capabilities of Hong Kong firms,  and to coordinate  with  Guangdong's  provincial  and local governments for the planning and development of industries in the  region. The Hong Kong government  has  made limited progress toward the promotion of technology-intensive industries in the territory  (Federation of Hong Kong Industries 1992),  but substantial efforts, especially those  related to  intergovernmetttal cooperation, are required if the viability of the system  is to be maintained.

The findings of this study highlight  the inadequacies of existing  theories of industrial  organization and location, led by Scott,  in explaining the  locational and  structural characteristics of vertical  disintegration  of  production  (Phelps 1992;  Sayer  and Walker  1992). The  develop-

ment o f   vertical disintegration  does not necessarily  promote  locational  agglomeration.  Hinterland or distant linkages d o   not necessarily lie in locations  o f low  labor  or  land  costs,  nor necessarily involve bulky or stable transactions, nor are these linkages necessarily more routine or less skilled  than center linkages.  These findings point to the need for a theoretical reformulation in  industrial organization  and location research. The reformulation needs to consider  not  only  the effects  o f   transaction  costs but  also  the  effects  o f interfirm  relationships, both preexisting social-institutional and  subsequent  transactional,  on  the  locational  and structural  characteristics  o f vertically  disintegrated  activities.  Preexisting  relationships  primarily  affect  the  choice  o f with  whom  and where to invest,  because firms usually need to insure the reliability  o f   exchanges. Subsequent relationships,  on  the  other  hand,  affect what firms plan to d o  with  their  transactional counterparts,  because  firms  generally  want to  secure needed resources and operational  stability.  These  operational  considerations  are  important  to  firms,  for  unreliable  exchanges  or instability can incur high potential linkage costs such  as  losses  due  to  production  disruption. Accordingly, in situations where potential linkage costs are high  or prohibitive,  interfirm  relationships  are  likely  to  be  a  more  important linkage  decision  criterion  than  actual  linkage costs. Future theories o f   industrial organization and location  must therefore consider  interfirm relationships, both preexisting social-institutional  and  subsequent transactional,  as  major determinants o f   the  locational  and  economic consequences of  vertical disintegration o f   production.

The findings  also show the inadequacies  in the field o f   industrial organization  and location in conceptualizing  the transactional structure o f a production system.  Existing perspectives, such as the transaction  costs approach, simply view the transactional structure o f   a production system as a network o f   linkages (Scott 1988a). This view ignores the multitudinous characters of   firms and their transactional counterparts, or, as  Sayer  (1989) noted,  the  vertical  organization,  o f   a production system, hence disengaging the  system  from  its  internal  social-institutional environment and from its external political-economic context. The transactional structure o f   a production system, while complex, is usually  organized  comprising a  number o f   industrial segments  o f   differing operational  and functional  characteristics,  and  several transactional  channels  o f varying  social  and  institutional  attributes.  Given  the  differences  in  operational and functional  characteristics, the channel selection  strategies,  interfirm transactional relationships, and the subsequent spatial and economic impacts o f   individual segments are therefore likely to vary. The segmental and channel composition  o f   a  production  system and the resultant patterns o f   contacts are placespecific,  reflecting  the  peculiar  sociocultural, political,  economical,  and  historical  organization  o f production  o f   a  particular locality. The examination of interfirm relationships and transactional characteristics with respect to the detailed  transactional structure o f   a production system  can  therefore  provide  a  context-specific  mesoscale  explanation  o f the  locational and economic consequences o f   vertical disintegration o f   production.  By  placing a firm  in  its specific  social  and  institutional  environment and  by placing  a  production system  in its proper  national and  international  context, the issue o f   contingency and indeterminacy  in  industrial organization and location research  can be resolved (Lovering  1990,1991; Scott 1991  a, b).6  The  heterogeneity of vertically  disintegrated  production  systems  or  "new  industrial spaces" can  be better  understood  (Amin and Robins 1990; Best 1990; Markusen 1991; Scott 1988b).  Future studies o f   industrial  organization and  location  must  therefore examine the  detailed  transactional  structure  o f a  production system  and  the  subsequent contact  patterns and  interfirm transactional  arrangements.  The research  approach  must  be  comprehensive, integrating the microscale decision patterns o f different types o f   firms in  different industries to the macroscale development processes o f   regional economies.

There are at least three important areas that merit  further  investigation. The first area concerns  the  spatial  structure  o f major  transactional  channels  and  the  associated  determinants. Certain channels such as kinship or affiliated  factories  in  the  present  study  are  geographically noncentral or interregional i n scope. An  understanding  o f the  geographical organization  o f these  transactional  channels and  their  underlying  locational  determinants, from a policy perspective, can help to promote greater decentralization o f vertically  disintegrated  activities from  central to noncentral locations.  The  second  area regards the  societal conditions that facilitate interfirm  cooperation.

Preexisting  kinship and personal ties, while important in the Chinese context, may neither be necessary nor sufficient conditions for fostering interfirm  cooperation  in  other  social  settings. An entrepreneurial culture  that  fulfils transactional  obligations and an  institutional  structure that  supports  interfirm  transactions,  as  other studies  have  shown,  may  assume greater  importance in alternative social context (Friedman 1988; W hitley 1990). A detailed understanding of   these conditions  therefore  will  enable  successful  development o f interfirm  cooperation and o f   vertically  disintegrated  production  systems  in  a  given  social  and  political  environment. The third area concerns the evolution o f the transactional structure o f   a production system. The importance o f   kinship-based transactional  channels  may  decline  through  time  as other  avenues  develop  because  o f the  advances  in  transportation  and  telecommunications. An examination o f   the evolution  o f   the transactional  structure will  therefore  allow  assessments o f   the changes in  center-hinterland economic relations through time. The relationships  between  firms  and  the  structures  o f transactions  as major  locational  and  structural determinants  o f   vertical  disintegration of production are o f   growing theoretical and empirical  importance,  as firms  increasingly  seek  to establish strategically-allied linkages  with  the others.

## Acknowledgments

I would  like to thank  Woody M.H.  Lam  for field work  assistance, Stanley  Brunn, editor, and  five anonymous reviewers for their constructive suggestions  and  comments,  and William  Slusser  for  cartographic  support.

## Notes

1. Derived from the  amount of realized foreign  investments by city regions in the Cuangdong Province  Statistical  Yearbook  (Guangdong  Province Statistical Bureau  1985-90), with  the  assumption that 90 percent of the cumulative realized foreign investments in city regions that have their  respective shi (administrative units with urban status) in the  Delta were actually located  in the  Delta area, since some of these city regions also administered locales not in the Delta. The calculation of cumulative  realized foreign  investments was  based on the corresponding data with specific locational information.  Data that lacked specific  locational information,  that is,  realized foreign investments ac-
2. counted for  by certain  provincial agencies,  were excluded.
2.  Given the complexity of their operations,  it should be  noted  that  the  exchange  characteristics  between large firms  and their transactional counterparts are  affected  by many factors,  including the products or processes involved, the marketing or purchasing strategies of large firms,  and the  relationships  between  firms.  Products  or  processes that  have seasonal fluctuations  may  increase  the exchange  variability  of large firms,  while  peculiar marketing or purchasing strategies can strengthen the  stability  of  transactions  (Donaghu  and  Barff 1990;  Egan and Mody 1992). Similarly,  recent developments  in time-sensitive  manufacturing practices and  production  decentralization  to  small firms  may  increase  the  exchange  variability of large firms,  while  the  trend  toward strategic  alliance  may  introduce  greater  exchange stability (Blackburn 1991;  Davidson 1987;  Mytelka 1991; Pratten 1991  ).
3. In their chronological  order of  establishment, these  specially designated areas include the SEZs of  Shenzhen,  Zhuhai,  Shantou,  and  Xiamen,  all established in 1979; the open cities of Dalian, Qinhuangdao,  Tianjin,  Yantai,  Qingdao,  Lianyungang, Nantong,  Shanghai,  Ningbo,  Wenzhou,  Fuzhou, Guangzhou,  and  Zhanjiang, all  established in 1984;  the  open regions  of the  Changjiang Delta, the  Minnan Delta,  and the  Zhujiang Delta,  all established in 1985;  and the  SEZ  of Hainan,  established  in 1988.  In  1984,  the  open  region of the Zhujiang Delta  comprised  three shis (Foshan, Jiangmen, and  Zhongshan) and 13 xians  (Baoan, Dongguan,  Zengcheng,  Panyu,  Nanhai,  Shunde, Doumen, Xinhui, Gaoming, Heshan, Kaiping, Taishan,  and Enping). The area of the open region was later expanded and covered a total of 28 shis and xians in 1989 (Guangdong Province Statistical Bureau 1985, 1990).
4.  Derived from Guangdong Province Statistical Bureau  (1990).  The  assumption  for  calculating  the proportion  of G uangdong's realized  foreign  investments  in the  Zhujiang Delta was the same as that  in  Note 1. The  calculation  of  Hong Kong's share of total realized foreign  investments in the Delta was  based on the  assumption  that 90 percent  of  its  realized  investments  in  Guangdong were located in the Delta, and that 95 percent of the  realized  investments  from  the  Hong  KongMacao regional category  in the Guangdong Province  Statisticaf  Yearbook 1990 were  from  Hong Kong. The calculation was also based on the total amount of realized investments in the  province, with the  assumption  that the  proportion of locationally  nonspecific  investments  (investments accounted for by certain provincial agencies) in the Delta was the same as that of locationally  specific (accounted for by city regions) investments.
5.  Although the  fact  is  not revealed  by the  survey, Baoan  was  one  of the  major  locations  of  Hong Kong's subcontracting investments in  the Zhujiang Delta. In 1986 Baoan had a processing fee income of  US$ 53 million,  which accounted  for  approximately 20 percent of the total processing fee  income (US$ 270 million) of the province ('Baoanxian sanlai yibu.  .  .' 1987;  'Woguo  lailiao

- jiagong.  .  . "  1987). The corresponding processing fee  income for  Dongguan in the  same  year  was US$ 63 million ("Baoanxian sanlai yibu.  . ."  1987).
6.  In the ongoing debate concerning the theoretical and empirical investigations of vertical disintegration  of  production,  Lovering (1 990, 1991)  criticizes Scott's theory of  flexible accumulation a s   deterministic  and  economistic  on the  grounds  that the  theory  neglects  the  peculiar  socioeconomic and political-historical  context (contingency) of individual  "new  industrial  spaces." In  reply,  Scott (1991a,  b) argues that Lovering's  inquiry  into the complexity and mukidimensionality of production organization  is  indeterminate, as  it  provides  no concrete analytical specifications  about the  given domain of investigation. By analyzing the segmental and  channel composition of the transactional structures of a production system,  this study provides a viable  empirical framework,  or  concrete analytical specifications as Scott suggests, to examine  the  spatial  and  economic  consequences  of vertical disintegration of production with  respect to the complex organization of a production system in a given socioeconomic and political-historical context.

## References

- Advisory Committee on Diversification. 1979. Report of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Diversification 7979. Hong Kong: Hong Kong Government.
- Aggarwal, V . K. 1985. Liberal  protectionism:  The international  politics  of  organized  textile  trade. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Ahmed,  N. U.; Tunc, E.  A.;  and Montagno,  R. V . 1991. A comparative study of U.S. manufacturing firms at  various stages of just-in-time  implementation. international  Journal  of  Production  Research 29(4):787-802.
- Amin, A.,  and Robins, K. 1990. The re-emergence of regional economies? The mythical geography of flexible accumulation.  Environment  and  Planning D 8(1):7-34.
- Asian  Productivity Organization. 1978.  international subcontracting: A tool  of  technology transfer. Tokyo.
- Averitt,  R. 1. 1968. The dual economy:  The dynamics  of American  industry  structure.  New  York: Norton.
- Baoanxian  sanlai  yibu  yewu  fazhan  xunmeng [Rapid growth  of  Baoan  County's foreign industrial processing business]. 1987. Nanfang  Ribao, Nov. 12.
- Beije,  P .   R.,  and  Groenewegen,  1. 1992. A  network analysis  of  markets. Journal o f  Economic Issues 26(1):87-114.
- Best,  M. H . 1990. The new competition:  Institutions of  industrial  restructuring. Cam  bridge: Polity Press.
- Blackburn, J.  D.,  ed. 1991. Time-based competition:
- The next battleground i n American manufacturing. Homewood,  IL:  Business One Irwin.
- Bradley,  P . 1991. Sky's  the  limit for  international air cargo. Purchasing 111 (8):94-97.
- . 1992. Unite &amp; conquer. Purchasing 11 2(5):46-51.
- Burt,  D.  N. 1989. Managing suppliers  up to speed. Harvard Business Review 67(4):127-35.
- Central Registry Section. 1986. Central registry o f   all Hong  Kong  manufacturing establishments. Computer  listing.  Hong Kong:  Census  and  Statistics Department.
- Chen, D. X. 1988. Guanyu guangdong waixiangxing qiye  di  gaikuang fazhen  qushi  wenti  he  jianyi [The conditions,  development trend,  problems, and  suggestions  of  Guangdong  outward-oriented town and village enterprises]. Guangdong Shehui Kexue 17(3):52-55.
- Chen,  E. 1983. Multinationals from  Hong Kong.  In The  new  multinationals: The  spread  o f  Third World enterprises, ed. S.  Lall,  et al.,  pp. 88-136. Chichester, England: John  Wiley  &amp; Sons.
- Cheng, 1. Y . 1982.  The  economy  of Hong Kong. Hong Kong: Far  East Publications.
- Clutterbuck,  D.,  ed. 1985.  New patterns  of work. New York: St.  Martin's  Press.
- Coase, R. H. 1937. The nature of the firm. Econornica 4:386-405.
- Contractor,  F. J., and  Lorange, P . 1988. Why should firms  cooperate? The  strategy  and  economics basis  for  cooperative  ventures.  In  Cooperative strategies in international  business, F.J. Contractor and P . Lorange,  pp. 3-28. Lexington,  MA: Lexington Books.
- Cooke,  P. 1988.  Flexible  integration,  scope  economies,  and  strategic  alliances:  Social  and  spatial implications. Environment and Planning D 6(3):281-300.
- Davidson, j.  P . 1987. Marketing to the  Fortune 500 and other  corporations.  Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin.
- Dias, S. 1986. Organizational structure and purchasing linkage  patterns  of  manufacturing firms  in developing countries:  Small- and medium-scale firms in Metropolitan Colombo, Sri Lanka. Environment and Planning A 18(12):1595-1610.
- Donaghu, M. T., and Barff,  R. 1990. Nike just  did  it: International subcontracting and flexibility in athletic footwear production. Regional  Studies 24(6):53  7-52.
- Dore,  R. 1986.  Flexible  rigidities: lndustrial policy and structural adjustment in the Japanese economy 7970-80. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Economist Intelligence Unit. 1983. Hong Kong: Economic prospects  to 7987. Special  report  156. London.
- Editorial Board of the Almanac. 1984-90.  Almanac of China's  foreign  economic  relations  and trade. Beijing: China Prospect  Publishing.

- Egan, M. L.,  and Mody, A. 1992. Buyer-seller links in export development. World Development 20(3):321-34.
- Employment  and  Earning  Statistics Section. 1981. Hong  Kong  annual  digest  of  statistics.  Hong Kong: Census and Statistics  Department.
- Ettlinger, N. 1992. Modes of corporate organization and  the  geography  of  development.  Papers  in Regional Science 71(2):107-26.
- Federation  of Hong  Kong  Industries. 1990.  Hong Kong's offshore investment. Hong Kong.
- . 1992.  Government investment  in  industry on  the  CARDS.  Hong Kong  fndustrialist, July, p. 17.
- Feng, X. Y . 1990. Zhugangao gongye hezuo de fenxi yu zhanwang  [Industrial  cooperation in  the Zhujiang-Hong  Kong-Macao  region:  Analysis and prospects]. Guangdong Shehui Kexue 23~62-66.
- Foshan  City  Policy  Research  Office  and  Foshan  City Statistical Bureau. 1989. Foshan zai tansuozhong fenyong qianjin [Progressive development under creative experiments  in Foshanl. In Qianjin  zhongde  Guangdong  [Guangdong  in progress],  ed.  Guangdong  Province  Statistical Bureau,  pp. 97-100.  Hong Kong: Da Dao Publis  hing.
- Fredriksson, C.  G.,  and  Lindmark, L.  G. 1979.  From firms to systems of firms:  A study of interregional dependence  in  a  dynamic  society.  In  Spatial analysis, industry  and  the indus  trial  environment, vol. 1,  lndustrial Systems,  ed.  F.E.I. Hamilton and G.J.R.  Linge,  pp. 155-186. Chichester,  England: John Wiley &amp; Sons.
- Friedman,  D. 1988.  The misunderstood miracle: lndustrial development and political change in lapan. Ithaca,  NY: Cornell University Press.
- Geiger, T . , and Geiger,  F.  M. 1973. Tales of two citystates: The development  progress of  Hong Kong and Singapore.  Washington:  National  Planning Association.
- General Economy Division  of the Statistics Department. 1991.  Direction of  trade statistics  yearbook. Washington:  International Monetary Fund.
- Germidis, D.,  ed. 1980. International  subcontracting: A  new form  o f  investment.  Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
- Glasmeier, A. 1990. The role of merchant wholesalers in industrial agglomeration formation. Annals of  the  Association  of  American  Geographers 80(3):394-417.
- Granovetter, M. 1985.  Economic  action  and  social structure: The problem of embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology 91  (3):481-510.
- Guangdong  Province  Statistical Bureau. 1985-90. Guangdong province  statistical  yearbook.  Beijing: China Statistical Publication.
- Guyot, E. 1991. The exodus of money worries bankers.  Asian Finance 17(3):36-39.
- Hakansson, H., ed. 1982. lnternationalmarketing and

- .

- purchasing of industrial  goods. Chichester,  England: John Wiley  &amp; Sons.
1989.  Corporate  technological  behaviour: Cooperation and networks. London: Routledge.
- Hamilton, F . E. 1. 1974. A view  of spatial behaviour, industrial organizations  and decision-making. In Spatial  perspectives  on  industrial  organization and decision-making,  ed. F.E.I. Hamilton,  pp. 343.  London, England: John Wiley &amp;  Sons.
- Han,  6.  C. 1988.  Industry booms on the  Zhujiang river delta. Beijing Review 31  (34):18-23.
- Hansen,  N. 1991.  Factories  in  Danish  fields:  How high-wage, flexible production has succeeded in peripheral Jutland. lnternational  Regional Science Review 14(2):109-32.
- Harper,  D. V., and Goodner,  K.  S. 1990. Just-in-time and inbound transportation. Transportation /ournal 30(2):22-31.
- Ho,  A. K. 1990. Joint  ventures  in the  People's  Republic of China. New York: Praeger.
- Holmes, J. 1986.  The  organization  and  locational structure  of  production subcontracting.  In Production,  work,  territory:  The geographical anatomy of  industrialcapitalism, ed. A.J. Scott and M. Storper,  pp. 80-106.  Boston: Allen &amp; Unwin.
- Hong Kong Government. 1984.  A  draft  agreement between the  government  of the  United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern lreland and the  government  o f  the  People's  Republic of China on the future  of Hong  Kong. Hong Kong: Government Printers.
- Imrie, R. F. 1986. Work decentralization from large to small firms:  A preliminary analysis of subcontracting.  Environment  and  Planning A 18(7):94965.
- Industrial Production Statistics Section. 1985-91. Survey  of  industrial  production.  Hong  Kong: Census and Statistics Department.
- Jahiel,  A.  R.,  and Diamond, D. C. 1986. Overview of investment  incentives.  China  Business  Review 13(3):20-23.
- Johannisson, B. 1987. Beyond process and structure: Social exchange  networks. lnternational Studies of Management and Organization 17(1):3-23.
- Johanson, I . , and  Mattsson,  L. 1987.  Interorganizational  relations  in industrial systems:  A  network approach  compared  with  the  transaction-cost approach.  lnternational Studies of Management and Organization 17(1):34-48.
- Jones, P .   N.,  and  North,  J. 1991. Japanese motor industry  transplants:  The  West  European dimension.  Economic Geography 67(2):105-23.
- Kemp, L. 1987. lnvesting in China:  Where,  how  and why? London: Economist intelligence  Unit.
- Khan,  Z.  S. 1991.  Patterns o f  direct  foreign  investment in China. Washington: World Bank.
- Kim, J., and Daniels, J. D. 1991. Marketing channel decisions  of  foreign  manufacturing subsidiaries in  the  U . S . Management  lnternational Review 31  (2):123-38.

- Klimasewski, T. 1978. Corporate dominance of manufacturing in Appalachia.  Geographical Review 68(1):94-102.
- Lall, S. 1980. Vertical interfirm linkages in LDCs: An empirical  study.  Oxford  Bulletin  of Economics and Statistics 42(3):203-26.
- Landeros, R.,  and Monczka, R.  M. 1989. Cooperative buyer/seller  relationships  and a firm's  competitive posture. Journal of  Purchasing and Materials Management 25(3):9-18.
- Lash,  S., and  Urry, J. 1987.  The  end of organized capitalism. Madison: The University of Wisconsin  Press.
- Leung, C.  K. 1990.  Locational characteristics of foreign  equity  joint  venture  investment in China, 1979-1 985. The Professional Geographer 42(4):403-21.
- Linge,  C. J. R. 1991. Just-in-time:  More or less flexible?  Economic Geography 67(4):316-32.
- Linn, C. 1986. A window on the world. China Trade Report 24(June):8-10.
- Lovering, 1. 1990.  Fordism's  unknown successor: A comment on Scott's  theory of flexible accumulation and the re-emergence of regional economies. InternationalJournal  o f   Urban and  Regional Research 14(2):159-74.
- . 1991. Theorizing postfordism: Why contingency matters  (A further response to Scott). International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 15(2):298-301.
- McDermott, P . J. 1976.  Ownership, organization, and  regional dependence  in the  Scottish  electronics industry. Regional  Studies 10(3):319-35.
- Markusen, A. 1991. The military-industrial  divide. Environment and Planning D 9(4):391-416.
- Marshall,  J. N. 1979.  Ownership,  organization and industrial linkage:  A  case study  in the  northern region  of England.  Regional Studies 13(6):53157.
- Mead,  D.  C. 1984.  Of contracts  and  subcontracts: Small  firms i n   vertically  disintegrated  production/distribution  systems in LDCs.  World Development 12(11/12):1095-1106.
- Melin, 1 . 1987. The field-of-force metaphor: A study in  industrial  change. lnternational  Studies of Management and Organization 17(1):24-33.
- Mushkat,  M. 1990.  The  economic  future  of Hong Kong. Boulder,  CO: Lynne Rienner.
- Mytelka,  L. K. 1991.  Strategic partnerships:  States, firms and international competition.  Rutherford, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.
- Ng, F. H. 1988.  Shengchan  beiyi  shi  Xianggang zhongbiaoye de chulu ma? [Is northward relocation a development path for Hong Kong's watch industry?]  Economic Reporter 2099:3-5.
- Pfeffer, J.,  and Salancik, C. R. 1978. The externalcontrol  o f  organizations: A resource  dependency perspective. New York:  Harper &amp;  Row.
- Phelps, N. A. 1992. External economies,  agglomeration and flexible accumulation. Transactions
- of the Institute of British Geographers 17(1):3546.
- Phillips, D. R.,  and Yeh,  A. 1990. Foreign investment and  trade:  Impact  on  spatial  structure of  the economy.  In  The  geography  of contemporary China:  The  impact of Deng Xiaoping's  decade, ed. T.  Cannon and A. Jenkins, pp. 224-48.  London: Routledge.
- Piore, M.  J., and Sabel, C. F . 1984. The second industrial divide. New York: Basic  Books.
- Porter, A. M. 1991.  "JIT  II"  is here.  Purchasing 11 1   (3):60-65.
- Pratten, C. 1  991.  The competitiveness o f   small  firms. Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
- Rafferty, K. 1991.  China's  grasp  and  Hong  Kong's golden eggs. Harvard  Business Review 69(3):5469.
- Ramsdale, P . ,   and Harvey, S. 1990. Make freight cost control part of planning. Journal  o f   Business Strategy 1 1   (2):42-45.
- Richards,  S. F . 1981.  Industrial  activities  in the  periphery: Hong Kong. In Spatial analysis,  industry and the  industrial environment,  vol.  2, International industrial systems, ed.  F.E.I. Hamilton and G.J.R.  Linge,  pp. 465-80. Chichester,  England: John Wiley &amp; Sons.
- Rosson,  P . J., and  Ford, 1. D. 1982.  Manufactureroverseas  distributor  relations  and  export  performance. Journal o f   International  Business Studies 6(3):57-72.
- RUSSO, M. 1989. Technical change and the industrial district: The  role  of  inter-firm  relations  in  the growth and transformation of ceramic  tile  production in Italy. In SmaN firms and industrial districts in Italy,  ed. E.  Goodman, J. Bamford, and P . Saynor,  pp. 198-222.  London: Routledge.
- Salem, E . 1988. Investment incognito.  Far East Economic Review 140(25):64-66.
- Sato,  Y. 1984.  The  subcontracting production (shitauke)  system  in Japan. Keiko  Business Review 21 :I -25.
- Saxenian, A. 1990. Regional networks and the resurgence of Silicon Valley.  California  Management Review 33(1):89-112.
- Sayer,  A. 1985.  Industry and  space:  A  sympathetic critique  of  radical  research.  Environment  and Planning D 3(1):3-29. - .
1989. Postfordism in question.  lnternational Journal of Urban and Regional Research 13(4):666-95.
- -and Walker,  R. 1992.  The  new social economy: Reworking  the  division  o f  labor.  Cambridge,  MA: Blackwell.
- Scott, A.  J. 1983. Industrial organization and the logic of intra-metropolitan location I: Theoretical considerations. Economic Geography 59(3):233-50. - .
1986.  industrial  organization  and  location: Division of  labor,  the  firm,  and  spatial process. Economic Geography 62(3):215-31.

- .

1988a. Metropolis:  From the  division of la-

- bor to urban form.  Berkeley: University of California Press.
- . 1988b. New  industrial  spaces. London: Pion.
- . 1991a. Flexible production systems: Analytical  tasks  and  theoretical  horizons-A reply  to Lovering. International  Journal of Urban and Regional Research 15(1  ) : I 30-34.
- . 1991b. A  further  rejoinder to Lovering.  lnternational lournal o f  Urban  and Regional  Research 15(2):302.
- and Storper, M. 1986. Industrial  change and  territorial  organization:  A  summing  up.  In Production, work, territory: The  geographical anatomy  of industrial capitalism,  ed.  A.J.  Scott and M. Storper,  pp. 301  - 1 1 .   Boston: Allen &amp; Unwin.
- Shelton, S., and Adams,  R. 1990. Filling Hong Kong's labor pool. China Business Review 17(1):50-52.
- Smart, J., and Smart, A. 1991. Personal relations and divergent  economies:  A  case  study  of  Hong Kong investment  in  South  China.  lnternational lournal of Urban and Regional Research 15(2):216-33.
- Stanford Research institute international. 1990. Hong Kong's  human  resource  challenge.  China  Business Review 17(1):44-49.
- State Statistical Bureau. 1981  -1  990.  China statistical yearbook.  Beijing: China Statistical Publication.
- Storper,  M.,  and Scott,  A.  J. 1989. The  geographical foundations and social regulation of flexible production complexes. In The power of  geography: How territory shapes social life,  ed. J. Wolch and M. Dear,  pp. 21  -40.  Boston: Unwin Hyman.
- Taylor,  M.,  and  Thrift,  N. 1982a.  Industrial  linkage and the segmented economy: 1. Some theoretical proposals. Environment  and  Planning  A 14(12):1601-13.

- .

198213. Industrial linkage and the segmented economy: 2. An empirical reinterpretation. Environment and Planning A 14(12):1615-32.

- .

1983.  Business organization,  segmentation, and location.  Regional Studies 17(6):445-65.
2. -and Wood, P . 1973. Industrial linkage and local  agglomeration  in  the  West  Midlands  metal industries.  Transactions of the  Institute of British Geographers 59:129-54.
3. Trade Analysis Section. 1981-90.  Hong Kong review of overseas trade.  Hong Kong: Census and Statistics Department.
4. United Nations industrial Development Organization. 1974.  Subcontracting  for  modernizing economies. Vienna.
5. Vogel,  E. F . 1989. One step ahead in China:  Guangdong under reform. Cambridge: Harvard University  Press.
6. Walden,  J. 1987.  Toying  with  China:  Hong  Kong manufacturers shift production to the  mainland. Far East Economic Review 138(51  ):I 26.
7. Walker,  R. 1988.  The  geographical  organization of
8. production-systems. Environment and Planning D 6(4):377-408.
9. Watanabe, S. 1980. International  subcontracting and regional economic integration of the Asian countries:  The  role of multinationals.  In International subcontracting:  A  new form  o f   investment,  ed. D. Germidis,  pp. 210-27.  Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
10. Whitley,  R.  D. 1990. Eastern Asian enterprise structures and the  comparative analysis  of  forms  of business  organization. Organizational  Studies 11   (1 ):47-74.
11. Wilkinson, F . ,   ed. 1981. The dynamics o f   labour market segmentation. London: Academic Press.
12. Williamson,  0. E. 1975.  Markets  and  hierarchies: Analysis  and  antitrust  implications.  New  York: Free Press.

- .

- .

- .

1979. Transaction-cost economics: The governance  of  contractual  relations. Journal o f Law and Economics 22(0ctober):233-61.
1984. The economics of organization: The transaction  cost approach.  American lournal o f Sociology 87(3):548-77.
1985.  The economic  institutions o f  capitalism. New York:  Free Press.
4. Willis, T .   H.,  and Huston, C. R. 1990. Vendor requirements and evaluation  in a just-in-time  environment.  lnternational lournal o f  Purchasing  Management 10(4):41-50.
5. Woguo  lailiao  jiagong  hangye  fazhan  xunsu [Rapid growth of our  country's  foreign industrial processing sectors]. 1987. Renmin Ribao,  May 16.
6. Wong, S.  L. 1988. Emigrant entrepreneurs:  Shanghai industrialists in Hong  Kong. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.
7. Yang, 2 . H . ; Fang,  B.  Y . ;   and Liang, Z.  S. 1988. Zhujiang  sanjiazhou  dijueqi jiqi qishi (I)  [The rise of Zhujiang Delta and its implications (I)].  Economic Reporter 2065:4-6.
8. Youngson, A.  J. 1982. Hong  Kong: Economic growth and policy. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.
9. Zhou, S. D. 1988. Pengbo fazhen de Dongguanshi duiwai jiagong zhuangpei yewu [Prosperous development of Dongguan's foreign industrial processing business]. In Almanac of China's foreign economic  relations and  trade, Editorial Board of the Almanac, pp. 722-23.  Beijing: China Prospect Publishing.
- . 1989. Baoanxian duiwai jiagong  zhuangpei yewu chixu fazhen [Continuous development of Baoan's  foreign  industrial processing business]. In Almanac of  China's foreign economic relations and  trade, Editorial  Board of the Almanac, pp. 689-90.  Beijing: China Prospect Publishing.
11. Zhu, J.  T. 1988. Guangzhou gongye fazhen fangxiang jiqi duice. [The development direction and  policy  of  Guangzhou's  industries].  Guangzhou Yanjiu 46:19-24.