## Geospatial Information Technology, Rural Resource Development, and Future Geographies

Presented at the Centennial Meeting of the Association of American Geographers, March 17, 2004, Philadelphia, PA

## M. Duane Nellis

Past President, Association of American Geographers, and Provost, Kansas State University

Geospatial information technologies, particularly as they relate to remote sensing and geographic information science (GIScience) are providing new perspectives for understanding rural systems. By utilizing geospatial technologies with more integrative research approaches, geographers can ask more socially relevant and innovative questions about the human-environmental system. Within remote sensing alone, there has been a significant leap forward in usable sensor systems for analyzing human dimensions of rural areas through high spatial and spectral resolution approaches. The impact of various forcing factors (e.g., water availability) in Kansas and Botswana, for example, within the context of human-environmental interactions can be more fully understood using such geospatial technology approaches. At the same time, through new infospheres, cybergeography, and sensitivity to new attitudes in learning by millinneals, future geographies are created that demand more geographic management systems (GMSs). At the center of such evolving trends, geographers are poised to provide important leadership in more fully understanding the human-environmental system as we begin the Association of American Geographers' next century. Key Words: geospatial information technology, remote sensing, geographic information science (GIScience), rural systems, human-environmental interactions, geographic management systems (GMSs).

I t is an honor for me to present this Past President's address at the time of our centennial meeting, one of the largest concentrations of geographers in one location on earth. From our humble beginnings in College Hall at the University of Pennsylvania to this meeting of over 5,000 geographers, we should be excited about where geography and our association are today. As we celebrate the centennial of the Association of American Geographers (AAG) and reflect on the next century of the AAG, this is truly an extraordinary time for geography and for geographers. Throughout this meeting we have heard outstanding plenary speakers, special paper sessions, and received special publications celebrating this centennial event and reflecting on the various dimensions of our discipline as well as thoughts about geography's future. In some ways, this address could have been some attempt on my part to capture a broad sense of where we are now as a discipline and association, but certainly any such reflection would carry with it my experiential perspectives based on my own interests within this vast and exciting discipline; and in a sense we have heard such reflective discourse as part of the planned structure of this meeting. At the same time, as we reflect back and then look forward, I do feel that drawing on my own specialties within geography, geospatial information technology and rural resource development, as well as links to geographic education, provides at least one perspective or window upon where future geographies may lead us.

I would like to share with you my thoughts on geospatial technologies, particularly as they relate to remote sensing and geographic information science (GIScience), in the context of understanding rural systems. But then, too, I want to use this presentation as a way to begin to look to the future and reflect on evolving opportunities in geography through GIScience, virtual geography, and cybergeography, as well as how such emerging geographies offer new perspectives on the way we understand dynamic earth as well as how we educate the new generation of geographers and those interested in geography.

## New Technologies and New Opportunities for Geographers

A dozen years ago, five teacher consultants, K-12 teachers who were part of the Kansas Geographic Alli-

ance Network supported by the National Geographic Society, gave me a plaque celebrating an important theme they felt they had gained from their Kansas summer geography workshop. The plaque read ''the real voyage of discovery consists not in seeking new landscapes, but in having new eyes.'' Through their experiences in geography, these teachers felt as if they were now able to understand landscapes in new ways. And in many ways, emerging technologies in geography and related developments in our discipline have given us new and exciting opportunities that we must seize and continue to advance.

In my role as a university administrator and as a geographer, I have not seen before such widespread opportunity and potential for geography to create a central place for itself in society, within the university, and within the K-12 community than it has today. In part, the leverage we have gained within society and our universities is through geospatial technologies, and in particular GISciences, and the ''new eyes'' that these emerging areas of our discipline have provided. At the same time, the emergence of interdisciplinary or crossdisciplinary research, (in a sense, integrative research as articulated by people like Rita Colwell and Bruce Alberts), as a priority research agenda for many of the significant questions in the sciences and social sciences, creates unique leadership opportunities for geographers. The reports Environmental Science and Engineering for the 21 st Century: The Role of The National Science Foundation , developed by the National Science Board (2000), and Complex Environmental Systems: A 10 Year Outlook for The National Science Foundation (National Science Foundation Advisory Committee for Environmental Research and Education 2003), validate the importance of interdisciplinary research and associated budgetary support. For geographers, who often operate at the interdisciplinary interface and have a long tradition in integrative research, this new focus provides special opportunities to provide leadership to the broader research community. Within this context, Geographic Information Systems (GIS), for example, can be developed as decision support software that allows people in collaborative research to understand decision options for a variety of human-environmental research analysis topics, using approaches that were unavailable to geographers not that long ago.

Beyond GIScience, I am not saying that other dimensions of our discipline are not just as important. Donald G. Janelle, Barney Warf, and Kathy Hansen in Worldminds (2004, xvii), for example, articulate the growing prominence of our broader discipline where ''environmental issues-''informed by political ecology, fears of global warming, and a worldwide ecological crisis-have taken on new conceptual sophistication and policy relevance. Human geography has witnessed one field after another refashioned by various forms of social theory, political economy, and philosophically selfconscious inquiry.'' Through GIScience, we have avenues to centralize a broad range of geographic approaches and concepts in meeting many of societies' needs in this information age. At the same time, we must move forward carefully and recognize that many geographic modeling processes do not offer adequate facilities to represent geographic realities as conceptualized by the users. Careful thought in including social interaction actually assists us in securing firm, rationally based knowledge (Longino 2002). Clearly, such careful thought in the design and use of any GIS must be carried out for effective implementation.

As Richardson and Solis mention in their most recent paper in The Professional Geographer (2004), GIScience, and more specifically computer-based geospatial information systems, global positioning systems (GPS), and remote sensing can help position geographers to catalyze research, scholarship, and teaching within geography and to enhance geography's standing within the university, without diminishing our traditional methods or threatening the diversity and richness of our discipline. But we cannot sit back and wait while other disciplines in areas such as biology, sociology, landscape ecology, engineering, and business try to position themselves to seize these geography technologies and approaches as somehow their own. We are truly at the threshold as we begin our second century of either solidifying our position as central to GIScience or depending on the action of others, thereby, placing this important aspect of our discipline at risk of diffused assimilation in corollary areas. As Daniel Sui recently wrote (2004, 63), ''by integrating tools with creative imaginations, we can ask more innovative and socially relevant questions about the evolving character of the Earth's surface under conditions of global environmental change and the global economy.'' Geographers need to be central to the development of such innovative questions.

## GIS Diffusion and Evolution Towards Management

The emergence of GIS, GPS, and remote sensing as an integral part of society is resulting in and will result in a broader array of players, including representatives from a broader spectrum of government, corporations, workers, consumers, and citizens in general (Richardson and Solis 2004). With this broader spectrum of users comes potential dichotomies. On the one hand, we have the

potential for rapid expansion of misuse and the introduction of errors, as well as the potential for abuse and infringements on privacy (Armstrong 2002). It will be crucial for geographers to play an active role in implementation and diffusion strategies to help minimize the abuse or misuse of this important information medium. Such dialogue is central as part of the social interaction that makes for a more effective GIS for a range of management decisions.

Just as there is the potential for abuse, there is also the potential through GIS for empowerment through better informed citizens, more engaged communities and, as a result, more inclusive practices of government; and just as effective land-use planning and regional development involve citizen or public participation, so too does effective GIS in community planning require citizen input and participation (Craig, Harris, and Weiner 2002) as this important area expands in its role in management practices.

## Remote Sensing Within GIScience

My own interests within the broad array of geospatial technologies are in the area of remote sensing. It is perhaps fitting that a geographer, Evelyn Pruitt, an employee of the U.S. Office of Naval Research, was the first to introduce the term remote sensing in 1958 (Estes and Jensen 1998). Even prior to the coining of the term, early pioneers in geographic remote sensing recognized the potential value of aerial photography for site-specific and regional surveys (Lulla et al. 2004). MacFadden, for example, reported in the Annals of the Association Of American Geographers (1949) on the use of a 35mm camera mounted on a light aircraft to augment field reconnaissance for analysis of land cover in California. Continued evolution of aerial photography, the development of satellite remote sensing through the manned Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, and Space Shuttle programs, then dedicated unmanned remote sensing satellites like Landsat, SPOT and NOAA, further advanced the use of such data in numerous ways by geographers and other scientists.

But just as we have seen the emergence of GIScience, the science and technology of remotely sensed data has undergone a revolution in the number and types of sensors, data availability, potential applications, and governmental and commercialization activities (Merry et al. 2002) that are dramatically altering the types of questions geographers specializing in remote sensing as well as geographers interested in ''socializing the pixel'' are able to address, as well as creating new opportunities to interface through GIScience for creating more dy- namic models for understanding a wide range of dimensions of our earth.

Government controls on spatial and spectral resolution of sensors and data have been relaxed in recent years. Not that long ago, the U.S. remote sensing community was constrained to broad band sensors and a spatial resolution of thirty meters offered through the LANDSAT system. Foreign competition and, until 11 September 2001 (9/11), a changing view of the future, resulted in an easing of constraints on the spatial resolution in the United States related to satellite data. And even since 9/11, we have seen commercial ventures in remote sensing move forward in dramatic fashion.

Another advance in remote sensing has been the leap in scientific development and technology transfer of usable sensor systems producing reliable, cost-effective data. The newest developments have occurred in high spatial resolution satellite data in the visible and near infrared spectrum, radar, and hyperspectral and laser illumination sensors (LIDAR). These new data forms create the opportunity to ask new spatial questions and develop new models for understanding our complex world. For example, using LIDAR data, it is possible to ask new questions about forest canopy structure, urban structures and systems, surface reconstructions after an earthquake, or even mapping lineaments in rural landscapes.

New developments have also included geographers spearheading efforts linking remote sensing to the social sciences (Liverman et al. 1998; National Research Council 2002). Geographers with this perspective have been able to ''socialize the pixel'' and ''pixeling the social,'' and in so doing infer information relevant to social science applications from remotely sensed data (Lulla et al. 2004). Examples include understanding more fully human dimensions of areas using remote sensing approaches, and the links and feedbacks between people, place, and environment. Many of these humanenvironmental interactions are manifested at a range of spatial and temporal scales, and remote sensing offers insights on pattern and process relationships through time, through image time-series assembled through archived data, and through fine-and coarse-grained systems such as Ikonos and Modis, respectively (Walsh, Evans, and Turner 2003).

The last few years have also seen a major growth in the private sector commercialization of remote sensors, data, and information products. Ikonos and QuickBird are just two examples of commercial ventures among many emerging in the market. In fact, it is likely the commercial market could soon overtake the government remote sensing market. The recent impact of commer-

cialization is to take abstract remote sensing science and move it into the public consumer domain. This has led to increased availability and, to a certain extent, reduced cost, at the same time creating new opportunities for those geographic remote sensing specialists who are open to seize these new avenues of opportunity.

Such commercialization ventures have not always been so positive. The commercialization efforts related to Landsat 5, for example, increased the price of medium resolution data; and such cost increases along with constraints on sharing of data led to a reduction in data sets. Only the return of these data to the public sector has enhanced public access and in fact created better worldwide archive development.

On the other hand, the ten-year industry forecast by the American Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing/NOAA/NASA clearly suggests that aerial and space data sales will continue to grow, and the introduction of market-based privately organized high-resolution satellite imagery has enhanced sales on a broad range of fronts (Mondello, Hepner, and Williamson 2004). More broadly, the geotechnology industry worldwide is expected to increase six-fold to a $30 billion industry by next year.

At the same time, commercial entities want partnerships with university researchers in sensor calibration, algorithms for analysis, and enhanced applications to expand markets. Again, geographers need to be open to such entrepreneurial ventures. In addition, these commercial data, some with less than one-meter spatial resolution, create new opportunities for understanding some social dimensions of urban areas, detailed analysis of natural hazard impacts, or more detailed analysis of agricultural areas. Rural-urban migration is an important social and ecological process that remote sensing can help to understand by considering the pattern-process relationships of people and the environment at source and destination locations. Land degradation in rural areas and core-periphery relationships, if linked to urban densification, are measurable through remote sensing systems, particularly when linked with demographic information.

Noncommercial developments in remote sensing have also increased dramatically. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Department of Defense (DoD), National Oceanic &amp; Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), and the U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT) are leading the way among government agencies in developing new sensors, spacebased sensors, imagery analysis, and in linking remotely sensed data to GIS. Such data systems are revolution- izing a broad range of Earth models for understanding human-environmental systems. In addition, the USGS, through its AmericaView Program, has been at the forefront of promoting educational consortia within individual U.S. states to foster the development and use of remote sensing at the grassroots level.

## Rural Resource Development or Rural Systems in Transition and Geospatial Information Technologies

A significant part of my own research in geography has focused on rural resource development, or maybe more appropriately, rural systems in transition, and the role of geospatial information technologies, especially remote sensing but also using GIS in understanding these geographic domains. Throughout the world, rural areas are in economic, social, environmental, and visible transition. In the developed world, many rural resource industries are in decline. Even beyond commuting range, the rural landscape is increasingly influenced by urban attitudes as land is valued more highly for recreation, tourism, retirement, or natural processes, and less highly for food or fiber. In addition, various forcing factors, including socioeconomic change, environmental change, technological change, globalization and restructuring, postproductivism and environmentalism, and coreperiphery shifts are driving significant change (Figure 1). Such change occurs in some rural setting influenced by conditions such as density/intensity and related land value, policy orientation, material wealth, environment, and resources (Beesley et al. 2003).

Within this framework, my own research has focused on understanding the impact of various forcing factors in the context of human-environmental interactions. As you all know, human-environmental interaction, formerly known as the man- or human-land tradition, has long formed a core element of geographic thought. The impacts of humans on their environment were wellestablished subjects in geographic literature going back to Marsh (1864/1965) in Man and Nature, Or Physical Geography As Modified By Human Action , and clearly articulated as a core of geography by H. H. Barrows in his 1923 AAG presidential address focusing on geography as human ecology, and continued by numerous geographers including integrated resource/environmental studies by people such as Kasperson, Kasperson, and T urner (1995) and Giordano (2003). Turner (2002) makes an important argument for a renewed emphasis within geography focused on the human-environment tradition. Yet, the methods of analysis that so often have characterized our discipline should not be left out of this central focus;

Figure 1. Rural systems dynamics of change (in Beesley et al. 2003).

<!-- image -->

their inclusion allows for the rich breadth of our discipline.

## From the Kansas High Plains to the Kalahari to Appalachia and Back

In 2001, the National Academy Press published Grand Challenges In Environmental Sciences, citing landuse dynamics as one of eight (out of 200) most pressing issues facing environmental scientists and policy makers, but, moreover, recommending land-use dynamics as one of the four areas most likely to achieve significant and practical gains over the next decade, given adequate scholarly attention and support. In my opinion, and those of some others, most important for this work is the continued development of a suite of techniques linked to GIScience (Crews-Meyer 2002). Using the evolution of some of my own research, I would like briefly to review examples of how opportunities for interfacing integrated rural human-environmental systems change with the use of geospatial information technology approaches.

The High Plains, extending from the Dakotas to Texas, have been transformed by exploitation of the Ogallala Aquifer, primarily to fuel irrigation agriculture and related feedlots and beef processing plants that dot the landscape where groundwater availability is more plentiful. The Ogallala Aquifer varies in saturated thickness from over 200 meters to virtually zero, with a high degree of spatial irregularity linked to thickness pattern and, therefore, related surface development patterns. Essentially, irrigators are mining water reserves, since groundwater withdrawal rates far exceed recharge rates. States underlain by the Aquifer have responded in different ways to manage this limited resource, including approaches such as limiting water use, encouraging water-use efficiencies, and providing education programs that focus on conservation (Kromm and White 1992). Federal programs that encourage conservation have also had some impact on patterns of adjustment.

This is part of the Great Plains region that Popper and Popper (2004) have characterized as North America's grassland and breadbasket, a charismatic place with a volatile settlement history. This is the region of Big Sky and the Dust Bowl, as well as straight-line interstate highways and custom combines; a place of oceans of grass vistas and beauty that has captured the imagination of many as well as the recognition of the challenges such a region presents.

In the late 1980s, Popper and Popper (1987) offered the Buffalo Commons as an alternative to the boom and bust cycles that have characterized this region. The Buffalo Commons in essence presents an ecologically and economically restorative possibility for large stretches of the Plains, including the High Plains. As you can imagine, this proposal has created considerable debate and action on the part of various groups on both sides of the issue at the same time that selected areas continue on the basis of the use of center pivot irrigation technology and related developments that started intensively in the early 1970s.

One of the most intensive areas of industrial agricultural development in the High Plains region is in

southwest Kansas, and, more specifically, Finney County. In addition to water resource management policies, as a result of the U.S. Farm Bill and its renewals, there have been incentives for setting aside the lands most vulnerable to erosion. T o understand this integrated humanenvironmental system and the response by land managers to such policy incentives for conservation of marginal lands, I employed, in collaboration with others, geospatial technologies that involved a three-tier approach. Remote sensing techniques were employed with sample field analysis to map the extent of irrigated crops, then spatially based databases were developed of soil parameters, topography, saturated thickness groundwater reserves, which provided the opportunity to study the spatial relationship among these variables and then relate back to policy decisions that might influence such patterns. Among numerous findings we discovered that conservation reserve lands in fact were cospatially related to areas with the least amount of saturated thickness, while intensively irrigated areas, with significant groundwater reserves, were not participating in the conservation programs even though they were areas of greatest erodibility indices (Wu et al. 2002) (Figure 2). Clearly, the incentives for shorter term economic gain were greater than-long term conservation and sustainability. Such is the pattern that continues in areas of the High Plains with more abundant groundwater reserves.

Transitioning to another one of my research areasBotswana and the fringe of the Kalahari-created a contrasting landscape for me as a rural geographer, yet in some ways similar issues related to the fragile balance between humans and the environment, and again the potential to understand more fully this rural system

Figure 2. The relationship between groundwater saturated thickness levels and conservation reserve program set-aside area in southwest Kansas (modified from Wu et. al. 2002).

<!-- image -->

through geospatial technologies. Botswana is bisected by the Tropic of Capricorn and the corollary Kalahari desert. Much like the American High Plains, the rural areas are experiencing large out migration of people to urban areas, and opportunities in urban areas such as Gaborone. Diamond mining has fueled economic development and today accounts for about 25 million carats exported per year and approximately 80 percent of the export revenue. This is also a country with a tremendous diversity of wildlife, including large concentrations of elephants-approximately 50,000 in northern Botswana alone-and over 3 million cattle, with a human population of 1.8 million and the devastation associated with the AIDS virus, which effects 40 percent of the human population fifteen to forty-nine years of age.

In a country as vast as Botswana, with an area about the size of T exas and low human population density, the ability to understand rural systems change and to make informed decisions is limited without the employment of geospatial information technologies. Building on the National Natural Resources Conservation Strategy that was developed in the late 1980s and early 1990s, I was part of a team invited to Botswana to investigate geospatial approaches that might be of value in managing their rural areas, such as wildlife resources, which fuel an important part of the tourism revenue, as well as to understand more fully the complexity of the cattle grazing systems in relation to natural resource pressures. Historically, the cattle grazing system is a central element to the traditional rural system as it relates to grazing pressures and water availability.

One of the important dimensions of Botswana's wildlife resources, which include 160 different game species and approximately 17 percent of the country's total area in National Parks, are elephants and their population vulnerabilities, as well as opportunities to understand the relationship between elephants and their natural environment and the impact of humans in concentrating elephant populations in certain areas. The area where we examined this relationship more closely was in the Chobe National Park area of northern Botswana along the edge of the Chobe River. Elephants debark trees and eat the leaves of trees, especially mopane, which dominates in this more-forested area of northern Botswana. Through use of field work and global positioning systems, we were able to sample elephant populations in relation to tree density (Figure 3 reflects this relationship). As part of our on-site analysis, we met with wildlife biologists and park managers. At the same time, by combining this field-based information with remote sensing data and other spatially based data such as soil resource information and topography, we were

Figure 3. Relationship between tree density and elephant populations in northern Botswana.

<!-- image -->

able to develop algorithms that helped us estimate elephant impact areas (Robinson et al. 2001). Results of this data integration proved useful for clearly seeing the pattern of elephant migration paths to water and impact on vegetation.

In the southern part of Botswana and the more arid portions of the country, land users face challenges linked to cycles of drought, increasing cattle numbers, the exploitation of groundwater reserves through the drilling of bore holes, and balancing all of this with some set-aside areas for game ranching. Using remote sensing and geospatial techniques, combined with on-site field observations and interviews with local land managers, we were able to understand more fully the relationship between grazing density and resulting land degradation, as well as the relationship between bore hole development and intensity of grazing pressures (Figure 4). Algorithms that we tested offer local and regional land managers additional information to assist in land development decisions.

A third case study brings me back to Appalachia and the first ridge of the Alleghany Mountains just outside Morgantown and West Virginia University. In this initial analysis, involving my colleagues Tim Warner, Jim McGraw, Rick Landenberger, and my former graduate student, Fei Wang, we were interested in using some of the high spatial resolution LIDAR data to understand more fully forest canopy structure and link land cover and forest fragmentation data derived from remote sensing techniques with other spatial data in an effort to create Web-based functionality as a demonstration project linking geospatial approaches with rural forest managers for better decision-making information (Nellis et al. 2000; Wang 2002; Warner et al. 2003) (Figure 5). Through Web access, forest managers will have the potential for using such information more effectively to understand the

Figure 4. Relationship between bore hole density and intensity of grazing pressures in southern Botswana.

<!-- image -->

balances between humans and forest resource development, and the impact of such human actions, such as introduced species, on native stands and diversity.

These three examples in which I was involved are not meant to suggest best or forward looking approaches, but I do think they illustrate the opportunities for enhancing our understanding of rural areas and rural system dynamics through exploiting the capabilities provided by geospatial technologies. In my opinion, such opportunities are only expanding-in fact, in some way, exploding-and the key from my perspective is that we as geographers are guiding that explosion and positioning ourselves to be at the forefront of these exciting developments, which to me are truly at the core of integrated human-environmental analysis.

## Future Geographies

Unfolding in the 1990s and continuing to expand at a rapid pace in the current decade, we have had emergence of the information dominated society. As Kellerman states in his recent book, The Internet On Earth: A

Figure 5. Web-based functionality for forest management.

<!-- image -->

Geography Of Information (2002), information production, transmission, and use have become a leading if not the leading economic and social activity, both as a product itself and as a service leading to the production or consumption of material products. Wide adoptions of broadband transmissions and wireless communication further complicate and some ways complement emerging infospheres.

The Internet alone provides the common interface and infrastructure for those interested in rural perspectives of the human-environmental system by providing access in expanding areas anytime through the Web browser on a computer linked to the Internet. The operational benefits of such an Internet GIS might include the following: timely access to relevant geospatial information; the opportunity to share, display, and manipulate such spatial information that might be of value to the rural community; the opportunity to interact with a GIS via Web browser for those who want it might gain value from such access without investing in GIS software, GIS capable computer equipment, GIS expertise, high network bandwidth, and significant data storage capacity; and the Internet can be the common foundation for communication and integration of heterogeneous systems (modified from Peng and Tsou 2003).

Whether framed through the more generalized notion of cyberspace, or the more specific phenomena of the Internet, the World Wide Web, or Virtual Reality, it is hard to miss the growing debates over the social and geographical significance of new technologies linked to computer mediated communication. For some, these technologies are seen as facilitating, if not producing, a qualitatively different human experience of dwelling in the world, new articulations of near and far, present and absent, and self and environment (Crang, Crang, and May 1999). At the same time, the capacity for digitalization to integrate previously separate operations such as computation, communication, and surveillance, results in new information networks, and ''spaces of flows'' creating associated morphologies of connections and disconnection, and thus generating an entirely new dimension of geography, or virtual geography, that is not only virtual but real.

In some ways, this explosion in cyberspace provides new forums for accessing, integrating, and utilizing remotely sensed data and other spatially based information to make a wide range of personal or more broadly cast management decisions. Yet, others point to the different political geographies that real virtualities can performthe liberation of those who enter into them from the very context of the real-real. At one level such claims for the virtual are framed in terms of the delocalization of the visibility of events. Thus, the World Wide Web is promoted as a learning tool, as a space that allows access to extralocal knowledge and encounters-the detraditionalization and opening up of the realm of the possible to compare with the customary (Crang, Crang, and May 1999). The way, then, that users actually engage with and make sense of these expanded geographies they access is crucial as we speculate about the impact of virtual systems. Further, the importance of access to these geographies and the geographies of inclusion and exclusion certainly have implications as well.

Complicating these emerging future geographies is the continued unstable global financial and technology crisis, and the post 9/11 world and global uncertainties. Information systems in general, notably the Internet both in e-mail and Web components, have repeatedly become targets of various forms of attack, through viruses, destruction of Web sites, and unauthorized manipulations of databases. Of course such uncertainties have implications for future geographies, global GIScience linkages and security, and the potentials of Web-based GIS and virtual GIS to play more of a prominent role in future management systems design. And although some feel distance and location may become meaningless in the information age with a globally networked infrastructure, it is my opinion that geography and location will become even more important as we are able to access greater amounts of more sophisticated spatial data that allow the end users greater ability to understand and manage their local global situation and its connectedness to other locations within a global system.

At the same time, we must not lose sight of the context for future geographies and the new generation of geographers and those using geographic approaches and information. The millennials-the post baby boomers and post-generation Xers-are the new generation of College students and soon to be the new geographers and users of geographic discoveries and information. This is the generation that has grown up with standards and metrics, the information age, and changing expectations (Howe and Strauss 2000). In many ways, this new generation is prepared for future geographies, and through their changing expectations associated with inquiry-based learning and engagement, are ready to ask new questions through access to spatially based information technologies (Nellis 2003). Universities are responding to these changing expectations and needs. In 2001, the Boyer Commission published Reinventing Undergraduate Education: The Years After The Boyer Report (2001), which documented the trend at American research universities that have developed more engaged

experiences for undergraduates that might include interaction learning using information technologies. Geography is poised to take advantage of these new expectations if they look forward toward linking GIScience to the broader undergraduate experience rather than limiting such training to those who are specializing in GIScience. Limited research in this area suggest that entry-level students learn geography principles more effectively using the aid of GIS approaches than those who don't use such approaches (M. Patterson, Reeve, and Page 2003).

In many ways, we are moving toward what Richardson (2001) has called Geographic Management Systems (GMSs). In this context, we shall see over the next few decades the continued development, refinement, and implementation of real-time interaction GIS or GMSs in the context of providing core daily operations management networks within government and business entities. Through this approach, entities build on the capacity of integrated, real-time, and mobile GPS/GIS/remote sensing technologies to create a highly interactive world and management environment, something Michael Goodchild et al. (1999) have called Interoperating GIS . And geographers need to maintain their centrality to such efforts as GMSs evolve and are implemented. Clearly, the U.S. Department of Labor's recent Career Voyages in ''what's hot in emerging and evolving fields'' recognizes geospatial information, nanotechnology, and biotechnology as the three most dramatic areas for job growth, as companies and government entities see the value of management through GIS and related geospatial information technologies (U.S. Department of Labor 2003).

So as we look to the future, geographers and our association need to be poised to: 1) leverage the explosive growth in geographic information technologies for the benefit of the discipline and society in general (and GIS will flourish around computational, spatial, social, environmental, and aesthetic dimensions); 2) engage in a more active role in information and geographic-related policy from state, to nation, to the world; 3) foster interdisciplinary or integrative research partnerships; 4) develop Web-based/virtual resources that can serve society in multidimensional ways; 5) be out front in responding to emerging opportunities in cybergeography; 6) be on the leading edge of GMSs; and 7) raise the overall visibility and influence in geography as it serves societies' needs in diverse ways. Humankind needs such a response from our discipline as we begin our next century. And geospatial technology linked to rural resource systems can provide a clear framework that links integrative science with future geographies.

I could see a day when large areas of rural environments are carefully monitored and management decisions are made on the basis of interaction processes with local communities, land owners, and resource managers that more effectively create balanced systems between development and conservation and balances between local rural community interests, attitudes, and goals with broader global market perspectives, and using GMSs. And I see a future where our education systems are using geospatial technologies for a more engaged learning environment at all levels. And at the center of such evolving approaches to understanding human-environmental systems is the geographer with ''new eyes to see.''

## Acknowledgements

A special thanks to Steve Walsh, University of North Carolina, Tim Warner, West Virginia University, and Richard Marston, Oklahoma State University, for their feedback on drafts of this address.

## References

- Armstrong, M. P . 2002. Geographic information technologies and their potentially erosive effects on personal privacy. Studies in the Social Sciences 27 (1): 19-28.
- Beesley, K., H. Millward, B. Ilbery, and L. Harrington. 2003. The new countryside: Geographic perspectives on rural change. Halifax, Canada: Brandon University and Saint Mary's University.
- Boyer Commission on Education Undergraduates in the Research University. 2001. Reinventing undergraduate education: The years after the Boyer Report. Stony Brook, NY: SUNY-Stony Brook.
- Craig, W ., T . Harris, and D. Weiner. 2002. Community participation and geographic information systems . London and New York: T aylor and Francis.
- Crang, M., P . Crang, and J. May. 1999. Virtual geographies . London and New York: Routledge.
- Crews-Meyer, K. 2002. Challenges for GIScience: Assessment of policy relevant human-environmental interactions. In Linking people, place, and policy: A GIScience approach , ed. S. Walsh and K. Crews-Meyer. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
- Estes, J., and J. Jensen. 1998. Development of remote sensing digital image processing systems and raster GIS. In The history of geographic information systems , ed. T. Foresman, 163-80. New York: Longman.
- Goodchild, M. F ., M. J. Egenhofer, R. Fegeas, and C. A. Kottman, eds. 1999. Interoperating geographic information systems . Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
- Giordano, M. 2003. The geography of the commons: The role of scale and space. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 93:365-75.
- Howe, N., and W . Strauss. 2000. Millennials rising : The next generation . New York: Vintage Books.

- Kasperson, J., R. Kasperson, and B. L. T urner II. 1995. Regions at risk: Consequences of threatened environments . Tokyo: United Nations University Press.
- Kellerman, A. 2002. The Internet on Earth: A geography of information . Chichester, England: Wiley.
- Kromm, D., and S. White, eds. 1992. Groundwater exploitation in the high plains . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
- Liverman, D., E. Moran, R. Rindfuss, and P . Stern, eds. 1998. People and pixels: Linking remote sensing to social science . Washington, DC: The National Academy Press.
- Longino, H. 2002. The fate of knowledge . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Lulla, K., T . Warner, M. D. Nellis, and D. Stow. 2004. Remote sensing, geospatial analysis, and geographers at the centennial of the Association of American Geographers. Geocarto International 19:5-12.
- MacFadden, C. 1949. Some preliminary notes on the use of the light airplane and 35mm camera in geographic field research. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 39:188-200.
- Marsh, G. P . 1864/1965. Man and nature, or physical geography as modified by human action , ed. David Lowenthal. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Merry, C., D. Wright, E. Wentz, S. Anderson, A. Budge, and G. Hepner. 2002. Remotely acquired data and information in GIScience. UCGIS Research Initiative (www.ucgis.org/ priorities/research/2002researchagenda).
- Mondello, C., G. Hepner, and R. Williamson. 2004. 10-year industry forecast . Bethesda, MD: American Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing.
- National Research Council. 2002. Down to Earth: Geographic information for sustainable development in Africa . Washington, DC: The National Academy Press.
- National Science Board. 2000. Environmental science and engineering for the 21st century: The role of the National Science Foundation . Washington, DC: National Science Foundation.
- National Science Foundation Advisory Committee for Environmental Research and Education. 2003. Complex environmental systems: Synthesis for Earth, life, and society in the 21st century . Washington, DC: National Science Foundation.
- Nellis, M. D. 2003. Geography, gamma teta upsolin, and the millennials in the new millennium. The Geographical Bulletin 45 (2): 81-85.
- Nellis, M. D., T . Warner, R. Landenberger, J. McGraw, J. S. Kite, and F. Wang. 2000. The Chestnut Ridge Anticline: The first ridge of the Appalachian Mountains. Geocarto International 15:73-78.
- Patterson, M., K. Reeve, and D. Page. 2003. Integrating geographic information systems into the secondary curricula. Journal of Geography 102 (6): 275-81.
- Peng, Z., and M. Tsou. 2003. Internet GIS: Distributed geographic information services for the Internet and wireless network . New York: Wiley.
- Popper, D., and F . Popper. 1987. The Great Plains: From dust to dust. Planning 53 (12): 12-18.
- FFF . 2004. The Great Plains and the Buffalo Commons. In Worldminds: Geographical perspectives on 100 problems , ed. D. G. Janelle, B. Warf, and K. Hansen, 345-49. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publications.
- Richardson, D. 2001. Creating a central place for geography in society and the university: An historic opportunity. Papers and Proceedings of the Applied Geography Conferences 24:311-15.
- Richardson, D., and P . Solis. 2004. Confronted by insurmountable opportunities: Geography in society at the AAG's centennial. The Professional Geographer 56:4-11.
- Robinson, J., K. Lulla, M. Kashiwagi, M. Suzuki, M. D. Nellis, C. Bussing, W . Lee Long, and L. McKenzie. 2001. Conservation applications of astronaut photographs of Earth: Tidal flat loss (Japan), elephant impact on vegetation (Botswana), and seagrass and mangrove monitoring (Australia). Conservation Biology 15 (4): 876-84.
- Sui, D. 2004. GIS, cartography, and the ''third culture'': Geographic imaginations in the computer Age. The Professional Geographer 56:62-72.
- Turner, B. L., II 2002. Contested identities: Human-environment geography and disciplinary implications in restructuring the academy. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 92:52-74.
- U.S. Department of Labor. 2003. Career voyages . U.S. Department of Labor: Washington, DC (http://www.careervoyages. gov/watshot.cfm).
- Walsh, S., T. Evans, and B. L. Turner II. 2003. Populationenvironmental interactions with emphasis on LULC dynamics and the role of technology. In Geography and technology , ed. S. Brunn, S. Cutter, and J. W. Harrinton Jr., 491-520. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
- Wang, F. 2002. Design and Implementation of Web-based BIS for forest fragmentation analysis. Master's thesis, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV .
- Warner, T., T. Brandtberg, J. McGraw, M. D. Nellis, and J. Gardner. 2003. The potential of virtual reality technology for analysis of remotely sensed data: A LIDAR case study. Geocarto International 18 (1): 25-32.
- Wu, J., M. Ransom, M. D. Nellis, H. Seyler, and G. Kluitenberg. 2002. Assessing and managing the conservation reserve with GIS for Finney County, Kansas. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 68 (7): 735-44.

Correspondence : Office of the Provost, 106 Anderson Hall, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, e-mail: provost.nellis@ksu.edu.