<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Spatial Social Network Analysis of Resource Access in Rural South Africa

## Sam Schramski &amp; Zhuojie Huang

To cite this article: Sam Schramski &amp; Zhuojie Huang (2016) Spatial Social Network Analysis of Resource Access in Rural South Africa, The Professional Geographer, 68:2, 281-298, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2015.1065545

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2015.1065545

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 20 Aug 2015.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 150

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

## Spatial Social Network Analysis of Resource Access in Rural South Africa

## Sam Schramski

University of Colorado, Boulder

## Zhuojie Huang

The Pennsylvania State University

Communities in the rural developing world often sit at the margin of market, migration, and technology exchanges. They are arguably becoming more interconnected and networked than ever before. This article seeks to expand on an understanding of natural resource access in the rural developing world by combining social network analysis (SNA) data and geographic position data obtained via Global Positioning System (GPS) and participatory mapping in rural South Africa. This work therefore utilizes a sociospatial framework in understanding natural resource use and access in a community-level analysis. Notably, in our study we fi nd very little association among natural resource use, access, and social position with even the most tolerant measure but enough association so as not to dismiss the relationship completely. We believe that our results can inform investigations of both resource access and social network position and conclude that a subsequent possibilist approach to human -environmental interactions would be an ideal framework for this methodology and potentially for sociospatial studies more widely. Key Words: natural resources, social network analysis, sociospatial analysis.

发 展 中世 界 的 农 村 社 区 , 经 常 位 于 市 场 、 迁 徙 和 技 术 交 换 的 边 缘 。 它 们 较过 往 而 言 , 无 疑 地 变 得 更 为 相 互 连 结 和 网 络 化 。 本 文 透 过 结 合 从 全 球 定 位 系 统 (GPS) 和 南 非 乡 村 地 区 的 参 与 式 製 图 中 所 获 得 的 社 会 网 络 分 析 (SNA) 数 据 以 及 地 理 位 置 数 据 , 寻 求 扩 张 我 们 对 发 展 中 国 家 农 村 的 自 然 资 源 取 得 之 理 解 。 该 工 作 因 而 运 用 社 会 空 间 架构 , 以 理 解 社 区 层 级 分 析 中 的 自 然 资 源 使 用 与 获 得 。 特 别 是 在 我 们 的 研 究 中 , 即 便 运 用 最 具 容 忍 度 的 方 法 , 仍 发 现 自 然 资 源 使 用 、 获 得 和 社 会位 置 之 间 有极 少 的 关 联 性 , 但 却 仍 有 足 够 的 关 联 性 让 , 我 们不 至 于 全 面 忽 略 该 关 係 。 我 们 相 信 , 我 们 的 研 究 结 果 能 够 同 时 告 知 资 源 获 得 和 社 会 网 络 位 置 的 调 查 , 并 于 结 论 中主 张 , 随 后 的 人 类 -自 然 互 动 的 可 能 性 取 径 , 会 是 此 一 方 法 论 、 且 可 能 是更 广 泛 的 社 会 空 间 研 究 的 理 想 架构 。 关 键 词 : 自 然 资 源 , 社 会 网 络 方 析 , 社 会 空 间 分 析 。

Las comunidades rurales del mundo en desarrollo a menudo se ubican al fi lo de los intercambios de mercado, migraci  on y tecnología. Podría decirse que ahora esas comunidades est  an m  as interconectadas y eslabonadas que nunca. Este artículo busca extenderse en la comprensi  on del acceso al recurso natural en el mundo en desarrollo, combinando el an  alisis de datos de las redes sociales (SNA) y los datos de la posici  on geogr  a fi ca obtenidos por medio del Sistema de Posicionamiento Global (GPS) y por mapeo participativo en la Sud  africa rural. Por eso este trabajo utiliza un marco socioespacial para entender el uso y acceso al recurso natural en un an  alisis a nivel de comunidad. Es interesante notar que en nuestro estudio hallamos muy poca relaci  on entre el uso del recuso natural, el acceso al mismo y la posici  on social incluso con la m  as tolerante medici  on, aunque con asociaci  on su fi ciente para no desechar completamente la relaci  on. Creemos que nuestros resultados pueden servir por igual para investigaciones de acceso al recurso y sobre posici  on en la cadena social, y concluimos que un subsiguiente enfoque posibilista para abordar las interacciones humano-ambientales sería un marco ideal para esta metodología y potencialmente para estudios socioespaciales de mayor amplitud. Palabras clave: recursos naturales, an  alisis de redes sociales, an  alisis socioespacial.

G eography has long been concerned with identifying how social and spatial factors interact and to what degree spatial variables drive social ones (see Warf and Arias [2009] for a summary). This has especially been the case in investigations of spatial access to natural resources and their uses, such as in research on nontimber forest products (NTFPs; L  opez-Feldman and Wilen 2008; Robinson, Albers, and Williams 2008). In contemporary geographic work, human -environmental research has often taken the form of remotely sensed imagery combined with socioeconomic data. This article seeks to expand on an understanding of natural resource access in the rural developing world. Our research in South Africa combines social network analysis (SNA) and geographic position data obtained via Global Positioning System (GPS) and participatory mapping all collected at the household level. In four communities under review, we fi nd very little association between areas of natural resource use and social network position. Individual exceptions are discussed in detail but, as a whole,

we conclude that neither methodologies nor analyses conventional within geography (geographic information systems [GIS] and participatory mapping) and within anthropology and sociology (SNA) prove useful in gauging human -environmental interactions in the study area. This runs counter to expectation that one direction -that is, one of a more ' social ' or ' geographical ' orientation -would emerge at even a small scale, including a small rural village.

Rural communities sitting at the margins of market, migration, and technology exchanges are becoming less remote and arguably more interconnected and networked with each other than in previous times (Burrell 2009; Castells 2011). Although interactions within and among social networks exhibit geographical constraints, they also shape the geographies inhabited (Kwan 2007). Geographical research for its part has integrated spatial thinking into the social sciences, most fi rmly since the ' spatial turn ' (Goodchild et al. 2000; Goodchild and Janelle 2010). Studies of networks, meanwhile, have been central to human -environmental geographical and environmental anthropological research (Brondízio and Chowdhury 2013; McLain et al. 2013). These studies have implicitly or explicitly adopted an understanding of social actors ' behaviors via an integration of territorial, network, and social embeddedness (Hess 2004). In most cases these studies emphasize the importance of scale and connectivity in understanding impediments to sustainable development in the Global South (Wilbanks 1994). Smaller scale natural resource use studies, including at the household level, have recently combined dimensions of geospatial knowledge and SNA (Bodin and Prell 2011), but the dif fi culties in collecting and analyzing these data have prevented it from producing a robust body of work. Nevertheless, a growing fi eld of geosocial analytics, which refers to the interactions located in communication and epidemiology, could be of great help in informing this approach (Luo and MacEachren 2014).

This article seeks to answer, in part, whether an interaction exists between what has been often been considered social or exclusively geographic variables, as manifested in both network position and connectivity. Our focus is on the distance to an area of natural resources as well as the social position of a household in South Africa ' s poorest province. Spatial and network dimensions are therefore not necessarily presumed to be linked or delinked. In our study, we concentrate on how closely associated these variables measured using methodologies germane to both geography and other domains of the social sciences are (Moran and Brondízio 2013).

The relationship between the two domains has not been extensively written about, although some literature does point to a linkage between fi rewood access and network-wide phenomena (Nepal, Bohara, and Berrens 2007) and NTFPs and centrality (Kelly et al. 2014). This has been as a result of a focus on the wealth or other socioeconomic indicators of a household as the predictor of spatial position. It has also been discussed in the natural resources management scholarship with regard to forest products or wildlife, although there, too, network variables are largely brought in to assess measurements (Bodin and Prell 2011; Crona et al. 2011). Given the continuous geographic critique that space is socially and politically produced (e.g., Lefebvre 1991; Lefebvre, Brenner, and Elden 2009), the existence of a relationship between social and spatial variables is even more overtly expected in our analysis.

One alteration we provide to the current norm of remotely sensed imagery as a surrogate for geographic data and interviews and questionnaires for social data is GPS-assisted and participatory mapping for the former and SNA to aid in the latter. We argue within four communities in rural South Africa that social relations have bearing on spatiality, spatiality has bearing on social position, but at our chosen scale of analysis (households in rural communities) and with our chosen units of measurement (households and polygons of resource use), no demonstrable statistical effect is evident.

## From Management to a Focus on Smaller Community Contexts

Scholarship on environmental management and social networks has increased in recent years (Armitage et al. 2008; Prell, Hubacek, and Reed 2009). This has lent the environmental social sciences the sense of being exclusively interested in questions of natural resource management at larger scales of analysis, in part because this is where wide-reaching decisions are taken. Although there has been some work on social and spatial analyses at smaller rural community contexts in recent years (Cassidy and Barnes 2013; Lee et al. 2013; Shakya, Christakis, and Fowler 2014), these studies have not received the same attention. The use of social capital remains perhaps the most trenchant line of theoretical inquiry and has been for the last two decades (e.g., Lin 2001), even as sociospatial studies have developed rapidly alongside the development of software and data analysis techniques. Social capital, although multivalent in its de fi nition, is measured in terms of location, strength, weakness, and embeddedness within a network. Our focus on a centrality measurement emerges therein.

## Geography: The Social and Geographic Were Never Divided

Theoretical and methodological aspects deemed social and those deemed spatial at fi rst do not comport in analysis, as by its very de fi nition geography is not reducible to static demarcations and measurements. This, however, does not mean that there is little utility in separating out variables that have been associated

with very social sciences (i.e., anthropology and sociology) and testing their relationship with variables that are both in the vernacular and within the discipline of geography ' spatial. ' (Recent reviews of the scienti fi c literature indicate, for instance, that ' geographic variables ' are contrasted with other variables in studies in which the latter might very well be considered geographic prima facie or otherwise; Rojas et al. 2013; Schutte and Donnay 2014).

As a result, although we semantically differentiate between social and spatial variables, we recognize that they are generally considered not to be ontologically separable. The semantic differentiation, we believe, builds on our argument that a relationship between network position and access to (and availability of) natural resources is an important fi eld of inquiry.

## Social Network Analysis, Geography, and Natural Resource Access

Households thrive off of a variety of resources, or capitals, other than the purely fi nancial (Scoones 1998; Bebbington 1999; Bhandari 2013). Such resources might include natural, social, human, and physical assets. Arguably, there are even more resources a household uses, derived from hybrids of all of the preceding. In the rural developing world this notion is arguably even truer. Social capital, which includes bene fi ts derived from cooperation and the bene fi cial relations between individuals and groups, has both informed and been informed by studies in SNA for several decades (Granovetter 1985; Coleman 1988; Lin 2002). One of the means of understanding social capital is through the embeddedness of individuals or households, which is often measured by forms of network centrality (Zhang 2010). Embeddedness is a concept that has more history in sociology but is also present in human geography (e.g., Granovetter 1985; Hess 2004). Embeddedness has a close corollary within Tobler ' s fi rst law of geography -that ' everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things ' (Tobler 1970, 236). Although Tobler ' s formulation has been problematized in sophisticated model designs (Miller 2004), at smaller community scales of analysis it has held fi rm.

From a networks perspective, embeddedness does not automatically equate to an individual being more successful because of dense social connections or advantageous spatiality (Granovetter 1985; Radil, Flint, and Tita 2010). The types of ties a person or organization might have could facilitate status (e.g., social prestige or wealth). We understand embeddedness for rural people in the study area in a similar way and therefore do not rely solely on the most basic measure of it as a function of centrality, distance, and area.

Social networks themselves re fl ect numerous types of social relationships: work, kinship, and friendship (Scott and Carrington 2011). Social network formation has been limited historically by geographic context, but modern information technologies and transport have changed this throughout the world (Onnela et al. 2011). In either case, a network-based model has the advantage of demonstrating accessibility and topological relationship among populations and their spatial entities. The growth in technology and information systems has increasingly expanded people ' s networks, although questionably not the strength of their ties socioeconomically, but developing regions of the world do not necessarily present identical patterns. A challenge for SNA is that it might not take into account the spatialities of power inscribed within networks (Bosco 2006) and thus falter without these complementary data.

SNA can complement geographical research in a variety of ways. For instance, social interactions are often context speci fi c (Radil, Flint, and Tita 2010) and relationships between social and spatial phenomena exist at varieties of scales (Leitner, Sheppard, and Sziarto 2008). Households occupy multiple social roles and diverse spatialities, as small as they might be. Building on the work of Radil, Flint, and Tita (2010), we incorporate embeddedness into our analysis. Embeddedness is inherently geographic because it emphasizes that social relationships are situated in sets of interrelated actors (Staeheli 2003; Leitner, Sheppard, and Sziarto 2008). Work in the geography of regional development also highlights these relationships to both available fi nancial and natural resources (Kubr and Prokopenko 1989). We seek to clarify that the households studied are embedded both in their social networks of interaction as well as spatially.

## Geographic Constraints on Social Networks

Previous work has demonstrated that network cohesion and group formation can be constrained by geographical position (Giordano and Cole 2011) but that the probability of social ties declines as a function of distance (e.g., Bossard 1932; Festinger 1950; H € agerstrand 1967; Freeman, Freeman, and Michaelson 1988; McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001). Butts et al. (2012) argued that at large geographic scales, spatial structure can suf fi ciently account for social structure, as de fi ned by what they de fi ne as total entropy (i.e., the way a network breaks down or becomes simpler). In this conceptualization, networks are affected by both constraints and opportunities, afforded by geographic factors, other than whether the ties themselves were formed or discontinued solely based on spatiality. As Massey (2004) observed, relationships may be constrained within place, but they are more likely to to link locations in wider relations and processes. As a result, spaces becomes ' social location[s] ' embdedded in ' webs of cultural, social, economic, and political relationships ' (Staeheli 2003, 160). This more possibilist approach will be discussed later in the article and might be more relevant to the

concerns of sustainable development researchers and practitioners (Rydin and Holman 2004).

Although SNA is useful in measuring behavior, it can become overly deterministic, or seemingly explanatory, if not assessed against other types of data (Scott 2011). Conversely, when spatial analysis is relied on solely for the analysis of social phenomenona, individuals might be reduced to mere occupiers of space (Warren 2011). In the developing world, this reductionist de fi nition might redound to simplistic notions of peasant dwellers or resource extractor (Robbins 2012).

As Andris (2011) noted, interrelations between network and geographic methodologies are similar. Measurements of nodes, in our case households, are able to show the power of place within a given network. Second, network measures, such as degree distribution, closeness, and clustering, might indicate the role of regions that at fi rst appear disparate. Also, multiple social fl ows found within SNA can be added to GIS to evaluate place-based interactions. Finally, explicit network representations model cases in which closeness does not correspond to stronger social fl ows between places. From a design and methodological perspective, the fi rst three are essential; from the vantage point of analysis, all four are necessary.

## Measurement

Wechose to investigate units at the level of household, further individuated to distances from given resources. Our focus includes measurements of household centrality of exchanges of food, money, fi rewood, water, manual labor, and disease information alongside those of distances to and from de fi ned extractive areas of wood, water, and bush medicine, as well as those of livestock grazing. Given the wide range of historical inquiry investigating interactions between social and spatial variables, it is our expectation that the results of a composite sociospatial study should produce correlated results. Although networks have been explored in work on natural resource management, and recent sociospatial studies have integrated GIS and SNA techniques in many parts of the Global South, an approach at the household and community level is at issue. Examples from the medical literature are common, including Christakis and Fowler ' s (2007) exploration of how network affects distances between, and areas of, obesity clusters, or Bates et al. ' s (2007) research into the geographic layout of rural Ecuadorean communities and the in fl uence on the network spread of diarrheal diseases. Less is published with regard to the combined spatial and social nature of natural resources and social makeup in the rural developing world.

Our speci fi c analysis of sociospatial contexts in rural South Africa is focused on embeddedness. Our speci fi c measures for areas of distances to natural resources were acquired through satellite imagery entered into

GIS, as well as participatory mapping. Our measures consisted of degree, betweenness, closeness, and eigenvector centrality. Degree centrality is the most basic measure of an actor ' s importance. An actor with high degree centrality has the most ties to other actors in the network. This is also a measure of activity of the actor. A geographic example of this is Giuliani ' s (2007) analysis of knowledge networks in the Italian wine industry, which found that speci fi c characteristics of fi rms were more likely to lead to innovation than geographic proximity per se.

Betweenness centrality is the number of shortest edge paths from all actors to all other actors passing through the initial actor. Betweenness, fi rst identi fi ed by Freeman (1976) as a network measurement, is slightly more nuanced than degree centrality in that it recognizes the position of actors through the shortest possible path to reach those actors and is not reliant on a count of ties. Guimer  a et al. (2005) demonstrated the utility of betweenness centrality in analyzing air transportation networks and their tendency toward community structure. They found that the most connected cities in terms of air transit were not necessarily the hubs with the greatest density.

Eigenvector centrality is the measurement of a node ' s in fl uence in a network. In this measurement, an actor with several ties receives greater weight for each individual tie rather than an actor with fewer ties. Thus, the value of the tie is assessed comparatively (with other ties) and not in absolute terms. Moore, Eng, and Daniel (2003) used eigenvector centrality in an analysis of humanitarian organizations in the wake of massive fl ooding in Mozambique and demonstrated how few were actually effective in rolling out relief.

Closeness centrality is the measure of an actor ' s distance to all other actors within a set of actors. It is a measure of geodesic distance (i.e., the distance when trying to fi t a straight line to a curved space), in which both direct and indirect ties have an effect. Crucitti, Latora, and Porta (2006) showed how constrained closeness centrality measurements are indicative of urban street movement.

Our geographic variables consist of the mean and the summed area of polygons that encompass natural resources, using both participatory and standard geoprocessing methods. These are explained in detail in Table 1 and described in detail in our methodology section. Additionally, we also evaluated the mean and sum distance to each individual polygon within which natural resource access should be considered. These resources, therefore, are conceived of both in terms of their distance and in total size; we attempt to test signi fi cance at the most basic geographic unit of analysis.

## Setting and Context

Over a year of fi eldwork, two villages in the Willowvale and Baviaanskloof areas were selected for comparative analysis. The rationale was that although two

distinctive community censuses would be useful for analysis, considering Tobler ' s (1970) ideas of geographic similarity and Lazarsfeld and Merton ' s (1954) idea of network homophily (among others), two more villages in an ethnically and ecologically different yet geographicaly proximate region of the country could yield greater variability. Additionally, analysis of overlapping personal networks was conceived of for another phase of the fi rst author ' s research, which required some mark of separation between the communities. In Willowvale the villages of Tokwe and Muncu demonstrate this; in the Baviaanskloof, the villages of Sewefontein and Zaaimanshoek are exemplary. 1 Each village is of moderate population size and neither is more than 15 km apart from each other. The Willowvale communities of Tokwe and Muncu were composed of thirty- fi ve and thirty households, respectively; Sewefontein and Zaaimanshoek in the Baviaanskloof were composed of twenty-six and fortytwo households. Willowvale is inhabited by the amaXhosa people and the Baviaanskloof by coloreds (South African racial terminology for those of mixed race, of predominant Khoisan heritage; QuintanaMurci et al. 2010).

The Baviaanskloof is marked by a commercially agrarian economy predominated by white farmers. Crops and livestock here have been witness to a lapse in favor of conservation-based tourism and ecosystem services, as a result of interest in both land degradation and carbon sequestration (Crane 2006). The majority of the valley is populated by coloreds (South African racial terminology; some 75 percent), who are often dependent on government pensions and disability grants due to the seasonal and infrequent nature of cultivation and livestock rearing. The national census bureau, Statistics South Africa, estimates that the current population stands at 1,090 (2012), of which 427 live in the two villages under review.

Willowvale is situated in the former amaXhosa Bantustan or homeland of Transkei, where access to electricity, running water, and indoor plumbing is below the levels of rest of the country (Westaway 2012). The Transkei was the result of the 1951 apartheid-era Bantu Authorities Act, an attempt to produce distinct, ethnically assigned African political units. The livelihood systems in Willowvale are similar to other rural communal areas in South Africa but speci fi cally include social grants, subsistence agricultural production, livestock rearing, natural resource acquisition, and interhousehold transfers (Shackleton and Shackleton 2004). Informal income-generating activities are increasing in importance, including money lending and other trading schemes. In general, households here bene fi t from extensive state social welfare grants (Statistics South Africa 2012).

Figure 1 Map of the study area, including communities in the Baviaanskloof and Willowvale areas of the Eastern Cape, South Africa.

<!-- image -->

Table 1 Description of each natural resource area measured in the participatory mapping stage of the methodology, including justifications for selection and the methods used for measurement

| Natural resource area   | Description                                                                             | Justification                                                                                                                                                              | Measures used in analysis                                      |
|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Firewood                | Area where household collected firewood for cooking and heating purposes                | Firewood is an essential resource in rural South Africa and is widely used in the study areas                                                                              | Area (sum and mean) and distance (sum and mean) from household |
| Water                   | Location where household harvests water for bathing, personal consumption, or livestock | Surface water is a vital resource in all of the sites' communities even if all households have periodic access to piped water supplies                                     | Distance (sum and mean) from household                         |
| Bush medicine           | Area where household collects plant- based medicines                                    | Although not all households engage in bush medicine collection, those who do largely extract from the veld                                                                 | Area (sum and mean) and distance (sum and mean) from household |
| Grazing lands           | Area where goats, cattle, or sheep graze                                                | Households in each community own livestock, although in the Baviaanskloof they are almost exclusively donkeys. The grazing areas are contained entirely in veld land cover | Area (sum and mean) and distance (sum and mean) from household |

The Eastern Cape possesses a diverse set of ecosystems, from the arid Karoo to the subtropical Maputaland -Pondoland -Albany hotspot. The Baviaanskloof and Willowvale meet at the intersection of several of these. Current and projected climatic patterns for the area are also quite different, with both the Baviaanskloof and Willowvale experiencing signi fi cant variability in rainfall and temperature variability. Although the cultural and natural histories of both locales differ, commonalities (other than shared provincial domain) existed between 2011 and 2012. First, water resources, although not abundant (especially in the case of Willowvale), are available to local people through taps or local wells. Second, erratic and often unreliable access to electricity, and the prominence of fi rewood as an energy source for cooking, bathing, and heating, is marked in both. Third, plants are collected for both medicine and food in the surrounding areas. Fourth, both crop cultivation and livestock rearing are less prominent than they were in the past in the study areas. Finally, heavy dependence on social grants, remittances, and interhousehold moneylending for fi nancial capital is a marked feature.

Figure 1 is a map of the study sites, which demonstrates the entire extent of the area under review.

## A Sociospatial Analysis in a Communal Setting

In all parts of the study area, the natural resources are contained within communal or open access resource areas; tenure arrangements do vary. In the case of the Baviaanskloof communities, particularly, the Nature Reserve is used. These cases are relatively few and not described here. The tenure arrangements in the Xhosa communities, particularly grazing areas, are directed by chiefs and headmen. In the Baviaanskloof communities, municipal and national laws have greater sway but do not necessarily affect the resources extracted in this study under review. The areas, as noted in

Figure 1, vary in size and location. We do not engage political theory extensively in our understanding of resource control, although we recognize the utility in doing so.

The centrality measurements used here are broadbased. Toward the end of describing the interactive fl ow between these two sets of variables, and in keeping in line with our own understanding of possibilism, we argue that statistically signi fi cant correlations are revealing.

## Method

The guiding question for this research is whether an association exist between social network centrality and the area of as well as distance to natural resources. We collected our network and geographical variables using a methodology divided between survey data elicitation, participatory mapping, and GPS point acquisition. We focused our research on the household, the de fi nition of which has been most recently adopted by the South African census bureau, Statistics South Africa (2012). The de fi nition of household is contested in the social sciences (Bender 1967; Saradamoni 1992; Keilman 1995), but Statistics South Africa (2012) de fi nes it as a place where a person or persons eat together and share resources and where they normally reside four nights a week at the speci fi c visiting point. To avoid the potential of recording responses from only one demographic, the adult spoken with was randomized whenever possible.

## Surveys: Livelihood and Network

We conducted initial livelihood surveys of every household where at least one individual lived eleven months out of the year, including members who lived in an assayed household most of any given year (sixtyfi ve in the Willowvale area and sixty-eight in the

Baviaanskloof). Therefore, we conducted a census of households in four different villages and thus a whole network. The survey gauged fi ve asset categories ( fi nancial, natural, social, human, and physical capital) commonly used in livelihood studies, in addition to a set of items related to perceptions of environmental change. We randomized each adult we spoke with on entering the household, in an effort to prevent a gender bias. A whole network interview developed from this, in which we asked about forms of exchange in a given month in each village (intra-, not inter-, village comparison): food, wood and water, labor (manual), health (disease exchange information), and money. Food exchanges include exchanges of unprepared or prepared food between households, and wood and water exchanges include the sharing of wood or water, mostly in the form of fi rewood and potable water from a natural sources. Labor includes the exchange of manual labor between households, either formal or informal, and money includes the exchange of physical Rand. Health, or disease information exchange, includes the exchange of information about disease, whether as a report about illness or nonpersonal or general knowledge thereof. An example of this exchange would be an individual reporting a bout of an illness in his or her household to another household. In all cases respondents were asked to report whether they exchanged anything (one) or nothing (zero) with another household in their community.

Our whole networks are exhaustive at the household level, but given the nature of mobility and communication, the village itself is not necessarily the single locus for social activity in any part of the study area. The fi rst author ' s work will explore that dimension through analysis of personal network data in future research; the whole network is discussed here exclusively. Each household is represented as a node in the network analysis, so all reported exchanges refer to household-to-household exchanges, not necessarily individual-to-individual exchanges.

The value of the exchange is expressed as zero or one depending on tie agreement. We symmetrized values on the minimum, meaning that any respondent who reported no exchange was deferred to when another respondent reported there was an exchange. This is a conservative coding regimen that has the potential to dispose of useful data. Methods for analyzing tie disagreement and reciprocity are expressed in the network literature (e.g., An and Schramski 2015), but they are not within the ambit of this article.

## Geographic Data

Spatial data were collected through a combination of participatory mapping and GPS data acquisition. Participatory mapping was particularly highlighted because it can facilitate ' who takes part, the nature of outcomes and power relationships ' (Chambers 2012, 133). The natural resources of each household were

Table 2 Centrality measurements in the network centrality measurements for the entire network

| Exchange network and community   |   Number of nodes |   Diameter |   Average degree |
|----------------------------------|-------------------|------------|------------------|
| Disease information              |                   |            |                  |
| Muncu                            |                30 |          2 |             3.13 |
| Sewefontein                      |                25 |          3 |            13.2  |
| Tokwe                            |                34 |          4 |             3.82 |
| Zaaimanshoek                     |                41 |          3 |            27.66 |
| Food                             |                   |            |                  |
| Muncu                            |                30 |          3 |            22.87 |
| Sewefontein                      |                26 |         10 |            13.07 |
| Tokwe                            |                35 |          5 |            18.57 |
| Zaaimanshoek                     |                41 |          4 |            26.73 |
| Labor                            |                   |            |                  |
| Muncu                            |                30 |          4 |            20.33 |
| Sewefontein                      |                 8 |          1 |             1.25 |
| Tokwe                            |                35 |          5 |            17.66 |
| Zaaimanshoek                     |                15 |          2 |             1.47 |
| Money                            |                   |            |                  |
| Muncu                            |                30 |          5 |            17.87 |
| Sewefontein                      |                21 |          4 |             2.57 |
| Tokwe                            |                35 |          4 |            11.14 |
| Zaaimanshoek                     |                30 |          6 |             3.07 |
| Wood and water                   |                   |            |                  |
| Muncu                            |                30 |          5 |            14    |
| Sewefontein                      |                25 |          3 |             3.44 |
| Tokwe                            |                35 |          4 |            18.91 |
| Zaaimanshoek                     |                41 |          3 |             7.41 |

Note: Number of nodes indicates the summed number of nodes in each network. Diameter is the longest of all of the calculated shortest paths in a network. Average degree is the average of node degree.

measured in the fi eld in both direct and indirect ways. Home gardens, animal pens, and, in the speci fi c case of Willowvale, given its distance to water resources, community spigots (measured with a GPS device of submeter accuracy). These were subsequently added as layers of accessibility to our spatial analysis. Resource analysis included interviews in which a household member identi fi ed his or her fi elds for cultivation (normally former fi elds), areas for animal grazing, plant medicine collection, and wood collection using high-resolution satellite imagery.

The geographic data include linked resource areas for livestock grazing, enclosure, fi elds that are either cultivated or owned, home garden cultivation, wood extraction, and medicinal plant gathering. In each of the households surveyed for the livelihood and network information, we asked a random adult member to identify on a high-resolution satellite image where the household ' s livestock grazed and where fi elds and areas for wood and medicinal plant gathering were located. We collected the geographic positions for livestock enclosures and home gardens with the household ' s permission, all at submeter accuracy and differentially corrected.

The size, distance to and from, and type of resource polygon were computed in nonparametric correlations (Spearman ' s) with the network -dichotomized and symmetrized on the mean (Rayner 2004). We ran separate correlations between two different phases of networks and directly obtained resource data (home

gardens, animal pens, and water spigots) to assess the hypothesis that social variables affect geographic ones.

## Results

Social Network Characteristics of the Four

Communities

In Table 2 we demonstrate social network characteristics for all the communities under review. These serve as reference points for the Spearman ' s correlations used subsequently. There are discrepancies in each of the networks based on the number of actors within the network, regional context, and individual characteristics of the households interviewed. Disease information exchange, our basic health indicator, is pronounced in the Baviaanskloof communities. These communities are both more isolated than the Willowvale communities and suffer from serious exposure to tuberculosis. Note that the food networks across all communities are the most robust, as measured by the number of nodes and average node degree across the network, which indicates that there are more households involved in food exchanges. Money is a sparse network and shows up as such in the study. Note that in networks that are relatively sparse, such as those of labor and money sharing in Sewefontein and Zaaimanshoek, the average degree is relatively low. Although degree centrality is a stable measure, it, too, can yield low values (Costenbader and Valente 2003). Sewefontein demonstrates sparseness in its wood and water exchange networks. Its smaller household size might be a problem for deriving robust data from centrality measurements (Kossinets 2006).

Exchanges and Resource Measures Derived from Participatory Mapping

Results from statistical testing of these hypotheses were not uniform. We neither rejected nor failed to reject them in toto, but we were able to detect differences in three of the four communities, speci fi cally in the village of Muncu. Overall, these results give some insight into the relationship between network and geographic features.

We tested whether there was a correlation between the centralities of the household within the exchange networks and natural resource areas. We measured correlations such as household centrality in a money exchange network and grazing areas, centrality in an exchange network of wood and water and distance to (and the area of) locations of wood extraction, centrality in a disease information exchange network and collection areas for bush medicine, centrality in a network of manual labor and distance to and area of a wood extraction location, and centrality in a money sharing network and distances to a location of wood extraction. All the correlation matrices that yielded at least one statistically signi fi cant result are presented in the Appendix.

Of all of the correlations, the signi fi cant pairs of social network positioning and spatial accessibility on natural resources are shown in Table 3. Both the mean area and sum of areas for wood gathering are negatively associated with closeness centrality of the wood and water sharing network in the village of Muncu. Also in Muncu, distances between households and locations where wood and water are collected are positively correlated with closeness centrality measures of labor exchanges. Not shown in Table 3 is the correlation between sum of grazing areas and measures of degree in a money exchange network in the Zaaimanshoek community and nowhere else ( rs D 0.933, p &lt; 0.001). The wood and water sharing networks are overlaid with locations of wood extraction in Figure 2. Although there is a strong negative association between wood collection areas and the eigenvector centrality of a labor-sharing network in Sewefontein, this does not accord with our hypothesized relationship (larger area and greater centrality). There are no signi fi cant associations found between disease information exchange and distances to areas of bush medicine collection. Although we fi nd no associations between centrality and distances to, or total areas for, wood gathering areas in any one of the communities, Figure 2 does demonstrate how much more households in Zaaimanshoek travel to collect wood and to a lesser degree water than the other three communities. It should be noted that Sewefontein and Zaaimanshoek occupy the same larger ecosystem and

Table 3 Statistically significant correlations between geographic and social network variables in three of the four communities studied, using Spearman's test

|                  |                  | Summed distance to wood collection site   | Summed distance to wood collection site   | Mean area of wood gathering site   | Mean area of wood gathering site   | Summed area of wood gathering site   | Summed area of wood gathering site   |
|------------------|------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Network measures | Network measures | Muncu                                     | Sewefontein                               | Muncu                              | Sewefontein                        | Muncu                                | Sewefontein                          |
| Closeness        | Labor Wood and   | 0.619                                     |                                           | ¡ 0.563 *                          |                                    | 0.512 *                              |                                      |
| Eigenvector      | Labor            |                                           |                                           |                                    | ¡ 0.927 ** y                       | ¡                                    | ¡ 0.982 *** y                        |

Figure 2 A sociospatial map of the four villages (clockwise from top left: Sewefontein, Zaaimanshoek, Muncu, and Tokwe) wherein the exchange networks for wood and water are combined with their wood extraction usage. Notice the overlapping nature of the social exchange network and the resource accessibility network, which is even more so in Zaaimanshoek. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

have similar utility use patterns (e.g., access to electricity), so this more likely explained by local availability of fi rewood.

## Discussion

Spatialized social networks demonstrate patterns in this study area and, in particular, in the Willowvale community of Muncu. We maintain that the results could inform investigations of both resource access and social network position. It would be a far reach, however, to conclude that network variables were closely associated with geographic variables in our study, as measured by centrality (networks) and distance and area (resource variables). If indeed the environment is not separate from the social sphere, as most contemporary environmental social science concludes (Moran 2010), then in some ways these fi ndings are surprising, particularly because they are an attempt to describe phenomena very particular to communities themselves. We ultimately favor an interpretation that draws on interactions between spatial and the social phenomena, even if at fi rst glance they would appear to be athwart. The argument that the natural environment is not uniformly deterministic of societal organization dates back more than a century, to such thinkers as de la Blache (1922) and his contemporaries, but is nevertheless important to recognize in light of both the spatial turn in geography and a reawakening of network and social structure focused modes of inquiry in the social sciences. Furthermore, we investigate a smaller scale and our expectation that such features should be interrelated might be appreciated in this vein.

Our results illustrate that network variables might both follow from and inform natural resource-based variables. The fact that neither sets of measures is static and that a household ' s structural position changes over time and context does not dispute the fact that at some level our results indicate social and geographic relationships need to be more closely assessed. Notably, the village of Muncu recurs as a community in our analysis, even when other communities prove less con fi rmatory. In correlating the centralities of the household within the exchange networks with the area of and distance to the natural resource area, Muncu appears in two differing exchange situations. Centrality measurements derived from exchanges of manual labor as well as correlations

Figure 3 A sociospatial map of Sewefontein wherein the exchange networks for wood and water, food, money, labor, and disease information sharing are laid over satellite imagery of the entire community. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

between wood and water exchanges and the areas and distances of wood and water collection locations demonstrate that centrality is not uniformly associated with with spatial measurements, even if it might appear otherwise. Indeed, the sharing of labor, which often includes activities such as herding, construction, and fi rewood collection in rural South Africa, might seem to be logically connected. An exchange of wood or other NTFPs and even water is not surprisingly linked to the area variables here, but even when distances and areas are compared across the four communities, these linkages become blurry. Tokwe, of roughly the same size and the same ethnicity, does not emerge in a similar fashion.

A questionable interaction between the environment and social variables is slightly starker in the case of Zaaimanshoek, where again directionality is not necessarily of the greatest importance. In Zaaimanshoek, in one correlation each, centrality measurements associate with resource-based ones. Zaaimanshoek ' s signi fi cance is perhaps the more intriguing of the two, given the apparent association that exists between household fi nancial exchanges and livestock grazing areas.

## Measurements in Focus

In all cases where there were signi fi cant results in the hypothesized direction between centrality and geographic variables, degree centrality, the least sophisticated of the centrality measurements used, was not the most indicative given hypothesized directions of correlation. Degree showed up as signi fi cant only once in the hypothesized direction (in Zaaimanshoek), where measurements of money exchange positively correlate with the area for resource grazing. Closeness centrality was more prevalent, and eigenvector appeared once in a non-hypothesized direction. Eigenvector is the measure of an actor ' s network in fl uence, and closeness is a geometric measure that weighs ties on the basis of the existence of other ties. Closeness measurements could be detecting in fl uential households, whose resource access and size are especially relevant, but this appears to only be the case in Muncu. Similarly, degree, the least mathematically complex of network measurements, demonstrates the importance of certain, presumably more af fl uent households, in a circumstance of few large stock (e.g., cattle are not permitted), as an example.

Our data show that the social networks, and particularly the measure of social capital of individual rural households, are relevant to an understanding of that household ' s geography, in terms of both its resource access and its assets. Our possibilist argument is that this relationship is not uniform across the two regions, and especially not across the four communities we identify in poor parts of South Africa. In particular, one littoral village, Muncu, appears to demonstrate the interaction between network and geographic

variables more so than any other, and not only through the symmetry of a natural resource and the exchange thereof. Overall, these relationships are not sustained throughout all four communities, nor are they uniform in any given one. Zaaimanshoek ' s circumstance would seem to provide evidence for the social presence of af fl uent households, as measured by livestock assets. The same can be understood in Muncu, wherein households with pronounced closeness centrality demonstrate a tendency toward the collection of resources from smaller areas and within shorter distances.

Muncu is located close to the coast and is more distant from a commercial center, although closer than the villages of the Baviaanskloof. Compared with Tokwe, a greater percentage of households have a permanently or temporarily employed family member (30.00 percent vs. 17.14 percent), but employment does not necessarily explain the wood and water or labor centrality, because communities such as Sewefontein and Zaaimanshoek have higher household employment numbers (46.15 percent and 42.86 percent, respectively). The household size of Muncu, too, is not an outlier -it lies within one s of the mean (33.25). Finally, measures of social capital, including household church attendance or civil society or political participation, do not appear to be statistically different.

Muncu represents a case where social structure determines natural resource access and size, in a minute way. We are as yet unable to explain why this is the case fully without a broader research foray. Further variables testing and attribute data gathering should be carried out to understand this. Our results could provide a contrasting frame to environmentally or structurally deterministic formulations of natural resource access and assets in the rural Eastern Cape, because most of the communities do not share relationships between their structural importance and their basis for resource acquisition. One can argue that given the size and geographic layout of these communities, the basis for associating network variables with geographic ones is unfounded. Issues of natural resource access and assets are those of equity and accumulation, which occur at larger concentric geographic scales (Escobar 2006). Similarly, an analysis of exchanges leaves out many households that cannot be measured indirectly from the responses of kin regarding food-sharing patterns.

We, however, attest to the value of relational, participatory mapping, and fi eld data collection. If anything, we fi nd the lack of associations at such a small geographic and social scale to be intriguing. Even a robust critique of reductionism, if indeed our work can be accused as such, must acknowledge that the wide assortment of resource features we gathered in combination with the detailed network data would most likely have some relationship if social features and natural resource access were analyzed at such a fi ne grain.

## Conclusions

This work represents techniques from different disciplines, which purposefully quantify the research problem at a smaller unit of analysis and scale and, in so doing, remove the complications of political economic factors -or least as much of their explanatory power. Variability exists within survey and exchange data, and even more so in resource distance and area measurements, but our focus has been on how such variability provides meaning for geographic circumstances, not how accumulation and inequality have arisen in rural South Africa. This is, we believe, one contribution. As for the messiness of network responses, although we are neither the fi rst nor the last to use the household for these responses, we think it is important to note that the abstractions detailed by the household in their exchanges are concrete, as observable in the results of our analyses of network centralization.

This possibilist contention is one that recognizes the physical environment and the social environment as meaningful, although not always in constant interaction as presented in systems theories (Cote and Nightingale 2012). This is complemented by what we see as the value in a geosocial, or sociospatial, lens of analysis, which geographers have noted privileges neither the geographic nor the social context over the other (Luo and MacEachren 2014). In the developing world, especially in Africa, the environment has been cited as either a constraint or a buffer against social processes. Another approach, however, might be to view it as the driving force in social and geographic interactions. Neither might be particularly relevant in our own study, whereby neither the social capital of a household nor the environmental or natural resources available to that household emerge as dominant. &amp;

## Note

- 1 We recognize this is an etic, not emic, geographic system of nomenclature. We use it to simplify the description of place.

## Literature Cited

- An, W., and S. Schramski. 2015. Analysis of contested reports in exchange networks based on actors ' credibility. Social Networks 40:25 -33.
- Andris, C. 2011. Metrics and methods for social distance. PhD diss., Department of Urban Studies and Planning, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA. http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/68882 (last accessed 29 July 2015).

Armitage, D. R., R. Plummer, F. Berkes, R. I. Arthur, A. T. Charles, I. J. Davidson-Hunt, A. P. Diduck, N. C. Doubleday, D. S. Johnson, and M. Marschke. 2008. Adaptive co-management for social-ecological complexity. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 7 (2): 95 -102.

- Bates, S. J., J. Trostle, W. T. Cevallos, A. Hubbard, and J. N. S. Eisenberg. 2007. Relating diarrheal disease to social networks and the geographic con fi guration of

- communities in rural Ecuador. American Journal of Epidemiology 166 (9): 1088 -95.
- Bebbington, A. 1999. Capitals and capabilities: A framework for analyzing peasant viability, rural livelihoods and poverty. World Development 27 (12): 2021 -44.
- Bender, D. R. 1967. A re fi nement of the concept of household: Families, co-residence, and domestic functions. American Anthropologist 69 (5): 493 -504.
- Bhandari, P. B. 2013. Rural livelihood change? Household capital, community resources and livelihood transition. Journal of Rural Studies 32:126 -36.
- Bodin, € O, and C. Prell. 2011. Social networks and natural resource management: Uncovering the social fabric of environmental governance . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Bosco, F. J. 2006. The Madres de Plaza de Mayo and three decades of human rights ' activism: Embeddedness, emotions, and social movements. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 96 (2): 342 -65.
- Bossard, J. H. S. 1932. Residential propinquity as a factor in marriage selection. American Journal of Sociology 38 (2): 219 -24.
- Brondízio, E. S., and R. R. Chowdhury. 2013. Human -environment research: Past trends, current challenges, and future directions. In Human -environment interactions , ed. E. S. Brondízio, and E. F. Moran, 391 -400. New York: Springer.
- Burrell, J. 2009. The fi eld site as a network: A strategy for locating ethnographic research. Field Methods 21 (2): 181 -99.
- Butts, C. T., R. M. Acton, J. R. Hipp, and N. N. Nagle. 2012. Geographical variability and network structure. Capturing Context: Integrating Spatial and Social Network Analyses 34 (1): 82 -100.
- Cassidy, L., and G. D. Barnes. 2013. Understanding household connectivity and resilience in marginal rural communities through social network analysis in the village of Habu, Botswana. Ecology and Society 17 (4): 11.
- Castells, M. 2011. The rise of the network society: The information age . Economy, society, and culture . Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
- Chambers, R. 2012. Revolutions in development inquiry . London and New York: Taylor &amp; Francis.
- Christakis, N. A., and J. H. Fowler. 2007. The spread of obesity in a large social network over 32 years. New England Journal of Medicine 357 (4): 370 -79.
- Coleman, J. S. 1988. Social capital in the creation of human capital. American Journal of Sociology 94:S95 -S120.
- Costenbader, E., and T. W. Valente. 2003. The stability of centrality measures when networks are sampled. Social Networks 25 (4): 283 -307.
- Cote, M., and A. J. Nightingale. 2012. Resilience thinking meets social theory situating social change in socioecological systems (SES) research. Progress in Human Geography 36 (4): 475 -89.
- Crane, W. 2006. Biodiversity conservation and land rights in South Africa: Whither the farm dwellers? Geoforum 37 (6): 1035 -45.
- Crona, B., H. Ernstson, C. Prell, M. Reed, and K. Hubacek. 2011. Combining social network approaches with social theories to improve understanding of natural resource governance. In Social networks and natural resource management , ed. € O. Bodin, and C. Prell, 44 -72. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Crucitti, P., V. Latora, and S. Porta. 2006. Centrality measures in spatial networks of urban streets. Physical Review E 73 (3): 036125.
- De La Blache, P. V. 1952. Principles of human geography , ed. E. de Martonne. New York: H. Holt and Company.
- Escobar, A. 2006. Difference and con fl ict in the struggle over natural resources: A political ecology framework. Development 49 (3): 6 -13.
- Festinger, L. 1950. Informal social communication. Psychological Review 57 (5): 271.
- Freeman, L. C. 1976. A bibliography of social networks . Monticello, IL: Council of Planning Librarians.
- Freeman, L. C., S. C. Freeman, and A. G. Michaelson. 1988. On human social intelligence. Journal of Social and Biological Structures 11 (4): 415 -25.
- Giordano, A., and T. Cole. 2011. On place and space: Calculating social and spatial networks in the Budapest ghetto. Transactions in GIS 15:143 -70.
- Giuliani, E. 2007. The selective nature of knowledge networks in clusters: Evidence from the wine industry. Journal of Economic Geography 7 (2): 139 -68.
- Goodchild, M. F., L. Anselin, R. P. Appelbaum, and B. H. Harthorn. 2000. Toward spatially integrated social science. International Regional Science Review 23 (2): 139 -59.
- Goodchild, M. F., and D. G. Janelle. 2010. Toward critical spatial thinking in the social sciences and humanities. GeoJournal 75 (1): 3 -13.
- Granovetter, M. 1985. Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology 91 (3): 481 -510.
- Guimer  a, R., S. Mossa, A. Turtschi, and L. A. Nunes Amaral. 2005. The worldwide air transportation network: Anomalous centrality, community structure, and cities ' global roles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102 (22): 7794 -99.
- H € agerstrand, T. 1967. The computer and the geographer. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 42:1 -19.
- Hess, M. 2004. ' Spatial ' relationships? ' Towards a reconceptualization of embeddedness. Progress in Human Geography 28 (2): 165 -86.
- Keilman, N. 1995. Household concepts and household de fi nitions in Western Europe: Different levels but similar trends in household developments. In Household demography and household modeling , ed. E. van Imhoff, A. Kuijsten, P. Hooimeijer, and L. van Wissen, 111 -35. New York: Springer.
- Kelly, G., A. Cooper, E. Pinkerton, and D. Ramsey. 2014. Quantifying equity with Messrs. Markov, Lorenz and Gini: Retaining and distributing bene fi ts in natural resource-dependent communities. Journal of Rural and Community Development 9 (3): 97 -117.
- Kossinets, G. 2006. Effects of missing data in social networks. Social Networks 28 (3): 247 -68.
- Kubr, M., and J. Prokopenko. 1989. Diagnosing management training and development needs: Concepts and techniques . Geneva: International Labour Of fi ce.
- Kwan, M.-P. 2007. Mobile communications, social networks, and urban travel: Hypertext as a new metaphor for conceptualizing spatial interaction. The Professional Geographer 59 (4): 434 -46.
- Lazarsfeld, P. F., and R. K. Merton. 1954. Friendship as a social process: A substantive and methodological analysis. Freedom and Control in Modern Society 18 (1): 18 -66.

- Lee, S.-H., J.-Y. Choi, S.-H. Yoo, and Y.-G. Oh. 2013. Evaluating spatial centrality for integrated tourism management in rural areas using GIS and network analysis. Tourism Management 34:14 -24.
- Lefebvre, H. 1991. The production of space . New York: Wiley.
- Lefebvre, H., N. Brenner, and S. Elden. 2009. State, space, world: Selected essays . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Leitner, H., E. Sheppard, and K. M Sziarto. 2008. The spatialities of contentious politics. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 33 (2): 157 -72.
- Lin, N. 2001. Social capital: A theory of social structure and action . New York: Cambridge University Press.
- ---. 2002. Social capital: A theory of social structure and action . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- L  opez-Feldman, A., and J. E. Wilen. 2008. Poverty and spatial dimensions of non-timber forest extraction. Environment and Development Economics 13 (5): 621 -42.
- Luo, W., and A. M. MacEachren. 2014. Geo-social visual analytics. Journal of Spatial Information Science 2014 (8): 27 -66.
- Massey, D. 2004. Geographies of responsibility. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography 86 (1): 5 -18.
- McLain, R., M. Poe, K. Biedenweg, L. Cerveny, D. Besser, and D. Blahna. 2013. Making sense of human ecology mapping: An overview of approaches to integrating sociospatial data into environmental planning. Human Ecology 41 (5): 651 -65.
- McPherson, M., L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M Cook. 2001. Birds of a feather: Homophily in social networks. Annual Review of Sociology 27 (1): 415 -44.
- Miller, H. J. 2004. Tobler ' s fi rst law and spatial analysis. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 (2): 284 -89.
- Moore, S., E. Eng, and M. Daniel. 2003. International NGOs and the role of network centrality in humanitarian aid operations: A case study of coordination during the 2000 Mozambique fl oods. Disasters 27 (4): 305 -18.
- Moran, E. F. 2010. Environmental social science: Human -environment interactions and sustainability . New York: Wiley.
- Moran, E. F., and E. S. Brondízio. 2013. Introduction to human -environment interactions research. In Human -environment interactions , ed. E. S. Brondízio, and E. F. Moran, 1 -24. New York: Springer.
- Nepal, M., A. K. Bohara, and R. P. Berrens. 2007. The impacts of social networks and household forest conservation efforts in rural Nepal. Land Economics 83 (2): 174 -91.
- Onnela, J.-P., S. Arbesman, M. C. Gonz  alez, A.-L. Barab  asi, and N. A. Christakis. 2011. Geographic constraints on social network groups. PLoS ONE 6 (4): e16939.
- Prell, C., K. Hubacek, and M. Reed. 2009. Stakeholder analysis and social network analysis in natural resource management. Society and Natural Resources 22 (6): 501 -18.
- Quintana-Murci, L., C. Harmant, H. Quach, O. Balanovsky, V. Zaporozhchenko, C. Bormans, P. D. van Helden, E. G. Hoal, and D. M. Behar. 2010. Strong maternal Khoisan contribution to the South African coloured population: A case of gender-biased admixture. The American Journal of Human Genetics 86 (4): 611 -20.
- Radil, S. M., C. Flint, and G. E. Tita. 2010. Spatializing social networks: Using social network analysis to investigate geographies of gang rivalry, territoriality, and violence in Los Angeles. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 100 (2): 307 -26.
- Rayner, E. 2004. Unconscious logic: An introduction to Matte Blanco ' s bi-logic and its uses . London and New York: Routledge.
- Robbins, P. 2012. Political ecology: A critical introduction . New York: Wiley.
- Robinson, E. J. Z., H. J. Albers, and J. C. Williams. 2008. Spatial and temporal modeling of community non-timber forest extraction. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 56 (3): 234 -45.
- Rojas, C., J. Pino, C. Basnou, and M. Vivanco. 2013. Assessing land-use and -cover changes in relation to geographic factors and urban planning in the metropolitan area of Concepci  on (Chile). Implications for biodiversity conservation. Applied Geography 39: 93 -103.
- Rydin, Y., and N. Holman. 2004. Re   evaluating the contribution of social capital in achieving sustainable development. Local Environment 9 (2): 117 -33.
- Saradamoni, K. 1992. Finding the household . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
- Schutte, S., and K. Donnay. 2014. Matched wake analysis: Finding causal relationships in spatiotemporal event data. Political Geography 41:1 -10.
- Scoones, I. 1998. Sustainable rural livelihoods: A framework for analysis. IDS Working Paper 72, Institute of Development Studies, Bloomington, IN.
- Scott, J. 2011. Conceptualising the social world: Principles of sociological analysis . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Scott, J., and P. Carrington. 2011. The Sage handbook of social network analysis . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
- Shackleton, C. M., and S. E. Shackleton. 2004. The importance of non-timber forest products in rural livelihood security and as safety nets: A review of evidence from South Africa. South African Journal of Science 100 (11 -12): 658 -64.
- Shakya, H. B., N. A. Christakis, and J. H. Fowler. 2014. Association between social network communities and health behavior: An observational sociocentric network study of latrine ownership in rural India. American Journal of Public Health 104 (5): 930 -37.
- Staeheli, L. A. 2003. Place. In A companion to political geography , ed. J. A Agnew, K. Mitchell, and G.  O Tuathail, 158 -70. London: Wiley-Blackwell.
- Statistics South Africa. 2012. Census 2011. Statistical release P0301.4, Statistics South Africa, Pretoria, South Africa.
- Tobler, W. R. 1970. A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit region. Economic Geography 46:234 -40.
- Warf, B., and S. Arias. 2009. The spatial turn: Interdisciplinary perspectives . London and New York: Taylor &amp; Francis.
- Warren, S. 2011. The social potential of GIS. In The Sage handbook of GIS and society , ed. T. L. Nyerges, R. B. McMaster, and H. Couclelis, 67 -86. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
- Westaway, A. 2012. Rural poverty in the Eastern Cape Province: Legacy of apartheid or consequence of contemporary segregationism? Development Southern Africa 29 (1): 115 -25.
- Wilbanks, T. J. 1994. ' Sustainable development ' in geographic perspective. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 84 (4): 541 -56.
- Zhang, M. 2010. Social network analysis: History, concepts, and research. In Handbook of social network technologies and applications , ed. B. Furht, 3 -21. New York: Springer.

SAM SCHRAMSKI is a Visiting Postdoctoral Scholar at the Center for Science and Technology Policy Research and the Center for Environmental Journalism at the University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, and a Postdoctoral Researcher in the Postgraduate Program in Amazonian Society and Culture at the Federal University of Amazonas, Manaus, Brazil 69020 -160. E-mail: sam.schramski@colorado.edu. His research interests include social network and geosocial

## Appendix Whole Network Survey (English)

1. How would you characterize your exchanges of food with household B per month?
- a. Nothing (0)
- b. Equal (1)
- c. Our household gives more to them than they give to us (2)
- d. Their household gives more to us than we give to them (3)
2. How would you characterize your exchanges of money with household B per month?
- a. Nothing (0)
- b. Equal (1)
- c. Our household gives more to them than they give to us (2)
- d. Their household gives more to us than we give to them (3)
3. How would you characterize your exchanges of information about disease with household B per month?

analyses, climate change adaptation, and agrobiodiversity in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa.

ZHUOJIE HUANG is a Postdoctoral Scientist at the GeoVISTA Center at The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802. E-mail: seenhzj@gmail.com. His research interests include population movement and location-based social network analysis.

- a. Nothing (0)
- b. Equal (1)
- c. Our household gives more to them than they give to us (2)
- d. Their household gives more to us than we give to them (3)
4. How would you characterize your exchanges of wood or water with household B per month?
- a. Nothing (0)
- b. Equal (1)
- c. Our household gives more to them than they give to us (2)
- d. Their household gives more to us than we give to them (3)
5. How would you characterize your exchanges of manual labor with household B per month?
- a. Nothing (0)
- b. Equal (1)
- c. Our household gives more to them than they give to us (2)
- d. Their household gives more to us than we give to them (3)

Table A1 Correlations between exchanges of manual labor between households and wood and water collection in Muncu

|                                            | Degree    | Betweenness centrality   | Closeness centrality   | Eigenvector centrality   | Mean of distances to wood collection   | Sumof distances to wood collection   | Summed areas for wood collection   | Mean area for wood collection   |
|--------------------------------------------|-----------|--------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Degree                                     | 1.000 *** | 0.907 ***                | ¡ 0.076                | 0.983 ***                | 0.004                                  | 0.006                                | 0.354                              | 0.288                           |
| Betweenness centrality                     | 0.907 *** | 1.000 ***                | ¡ 0.1                  | 0.879 ***                | 0.002                                  | 0.007                                | 0.31                               | 0.236                           |
| Closeness centrality                       | ¡ 0.076   | 0.1                      | 1.000 ***              | ¡ 0.01                   | 0.116                                  | 0.619                                | ¡ 0.138                            | ¡ 0.372                         |
| Eigenvector centrality                     | 0.983 *** | ¡ 0.879 ***              | ¡ 0.01                 | 1.000 ***                | 0.032                                  | 0.066                                | 0.341                              | 0.267                           |
| Mean of distances to wood collection areas | 0.004     | 0.002                    | 0.116                  | 0.032                    | 1.000 ***                              | 0.61                                 | 0.072                              | 0.085                           |
| Sum of distances to wood collection areas  | 0.006     | 0.007                    | 0.619 **               | 0.066                    | 0.610 **                               | 1.000 ***                            | 0.356                              | 0.15                            |
| Summed areas of wood collection            | 0.354     | 0.31                     | ¡ 0.138                | 0.341                    | 0.072                                  | 0.356                                | 1.000 ***                          | 0.939 ***                       |
| Mean area of wood collection               | 0.288     | 0.236                    | ¡ 0.372                | 0.267                    | 0.085                                  | 0.15                                 | 0.939 ***                          | 1.000 ***                       |

Table A2 Correlations between exchanges of wood and water between households and wood collection areas in Muncu

|                                                  | Degree     | Betweenness centrality   | Closeness centrality   | Eigenvector centrality   | Mean of distances to wood collection   | Sumof distances to wood collection   | Summed areas of wood collection   | Mean area of wood collection   |
|--------------------------------------------------|------------|--------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Degree                                           | 1.000 *    | 0.548                    | ¡ 0.643                | 0.983 *                  | 0.043                                  | ¡ 0.384                              | 0.313                             | 0.455                          |
| Betweenness centrality                           | 0.548 *    | 1.000 *                  | ¡ 0.332                | 0.491                    | 0.477                                  | 0.088                                | 0.033                             | 0.092                          |
| Closeness centrality                             | ¡ 0.643 ** | ¡ 0.332                  | 1.000 *                | ¡ 0.611                  | 0.053                                  | 0.194                                | ¡ 0.512                           | ¡ 0.563                        |
| Eigenvector centrality                           | 0.983 *    | 0.491 *                  | ¡ 0.611 **             | 1.000 *                  | 0.005                                  | ¡ 0.419                              | 0.313                             | 0.475                          |
| Mean of distances to wood collection areas       | 0.043      | 0.477                    | 0.053                  | 0.005                    | 1.000 *                                | 0.61                                 | 0.072                             | 0.085                          |
| Sum of distances to wood                         | ¡ 0.384    | 0.088                    | 0.194                  | ¡ 0.419                  | 0.610 **                               | 1.000 *                              | 0.356                             | 0.15                           |
| collection areas Summed areas of wood collection | 0.313      | 0.033                    | ¡ 0.512 *              | 0.313                    | 0.072                                  | 0.356                                | 1.000 *                           | 0.939 *                        |
| Mean area of wood collection                     | 0.455      | 0.092                    | ¡ 0.563 *              | 0.475                    | 0.085                                  | 0.15                                 | 0.939 *                           | 1.000 *                        |

Table A3 Correlations of exchanges of manual labor between households and wood collection areas in Sewefontein

|                                            | Degree    | Betweenness centrality   | Closeness centrality   | Eigenvector centrality   |     | Mean of distances to wood collection   | Sumof distances to wood collection   | Summed areas of wood collection   | Mean area of wood collection   |
|--------------------------------------------|-----------|--------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------|-----|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Degree                                     | 1.000 *** | N/A                      | 0.683                  | 0.624                    | 0   |                                        | 0.612                                | ¡ 0.612                           | ¡ 0.612                        |
| Betweenness centrality                     | N/A       | N/A                      | N/A                    | N/A                      |     | N/A                                    | N/A                                  | N/A                               | N/A                            |
| Closeness centrality                       | 0.683     | N/A                      | 1.000 ***              | 0                        |     | 0.239                                  | 0.657                                | ¡ 0.06                            | ¡ 0.06                         |
| Eigenvector centrality                     | 0.624     | N/A                      | 0                      | 1.000 ***                |     | 0.164                                  | 0.455                                | ¡ 0.982 **                        | ¡ 0.927                        |
| Mean of distances to wood collection areas | 0         | N/A                      | 0.239                  | 0.164                    |     | 1.000 ***                              | 0.786                                | ¡ 0.321                           | 0                              |
| Sum of distances to wood collection areas  | 0.612     | N/A                      | 0.657                  | 0.455                    |     | 0.786 *                                | 1.000 ***                            | ¡ 0.571                           | ¡ 0.321                        |
| Summed areas of wood collection            | ¡ 0.612   | N/A                      | ¡ 0.06                 | ¡ 0.982                  | *** | ¡ 0.321                                | ¡ 0.571                              | 1.000 ***                         | 0.893                          |
| Mean area of wood collection               | ¡ 0.612   | N/A                      | ¡ 0.06                 | ¡ 0.927                  | **  | 0                                      | ¡ 0.321                              | 0.893 **                          | 1.000 ***                      |

Table A4 Correlations between exchanges of wood and water between households and wood collection sites in Sewefontein

|                        | Degree   | Betweenness centrality   | Closeness centrality   | Eigenvector centrality   | Mean of distances to wood collection areas   | Sumof distances to wood collection areas   | Summed areas of wood collection sites   | Mean area of wood collection sites   |
|------------------------|----------|--------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Degree                 | 1.000 *  | 0.56                     | 0.678 *                | 0.853 *                  | ¡ 0.21                                       | ¡ 0.089                                    | ¡ 0.027                                 | ¡ 0.134                              |
| Betweenness centrality | 0.560 *  | 1.000 *                  | 0.444                  | 0.522                    | ¡ 0.134                                      | ¡ 0.025                                    | ¡ 0.107                                 | ¡ 0.214                              |
| Closeness centrality   | 0.678 ** | 0.444 *                  | 1.000 *                | 0.717 **                 | ¡ 0.179                                      | ¡ 0.117                                    | ¡ 0.216                                 | ¡ 0.277                              |
| Eigenvector centrality | 0.853 *  | 0.522 *                  | 0.717 *                | 1.000 *                  | ¡ 0.286                                      | ¡ 0.239                                    | ¡ 0.09                                  | ¡ 0.139                              |

Table A5 Correlations between exchanges of financial resources between households and livestock grazing areas in Zaaimanshoek

|                                                | Degree    | Betweenness centrality   | Closeness centrality   | Eigenvector centrality   | Mean distance to livestock grazing areas   | Sumof distances to areas of livestock grazing   | Sum of areas for livestock grazing   | Mean of areas for livestock grazing   |
|------------------------------------------------|-----------|--------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| Degree                                         | 1.000 *** | ¡ 0.082                  | ¡ 0.196                | 0.398                    | 0.229                                      | 0.388                                           | 0.733                                | 0.326                                 |
| Betweenness centrality                         | ¡ 0.082   | 1.000 ***                | 0.3                    | ¡ 0.137                  | 0.548                                      | 0.548                                           | 0.420                                | 0.560                                 |
| Closeness centrality                           | ¡ 0.196   | 0.3                      | 1.000 ***              | ¡ 0.347                  | 0.128                                      | 0.037                                           | ¡ 0.224                              | 0.019                                 |
| Eigenvector centrality                         | 0.398     | ¡ 0.137                  | ¡ 0.347                | 1.000 ***                | 0.167                                      | 0.350                                           | 0.545                                | 0.119                                 |
| Mean distance to livestock grazing areas       | 0.229     | 0.548                    | 0.128                  | 0.167                    | 1.000 ***                                  | 0.900 *                                         | 0.349                                | 0.315                                 |
| Sum of distances to areas of livestock grazing | 0.388     | 0.548                    | 0.037                  | 0.35                     | 0.900 ***                                  | 1.000 ***                                       | 0.553                                | 0.179                                 |
| Sum of areas for livestock grazing             | 0.733 *   | 0.42                     | ¡ 0.224                | 0.545                    | 0.349                                      | 0.553                                           | 1.000 ***                            | 0.635                                 |
| Mean of areas for livestock grazing            | 0.326     | 0.56                     | 0.019                  | 0.119                    | 0.315                                      | 0.179                                           | 0.635                                | 1.000 ***                             |

Figure A1 Google Map visualization of participatory mapping data for natural resources measured in Muncu. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure A2 Google Map visualization of participatory mapping data for natural resources measured in Sewefontein. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure A3 Google Map visualization of participatory mapping data for natural resources measured in Tokwe. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure A4 Google Map visualization of participatory mapping data for natural resources measured in Zaaimanshoek. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->