This article was downloaded by: [National Cheng Kung University]

On: 11 April 2013, At: 18:31

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## Access Regimes and Regional Land Change in the Brazilian Cerrado, 1972-2002

Wendy Jepson a , Christian Brannstrom a &amp; Anthony Filippi a

a Department of Geography, Texas A&amp;M University Version of record first published: 14 Dec 2009.

To cite this article: Wendy Jepson , Christian Brannstrom &amp; Anthony Filippi (2010): Access Regimes and Regional Land Change in the Brazilian Cerrado, 1972-2002, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 100:1, 87-111

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045600903378960

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

[Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions](http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions)

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

## Access Regimes and Regional Land Change in the Brazilian Cerrado, 1972-2002

Wendy Jepson, Christian Brannstrom, and Anthony Filippi

Department of Geography, Texas A&amp;M University

We examine how access regimes, defined by a set of interrelated institutions and organizations, facilitated the flow of production resources and benefits that resulted in patterns of land change in the Brazilian Cerrado. We analyzed remotely sensed data (Landsat MSS, TM, + ETM) for three time periods (1972/1973-1986, 1986-1992, 1992-2002) with qualitative and archival data for eastern Mato Grosso state. Overall we found that land privately colonized was cleared more rapidly and extensively than lands under no colonization scheme. We also identified significant spatial variability in Cerrado conversion within and outside colonization areas and variability of annual rates of Cerrado conversion during each period. We explain that farmers in the Cerrado engaged in landleasing and production contracts and worked through cooperatives and firms to marshal resources, including credit, technology, and inputs, which, in turn, influenced land-use decisions and regional patterns of land-cover change. We conclude that a mesoscale analytical framework that examines how land managers access natural and productive resources provides useful insights to explain the processes that cause patterns of high-input agricultural expansion. Key Words: agriculture, Brazil, Cerrado, land-use and land-cover change, new institutional economics.

本文研究了巴西塞拉多地区由一系列相关的机构和组织定义的上地获取制度，是如何促进生产资源和利益的流动，并导致 土地格局变化的。我们分析了三个时段（1972/1973-1986，1986-1992，1992-2002）的遥感数据(陆卫MSS，TM，+ETM), 以及马托格罗索州东部地区的定性和档案数据。整体而言，我们发现，私人拓殖的土地比没有拓殖规划的土地得到了更为 迅速和广泛的清理。我们还确定了塞拉多拓殖地区内部和外部转换的几个重要的空间差异，以及每个时期塞拉多地区年度 转化率的变化。我们解释说，寨拉多的农民通过合作社和商社进行土地租借和生产合同，借此调动资源，包括信贷，技术， 和投入。这一切反过来又影响了上地利用的决策和上地覆盖变化的区域模式。我们的结论是，通过一个中尺度分析框架来 研究土地管理者是如何获得自然资源和生产资源，为说明导致高投入的农业发展模式的进程提供了有益的见解。关键词： 农业，巴西，寨拉多地区，土地利用和土地覆盖的变化，新制度经济学。

En el art´ ıculo examinamos la manera como los reg´ ımenes de acceso, definidos por un conjunto de instituciones y organizaciones interrelacionadas, han facilitado el flujo de recursos de producci´ on y beneficios, que dieron lugar a patrones de cambios de la tierra en el Cerrado brasile˜ no. Analizamos datos de percepci´ on remota (Landsat MSS, TM, +ETM) para tres per´ ıodos de tiempo (1972/1973-1986, 1986-1992, 1992-2002), con datos cualitativos y de archivo para la parte oriental del estado de Mato Grosso. Se encontr´ o, en general, que la tierra colonizada de manera privada se desmont´ o m´ as r´ apidamente y en mayor extensi´ on que las tierras no sujetas a esquema colonizador alguno. Tambi´ en identificamos una variabilidad espacial significativa en la conversi´ on del Cerrado, dentro y fuera de las ´ areas de colonizaci´ on, y variabilidad de las tasas anuales de conversi´ on del Cerrado en cada per´ ıodo. Explicamos que los agricultores del Cerrado se han comprometido con contratos de arrendamiento de tierras y producci´ on, y trabajan integrados en cooperativas y compa˜ n´ ıas para compartir recursos, incluyendo cr´ edito, tecnolog´ ıa e insumos, lo que a su vez influye sobre las decisiones relativas al uso de la tierra y los patrones regionales de cambio en la cobertura del suelo. Concluimos que un marco anal´ ıtico a escala mediana que examine el modo como los agricultores acceden a los recursos naturales y productivos sirve como instrumento intelectual para explicar los procesos que generan los patrones de expansi´ on de una agricultura intensiva en el uso de insumos. Palabras clave : agricultura, Brasil, Cerrado, cambio del uso y cobertura del suelo, nueva econom´ ıa institucional .

I nstitutions, the formal and informal rules that define access to natural resources, are central to contemporary theories of land-use and land-cover change (LULCC) because they structure the complex and dynamic interactions between society and the environment (Ostrom 1990; Turner, Meyer, and Skole 1994; Haberl, Batterbury, and Moran 2001; Lambin et al. 2001; Geist and Lambin 2002; Lambin, Geist, and Lepers 2003; Ostrom, Janssen, and Anderies 2007). Institutions, particularly property rights to resources, are underlying causes of human modification of nature and landscapes (Gibson, McKean, and Ostrom 2000; Tucker and Ostrom 2005). This close attention to

social and economic relationships that influence how individuals interact with environmental resources. Institutions and organizations influence access to land, capital, technology, and labor and, thus, are potentially significant in explaining land-change outcomes. Therefore, our research objective is to examine how access regimes, defined by a set of interrelated institutions and organizations, facilitate the flow of productive resources and benefits that ultimately result in patterns of land change.

Weapply this 'access regime' framework to examine high-input agriculture in the Brazilian Cerrado. For this eco-region, estimates of total clearing for crops and pasture range from 40 to 55 percent (Machado et al. 2004; Sano et al. 2009), with considerable interregional variability in the patterns of remaining Cerrado fragments (Brannstrom et al. 2008). Macroeconomic drivers of commercial agricultural expansion in the Cerrado include road construction, land policies, technological change, and global agro-commodity demand (Smith et al. 1998; Smith et al. 1999; Fearnside 2001; Simon andGaragorry 2006; Wolford 2008). Scholars who have estimated Cerrado land change have privileged the entire eco-region over smaller scales of analysis, whereas social scientists have emphasized federal policies over regional political economic processes as drivers of land change. We argue that the study of regional institutions and organizations provides a mesoscale analysis that connects the macroeconomic drivers to place-based land-use and land-cover processes and outcomes. Research that integrates remote sensing results with grounded socioeconomic analyses on Cerrado land change has advanced very little. Therefore, we examine how farmers engage with a set of institutions and organizations to facilitate the flow of production resources that result in certain land-use decisions and patterns of land change. Addressing this problem will allow for the specification of place-based socioeconomic factors in land use, an analysis of the synergy among them, and an improvement in comparability across cases, which ultimately furthers a critical objective within land-change science (Rindfuss et al. 2004).

The article is organized as follows. First, we review research on institutions in land change and develop an access regime approach. This theoretical discussion is followed by an account of recent research in Cerrado land change against a background of state development policies and settlement in the study region, eastern Mato Grosso state. Next we detail LULCC in eastern Mato Grosso between 1972 and 2002. We proceed to examine the major trends in land-cover change

(land conversion, land-use intensification) through the access regime framework, drawing on the qualitative and archival data on the relevant organizations and institutions. We conclude with an appraisal of the access regime framework for future land-change research.

## Institutions and Access in Land-Change Research

This section begins with a review of how institutions are conceptualized within land-change research. We address key analytical shortcomings and conceptual gaps andproposeanaccessregimeframeworkthatdrawsfrom new institutional economics (NIE) to advance our theoretical understanding of how institutions shape land change. The access regime approach provides analytical space to examine how institutional and organizational synergies shape access to productive resources and result in land-change patterns.

## Institutional Analyses of Land Change

Substantial agreement exists on the idea that institutions mediate human responses to economic and social change because they are understood to 'modify the effect of factors thought to be driving the forces' of LULCC (Gibson, McKean, and Ostrom 2000, 4). Institutions, particularly property rights, determine how and where natural resources are exploited, acting as constraints and opportunities for individuals, households, and communities. The study of institutions in land-change research addresses two related concerns in human-environment scholarship. First, the study of institutions allowed some scholars to move beyond a single-cause explanation (e.g., population) of environmental change, offering a measurable category of analysis that could be compared cross-nationally (Sanderson 1994; Turner, Meyer, and Skole 1994; Geist and Lambin 2002). In this way, institutions became central to the conceptual 'driving forces/proximate causes' framework in land-change research, incorporating a set of social relations that enable or constrain an individual's access to natural resources (Geist and Lambin 2002). Institutions describe a variety of arrangements that mediate society's relationship with natural resources, ranging from markets (Lambin et al. 2001), infrastructure and subsidies (Keys and McConnell 2005), cooperation (Jiang 2004), authority (Robbins 1998), policy (Brannstrom 2005), and property rights (Gibson, McKean, and Ostrom 2000; Ostrom 1990).

Second, attention to institutions emerged from responses to Hardin's 'tragedy of the commons' idea (Blaikie and Brookfield 1987, 188-90; Feeney et al. 1990; Dietz, Ostrom, and Stern 2003). In this theoretical approach, scholars informed by rational choice theory and institutional economics defined institutions as the 'rules-in-use' that constrain humanenvironment interactions (Ostrom 1990). Formal rules include legislation, executive decisions, court decisions, and contracts; customary or informal rules are traditional practices, social mores, or taboos. This research predicted and documented the institutions that constrained social actors' access to common resources, thus undermining Hardin's position that assumed no checks or limits on societal use of natural resources. For example, institutional analysis, focusing on property rights, used geospatial methods to examine how privatization, market pressures, governance changes, and demographic changes caused the loss or degradation of community forests in Latin America, Asia, and Africa (Moran et al. 2000; Southworth and Tucker 2001; Nagendra 2002; Moran and Ostrom 2005; Agrawal and Chhatre 2006; Moran, Siqueira, and Brondizio 2006; Tucker, Randolph, and Castellanos 2007). These studies revealed how specific sets of rules, not general forms of property rights (e.g., private, public, or common), interacted with the biophysical context to shape land transformations (Tucker and Ostrom 2005).

## Theorizing Access and Land Change

Although the study of institutions has advanced theories on human-environment interactions, the emphasis on a single institution-property rights-has not captured the complex array of social relations that bear on the capacity of individuals and communities to access and use land resources. We build on current scholarship to advance an 'access regime' approach that addresses limitations of a single-institution explanation of land change. NIE and the theory of access posited by Ribot and Peluso (2003) provide the theoretical basis for arguing that a broad array of interrelated institutions and organizations needs to be included in land-change studies because they are major factors that determine how land managers access and use land resources.

NIE enhances the study of institutions because it provides a relational economic explanation of how institutions and organizations influence decisions about resource use and environmental decision making. NIE explains the role of transaction costs, property rights, and organization in economic life (Coase [1937] 1988;

Williamson 1985, 2000). In NIE analyses, institutions and organizations reduce information asymmetries, transaction costs, and risk in economic activities (Stiglitz 1986, 1989; Bardhan 1989; Harris, Hunter, and Lewis 1995; North 1995). Information asymmetry is defined as incomplete and uneven knowledge among decision makers. Transaction costs are expenditures of time, effort, or capital to acquire information and bargain, monitor, supervise, coordinate, and enforce economic relations. Institutions are informal constraints on behavior and formal rules that mark the fields of action for agents (Williamson 2000). Organizations are 'players' bound by a common purpose to achieve objectives, such as political bodies (political parties, regulatory agencies), economic bodies (firms, trade unions), social bodies (churches, clubs), and educational bodies (schools, universities; North 1995).

Although uncommon within the dominant perspectives in human-environment geography or land-change science, some scholars have applied NIE to the study of nature-society relations. These studies have targeted environmental decision making and governance (Paavola 2007) and biophysical influences on transaction costs and institutional choice (Banks 2003). Geographers and economists working in Brazil have drawn from NIE to examine how risk and transaction costs shape labor relations in rubber and coffee (Barham and Coomes 1996; Brannstrom 2001), land colonization (Jepson 2006a), and Amazonian deforestation (Alston, Libecap, and Mueller 2000).

Ribot and Peluso (2003) developed a theory of access to natural resources based on the idea that many institutions and organizations, beyond property rights, enable actors to access resources. Their view is that the study of access should identify 'the multiplicity of ways people derive benefits from resources' (Ribot and Peluso 2003, 154) and the 'larger array of institutions, social and political-economic relations, and discursive strategies that shape benefit flows' (157). They outlined a framework within which to understand resource access because, as they note, someone might have the right to benefit from land or other resources but might be unable to do so without access to capital, labor, or technology (Ribot and Peluso 2003). Ribot and Peluso argue that many institutions and organizations, beyond property rights, enable actors to access resources.

The analytical categories in NIE and the RibotPeluso theory provide a theoretical framework to examine the variable, rather than determinative, institutional and organizational interactions that contributed to land change. We develop three ideas to

advance the study of institutions in land-change research. First, we assert that institutions need to be defined theoretically to improve the capacity for better land-change model building. The descriptive approach to institutions, highlighted in the 'driving forces/proximate causes' model, is too ecumenical in its usage. This definition of institutions is theoretically thin and has become a catch-all term that loses its explanatory power. Therefore, we employ the definition of institutions as formal or informal rules-in-use.

Second, we expand the rules-in-use to include many other rules beyond property rights. We concur with Ribot and Peluso (2003) that property rights are only one element in a larger array of institutions that shape access to resources. Equating institutions to property rights in land-change research restricts the analysis to only one type of institution that influences land manger decision making. The focus on property only addresses one factor of production (e.g., land), thus ignoring the importance of other institutional arrangements that constrain and enable access to other factors of production. Land-change research should consider a 'constellation of means, relations and processes that enable various actors to derive benefits from resources' (Ribot and Peluso 2003, 154). For example, one might have land rights, through formal or customary law, but if individuals, households, or communities do not have other resources (e.g., labor, capital, technology) to use the land, then property rights are irrelevant. In sum, the narrow empirical target of property rights does not address how other types of institutions (or 'rules') also enable or constrain access, mobilization, and deployment of labor, capital, and technology so that individuals or groups can exploit land resources.

Other institutions, such as contracts, need to be included in land-change analyses. Contracts influence how factors of production (land, labor, technology, or inputs) are mobilized, used, and deployed in agriculture, which, in turn, shapes land-change outcomes. Landlease contracts (cash rental or sharecrop) are arrangements between land owners and farmers to secure land access and production resources for specific places and periods. Sharecropping, the condition in which tenants pay owners a share of the output, is an institution still common in peasant and advanced capitalist farming (Allen and Lueck 2002). Contract farming, defined as a transactional relationship between a farmer (e.g., peasants, capitalized family farms, capitalist enterprises) and a firm (e.g., processor, exporter) in which the latter commits in advance to purchase a specific crop from the grower, is also a prominent institution in agri- culture across the globe (Binswanger and Rosenzweig 1984; Scott 1984; Little and Watts 1994; Watts 1994; Singh 2002; Echanove and Steffen 2005; Bowen and Gerritsen 2007). Yet, with few exceptions (Jepson, Brown, and Koeppe 2008), the influence of contracts is absent in land-change research.

The third idea supporting our access regime approach is that organizations are theoretically distinct from institutions. Organizations such as peasant or indigenous associations (Bebbington 1999; Bebbington and Perreault 1999; Perreault 2001, 2008), social movements (Wolford 2004), and cooperatives (Brown 2001; Mutersbaugh 2002; Chase 2003) shape rural life, culture, and regional agricultural development. Despite their prominence in rural communities, organizations are absent as independent categories of analysis in land-change analytical frameworks. Researchers are beginning to examine how organizations, in the form of rural unions and landless movements, shape deforestation (Simmons et al. 2007; Puppim de Oliveira 2008). More frequently, however, organizations are simply lumped into the descriptive category of institution without attention to the particular role they play as collective actors in the economic transaction that results in land change. Therefore, we adopt the definition of organizations as 'players' or actors bounded by a common purpose to achieve objectives. These groups, often bounded by varying levels of social capital, organize to determine access to natural and productive resources for economic and social ends and, therefore, should be examined as key variables in land change.

Taken together, access regimes are defined as the specific institutional and organizational arrangements under which benefit flows occur from the use of resources. Our approach examines how farmers engage in rules and work in bounded groups to create, use, and negotiate resources access; we also assess land-change outcomes. Resources are broadly defined as natural resources (e.g., land) and productive resources (e.g., capital, technology, and labor). The term regime implies that the arrangements are relatively stable over time and that change, when it occurs, can be discerned by a change in the institutions or organizations, or both. Our framework broadens the institutional analysis in land-change studies beyond property rights to include land-leasing contracts and production contracts. In addition, we draw from NIE to treat organizations as distinct units of analysis within our expanded conceptual framework of access. Moreover, an analytical focus on organizations as distinct from institutions (rules-in-use) improves comparability across cases, which ultimately

Figure 1. (A) Brazilian Cerrado and study region; (B) municipalities and area of interest for land-change analysis.

<!-- image -->

furthers a critical objective within land-change studies (Rindfuss et al. 2004; Rindfuss et al. 2007). The remainder of this article empirically explores how institutions (property rights and contracts) and organizations (firms and cooperatives) formed a regime of access that mediated social-environmental interaction to create the conditions for two land-change outcomes-land clearance and land-use intensification-in Brazil's tropical savanna between 1972 and 2002.

## The Brazilian Cerrado

In the past forty years, the Cerrado has been converted from a 'wasteland' to Brazil's agricultural heartland, leading the country's rise to become the secondleading global soybean producer and leading exporter of soy, beef, and poultry. If, in the words of former U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell, Brazil is an 'agricultural superpower,' then it has achieved this status by the conversion large areas of the Cerrado into export-oriented farms (U.S. Department of State 2004; World Food Prize 2006). Unlike Amazonian humid tropical deforestation, the transformation of the Cerrado into commercial agro-pastoral landscapes has been infrequently examined. This section reviews the few existing studies on Cerrado land change and provides background on state policies directed toward Cerrado development as a point of departure for the subsequent institutional and organizational analysis of regional land change.

## Land-Change Research in the Cerrado

The Brazilian Cerrado is a mix of grasses, shrubs, and woody plants located on undulating topography and wide interfluves between tributaries of the Ama-

<!-- image -->

zon, Paran´ a-Paraguay, and the S˜ ao Francisco rivers (Oliveira-Filho and Ratter 2002; see Figure 1). The acidic soils are deep, porous, and high in aluminum saturation but deficient in base cations, phosphorus, and nitrogen (Furley 1999). Annual precipitation averages between 900 and 1,800 mm, with 80 percent of rain during the October through March wet season (EMBRAPA-Cerrados 1998; Goedert 1983). At the global scale, climate influences overall savanna formations, but the Cerrado's vegetation is determined by fire regimes, plant-available moisture, nutrients in soils, andtopography (Furley 1996, 1999; Mistry 1998, 2000). Although the Cerrado's biological richness is unevenly distributed (Ratter and Dargie 1992; J. F. Silva et al. 2006), the region boasts high levels of endemism in vascular plants (Marini and Cavalcanti 1996; J. M. C. Silva and Bates 2002).

Many scientists are concerned with the fate of the Cerrado as a global biodiversity 'hot spot,' an eco-region with high species richness and endemism that are under imminent threat from land users (Ratter, Ribeiro, and Bridgewater 1997; Myers et al. 2000; Cavalcanti and Joly 2002; Oliveira-Filho and Ratter 2002; J. M. C. Silva and Bates 2002; Klink and Machado 2005; J. F. Silva et al. 2006). It has been reported that 35 percent of the Cerrado was in a 'relatively natural state' (Mantovani and Pereira 1998); however, more recent studies have estimated that the Cerrado was 55 percent cleared in 2002 (Machado et al. 2004) and other scholars have estimated that only 40 percent has been cleared (Sano et al. 2009). Other scholars have examined Cerrado land change at larger map scales and identified interregional differences in terms of rates of change and spatial patterns in the far west of Bahia state (Batistella et al. 2002; Brannstrom 2009) and

Mato Grosso state (Jasinski et al. 2005; Jepson 2005; Ratana, Huete, and Ferreira 2005; Morton et al. 2006; Galford et al. 2008). One comparative study between western Bahia and eastern Mato Grosso demonstrated that although macroeconomic drivers are similar, land changes diverged in terms of landscape fragmentation and rates of change (Brannstrom et al. 2008).

Whether concerned with the fate of the Cerrado biome or the patterns of regional land cover, research that links remote sensing results with grounded socioeconomic analyses has advanced very little. In general terms, macroscale political economic drivers are limited because they focus only on unidirectional aggregate land-cover loss rather than dynamic landscape change (Jepson 2005). The main causes of Cerrado land change are thought to be state development policies and global soybean demand (Myers et al. 2000; Wood, StedmanEdwards, and Mang 2000; Kaimowitz and Smith 2001; Warnken 1999). The loss of Cerrado to soybeans has led to fears that a soybean-led advance of the agri- cultural frontier will threaten Brazil's humid tropical forests (Branford and Freris 2000; Fearnside 2001; Rohter 2003; Dros 2004).

## Cerrado Agricultural Development Policies

Beginning in the 1960s, the Brazilian state and allied international development interests created and sustained agronomic research and land-settlement programs that catalyzed agricultural development in the Cerrado. While government scientists developed the technology necessary to cultivate crops in the Cerrado, a second set of policies for infrastructure, farm improvements, and land purchases laid the groundwork for agricultural expansion (Figure 2).

Agricultural research adapted crop varieties and soil management to the ecological limitations of low soil pH and high Al concentration since the 1950s (McClung et al. 1958; Sousa and Trigueiro 1989), revealing the potential for further agronomic research to advance

Figure 2. Cerrado development projects and private colonization projects.

<!-- image -->

economic and agricultural development in the Cerrado (Crawford 1963; Ferri 1963; Gaucher 1963; Labouriau and Vanzolini 1964; Denevan 1965). By the early 1970s, the Brazilian government systematically funded research programs to improve agricultural production in the Cerrado by creating a research center called Centro Pesquisa Agropecu´ aria dos Cerrados (CPAC 1975, 23-25; Sousa and Trigueiro 1989; Wilkinson and Sorj 1992, 17; Pessˆ oa and Bonelli 1997). Principal achievements of CPAC included the adaptation of soybean, maize, and wheat varieties to Cerrado soils and soil correction techniques, such as lime applications to reduce soil acidity (Spehar 1994, 1995; Bahia Filho and Lopes 1998). In addition, Brazilian agronomists adapted soy cultivars to the tropical photoperiod, which is much shorter than summer months in higher latitudes, thus increasing the potential area for cultivation.

POLOCENTRO (Development Program for the Cerrado, 1975) aimed to develop infrastructure in the Cerrado and finance agricultural research at CPAC (Federal Republic of Brasil 2002). POLOCENTRO, part of the military regime's national development plan to increase national agricultural production capacity by 7 percent in a five-year period, targeted the Cerrado to increase agricultural lands by 3 million hectares. POLOCENTRO financed Cerrado land clearing, production, commercialization, capital goods acquisition, and harvest (Ruralidade 1975; R. R. Silva 1985; Scheibe 1985). The federal government also allocated approximately US$97.2 million to augment agricultural research, extension, road improvement, rural electrification, and grain storage units (Instituto de Pesquisa Econˆ omica Aplicada [IPEA] 1979). For example, the government's agricultural storage agency increased capacity in Cerrado priority areas (Alencar 1980, 50) and provided special credit lines to community-level mechanization amounting to US$20.23 million (Alencar 1980).

As POLOCENTRO was being established, PRODECER (Japanese-Brazilian Cooperative Program for Cerrado Development, 1976) financed improvements to commercial farms in new Cerrado colonization projects to secure a source for Japan's soybean supply (Hollerman 1988; Yoshioka 1992). PRODECER invested more than US$50 million to increase agricultural research and organize three colonization projects (38,020 ha) and three corporate agro-pastoral operations (20,744 ha; Paez et al. 1984; Federal Republic of Brasil 2002). In 1985 a second PRODECER phase expanded to more than 200,000 hectares in five states (Mato Grosso, Bahia, Minas Gerais, Goi´ as, and Mato Grosso do Sul) settling 545 families (Federal Republic of Brasil 2002). The third PRODECER phase (1994-1999), located in eastern Tocantins and southern Maranh˜ ao, was the most recent colonization scheme at a cost to Brazil and Japan of approximately US$138 million.

The Brazilian government also created PROTERRA (Land Redistribution Program, 1971-1978), which provided loans at negative real interest rates to small farmers, covering up to 80 percent of costs for land purchases in the Legal Amazon (which includes Mato Grosso) and the northeast. This program was complemented by a new legal framework for private colonization and fiscal incentives (Arruda 1979; Santos 1993). The government did not direct colonization and migration to specific locations; rather, the government required private colonization firms or organizations to register and obtain preapproval of projects.

These three policy initiatives complemented each other in the modernization of Cerrado agriculture (Salim 1986). PROTERRA financed a large portion of the private colonization that settled more than 900,000 hectares in the Cerrado (Jepson 2006b, 848). During the 1970s hundreds of smallholder families from southern Brazil settled in Mato Grosso and other states in the Brazilian Cerrado (Coy, Freidrich, and L¨ ucker 1997; Haesbaert 1997; Coy 2005). Private colonization schemes tapped government subsidies (PROTERRRA) to trade small farms (5-50 ha) in Brazil's southernmost states for large properties ( &gt; 400 ha) in Mato Grosso. Thirty-five private enterprises organized 104 settlement projects that settled 3.9 million hectares of land in Mato Grosso between 1970 and 1990 (Jepson 2006b). These projects also benefitted from POLOCENTRO financing for storage units and new agricultural technologies developed in EMBRAPA (Jepson 2006a). PRODECER's pilot project was situated in POLOCENTRO priority areas, taking advantage of some infrastructure already in place (IPEA 1979). The private firms and agricultural cooperatives also took advantage of POLOCENTRO to occupy an important role in Cerrado land change. PRODECER provided subsidized rural credit via agricultural cooperatives to help farmers obtain land titles (Paez et al. 1984). Indeed, agricultural cooperatives were the only organizations able to deliver PRODECER or POLOCENTRO benefits, such as technical assistance or capital to invest in silos, grain storage, weights, and other equipment to support commercialization. According to one observer, 'the cooperative's participation made it possible to implement the projects with reduced costs' when

compared to the costs otherwise left to the individual (Paez et al. 1984; Pires 1996).

## Data and Methods

## Study Region: Eastern Mato Grosso

Eastern Mato Grosso, located on a low-relief landscape between the Xingu and Araguaia rivers, has undergone the longest land-conversion process in Mato Grosso (Figure 1). This state, recently nicknamed Soylˆ andia (Hecht and Mann 2008), is at the leading edge of Brazil's agricultural development. Eastern Mato Grosso was the first Cerrado region to be settled through large-scale private colonization. In 1972, private colonization projects were established in the region when farmers from southern Brazil joined the first private colonization initiatives, settling in what would become Canarana, ´ Agua Boa, and Nova Xavantina municipalities (Table 1; Figure 1; Ribeiro 1987; Schwantes 1989; Jepson 2006a, 2006b). Between 1972 and 1988, private colonization companies and cooperatives in eastern Mato Grosso sold more than 460,040 hectares in twenty-five projects (Jepson 2006a, 844-46).

The region offers an opportunity to study Cerrado land change because of the available data for such an analysis. First, we have a complete remotely sensed Landsat archive (1972-2002) to allow for a robust land-cover change and transition analysis. A set of near-anniversary-date images consists of four Landsat Multispectral Scanner (MSS) scenes and three Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) and Enhanced Thematic Mapper (ETM + ) scenes for the years 1972/1973,

Table 1. Private colonization projects in study area

| No.   | Project name   | Colonization company   |   Area (km 2 ) |   Date |   No. rural lots |
|-------|----------------|------------------------|----------------|--------|------------------|
| 1     | Canarana I     | COOPERCOL              |         399.93 |   1972 |               80 |
| 2     | Agua Boa I     | COOPERCOL              |         246.65 |   1974 |               60 |
| 3     | Canarana II    | COOPERCOL              |         115.2  |   1975 |               47 |
| 4     | Canarana III   | COOPERCOL              |         323.35 |   1975 |               71 |
| 5     | Agua Boa II    | COOPERCOL              |         266.78 |   1975 |               44 |
| 6     | Garapu I       | COOPERCOL              |          97.5  |   1975 |               47 |
| 7     | Garapu II      | CONAGRO                |         393.86 |   1976 |               56 |
| 8     | Garapu III     | CONAGRO                |         101.3  |   1976 |               23 |
| 9     | Agua Boa III   | CONAGRO                |         180.29 |   1976 |               55 |
| 10    | Tanguro I      | CONAGRO                |         134.72 |   1976 |               32 |
| 11    | Tanguro II     | CONAGRO                |         195.61 |   1976 |               49 |
| 12    | Kuluene        | CONAGRO                |         555.47 |   1976 |               90 |
| Total |                |                        |        3010.68 |        |                  |

Note: See Figure 4 for location of projects.

Table 2. Satellite data sources and RSME in geo-rectification

| Sensor   |   Year | Path/Row   | Date         | RSME   |   GCPs |
|----------|--------|------------|--------------|--------|--------|
| MSS      |   1972 | 240/69     | 7 November   | ∼ 0.38 |     28 |
|          |   1972 | 240/70     | 7 November   | ∼ 0.50 |     34 |
|          |   1973 | 241/69     | 5 August     | ∼ 0.47 |     11 |
|          |   1973 | 241/70     | 5 August     | ∼ 0.64 |     20 |
| TM       |   1986 | 224/69     | 26 September | ∼ 0.53 |     61 |
|          |   1986 | 224/70     | 9 August     | ∼ 0.52 |     66 |
|          |   1986 | 225/69     | 15 July      | ∼ 0.58 |     69 |
| TM       |   1992 | 224/69     | 17 August    | ∼ 0.45 |     60 |
|          |   1992 | 224/70     | 1 August     | ∼ 0.45 |     56 |
|          |   1992 | 225/69     | 15 July      | ∼ 0.40 |     37 |
| ETM +    |   2002 | 224/69     | 26 June      | ∼ 0.40 |     49 |
|          |   2002 | 224/70     | 10 June      | ∼ 0.40 |     46 |
|          |   2002 | 225/69     | 1 June       | ∼ 0.40 |     30 |

Notes: RMSE = Root-Mean-Square Error; GCPs = ground control points; MSS = Multispectral Scanner; TM = Thematic Mapper; ETM = Enhanced Thematic Mapper.

1986, 1992, and 2002 (Table 2). Periods of regional political economic change determined the temporal sampling for selecting the remote-sensing data (Figure 3). Second, the firms and cooperatives that operated in land settlement and agricultural production left a rich and accessible archive, allowing for an analysis of how these organizations operated within the institutional environment of contracts and land title that could then be linked back to documented land changes.

## In Situ Data Sources

The first author obtained primary documents from private archives and government collections that yielded detailed information on agricultural colonization and development. These collections include (1) the private archives of the colonization cooperative COOPERCOL (Arlindo Schwantes Private Collection, Canarana, Mato Grosso); (2) private documents from the agricultural cooperative COOPERCANA (COOPERCANA Office, ´ Agua Boa, Mato Grosso); (3) private documents from COOPERCOL and the company responsible for private settlement, CONAGRO (Gertrudes Schwantes Private Collection, Bras´ ılia); (4) documents from the Division of Private Colonization (Divis˜ ao de Colonizac ¸˜ ao Particular) of the Brazilian government's institute of colonization and agrarian headquarters in Bras´ ılia; and (5) a survey of more than 600 farming contracts filed at the registry office (Primeiro Cart´ orio de Of´ ıcio) between 1985 and

Figure 3. Temporal sampling of satellite data.

<!-- image -->

2000 in Canarana and Nova Xavantina court districts. In addition, the first author conducted more than thirty informal and semistructured interviews with colonists, farmers, former cooperative directors, and managers of agro-industrial operations in the study region.

The first and second authors acquired the spatial data on the twelve colonization projects using the maps included in the general reports for each colonization project in the Divis˜ ao de Colonizac ¸˜ ao Particular and the Getrudes Schwantes Private Collection (Figure 4 and Table 1). The maps were traced on large-leaf mylar paper with colored pencils at the various archives. They were later digitized using a large-barrel scanner and converted to shape files, which were imported into the Environment for Visualizing Images (ENVI), converted into regions of interest (ROIs), and geo-rectified using 2002 Landsat ETM + imagery. The ROIs were used to subset the imagery into individual colonization projects and aggregate areas of colonization.

## Image Processing: Multispectral Satellite Data

The Landsat MSS data were preprocessed through routine procedures. The highest quality images were available for two consecutive years (1972 and 1973) and were used to create a baseline (1972/1973) for the thirty-year study. Postsettlement land conversion began in 1974; therefore, the aggregated baseline image is justified. Data were destriped using a radiometric preprocessing routine available in ERDAS IMAGINE, which we considered superior to other periodic noise removal methods we applied to the data (Leica Geosystems GIS &amp;Mapping, LLC 2003; Emch et al. 2005). Image-based atmospheric correction was performed on all Landsat TMand ETM scenes (all bands) using the Cos(t) module in IDRISI (Chavez 1996). The atmospherically corrected data sets were geometrically rectified using ENVI image-processing software. The 2002 Landsat scenes were registered to the 1999 image. We used a previously geo-rectified 1999 scene that was resampled to a common coordinate system using about 150 ground control points (GCPs) obtained in 2000 with a Global Positioning System with an accuracy of between 5 m and 10 m. All subsequent scenes were placed in the Universal Transverse Mercator coordinate system by registering each scene to the 2002 image. Second-degree polynomial warping was performed resulting in ∼ 0.4 root-mean-square error (RMSE). We performed imageto-image registration of remaining imagery to 2002 imagery, obtaining RMSE of ∼ 0.5 pixel for all eastern Mato Grosso scenes (sixty GCPs for each scene)

Before classification, we masked cloud cover in the MSS scenes and created an urban mask on the 2002 imagery. The urban mask was applied to every year of image data, whereas the cloud mask was only used for the MSS data. For the classification step, we applied the unsupervised ISODATA algorithm to all scenes (excluding thermal and panchromatic bands). Parameters were set to yield a minimum of sixty classes after a maximum of 150 iterations, with a specified standard deviation between classes at 5.0, yielding a number of classes far greater than the final three classes.

<!-- image -->

Based on field experience of the first and second authors, we initially combined the classes that resulted from the ISODATA algorithm into five classes: Cerrado lato sensu (LS), agro-pastoral, burned, riparian forest/Cerrad˜ ao, and water. We determined criteria for defining Cerrado LS and agro-pastoral classes that allowed us to further aggregate the land classification. The agro-pastoral land class included either crops or grazing land because ISODATA did not adequately separate the two classes. The riparian forest and Cerrad˜ ao (woodland) class was defined on the basis of topographical location or brightness values in the falsecolor mosaic. The Cerrado LS class included grasslands and Cerrado sensu stricto (Cerrado SS) because we could not distinguish between these subtypes. We merged the riparian forest and Cerrad˜ ao into the Cerrado LS class because we did not have objective means to separate riparian forest and Cerrad˜ ao from the Cerrado LS class; moreover, combining these did not undermine our objective of discriminating native vegetation from agricultural land covers. Finally, we combined the burned and water classes to yield a dark object class. ISODATA classes were combined to yield the final three classes (Cerrado LS, agro-pastoral, dark object), and then we created scene mosaics. No temporally coincident ground data for validation were available so we opted to use the procedure reported by Crews-Meyer, Hudson,

Figure 4. Private colonization projects in area of interest. See Table 1 for project names, dates, and area.

and Colditz (2004) in which the panchromatic band of the 2002 Landsat-7 ETM + imagery, which was not used in the ISODATA classification procedure, would serve as reference data. 1 Land-change maps and land-cover trajectories were calculated using the IDRISI CROSSTAB module. For the study region area of interest, we obtained 147 transitions, which we simplified into seven categories for which we indicate the key pixel-by-pixel subcategories (Table 3).

## Regional Land Change and Access Regimes

In this section we examine trends in regional land change through the access regimes that farmers used to access land, credit, and technology. We draw on the qualitative and documentary data to explain the proximate causes of land-cover conversion and landuse abandonment and intensification during three periods (1972/1973-1986, 1986-1992, 1992-2002). This section begins with a summary of regional land-change patterns between 1972 and 2002. We then focus on three periods defined by access regime. During the first period (1972-1986), private colonization firms and cooperatives secured land titles that facilitated settlement and agricultural production, causing rapid Cerrado

Table 3. Description of land-transition classes for 1972/1973, 1986, 1992, and 2002

| Class                                   | Description                                                                                                                            | Main transition subclasses (% area of transition class)        |
|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Stable Cerrado                          | Cerrado land cover throughout the time period; dark object class included if Cerrado precedes or follows in time                       | C-C-C-C (78%) C-C-DO-C (10%) C-DO-C-C (6%)                     |
| Early clearing and stable agro-pastoral | Replacement of Cerrado by agro-pastoral land cover before 1972-1973 or between 1972-1973 and 1986, persisting as agro-pastoral to 2002 | C-AP-AP-AP (78%) C-DO-AP-AP (7%) C-AP-DO-AP (5%)               |
| Post-1986 clearing                      | Cerrado clearing between 1986 and 1992, persisting as agro-pastoral to 2002                                                            | C-C-AP-AP (92%)                                                |
| Post-1992 clearing                      | Cerrado clearing between 1992 and 2002                                                                                                 | C-C-C-AP (75%) C-C-DO-AP (16%) C-DO-C-AP (6%)                  |
| Early Cerrado regeneration              | Regeneration of Cerrado land cover between 1972-1973 and 1992 in pixels classified as agro-pastoral land cover in previous date        | C-AP-C-C (60%) C-AP-DO-C (13%) AP-C-C-C (8%) AP-C-DO-C (6%)    |
| Late Cerrado regeneration               | Regeneration of Cerrado land cover between 1992 and 2002 in pixels classified as agro-pastoral in previous date                        | C-C-AP-C (45%) C-AP-AP-C (38%) C-DO-AP-C (7%)                  |
| Regeneration then clearing              | Regeneration of Cerrado 1986 followed by conversion to agro-pastoral land cover after 1992                                             | C-AP-C-AP (77%) AP-C-AP-AP (8%) AP-C-C-AP (6%) AP-C-DO-AP (6%) |

Notes: C = Cerrado; AP = agro-pastoral; DO = dark object. Transition subclasses greater than or equal to 5% are listed.

conversion within the project areas, and land-leasing contracts emerged as a mechanism for farmers to adapt to land degradation and expand production beyond colonization projects. Between 1986 and 1992, COOPERCANA,theagricultural cooperative, provided access to key production resources (e.g., technology and credit). These new inputs allowed farmers to improve soils in colonization projects and the land-leasing contracts also continued to allow farmers to clear land outside of the project area on leased land. By the third period (19922002), a shift from public agricultural loans to private credit, which included production contracts with transnational agro-industrial firms, encouraged farmers to switch from rice to soybeans and to encourage landuse intensification.

## Regional Land-Change Patterns, 1972-2002

Between 1972 and 2002, Cerrado declined from 94 to 53 percent, whereas the agro-pastoral class increased from 3 to 46 percent (Table 4 and Figure 5). By 1986, areas occupied by the colonization firm and cooperative had lost more Cerrado land cover compared to areas not settled by organizations. By 2002, the difference in Cerrado cover between the colonization and the noncolonization subsets persisted but had been reduced from a seventeen-point to an eleven-point gap. The most rapid rate of negative change in Cerrado cover was found in the colonization subset between 1972/1973 and 1986 (Table 5). These findings are similar to the overall

Cerrado eco-region land-change estimate of about 55 percent, but our results challenge specific conclusions for eastern Mato Grosso, a region in which the Cerrado vegetation is described as 'very sparse' (Machado et al. 2004, 5). Moreover, our findings reveal a regional spatial difference within and outside the colonization projects and surprisingly variable annual rates of Cerrado clearance for each of the three periods.

In Table 5, annual rates of change for each of the three periods describe an overall consistent clearance of Cerrado in the study region for the first two periods, 1.98 and 2.12 percent, respectively, and a drop in rate of Cerrado clearance to 0.96 percent for the final decade (1992-2002). A comparison of annual rates of change for the colonization and noncolonization subsets reveals the spatial offset of Cerrado conversion. For example, during the first period the highest levels of annual loss of in Cerrado occurred within the colonization projects (3.11 percent), as expected, with Cerrado loss outside the projects reaching 1.66 percent. Between 1986 and 1992, the annual rate of Cerrado loss occurred mainly outside the projects (2.36 percent), with the annual rate of change of Cerrado only 0.41 percent within the colonization projects. Although this would follow the general model of land use, where farmers maximize their production closest to the urban centers and then expand outward, the annual rates of change for the final decade counter this trend. The overall study region experienced a drop in the rate of Cerrado clearance, from 2.12 to 0.96 percent, but there was a large increase in the annual rate

Table 4. Estimated land cover for study region and subsets, 1972/1973, 1986, 1992, 2002

|                                 | 1972/1973   | 1972/1973   | 1986      | 1986   | 1992      | 1992   | 2002      | 2002   |
|---------------------------------|-------------|-------------|-----------|--------|-----------|--------|-----------|--------|
| Class                           | km 2        | %           | km 2      | %      | km 2      | %      | km 2      | %      |
| Study region (area of interest) |             |             |           |        |           |        |           |        |
| DO                              | 441.84      | 3.19        | 1,019.99  | 7.36   | 1,514.60  | 10.93  | 147.29    | 1.06   |
| Cerrado                         | 12,973.82   | 93.55       | 9,378.24  | 67.65  | 8,187.78  | 59.09  | 7,397.73  | 53.34  |
| AP                              | 452.27      | 3.26        | 3,464.28  | 24.99  | 4,154.10  | 29.98  | 6,323.16  | 45.59  |
| Total                           | 13,867.93   | 100.00      | 13,862.51 | 100    | 13,856.47 | 100    | 13,868.18 | 100    |
| Colonization subset             |             |             |           |        |           |        |           |        |
| DO                              | 89.40       | 2.97        | 192.37    | 6.44   | 170.75    | 5.71   | 29.03     | 0.97   |
| Cerrado                         | 2,871.20    | 95.40       | 1,622.25  | 54.28  | 1,528.17  | 51.13  | 1,321.32  | 44.21  |
| AP                              | 49.04       | 1.63        | 1,173.93  | 39.28  | 1,289.97  | 43.16  | 1,638.66  | 54.82  |
| Total                           | 3,009.65    | 100         | 2,988.55  | 100    | 2,988.90  | 100    | 2,989.01  | 100    |
| Non colonization subset         |             |             |           |        |           |        |           |        |
| DO                              | 352.44      | 3.25        | 827.63    | 7.61   | 1,343.84  | 12.37  | 118.26    | 1.09   |
| Cerrado                         | 10,102.61   | 93.04       | 7,755.98  | 71.33  | 6,659.61  | 61.28  | 6,076.41  | 55.85  |
| AP                              | 403.23      | 3.71        | 2,290.35  | 21.06  | 2,864.13  | 26.35  | 4,684.50  | 43.06  |
| Total                           | 10,858.28   | 100         | 10,873.96 | 100    | 10,867.58 | 100    | 10,879.17 | 100    |

Notes: AP = agro-pastoral; DO = dark object.

Figure 5. Land-cover maps for area of interest.

<!-- image -->

Table 5. Land change in eastern Mato Grosso, 1972-2002

|                        |                   | Gross change      | Gross change      | Annual change     | Annual change     |
|------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
|                        | km 2              | %subset           | %class            | %subset           | %class            |
|                        | 1972-1973 to 1986 | 1972-1973 to 1986 | 1972-1973 to 1986 | 1972-1973 to 1986 | 1972-1973 to 1986 |
| Total area of interest |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| Cerrado LS             | - 3,595.6         | - 25.94           | - 27.71           | - 1.85            | - 1.98            |
| Agro-pastoral          | 3,012.0           | 21.73             | 665.97            | 1.55              | 47.57             |
| Colonization subset    |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| Cerrado LS             | - 1,248.9         | - 41.50           | - 43.50           | - 2.96            | - 3.11            |
| Agro-pastoral          | 1,124.9           | 37.38             | 2293.73           | 2.67              | 163.84            |
| Noncolonization subset |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| Cerrado LS             | - 2,346.6         | - 21.61           | - 23.23           | - 1.54            | - 1.66            |
| Agro-pastoral          | 1,887.1           | 17.38             | 468.00            | 1.24              | 33.43             |
|                        | 1986 to 1992      | 1986 to 1992      | 1986 to 1992      | 1986 to 1992      | 1986 to 1992      |
| Total area of interest |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| Cerrado LS             | - 1,190.5         | - 8.59            | - 12.69           | - 0.61            | - 2.12            |
| Agro-pastoral          | 689.8             | 4.98%             | 19.91             | 0.36              | 3.32              |
| Colonization subset    |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| Cerrado LS             | - 94.1            | - 3.15            | - 5.80            | - 0.52            | - 0.41            |
| Agro-pastoral          | 116.0             | 3.88              | 9.89              | 0.65              | 0.71              |
| Noncolonization subset |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| Cerrado LS             | - 1,096.4         | - 10.08           | - 14.14           | - 1.68            | - 2.36            |
| Agro-pastoral          | 573.8             | 5.28              | 25.05             | 0.88              | 4.18              |
|                        | 1992 to 2002      | 1992 to 2002      | 1992 to 2002      | 1992 to 2002      | 1992 to 2002      |
| Total area of interest |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| Cerrado LS             | - 790.0           | - 5.70            | - 9.65            | - 0.41            | - 0.96            |
| Agro-pastoral          | 2,169.1           | 15.64             | 52.22             | 1.12              | 5.22              |
| Colonization subset    |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| Cerrado LS             | - 206.9           | - 6.92            | - 13.54           | - 0.69            | - 1.35            |
| Agro-pastoral          | 348.7             | 11.67             | 27.03             | 1.17              | 2.70              |
| Noncolonization subset |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| Cerrado LS             | - 583.2           | - 5.37            | - 8.76            | - 0.54            | - 0.88            |
| Agro-pastoral          | 1,820.4           | 16.75             | 63.56             | 1.68              | 6.36              |

of Cerrado loss in the colonization project (0.41 to 1.35 percent) and a decrease in the annual rate of change outside the projects (2.36 to 0.88 percent).

In our transition analysis, we found that 6,242.71 km 2 (45.1 percent) of the study region remained in Cerrado (Table 6 and Figure 6), compared with only 35.7 percent of the colonization subset and 47.7 percent of the noncolonization subset. The next largest class, early Cerrado clearing, stable agro-pastoral, is 17.7 percent overall but 30.5 percent in the colonization subset. The other main difference between colonization and noncolonization subsets can be seen in the post-1992 clearing transition. Approximately 16 percent of the noncolonization subset was cleared after 1992, in contrast to 11.37 percent of the colonization subset (Table 6 and Figure 7).

Three transition classes included pixels that represented regeneration, which we defined as pixels that were classified as agro-pastoral in one year and were classified as Cerrado in a subsequent year or years. 2 Overall, approximately 10 percent of the existing Cerrado in the study region regenerated from agro-pastoral land covers during the thirty-year study period. The land-transition analysis also provided information on clearance of Cerrado that had regenerated from previous agro-pastoral use. We calculated that 496.11 km 2 (12.75 percent) of the agro-pastoral land class for the entire study region in 2002 resulted from conversion of regenerated Cerrado formations. This area is equivalent to 3.58 percent of the study region. Conversion of regenerated Cerrado also displayed spatial variation. Land outside colonization areas experienced more conversion of regenerated

Table 6. Land-cover transitions

|                                      | Study region (area of interest)   | Study region (area of interest)   | Colonization subset   | Colonization subset   | Noncolonization subset   | Noncolonization subset   |
|--------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
| Transition class                     | km 2                              | %                                 | km 2                  | %                     | km 2                     | %                        |
| Stable Cerrado                       | 6,242.71                          | 45.11                             | 1,061.14              | 35.66                 | 5,167.05                 | 47.67                    |
| Early clearing, stable agro-pastoral | 2,450.83                          | 17.71                             | 908.48                | 30.53                 | 1,540.16                 | 14.21                    |
| Post-1986 clearing                   | 1,284.37                          | 9.28                              | 254.43                | 8.55                  | 1,028.01                 | 9.48                     |
| Post-1992 clearing                   | 2,087.12                          | 15.08                             | 338.24                | 11.37                 | 1,738.02                 | 16.03                    |
| Early Cerrado regeneration           | 702.70                            | 5.08                              | 126.06                | 4.24                  | 573.69                   | 5.29                     |
| Late Cerrado regeneration            | 575.26                            | 4.16                              | 150.93                | 5.07                  | 423.35                   | 3.91                     |
| Cerrado regeneration then clearing   | 496.11                            | 3.58                              | 136.53                | 4.59                  | 368.93                   | 3.40                     |
| Total                                | 13,839.09                         | 100.00                            | 2,975.81              | 100.00                | 10,839.21                | 100.00                   |

Note: See Table 2 for descriptions of classes.

Cerrado formations (368.93 km 2 ) than inside colonization areas (136.53 km 2 ).

## Colonization and Land Leases: Process of Cerrado Conversion to Rice and Pasture

Land-change patterns in eastern Mato Grosso demonstrate large-scale conversion of Cerrado to agro- pastoral land covers during the first fourteen years of regional settlement (Table 5 and Figure 5). During this period, approximately 3,600 km 2 of Cerrado, or one quarter of the study region, was converted to agricultural land uses, mainly rice production, at an annual rate of 1.85 percent. Land changes relative to the subset area were greater in the colonization subset than in the noncolonization subset: 43.5 percent (1,249 km 2 or

Figure 6. Land-transition map. See Figure 4 and Table 3 for colonization project information.

<!-- image -->

Figure 7. The development of rill erosion in Canarana I project. The 1976 image (A) shows fields cleared ca. 1973 with no visible rills. By 1979 (B) rills cover the field, whereas new fields, immediately south, have been cleared and still retain leiras.

<!-- image -->

3.11 percent annually) compared to 23.3 percent (2,346 km 2 or 1.66 percent annually), respectively. In addition, the fourteen-year period witnessed a significant total area of Cerrado conversion outside the colonization projects.

The high level of relative Cerrado loss within the colonization projects and the significant total Cerrado clearing outside the projects can be explained by the regional organizations and land-leasing contracts. First, colonization and agricultural organizations contributed to reduction in Cerrado land cover within the projects (1,249 km 2 over fourteen years) by facilitating access to credit, securing land title, and providing farmers with access to government subsidies (Jepson 2006a). COOPERCOL, the colonization cooperative, and CONAGRO, the private colonization firm, reduced transaction costs of securing land title and accessing credit for land and rice production (Jepson 2006a, 2006b). The agricultural cooperative, COOPERCANA, served as an intermediary between the Banco do Brasil, the state-owned bank, and its members ( Jornal da Terra 1978; Oliveira 1981); captured government financing for rural electrification and silo and storage construction (COOPERCANA 1976, 1979b, 1); and reduced risk to farmers by participating in the government minimum price (Warnken 1999, 59).

After initial settlement, however, soil erosion and economic crises halted large areas of production within colonization project areas. Rice production was vulnerable to short dry spells during the growing season and yields declined after three years of cultivation (Oliveira 1981, 108). Farmers had little or no access to chemical fertilizers or lime to improve soil quality ( Jornal Coopercana 1981). Rill erosion is evident on fields cleared of Cerrado only a few years previously (Figure 7). Moreover, colonist farmers also faced an economic crisis because rice production costs outstripped government minimum prices (Oliveira 1981). Between 1972 and 1976, colonists took land out of production within the colonization projects at an alarming rate. An average of 36.5 percent of cleared land during the colonization period (1972-1979) was abandoned by 1981, one third remained under production, and one quarter became pasture ( Jornal Coopercana 1981).

Colonist farmers faced the option of either abandoning farming altogether or taking their land out of rice production and leasing land outside the project areas. Many colonists adapted to the rice production crisis by moving their production to adjacent cattle ranches through land-leasing contracts, thus accounting for the substantial area of land-cover change outside the project area between 1972/1973 and 1986. Colonists leased land from cattle ranchers to access productive land while allowing the degraded soils on their own properties a chance to recover. In exchange for three years of land use, colonists cleared Cerrado, planted crops, and ended their tenure by planting pasture grass. For colonists, leasing land from neighboring cattle ranches was advantageous. Farmers could still access credit by using their original land as collateral, service their massive debts from purchasing land and new machinery, and generate some income from production without paying the costs of land rehabilitation. Cattle ranchers obtained improved pastures and thus intensified cattle production by using land leases as a low-risk and inexpensive means to clear land and improve pasture under conditions of low labor supply.

Spatially explicit lease contracts are not available because many land-lease contracts were informal, often verbal agreements (Santos 1993, 97-98). In addition, neither properties nor contracts were geo-referenced until after 2000. Using the available information about the general land-use practices of farmers during this period, however, we can demonstrate that colonists, rather than newcomers or ranchers-turned-farmers,

had the capacity to clear Cerrado located outside the colonization areas for this period. From our calculations, there was sufficient labor and machinery within the colonization projects that could be applied to converting Cerrado outside the settlement areas. By 1986, 39 percent (1,174 km 2 ) of the land was cleared in the projects for an average of 180 hectares per lot ( n = 654). Using information from interviews, farmers generally cleared land in 50- to 100-hectare tracts every two to three years during this period. If owners of all 654 lots cleared 75 hectares in seven years during the fourteen-year period, they would have cleared 3,433 km 2 , approximately 2,260 km 2 more than agro-pastoral land cover in the colonization areas estimated for 1986. Thus, it is reasonable to expect that most original colonists (and their machinery) could have entered into land-leasing contracts to clear land outside the original colonization area.

The synergy between property rights and contracts is evident in the narrative of one colonist. In July 1976 Wilmar Dansurek 3 migrated from northwestern Rio Grande do Sul to Mato Grosso. In early 1976, Dansurek sold his land in Rio Grande do Sul and purchased a total of 800 hectares in the project Garapu II for US$72,400 (CONAGRO1976). In the first year (1976-1977), the family cleared 30 hectares of dense or pesado Cerrado and planted rice. During the second agricultural year (1977-1978), Dansurek and his son opened more land, to total 400 hectares or 200 hectares per lot through the 1978-1979 season. Similar to many colonists in the region, production on their land decreased 50 percent. In one interview, Dansurek stated that the land was 'tired' and 'did not produce any more.' The family decided to stop planting on their land in the colonization project.

During the following three years, the Dansurek family entered into a three-year lease with a large cattle ranch (1979-1982), agreeing to clear 400 hectares of Cerrado and plant pasture grass after the last harvest in exchange for access to land for rice production. Dansurek secured agricultural credit by using their fallow fields in the colonization project as collateral. With access to new lands through the leasing contract and agricultural credit based on land title, the Dansureks could clear additional Cerrado. During the first year of their lease, the Dansureks' crop suffered from drought and the harvest was 30 percent of the predicted yield. The second year of the land-lease contract was so profitable, however, that the family acquired 800 hectares of land and purchased more equipment. In the third year, production dropped considerably. Dansurek did not renew the contract with the cattle rancher, and he stopped farming altogether. In 1984 Dansurek and his sons returned to farming, but this time they adopted the newly introduced soybean as their main crop.

WilmarDansurek's story repeats common themes expressed in several conversations and interviews with colonists. Rice production was precarious, but it was the only agricultural option during the first decade of settlement. No other crop was able to tolerate Cerrado soils without inputs such as fertilizers and lime applications, which were too expensive to use in rice production. Therefore, options for agriculture were very limited; to survive and, perhaps, accumulate more assets, farming families needed to expand beyond their degraded lots in the colonization projects. Property rights and land-leasing contracts provided colonists with necessary institutional structure to access land resources and agricultural credit for commercial agriculture.

## Soil Improvement and Crop Diversification: Conversion and Land-Use Intensification

Between 1986 and 1992, the scale and pace of Cerrado conversion decreased but with clear differences between colonization and noncolonization subsets (Table 5). In the overall study region, Cerrado declined 12.69 percent (1190.46 km 2 ) at an annual rate of 2.21 percent, but the rate of clearing outside the project areas was 1.68 percent per year compared to 0.52 percent annually in the colonization subset. Indeed, the annual rate of conversion was greater outside the colonization project during this second period than during the initial fourteen years of settlement. Approximately 5.8 percent (94 km 2 ) of Cerrado was converted within the colonization subset over six years, whereas 14.14 percent (1,096 km 2 ) of Cerrado was converted outside the project areas.

The synergy between the activities and resources from the agricultural cooperative COOPERCANA and land-lease contracts explains the spatial shift of Cerrado conversion outside the colonization projects. COOPERCANA developed a program to improve soils that led to increased intensification of production on previously cleared land in settlement areas. The organization marshaled productive resources, including new sources of lime, credit, and technology (especially new seed varieties), to help colonists intensify agricultural production. Rather than converting more Cerrado on their land within the colonization projects, farmers could access new resources available through the cooperative and intensify production on the recuperated soil, while continuing to expand outside the colonization

area through land leases ( Jornal Coopercana 1985; Jornal Coopercana 1988).

The cooperatives improved access to affordable lime, which was a key input for reducing soil acidity and intensifying production (Jepson 2006b). The cooperative financed a program to mine local lime deposits, estimated at 60 million tons, in Cocalinho (COOPERCANA 1979a, 1979c) and capture federal aid to construct the 'lime road' connecting the deposits to the colonization areas ( Jornal da Terra 1978). Between 1984 and 1989, Cocalinho produced between 45,000 and 95,000 metric tons of lime per year (COOPERCANA 1986-1989). In addition, the cooperative successfully negotiated with Banco do Brasil to develop a new credit line that would finance lime as a capital investment rather than a production cost, thus offering better terms (Associac ¸˜ ao dos Produtores Rurais do Medio Araguaia 1981; Jornal Coopercana 1983).

The cooperative also provided farmers with access to new techniques and inputs by developing a crop rotation program based on the introduction of chemical fertilizers, agronomic advice created by federal researchers, and new varieties of maize and soybeans. In 1980, COOPERCANA began its own local agricultural research program based on experimental stations and fields for new tropical soybean cultivars (COOPERCANA 1981; Jornal Coopercana 1983) along with aluminum-tolerant maize varieties, sorghum, beans, coffee, manioc, garlic, and forages ( Jornal Coopercana 1983; Jornal Coopercana 1986). By 1986, COOPERCANA managed a 200-hectare experimental station, certified soybean seeds for agricultural credit programs, and developed its own regionally tested soybean variety named Canarana ( Jornal Coopercana 1984; Jornal Coopercana 1986; Jornal Coopercana 1989). The cooperative disseminated agronomic information to farmers in the region through publications and field informational days ( Jornal Coopercana 1989; COOPERCANA 19841990). Finally, COOPERCANA aimed to improve access to agricultural chemicals and fertilizers through its own network of stores as a means to lower overall costs to the farmer (COOPERCANA 1984, 1986; Jornal Coopercana 1984; Jornal Coopercana 1985; Jornal Cooperacana 1986).

The synergy between the cooperative, which facilitated access to key inputs, and the continuation of land leases increased incentives to clear land outside of the project area. Not only did the colonists have resources to recuperate the soils and intensify production on land already cleared in the project areas, but they, along with new farmers who were attracted to the region, had access to productive resources and land through leasing arrangements to support the further expansion of agriculture into the Cerrado of eastern Mato Grosso.

## Corporations, Credit, and Contract Farming: Land-Use Intensification

Between 1992 and 2002, Cerrado in the overall study region declined by 9.65 percent, or 790 km 2 , which is 400 km 2 less than the previous eight-year period (Table 5). The rate of Cerrado loss changed from 1.98 percent per year in the first fourteen years to only 0.96 percent per year after 1992. Cerrado land cover declined by 207 km 2 as a class within the colonization subset between 1992 and 2002 compared with a 94 km 2 loss during the period from 1986 to 1992. Outside the colonization subset, Cerrado declined by 584 km 2 , approximately half of the 1,096 km 2 area of Cerrado lost in the period from 1986 to 1992. Clearing within the colonization area was 1.35 percent per year, and clearance decreased in scale and pace outside the project areas to 0.88 percent per year.

The agricultural economy changed dramatically during the 1990s. At a macroeconomic level, Brazil reduced government credit and eliminated price supports while encouraging private sources of credit for agriculture (Helfand and Rezende 2004). Neoliberalization of Brazilian agricultural credit policies contracted, but food products, such as rice, were disproportionally impacted. Simultaneously, the government liberalized the flow of foreign capital to export agriculture and allowed new private-sector innovations to offer farmers other credit lines. Contract farming with processors, traders, and input suppliers became an important means to obtain production credit for export-oriented crops (Helfand and Castro de Rezende 2004).

In eastern Mato Grosso, neoliberal policies facilitated the integration of the region's economy into global markets, particularly as access to credit and inputs shifted from government programs facilitated through COOPERCANAtotransnationalagro-industrial firms. The reduction of credit and a deep financial crisis in the agricultural sector caused the closure of COOPERCANA in 1992. The collapse of COOPERCANA meant that cooperative members lost streamlined access to credit, a major discount supplier of agricultural inputs, and storage facilities, all of which translated into higher transaction costs of production.

Agro-industrial firms began storage, credit, and purchasing operations in the region with the closing of

COOPERCANA.Twoagro-industrial firms, Ceval and Caramaru, initiated production contracts for local farmers in the early 1990s. Under the program, farmers developed plans for soybean production and the company wrote contracts based on expected yield (thirty-five to fifty sacks per hectare; 2,100 to 3,000 kg per hectare). They offered two types of contracts. In the first type, firms traded agricultural inputs for soybeans, with contract value based on global commodity prices and exchange rates between Brazilian and U.S. currencies. For example, for a maximum of fifty sacks per hectare (3,000 kg), the firm would provide agricultural inputs and seeds (valued in U.S. dollars) to farmers, usually through subsidiaries. The second type of contract would be a cash loan for machines or inputs. For both contract types, the firm did not charge interest; rather, the cost of the contract was the variation in the exchange rate between U.S. and Brazilian currencies at the time the contract expired. The second part of contracts reveals how the firm captured production from farmers engaged in this transaction. If the farmer produced 50,000 sacks of soybeans per year, and 30,000 sacks were already contracted, the firm reserved the right to buy the remaining 20,000 sacks. The only room for negotiation was that the farmer had the freedom to sell at any timebut the farmer was required to offer first refusal to the firm. Because soybean storage volume was limited and monopolized by the firms, farmers had little room for negotiating better terms or prices.

The shift from public to private sources of credit altered regional land use in two important ways. First, the deepened integration of production into global markets through production contracts with transnational corporations caused an increase in soybean production. The agro-industrial firms leveraged their capital resources to establish a new credit regime that stimulated soybean production for export. Indeed, in a tight credit market, farmers had few alternatives to firm-contracted credit lines to support production of any other crop. Production data support this shift in crops. Rice production in the region declined significantly and soybeans became the dominant crop between 1992 and 2002 (Figures 8

Figure 8. Crop production by municipality, 1992-2002.

<!-- image -->

Figure 9. Crop area by municipality, 1992-2002.

<!-- image -->

and 9). In 1992, rice dominated production, with a total of 89,110 hectares, and soybeans lagged behind with at total of 26,500 hectares under production. In 2002, the rice-soy relationship inverted: The same municipalities produced soybeans on 70,395 hectares and rice on 30,840 hectares.

Production estimates compared with information from regional managers of the two transnational firms confirmed that eastern Mato Grosso experienced an almost complete privatization and global integration of regional soybean production through credit-based contract farming. In 2000 the total area of soybean production in the Canarana, ´ Agua Boa, and Querˆ encia municipalities was 59,783 hectares, according to Brazilian government data. In 2000, according to the firm managers, Ceval and Caramuru contracted 108 farmers to produce soybeans on an average of 500 to 600 hectares each on a total of between 54,000 and 64,800 hectares.

As soybean production increased, a second landcover change trend can be identified: The rate of Cerrado clearance decreased to the lowest level in the thirty-year period (Table 5), from 2.12 percent between 1986 and 1992 to 0.96 percent in the final decade, between 1992 and 2002. The explanation for this overall reduction in the rate of Cerrado clearance lies in the constraints of soybean and rice production. Soybeans could not be cultivated immediately after Cerrado clearance because debris and vegetation from clearing impedes soybean development and yield. In addition, farmers would not cultivate soybeans immediately after Cerrado clearance. The remaining roots and debris would require farmers to set harvest platforms higher than normal to avoid damage. This higher setting, in turn, would result in a poor harvest. Rather, soybeans, which require costly investment in lime to correct the soil for acidity, were cultivated to renovate either leased or owned pasture or rice fields because the leguminous, nitrogen-fixing plant improves overall soil fertility. That is, the impetus to increase production also shifted the geography of soybean production in the region to previously cleared landscapes. New contracts for exclusive soybean production created a dynamic that led to a general intensification of production rather than an expansion of production into newly cleared areas, a trend identified at the national level (Brand˜ ao, Rezende, and Marques 2005). Therefore, the incentive to produce soybeans in a tight credit market largely facilitated intensification of land use (e.g., renovation of degraded pastures or fields) rather than an increase in the overall clearance of Cerrado. The intensification of land use through soybean-pasture renovation does not mean that Cerrado clearance ended completely, but rather that the overall Cerrado rate of conversion was reduced from previous years.

## Conclusion

Since 1970, the Brazilian Cerrado has become a region of global agricultural and economic consequence.

Previous explanations of Cerrado conversion have relied on state-led development schemes, distorted subsidies, global market demand, and transport networks to explain the expansion of high-input agricultural production. This article examined the problem of Cerrado conversion by exploring the process of private colonization, agricultural development, and land-cover change in eastern Mato Grosso state since 1972. We examined the institutional and organizational arrangements that supported access to land and productive resources that enabled farmers to expand and intensify agricultural production. Rather than relying on macroeconomic explanations, we outlined an access regime framework to explain the process through which farmers marshal institutions and organizations to generate benefits from land resources, ultimately resulting in land-change patterns.

Cerrado land change was examined in three periods corresponding with major events in the regional political economy. Each period was characterized by specific organizational and institutional arrangements that shaped the benefit flows of natural and productive resources, resulting in identifiable patterns of land change. Between 1972 and 1986, private colonization firms and cooperatives facilitated agricultural settlement by securing land title, which caused the initial rapid conversion of Cerrado. Land-leasing contracts emerged as a mechanism for farmers, who were facing land degradation on their plots, to expand beyond colonization projects. Between 1986 and 1992, the agricultural cooperative provided access to key production resources (e.g., new crops, inputs, credit), motivating farmers to improve production on degraded land in the colonization projects and clear land outside of the project area on leased land. By the third period (1992-2002), a shift from public to private sources of credit directly altered regional land use. The rise of production contracts with agro-industrial firms to gain access to credit required that farmers shift to export-oriented soybeans. This shift led to intensification of production; thus, production contracts might have lowered the rate of Cerrado clearance.

The access regime approach elaborated in this article offers three conceptual advances in the study of land change. First, the approach broadens an institutional analysis beyond property rights to include other rules that enable actors to benefit from land. Contracts bear greatly on how land users access the multiple resources necessary to cultivate crops in a commercial production system. In the case of eastern Mato Grosso, land leases allowed farmers to extend production during the first two phases of agricultural development, whereas production contracts encouraged farmers to intensify production on land already opened during the last period.

Second, institutions are but one variable in the larger array of mechanisms by which people access resources and change the landscape. Indeed, land changes, such as clearance, abandonment, and intensification, result from interaction among institutions and organizations as farmers attempted to access a wide variety of necessary resources. The colonization cooperative and firm facilitated access to land through titling, the agricultural cooperative provided access to key production resources (e.g., new crops, inputs, credit), and the transnational agro-commodity firm provided access to necessary inputs and credit. Each of these organizations operated within a broader political economy of agricultural production and interacted differently with several institutions. Engagement by land users with these organizations and institutions resulted in specific land-use decisions to increase production through Cerrado clearance, as was the case of initial settlement and access to inputs, or to intensify production on land already cleared for agriculture, as was the case with the period between 1992 and 2002.

Finally, the access-regime approach takes the interaction of institutions and organizations seriously, illustrating that there is no deterministic land-use outcome that results from one general type of institution. Institutions have differing impacts on how land resources are used, depending on the synergies with organizations and other institutions. For example, at the time of settlement, the colonization cooperative and firm provided access to property rights, which facilitated Cerrado conversion within the project areas. During the same period, however, farmers converted Cerrado to agriculture outside the project because they had made land-lease arrangements and were able to use their land titles within the project areas as collateral for production credit. In the first case, contracts (land leases) facilitated expansion of agricultural production, but during the last period (1992-2002), contracts encouraged intensification of soybean production on land already cleared for agriculture. Our results confirm the conclusion that it is not the general form of institution that has some deterministic land-use outcome, but it is the interaction of the institution with other factors that results in certain patterns of land change.

We acknowledge three limitations of the access regime approach. First, this approach does not provide insight into why significant portions of the landscape

remained in Cerrado or regenerated. Our approach is productivist; that is, focusing on how farmers access resources to generate benefits from land (produce crops), rather than providing an assessment of landscape stability. Regeneration, although evident in this study region (Jepson 2005), is a land-change transition that requires the sort of microscale analysis other groups have successfully accomplished (Moran et al. 2000; Moran, Siqueira, and Brondizio 2006; Perz, Walker, and Caldas 2006). This leads into the second caveat. A focus on mesoscale factors in land change does not replace microscale analysis of land-use change at the property level (McCracken et al. 1999; Walker 2003). Rather, the access regime approach allows for enhanced understanding of the variables at play at the mesoscale. A third limitation is that the access regime configuration in one region does not necessarily explain land-change dynamics in neighboring regions. Access regimes are grounded in place-based social and economic relationships so that there is no reason to believe that one access regime is necessarily reproduced in adjacent areas.

In summary, this study develops an alternative mesoscale analytical model to understand the processes and explain the regional patterns of land in the Brazilian Cerrado. This article demonstrates that analysis of regional land change requires knowledge of the natural and productive resources needed for land uses and howland managers use organizations and institutions to marshal these resources. Our access regime framework refines the analysis of how people access resources, thus providing more precise understanding of the causes of land change.

## Acknowledgments

Wewould like to thank the National Science Foundation (SBR99-0485), the Organization of American States, Donald Sawyer at the Instituto Sociedade Populac ¸˜ ao e Natureza (Bras´ ılia), the Schwantes family, and the research participants in Mato Grosso.

## Notes

1. For a more detailed discussion of our accuracy assessment see Brannstrom et al. (2008).
2. Reference to vegetation regeneration does not imply broader claims about ecological functions of regenerated Cerrado.
3. Names have been changed to maintain confidentiality.

## References

- Agrawal, A., and A. Chhatre. 2006. Explaining success on the commons: Community forest governance in the Indian Himalaya. World Development 34 (1): 149-66.
- Alencar, G. 1980. O programa de desenvolvimento da regi˜ ao dos cerrados [The Cerrado region development program]. Simp´ osio dos Cerrados 5:39-58.
- Allen, D. W., and D. Lueck. 2002. The nature of the farm. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Alston, L. J., G. D. Libecap, and B. Mueller. 2000. Titles, conflict, and land use: The development of property rights and land reform on the Brazilian Amazon frontier. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.
- Arruda, H. P. d. 1979. Colonizac ¸˜ ao na regi˜ ao dos cerrados [Colonization of the Cerrado region]. In Cerrado: Uso e manejo, 61-94. Bras´ ılia, Brazil: EMBRAPA.
- Associac ¸˜ ao dos Produtores Rurais do Medio Araguaia. 1981. Documento dos Produtores Rurais de Mato Grosso ao Presidente da Rep´ ublica [Documents from the Rural Producers of Mato Grosso to the President of the Republic] . Unpublished pamphlet, Arlindo Schwantes Private Archive, Canarana, Brazil.
- Bahia Filho, A. F. C., and M. A. Lopes. 1998. State of the art-Development grain cultivars for acid savannas of Brazil . Paper presented at Sustainable Crop Production in Acid Savannas and other Problem Soils of the World, Lafayette, IN.
- Banks, T. 2003. Property rights reform in rangeland China: Dilemmas on the road to the household ranch. World Development 31 (12): 2129-42.
- Bardhan, P. 1989. Alternative approaches to the theory of institutions in economic development. In The economic theory of agarian institutions, ed. P. Bardhan, 3-17. Oxford, UK: Clarendon.
- Barham, B. L., and O. T. Coomes. 1996. Prosperity's promise: The Amazon rubber boom and distorted development. Boulder, CO: Westview.
- Batistella, M., M. Guimar˜ aes, E. E. Miranda, H. R. Vieira, G. S. Valladares, J. A. C. Mangabeira, and M. C. Assis. 2002. Monitoramento da expans˜ ao agropecu´ aria na Regi˜ ao Oeste da Bahia [Monitoring agro-pastoral expansion in the western region of Bahia] . Campinas, Brazil: EMBRAPAMonitoramento por Sat´ elite.
- Bebbington, A. 1999. Capitals and capabilities: A framework for analyzing peasant viability, rural livelihoods and poverty. World Development 27 (12): 2021-44.
- Bebbington, A., and T. Perreault. 1999. Social capital, development, and access to resources in highland Ecuador. Economic Geography 75 (4): 395-418.
- Binswanger, H. P., and M. R. Rosenzweig. 1984. Contractual arrangements, employment, and wages in rural labor markets in Asia. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Blaikie, P., and H. Brookfield. 1987. Land degradation and society. London and New York: Routledge.
- Bowen, S., and P. Gerritsen. 2007. Reverse leasing and power dynamics among blue agave farmers in western Mexico. Agriculture and Human Values 24 (4): 473-88.
- Brand˜ ao, A. S. P., G. Rezende, and R. Marques. 2005. Agricultural growth in the period 1999-2004: Outburst in soybeans area and environmental impacts in Brazil. Rio de Janeiro: IPEA.

- Branford, S., and N. Freris. 2000. One great big hill of beans. The Ecologist 30 (3): 46-47.
- Brannstrom, C. 2001. Producing possession: Labour, law and land on a Brazilian agricultural frontier, 1920-1945. Political Geography 20 (7): 859-83.
- ---. 2005. Environmental policy reform on northeastern Brazil's agricultural frontier. Geoforum 36 (2): 257-71.
- ---. 2009. South America's neoliberal agricultural frontiers: Places of environmental sacrifice or conservation opportunity? Ambio 38 (3): 141-49.
- Brannstrom, C., W. Jepson, A. M. Filippi, D. Redo, Z. Xu, and S. Ganesh. 2008. Land change in the Brazilian savanna (Cerrado), 1986-2002: Comparative analysis and landuse policy implications. Land Use Policy 25 (4): 579-95.
- Brown, J. C. 2001. Responding to deforestation: Productive conservation, the World Bank, and beekeeping in Rondˆ onia, Brazil. The Professional Geographer 53 (1): 106-19.
- Cavalcanti, R. B., and C. A. Joly. 2002. Biodiversity and conservation priorities in the Cerrado region. In The cerrados of Brazil, ed. P. S. Oliveira and R. J. Marquis, 351-67. New York: Columbia University Press.
- Centro de Pesquisa Sobre o Cerrado (CPAC). 1975. Cerrado: Filosofia e programa do centro de pesquisa [Cerrado: Research center philosophy and program]. Cerrado 7 (27): 22-26.
- Chase, J. 2003. Regional prestige: Cooperatives and agroindustrial identity in southwest Goi´ as, Brazil. Agriculture and Human Values 20 (1): 37-51.
- Chavez, P. S. 1996. Image-based atmospheric correctionsRevisited and improved. Photogrammetric Engineering &amp; Remote Sensing 62 (9): 1025-36.
- Coase, R. H. [1937] 1988. The nature of the firm: Origin, meaning, and influence. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 4 (1): 3-47.
- Cooperative Agropecu´ aria Mista Canarana, Ltda (COOPERCANA). 1976. General assembly minutes #3. COOPERCANA Office, ´ Agua Boa, Brazil.
- ---. 1979a. Contrato Assinado [Contract signed]. Boletim Informativo [ Information bulletin ] 2 (23). Arlindo Schwantes Private Archive, Canarana.
- ---. 1979b. General assembly minutes, 31 March. COOPERCANA Office, ´ Agua Boa, Brazil.
- ---. 1979c.
- Projeto COOPERSOLO [Project COOPERSOLO] . COOPERCANA Office, ´ Agua Boa, Brazil.
- ---. 1981. Campo Experimental. Pamphlet, COOPERCANAOffice, ´ Agua Boa, Brazil.
- ---. 1984-1990. Annual reports. COOPERCANA Office, ´ Agua Boa, Brazil.
- CONAGRO. 1976. Garapu II, Box File. Gertrudes Schwantes Private Archive, Bras´ ılia, Brazil.
- Coy, M. 2005. Between globalisation and regionalisation: The political ecology of pioneer fronts in the south-west Amazon. In Global impact, local action: New environmental policy in Latin America, ed. A. Hall, 13-35. London: Institute for the Study of the Americas.
- Coy, M., M. Freidrich, and R. L¨ ucker. 1997. Town and countryside in the Brazilian mid-west: Modernization and urbanization of a pioneer region. In Small towns and beyond: Rural transformation and small urban centres in Latin America, ed. P. van Lindert and O. Verkoren, 31-52. Amsterdam: Thela.
- Crawford, W., ed. 1963. Survey of the agricultural potential of the central plateau of Brazil. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: The American International Association for Economic and Social Development.
- Crews-Meyer, K., P. F. Hudson, and R. R. Colditz. 2004. Landscape complexity and remote classification in eastern coastal Mexico: Applications of Landsat-7 ETM + data. Geocarto International 19 (1): 45-56.
- Denevan, W. 1965. The campo cerrado vegetation of central Brazil. The Geographical Review 55 (1): 112-15.
- Dietz, T., E. Ostrom, and P. C. Stern. 2003. The struggle to govern the commons. Science 302 (5652): 1907-12.
- Dros, J. M. 2004. Managing the soy boom: Two scenarios of soy production expansion in South America . Amsterdam: WWF; AIDEnvironment.
- Echanove, F., and C. Steffen. 2005. Agribusiness and farmers in Mexico: The importance of contractual relations. The Geographical Journal 171 (2): 166-76.
- EMBRAPA-Cerrados. 1998. EMBRAPA-Cerrados e a Regi˜ ao dos Cerrados: Informac ¸˜ oes B´ asicas e Dados Estat´ ısticos [EMBRAPA-Cerrados and the Cerrado region: Basic information and statistical data]. Planaltina, Brazil: EMBRAPA-Cerrados.
- Emch, M., J. Quinn, M. Peterson, and M. Alexander. 2005. Forest-cover change in the Toledo District, Belize from 1975 to 1999: A remote sensing perspective. The Professional Geographer 57 (2): 256-67.
- Fearnside, P. 2001. Soybean cultivation as a threat to the environment in Brazil. Environmental Conservation 28 (1): 23-38.
- Federal Republic of Brasil. 2002. Japan-Brazil agricultural development cooperation programs in the Cerrado region of Brazil. Bras´ ılia, Brazil: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Supply.
- Feeney, D., F. Berkes, B. J. McCay, and J. M. Acheson. 1990. The tragedy of the commons: Twenty-two years later. Human Ecology 18 (1): 1-19.
- Ferri, M., ed. 1963. Simp´ osio sobre o Cerrado [Symposium on the Cerrado] 1. S˜ ao Paulo, Brazil: Editora da USP.
- Furley, P. 1996. The influence of slope on the nature and distribution of soils and plan communities in the central Brazilian cerrado. In Advances in hillslope processes, ed. M. G. Anderson and S. Brooks, 327-46. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
- ---. 1999. The nature and diversity of neotropical savanna vegetation with particular attention to the Brazilian cerrados. Global Ecology and Biogeography 8 (3-4): 223-41.
- Galford, G., J. F. Mustard, J. Melillo, A. Gendrin, C. C. Cerri, and C. E. P. Cerri. 2008. Wavelet analysis of MODIS time series to detect expansion and intensification of row-crop agriculture in Brazil. Remote Sensing of Environment 112 (2): 576-87.
- Gaucher, G. 1963. Programme d'Etudes pour le Centre de Recherches et d'Exp´ erimentation de la Technologie du Cerrade [Program for research and technological experiment stations in the Cerrado] . Montpellier, France: Soci´ et´ e Centrale pour l'Equipement du Territoire Cooperation.
- Geist, H. J., and E. F. Lambin. 2002. Proximate causes and underlying driving forces of tropical deforestation. Bioscience 52 (2): 143-50.
- Gibson, C. C., M. A. McKean, and E. Ostrom. 2000. Explaining deforestation: The role of local institutions. In People and forests: Communities, institutions and governance, ed.

- C. C. Gibson, M. A. McKean, and E. Ostrom, 1-26. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
2. Goedert, W. J. 1983. Management of the cerrado soils of Brazil: A review. European Journal of Soil Science 34 (3): 405-28.
3. Haberl, H., S. Batterbury, and E. Moran. 2001. Using and shaping the land: A long-term perspective. Land Use Policy 18 (1): 1-8.
4. Haesbaert, R. 1997. Des-territorializac ¸˜ ao e identidade: A rede 'ga´ ucha' no nordeste [De-territorialization and identity: The 'Ga´ ucho' network in the northeast]. Niter´ oi, Brazil: Editora da Universidade Federal Fluminense.
5. Harris, J., J. Hunter, and C. Lewis. 1995. Introduction. In The new institutional economics and Third World development, ed. J. Harris, J. Hunter, and C. Lewis, 1-13. London and New York: Routledge.
6. Hecht, S. B., and C. Mann. 2008. How Brazil outfarmed the American farmer. Fortune 19 January:92-105.
7. Helfand, S. M., and G. Castro de Rezende. 2004. The impact of sector-specific and economy-wide policy reforms on the agricultural sector in Brazil: 1980-98. Contemporary Economic Policy 22 (2): 194-212.
8. Hollerman, L. 1988. Japan's economic strategy in Brazil: Challenge for the United States. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
9. Instituto de Pesquisa Econˆ omica Aplicada (IPEA). 1979. O POLOCENTRO: Aspetos gerais e realizac ¸˜ oes [POLOCENTRO:Generalaspects and accomplishments] . Bras´ ılia, Brazil: Instituto de Planejamento Economic e Social.
10. Jasinski, E., D. Morton, R. De Fries, Y. Shimabukuro, L. Anderson, and M. Hansen. 2005. Physical landscape correlates of the expansion of mechanized agriculture in Mato Grosso, Brazil. Earth Interactions 9:16.
11. Jepson, W. 2005. A disappearing biome? Reconsidering landcover change in the Brazilian savanna. Geographical Journal 171 (2): 99-111.
12. ---. 2006a. Private agricultural colonization on the Brazilian frontier, 1970-1980. Journal of Historical Geography 32 (4): 839-63.
13. ---. 2006b. Producing a modern agricultural frontier: Firms and cooperatives in eastern Mato Grosso, Brazil. Economic Geography 82 (3): 289-316.
14. Jepson, W., J. C. Brown, and M. Koeppe. 2008. Agricultural intensification on Brazil's soybean frontier in southern Rondˆ onia. In Land-change science in the tropics, ed. A. C. Millington and W. Jepson, 72-92. Boston: Springer.
15. Jiang, H. 2004. Cooperation, land use, and the environment in Uxin Ju: The changing landscape of a MongolianChinese borderland in China. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 (1): 117-39.
16. Jornal Coopercana. 1981-1992. COOPERCANA Office, ´ Agua Boa, Brazil, and Gertrudes Schwantes Private Archive, Bras´ ılia, Brazil.
17. Jornal da Terra. 1974-1979. Gertrudes Schwantes Private Archive, Bras´ ılia, Brazil.
18. Kaimowitz, D., and J. Smith. 2001. Soybean technology and the loss of natural vegetation in Brazil and Bolivia. In Agricultural technologies and tropical deforestation, ed. A. Angelsen and D. Kaimowitz, 195-211. Wallingford, UK: CABI Publications.
19. Keys, E., and W. J. McConnell. 2005. Global change and the intensification of agriculture in the tropics. Global Environmental Change Part A 15 (4): 320-37.
20. Klink, C. A., and R. B. Machado. 2005. Conservation of the Brazilian Cerrado. Conservation Biology 19 (3): 707-13.
21. Labouriau, L. G., and P. E. Vanzolini. 1964. Plan de Implantac ¸˜ ao de um Centro de Experimentac ¸˜ ao e Pesquisas Tecnol´ ogicas do Cerrado para a Universidade de Bras´ ılia [Implementation plan for an experimental and technological research center in the Cerrado for the University of Bras´ ılia]. S˜ ao Paulo, Brazil: Fundac ¸˜ ao de Amparo ` a Pesquisa do Estado de S˜ ao Paulo.
22. Lambin, E. F., H. J. Geist, and E. Lepers. 2003. Dynamics of land-use and land-cover change in tropical regions. Annual Review of Environment and Resources 28:205-41.
23. Lambin, E. F., B. L. Turner, H. J. Geist, S. B. Agbola, A. Angelsen, J. W. Bruce, O. T. Coomes, R. Dirzo, G. Fischer, and C. Folke. 2001. The causes of land-use and land-cover change: Moving beyond the myths. Global Environmental Change 11 (4): 261-69.
24. Leica Geosystems GIS and Mapping, LLC. 2003. ERDAS field guide. 7th ed. Atlanta, GA: Leica Geosystems GIS and Mapping.
25. Little, P., and M. Watts. 1994. Introduction. In Living under contract: Contract farming and agrarian transformation in sub-saharan Africa, ed. P. Little and M. Watts, 3-18. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
26. Machado, R. B., M. B. R. Neto, P. G. P. Pereira, E. F. Caldas, D. A. Gonc ¸alves, N. S. Santos, K. Tabor, and M. Steininger. 2004. Estimativas de perda da ´ area do Cerrado brasileiro [Estimates of the loss of area of the Brazilian Cerrado] . Bras´ ılia, Brazil: Conservac ¸ ˜ ao Internacional.
27. Mantovani, J. E., and A. Pereira. 1998. Estimativa da integradidade da cobertura vegetal do cerrado/pantanal atrav´ es de dados TM/Landsat [Estimate of the integrity of Cerrado/Pantanal vegetation cover by Landsat-TM data] . Paper presented at Simp´ osio Brasiliero de Sensoriamento Remoto 9, S˜ ao Jos´ e dos Campos, Brazil.
28. Marini, M. A., and R. B. Cavalcanti. 1996. Influˆ encia do fogo na avifauna do sub-bosque de uma mata de galeria do Brasil central [Influence of fire on subforest birds of a gallery forest in central Brazil]. Revista Brasileira de Biologia 56 (4): 749-54.
29. McClung, A. C., L. M. M. d. Freitas, J. R. Gallo, L. R. Quinn, and G. O. Mott. 1958. Alguns estudos preliminares sobre poss´ ıveis problemas de fertilidade em solos de diferentes campos cerrados de S˜ ao Paulo e Goi´ as [Some preliminary studies on possible fertility problems in different Campo Cerrado soils of S˜ ao Paulo and Goi´ as]. Bragantia 17 (1): 29-44.
30. McCracken, S. D., E. S. Brondizio, D. Nelson, E. F. Moran, A. D. Siqueira, and C. Rodriguez-Pedraza. 1999. Remote sensing and GIS at farm property level: Demography and deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 65 (11): 1311-20.
31. Mistry, J. 1998. Fire in the cerrado (savannas) of Brazil: An ecological review. Progress in Physical Geography 22 (4): 425-48.
32. ---. 2000. Savannas. Progress in Physical Geography 24 (2): 273-79.
33. Moran, E. F., E. S. Brondizio, J. M. Tucker, M. C. da Silva-Forsberg, S. McCracken, and I. Falesi. 2000. Effects of soil fertility and land-use on forest succession in Amazˆ onia. Forest Ecology and Management 139 (1-3): 93-108.

- Moran, E., and E. Ostrom. 2005. Seeing the forest and the trees: Human-environment interactions in forest ecosystems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Moran, E. F., A. Siqueira, and E. Brondizio. 2006. Household demographic structure and its relationship to deforestation in the Amazon basin. In People and the environment: Approaches for linking household and community surveys to remote sensing and GIS, ed. J. Fox, R. Rindfuss, S. Walsh, and V. Mishra, 61-89. Boston: Kluwer.
- Morton, D. C., R. S. DeFries, Y. E. Shimabukuro, L. O. Anderson, E. Arai, F. del Bon Espirito-Santo, R. Freitas, and J. Morisette. 2006. Cropland expansion changes deforestation dynamics in the southern Brazilian Amazon. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (39): 14637-41.
- Mutersbaugh, T. 2002. Building co-ops, constructing cooperation: Spatial strategies and development politics in a Mexican village. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 92 (4): 756-76.
- Myers, N., R. A. Mittermeier, C. G. Mittermeier, G. A. B. Fonseca, and J. Kent. 2000. Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature 403 (6772): 853-58.
- Nagendra, H. 2002. Tenure and forest conditions: Community forestry in the Nepal Terai. Environmental Conservation 29 (4): 530-39.
- North, D. 1995. The new institutional economics and third world development. In The new institutional economics and third world development, ed. J. Harris, J. Hunter, and C. M. Lewis, 14-26. London and New York: Routledge.
- Oliveira, L. R. C. 1981. Colonizac ¸˜ ao e differenciac ¸˜ ao: Os colonos de Canarana [Colonization and differentiation: The colonists of Canarana] . Master's thesis, Universidade Federal de Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
- Oliveira-Filho, A. T., and J. A. Ratter. 2002. Vegetation physiognomies and woody flora of the Cerrado biome. In The cerrados of Brazil: Ecology and natural history of a neotropical savanna, ed. P. S. Oliveira and R. J. Marquis, 91-120. New York: Columbia University Press.
- Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for collective action. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Ostrom, E., M. Janssen, and J. Anderies. 2007. Going beyond panaceas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 104 (39): 15176-78.
- Paavola, J. 2007. Institutions and environmental governance: A reconceptualization. Ecological Economics 53 (3): 93103.
- Paez, M. L. D., R. C. Almeida, A. Veiga, M. M. d. M. C. Casiolato, and H. H. T. d. Camargo. 1984. Avaliac ¸˜ ao do Programa de Cooperac ¸˜ ao Nipo-Brasileira para o Desenvolvimento dos Cerrados-PRODECER [Evaluation of the program for Japanese-Brazilian cooperation for Cerrado development]. Revista de Economia Rural 22:32764.
- Perreault, T. 2001. Developing identities: Indigenous mobilization, rural livelihoods, and resource access in Ecuadorian Amazonia. Ecumene 8 (4): 381-413.
- ---. 2008. Custom and contradiction: Rural water governance and the politics of usos y costumbres in Bolivia's irrigators' movement. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 98 (4): 834-54.
- Perz, S., R. Walker, and M. Caldas. 2006. Beyond population and environment: Household demographic life cycles and land use allocation among small farms in the Amazon. Human Ecology 34 (6): 829-49.
- Pessˆ oa, E., and R. Bonelli. 1997. O papel do estado no pesquisa agr´ ıcola no Brasil [The role of the state in agricultural research in Brazil]. Cadernos de Difus˜ ao Tecnol´ ogica 14:9-56.
- Pires, M. O. 1996. Desenvolvimento e Sustentabilidade: Um Estudo sobre o Programa de Cooperac ¸˜ ao Nipo-Brasileira para o Desenvolvimento dos Cerrados (PRODECER) [Development and sustainability: A study of the Program for JapaneseBrazilian Cooperation for Cerrado Development (PRODECER)] . Master's thesis, Universidade de Bras´ ılia, Bras´ ılia, Brazil.
- Puppim de Oliveira, J. A. 2008. Property rights, land conflicts and deforestation in the eastern Amazon. Forest Policy and Economics 10 (5): 303-15.
- Ratana, P., A. R. Huete, and L. Ferreira. 2005. Analysis of Cerrado physiognomies and conversion in the MODIS seasonal-temporal domain. Earth Interactions 9:3.
- Ratter, J., and T. C. D. Dargie. 1992. An analysis of the floristic composition of 26 cerrado areas in Brazil. Edinburgh Journal of Botany 49 (2): 235-50.
- Ratter, J. A., J. F. Ribeiro, and S. Bridgewater. 1997. The Brazilian Cerrado vegetation and threats to its biodiversity. Annals of Botany 80 (3): 223-30.
- Ribeiro, I. C. 1987. Pioneiros Ga´ uchos: A colonizac ¸˜ ao do norte matogrossense [Ga´ ucho pioneers: The colonization of northern Mato Grosso]. Porto Alegre, Brazil: Tchˆ e.
- Ribot, J. C., and N. L. Peluso. 2003. A theory of access. Rural Sociology 68 (2): 153-81.
- Rindfuss, R. R., B. Entwisle, S. J. Walsh, C. F. Mena, C. M. Erlien, and C. L. Gray. 2007. Frontier land use change: Synthesis, challenges, and next steps. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 97 (4): 739-54.
- Rindfuss, R. R., S. J. Walsh, B. L. Turner, J. Fox, and V. Mishra. 2004. Developing a science of land change: Challenges and methodological issues. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101 (39): 13976-81.
- Robbins, P. 1998. Authority and environment: Institutional landscapes in Rajasthan, India. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 88 (3): 410-35.
- Rohter, L. 2003. Relentless foe of the Amazon: Soybeans. The New York Times 17 September:A3.
- Ruralidade. 1975. A produtividade chega ao Cerrado [Productivity arrives in the Cerrado]. Ruralidade (Goiˆ ania) 5:6-10.
- Salim, C. A. 1986. As pol´ ıticas econˆ omicas e tecnol´ ogicas para o desenvolvimento agr´ ario das ´ areas de cerrados no Brasil: Avaliac ¸˜ ao e perspectivas [The economic policies and technologies for the agricultural development of Brazil's Cerrado: Evaluation and perspectives]. Cadernos de Difus˜ ao Tecnol´ ogica 3:297-342.
- Sanderson, S. 1994. Political-economic institutions. In Changes in land-use and land-cover: A global perspective, ed. W. Meyer and B. L. Turner II, 329-56. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Sano, E. E., R. Rosa, J. L. S. Brito, and L. G. Ferreira. 2009. Land cover mapping of the tropical savanna region of Brazil . Environmental Monitoring and Assessment .

- http://www.springerlink.com/content/f225572387u1560h/ (last accessed 2 November 2009).
- Santos, J. V. T. d. 1993. Matuchos: Exclus˜ ao e luta do sul para a Amazˆ onia [Matuchos: Exclusion and struggle of the south for the Amazon] . Petr´ opolis, Brazil: Vozes.
- Scheibe, S. D. 1985. Ac ¸ ˜ oes p´ ublicas e cerrados: Problemas e alternativas [Public policies and the Cerrado: Problems and alternatives]. Fundac ¸˜ ao Jo˜ ao Pinheiro 15: 63-78.
- Schwantes, N. 1989. Uma cruz em terra nova [A cross in new land]. S˜ ao Paulo, Brazil: Escrita.
- Scott, C. D. 1984. Transnational corporations and asymmetries in the Latin American food system. Bulletin of Latin American Research 3 (1): 63-80.
- Silva, J. F., M. R. Fari˜ nas, J. M. Felfili, and C. A. Klink. 2006. Spatial heterogeneity, land use and conservation in the Cerrado region of Brazil. Journal of Biogeography 33 (3): 536-48.
- Silva, J. M. C., and J. M. Bates. 2002. Biogeographic patterns and conservation in the South American Cerrado: A tropical savanna hotspot. Bioscience 52 (3): 225-34.
- Silva, R. R. 1985. A expans˜ ao da fronteira produtiva nos cerrados [The expansion of the productive frontier in the Cerrado]. Fundac ¸˜ ao Jo˜ ao Pinheiro 15: 53-61.
- Simmons, C. S., R. T. Walker, E. Y. Arima, S. P. Aldrich, and M. M. Caldas. 2007. The Amazon land war in the south of Par´ a. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 97 (3): 567-92.
- Simon, M. F., and F. L. Garagorry. 2006. The expansion of agriculture in the Brazilian Amazon. Environmental Conservation 32 (3): 203-12.
- Singh, S. 2002. Contracting out solutions: Political economy of contract farming in the Indian Punjab. World Development 30 (9): 1621-38.
- Smith, J., J. Vicente Cadavid, M. Ayarza, J. Pimenta de Aguiar, and R. Rosa. 1999. Land use change in soybean production systems in the Brazilian savanna: The role of policy and market conditions. Journal of Sustainable Agriculture 15 (2-3): 95-117.
- Smith, J., M. Winograd, G. Gallopin, and D. Pachico. 1998. Dynamics of the agricultural frontier in the Amazon and savannas of Brazil: Analyzing the impact of policy and technology. Environmental Modeling and Assessment 3 (12): 31-46.
- Sousa, I., and M. Trigueiro. 1989. Organizac ¸˜ ao da pesquisa agropecu´ aria brasileira: O caso da EMBRAPA [Organization of Brazilian agro-pastoral research in Brazil: The case of EMBRAPA]. Cadernos de Difus˜ ao Tecnol´ ogica 6:277337.
- Southworth, J., and C. Tucker. 2001. The influence of accessibility, local institutions, and socioeconomic factors on forest cover change in the mountains of western Honduras. Mountain Research and Development 21 (3): 27683.
- Spehar, C. R. 1994. Aluminium tolerance of soya bean genotypes in short term experiments. Euphytica 76 (1-2): 7380.
- ---. 1995. Impact of strategic genes in soybean on agricultural development in the Brazilian tropical savanna. Field Crop Research 41 (3): 141-46.
- Stiglitz, J. 1986. The new development economics. World Development 14 (2): 257-65.
- ---. 1989. Rational peasants, efficient institutions and a theory of rural organization: Methodological remarks for development economics. In The economic theory of agrarian institutions , ed. P. Bardhan, 18-29. Oxford, UK: Clarendon.
- Tucker, C., and E. Ostrom. 2005. Multidisciplinary research relating institutions and forest transformations. In Seeing the forest and the trees: Human-environment interactions in forest ecosystems , ed. E. Moran and E. Ostrom, 81-103. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Tucker, C. M., J. C. Randolph, and E. J. Castellanos. 2007. Institutions, biophysical factors and history: An integrative analysis of private and common property forests in Guatemala and Honduras. Human Ecology 35 (3): 25974.
- Turner, B. L., W. B. Meyer, and D. L. Skole. 1994. Global land use and land cover change-Towards an integrated study. Ambio 23 (1): 91-95.
- U.S. Department of State. 2004. Powell applauds Brazil's achievements and robust democracy. Press release, 9 October.
- Walker, R. 2003. Mapping process to pattern in the landscape change of the Amazonian frontier. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 93 (2): 376-98.
- Warnken, P. F. 1999. The development and growth of the soybean industry in Brazil. Ames: Iowa State University.
- Watts, M. 1994. Life under contract: Contract farming, agrarian restucturing, and flexible accumulation. In Living under contract: Contract farming and agrarian transformation in sub-Saharan Africa, ed. P. Little and M. Watts, 21-77. Madison: University of Wisconsin.
- Wilkinson, J., and B. Sorj. 1992. Structural adjustment and the institutional dimensions of agricultural research and development in Brazil: Soybeans, wheat, and sugar cane. Paris: OECD.
- Williamson, O. 1985. The economic institutions of capitalism. New York: Free Press.
- ---. 2000. The new institutional economics: Taking stock, looking ahead. Journal of Economic Literature 308 (September): 595-613.
- Wolford, W. 2004. This land is ours now: Spatial imaginaries and the struggle for land in Brazil. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 (2): 409-24.
- ---. 2008. Environmental justice and the construction of scale in Brazilian agriculture. Society and Natural Resources 21 (7): 641-55.
- Wood, A., P. Stedman-Edwards, and J. Mang. 2000. The root causes of biodiversity loss. Sterling, VA: Earthscan.
- World Food Prize. 2006. World Food Prize laureates Edson Lobato of Brazil, Alysson Paolinelli of Brazil, and Dr. A. Colin McClung of the USA. Press release. http://www.worldfoodprize.org (last accessed 14 November 2007).
- Yoshioka, Y. 1992. Development of agricultural policy in postwar Japan. In Agriculture and trade in the Pacific, ed. W.Coyle, D. Hayes, and H. Yamauchi, 91-100. Boulder, CO: Westview.