This article was downloaded by: [University of Birmingham]

On: 15 November 2014, At: 00:34

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,

37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## Migration, Urbanization, and Political Power in SubSaharan Africa

Clionadh Raleigh a

a Department of Geography , University of Sussex

Published online: 24 Feb 2014.

To cite this article: Clionadh Raleigh (2014) Migration, Urbanization, and Political Power in Sub-Saharan Africa, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 104:2, 253-261, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2013.875802

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2013.875802

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## Migration, Urbanization, and Political Power in Sub-Saharan Africa

Clionadh Raleigh

Department of Geography, University of Sussex

African political geographies have been overlooked in the discussion of internal migration and urbanization. Yet institutional changes since the early 1990s altered the practices of acquiring and keeping power across Africa, and it is now possible to address how rural and urban areas have changed as a result. In this article, the focus is on how political practices interact with circular internal migration flows. 'Democratic' practices depend on the manipulation of rural spatial clustering and migration, but modern political institutions effectively disenfranchise urban and migrant voters, resulting in the continued reproduction and exacerbation of spatial inequalities. Further, these are responsible for the poor conditions of urban areas, the proliferation of rural bias across states, and limited support for urban political identities and programmatic change. Key Words: Africa, migration, political geography, urbanization.

/ZdZ7221 /ZdZ1695/ZdZ1713 /ZdZ17940 /ZdZ17645 /ZdZ5317 /ZdZ826 /ZdZ3322 /ZdZ4910 /ZdZ2114 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ16596/ZdZ16614 , /ZdZ5479 /ZdZ7003 /ZdZ5417 /ZdZ10897 /ZdZ19594 /ZdZ8798 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ6763 /ZdZ8679 /ZdZ3164 /ZdZ10546 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ1138 /ZdZ14102 1990 /ZdZ5024 /ZdZ1039 /ZdZ6933 /ZdZ7243 /ZdZ1041 /ZdZ19321 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1890 /ZdZ5074 /ZdZ2308 /ZdZ17645 , /ZdZ4894 /ZdZ6757 /ZdZ2308 /ZdZ946 /ZdZ3156 /ZdZ19594 /ZdZ8798 /ZdZ2306 /ZdZ5315 /ZdZ2294 /ZdZ13344/ZdZ13207 /ZdZ7279 /ZdZ1991 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ4298 /ZdZ17185 , /ZdZ1195 /ZdZ5315/ZdZ5247 /ZdZ823 /ZdZ2331 /ZdZ6350 /ZdZ16596 /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ7293 /ZdZ826 /ZdZ3322 /ZdZ4910 /ZdZ3164 /ZdZ2150 /ZdZ3758 /ZdZ1153 /ZdZ3084 /ZdZ13624 /ZdZ6757 /ZdZ2308 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ7256 /ZdZ6835 /ZdZ4402 /ZdZ13702 /ZdZ9810 /ZdZ6763 /ZdZ8679 /ZdZ4298 /ZdZ17185 /ZdZ3758 /ZdZ1153 /ZdZ826 /ZdZ5334 /ZdZ10459 /ZdZ5459 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1713 /ZdZ17940 /ZdZ17645 /ZdZ5317 /ZdZ8813 /ZdZ2004 /ZdZ11300 /ZdZ958 /ZdZ1160 /ZdZ10836 /ZdZ544 ' /ZdZ8509 /ZdZ871 ' /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ4298 /ZdZ17185 , /ZdZ2306 /ZdZ1759 /ZdZ954 /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ7293 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ12198 /ZdZ19232 /ZdZ13702 /ZdZ19442 /ZdZ2488 /ZdZ17645 /ZdZ5317 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ6649 /ZdZ6355 , /ZdZ13624 /ZdZ5247 /ZdZ1039 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ6763 /ZdZ8679 /ZdZ1890 /ZdZ5074 , /ZdZ7221 /ZdZ6772 /ZdZ3164 /ZdZ1937 /ZdZ3686 /ZdZ946 /ZdZ3322 /ZdZ4910 /ZdZ826 /ZdZ17645 /ZdZ5317 /ZdZ17717 /ZdZ874/ZdZ998 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1688 /ZdZ8509 /ZdZ7279 , /ZdZ4392 /ZdZ14112 /ZdZ12198 /ZdZ19232 /ZdZ825 /ZdZ3187 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ6189 /ZdZ13337 /ZdZ1721 /ZdZ10827 /ZdZ979 /ZdZ2294 /ZdZ5538 /ZdZ2114 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ8336 /ZdZ3650 , /ZdZ822 /ZdZ17692 /ZdZ19226 /ZdZ19908 /ZdZ7003 /ZdZ3322 /ZdZ4910 /ZdZ3164 /ZdZ2150 /ZdZ3503 /ZdZ1761 /ZdZ5538 /ZdZ1999 /ZdZ543 /ZdZ2352 /ZdZ3113 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ7293 /ZdZ1403 /ZdZ3753 /ZdZ9452 /ZdZ3530 , /ZdZ1041 /ZdZ2294 /ZdZ4389 /ZdZ3322 /ZdZ4910 /ZdZ6763 /ZdZ8679 /ZdZ16592 /ZdZ2360 /ZdZ2294 /ZdZ4298 /ZdZ19313 /ZdZ2308 /ZdZ19605 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ6747 /ZdZ6189 /ZdZ11300 /ZdZ5247 /ZdZ7221 /ZdZ19324 /ZdZ887 /ZdZ4392 /ZdZ3084 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ1695 /ZdZ19034 /ZdZ16633 : /ZdZ19594 /ZdZ8798 , /ZdZ17645 /ZdZ5317 , /ZdZ6763 /ZdZ8679 /ZdZ3164 /ZdZ10546 , /ZdZ3322 /ZdZ4910 /ZdZ2114 /ZdZ544

En la discusi´ on sobre migraci´ on interna y urbanizaci´ on en ´ Africa no se han tomado en cuenta las geograf´ ıas pol´ ıticas de ese continente. Es necesario anotar que los cambios institucionales ocurridos desde principios de los a˜ nos 1990 alteraron en todo ´ Africa las pr´ acticas sobre c´ omohacerse al poder y conservarlo; ahora es posible abocar la cuesti´ on de las transformaciones experimentadas por las ´ areas rurales y urbanas como resultado de aquellos cambios. El presente art´ ıculo se centra en el modo como las pr´ acticas pol´ ıticas interact´ uan con los flujos circulares de la migraci´ on interna. Las pr´ acticas 'democr´ aticas' dependen de la manipulaci´ on de la concentraci´ on espacial de la poblaci´ onylamigraci´ on rural, pero las instituciones pol´ ıticas modernas obstruyen efectivamente los derechos electorales de los votantes urbanos y migrantes, lo cual resulta en la continua reproducci´ on y exacerbaci´ on de las desigualdades espaciales. A´ un m´ as, ´ estas son responsables de las pobres condiciones existentes en las ´ areas urbanas, la proliferaci´ on de prejuicios rurales a trav´ es de los estados y el apoyo limitado a las identidades pol´ ıticas urbanas y al cambio program´ atico. Palabras clave: ´ Africa, migraci´ on, geograf´ ıa pol´ ıtica, urbanizaci´ on.

T he plethora of theories designed to explain the form, function, and flows of migration and urbanization often assume a 'fairly stable political environment in which economic and social factors influence the nature and growth of cities' (Potts 2010, 18). Few suggest that migration patterns alter political institutions or the individual political circumstances of migrants. In general, the causal direction has been to suggest that political events-notably crises-lead to migration (Foresight 2011); that migration of some groups over others is facilitated due to political connections (Collinson et al. 2003); or that, across Africa, political elites brand particular communities as 'migrant' or 'foreign' to restrict their political rights (e.g., Ivory Coast and Democratic Republic of the Congo).

This article argues that institutional change has had negative repercussions for the urban poor and migrants (Raleigh 2013). Democratization and decentralization alter the political calculus against urban migrants and residents, who now routinely suffer from the practice of multiparty politics. From the range of intended and unintended consequences for regimes and voters, the most critical here is the de facto disenfranchisement through limited political identities in Africa outside of rural ethno-regional affiliations and alliances; the reversal of autocratic urban bias in favor of demographically strong rural voters; and negative competition between opposition and incumbent powers. This interpretation of political power is grounded in frameworks recognizing how citizens and their spatial movements

are used to bolster a political project from which they are ultimately victimized (Laclau and Mouffe 2001). In short, new patterns of mobility and settlement across Africa are at odds with the practices of power.

An ongoing debate presumes that as urbanization continues, the focus and attention of political institutions and regimes will return to urban areas to generate economic growth and placate a growing population. This neglects how the manipulation of the political process through democracy sustains a rural focus, through which spatialized and ethnic claims to power have more relevance. Manipulations centered around voting, registration, and representation make migrants pawns of political elites, kept in positions of dependence and patron subservience due to the underprovision of economic opportunities in urban areas and the lack of alternative political identities through which to support systematic change. In limiting effective political agency to those in rural areas, many African political transitions lead citizens to vote against their immediate self-interest for access to services, representation, and development. In addition, the dynamics of elite capture-including administrative rigging through decentralization, underfunding opposition areas, and creating disincentives for alternative political identities-leads to the relegation of urban migrants and residents as secondary citizens and has perpetuated decades of public mismanagement on urban issues.

The article proceeds as follows: I first present a brief general introduction to internal African mobility. Following that is a discussion of rural bias created by democracy and decentralization and the ways in which migrants and the urban poor are engaged in contests to secure power. I conclude by discussing the consequences for underrepresented migrant and urban residents.

## Why Migrate? And to Where?

African migration is often a socioeconomic obligation, undertaken to distribute resources in high-risk environments and cope with high levels of production uncertainty in both rural and urban spaces (Roncoli and Ingram 2001; Tacoli 2002; Homewood, Coast, and Thompson 2004; Perch-Nielsen, B¨ attig, and Imboden 2008). Most socioeconomic theories of movement posit that migration sustains rural homesteads and livelihoods during difficult periods and provides urban residents with a safety net from the growing pressures in urban areas (Todaro 1969; Smit 1998; Potts 2005). The typical migrant engages in reversible movements (Dustmann 2003; Raleigh and Jordan 2010) characterized by temporary, circular, 1 and internal migration from rural areas. It is generally agreed that circular migration dominates (Potts 2010) and varies in form by direction, steps, time span, and whether family members accompany a migrant (Skeldon 2012).

The absolute and relative location of movement (urban or rural) is largely structured by group or individual social capital, preestablished links, and infrastructure linking rural and urban areas (de Haan, Brock, and Coulibaly 2002). Satterthwaite (2010) noted that the scale and direction of people's migrations change according to the geography of economic opportunities: cities, towns, and rural areas with expanding economies that attract migrants, who are responsive to income variability (Lilleør and van den Broeck 2012). Destination characteristics beyond economic gain, however, are increasingly shaping movement (Vertovec 2007; Brettell 2008; Brooks and Waters 2010). Urbanization figures in several developing countries suggest a trend of downward growth in larger cities where populations are generally stagnant or decreasing, whereas secondary and tertiary cities are growing faster than capitals. African migrants seem most attracted to proximate small to large cities (Potts 2010; see Beauchemin [2011] on West Africa).

Overall, the African continent is rapidly urbanizing 2 : 39.6 percent of Africans are urban and annual urban population growth averages over 5 percent (World Bank 2008; United Nations 2011). Yet, these figures aggregate countries with high rates of urbanization (e.g., Djibouti, Democratic Republic of the Congo) and those with the lowest (e.g., Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda, and Ethiopia). Further, urban versus rural growth figures suggest that those states that are highly urbanized have the lowest urban growth, whereas countries like Rwanda (17 percent urban growth in 2010), Burundi (6.15 percent), and Malawi (5.6 percent) are the sites of rapidly growing urban centers. Rural-urban migration significantly contributes to urbanization rates across Africa, but it is not entirely responsible for the rates of urban growth; individual cities and states might have similar rates of urban growth caused by numerous variations in contributing factors (e.g., natural increase, slowing or increasing inor outmigration, recategorization of centers). Although the data on circular migration are particularly poor (see Gould [1995] for discussion), both inflows and outflows are considerable. 3

In response to growing pressures, African governments have attempted to alter migration patterns, flows, and incentives. To limit urbanization, many incentivize the rural poor to remain in or return to their villages through nationwide access to primary and secondary education (Mabogunje 2007). Such policies might alter migration patterns but ultimately fail to stem rural-tourban circular movements (Beauchemin 2011). This sort of migration occurs in all African states and involves large portions of the populations.

## Governance and Migration Effects

Spatial reconfigurations and demographic changes within African states cannot be divorced from expressions of power and the means by which it is acquired and exercised. From a political geography standpoint, the questions are not how Africa's political changes have affected migration but, rather, how institutional changes have altered the urban-rural political divide, how migrants and migration have supported political change, and what the political consequences of high internal migration are. This article argues that the main results of institutional change are that rural areas are politically privileged, despite needed attention to urban issues; migrants and the urban poor vote against their own self-interest, which leads to poorer urban conditions; and decentralization has stunted an effective opposition and alternative urban political identity. In short, many African governments engage in different modes of informal disenfranchisement and demographic manipulation (Schedler 2002).

## Rural and Urban Biases

Previous research into the distinctions between African governance in urban and rural areas largely focused on theories of urban bias and rural patronage and repression (see Bates 1981, 1993). Urban bias was the result of economic policies that systemically favored those living in towns and cities at the expense of the rural majority (Bates 1981, 1993). In particular, distorted commodity pricing systems for urban residents were designed to quell potential collective action against the autocratic state (Van de Walle 1989), as this was considered far easier for urban groups to organize than disenfranchised rural groups. Urban bias implies that individuals engage in and support violent collective action-including riots, protests, or coups-to maximize economic self-interest. The end to urban bias was ascribed to structural adjustment policies (SAPs); despite relatively poor adherence to those (Van de Walle 2001), the urban population bore the costs of retrenchment of the public sector, new collections of tax, and an end to favorable prices for commodities (Nugent 1999; Harding 2011). There are few references to migration practices in this literature, although Potts (2005) has argued that SAPs resulted in high poverty rates within the urban civil service and a significant return migration to rural areas.

## Democracy

In addition to SAPs, concurrent, externally mandated changes in political institutional form ushered in multiparty democracy to many African states. Since the early 1990s, multiparty systems clearly position demographically strong rural areas as the main constituency (Nugent 1999; Boone 2003; Harding 2012). Simple political demography demands more efforts by regimes in rural areas, as they are often more populated than urban sectors. Indeed, smaller and more demanding urban constituencies have lost in the democratic transition (Bates 1993). In addition to a rural focus, the structure of most sub-Saharan African political systems reinforces the dominance of ethno-political-territorial identities. This is a result of both politicized ethnicity and spatial considerations: Ethnicity is a significant predictor of party support in most African societies (Norris and Mattes 2003). In response, political parties across Africa do not distinguish themselves through programmatic policy stances (Scarritt and Mozaffer 1999; Van de Walle and Butler 1999; Posner 2005) and instead represent ethno-political divisions (Salih and Mohamed 2003; Harding 2012; in specific reference to Senegal, see Galvan 2001).

Ethnic pandering is much more successful in countries with clustered ethnic communities (Ichino and Nathan 2013). African ethno-regional groups are strongly identified with specific territories (Scarritt and McMillan 1995), and group-based calculations can result in entire areas of electoral support (Boone 2003). This allows politicians to cater a message on 'service delivery' without needing to emphasize an ethnic dimension.

Furthermore, incumbents enjoy multiple rural advantages: While in power, they engage in rival bargaining and consolidation of key constituencies into party alliances (Van de Walle and Butler 1999) and use state resources to strategically plan the distribution of public and private (e.g., ministry position) goods to

elevate their standing across communities and court rivals. For example, Yoweri Museveni's 2011 reelection in Uganda is largely explained by massive government spending intended to rouse support during the election (some estimates suggest 85 percent of the annual state budget; Conroy-Krutz and Logan 2012). Finally, incumbents orchestrate obstacles for opposition candidates to limit their ability to educate and appeal to voters. Spatial clustering in rural areas, coupled with the creation of electoral vote districts benefiting incumbents, has allowed multiparty elections to become a fight over rural dominance. As evidence of the link among political favor, space, and ethnic demography, rural candidates support incumbent parties in higher numbers, whereas urban areas return higher than average opposition support (Conroy-Krutz 2009).

## Decentralization

The political geography of African states is formalized within the institutional structure, allowing for both rural and regime dominance. For more than thirty years, the decentralization process was designed to limit centralized state power. In practice, it has been a process of regime reorganization, capture, and recentralization due to the creation of governing units in exchange for patronage (e.g., Uganda), a reluctance to relinquish significant power to the subnational level, and a refusal to fiscally support new units (e.g., Nigeria; Wunsch 2001). Consequently, urban movements, residents, identities, and programs are effectively restricted.

The creation of decentralized administrative units is not a politically neutral process (Boone 1998), as both district proliferation and the use of decentralized administrative positions allow central regimes to extend patronage networks in periods of constrained state budgets (Tripp 2010; Conroy-Krutz and Logan 2012). This is often due to the largely hierarchical and centralized patronage distribution systems operating in many African states, where the objective is to create nested power hierarchies in which 'local power structures have beenfacilitated by the desire for rural elites to create and sustain power bases in the countryside' (Crook 2003, 77). 4 These local governance agents become intermediaries to exert control of the countryside and ensure regime support within a locality (Kasara 2007).

Central regimes create and acknowledge decentralized units but provide administrators with little to no fiscal support. In a majority of African states, the transfer of funds from the center is calculated to range from less than 5 percent of national budgets (Ndegwa

2002) to less than 15 percent (Therkildsen 1994; e.g., Kenya's rate was 3.5 percent; World Bank 2000). The reluctance of central governments to allocate sufficient funds is particularly important in urban areas with large influxes of migrants and high growth: The lack of support is possibly related to the higher than average rates of opposition support in urban areas (Resnick 2011). Given that opposition parties controlling city councils might benefit from urban programs, by starving the council of adequate funds, the central government is also managing opposition support and risk to regime stability. In summary, rural decentralization by regimes is designed to capture political bases; urban areas are decentralized but inadequately funded to effectively limit opposition appeal.

These factors go far in explaining the lack of urban agendas across parties in rapidly urbanizing areas, the poor conditions that urban residents persistently live with, the lack of incumbent support in cities, and agency of opposition parties. Further, as both migrants and the urban poor do not act in their own political best interest, migration exacerbates the conditions in cities while reinforcing rural electoral dominance.

## Manipulation

Considerable geographic work focuses on the complexity of voting exclusion mechanisms for particular types of citizens, including international migrants (Collyer 2013); yet there is little on the role of internal migrants in political competition. Taking advantage of looser populations in electoral contests is part of the available options for democratic manipulation (Schedler 2002). Three ways in which migrants and the urban poor contribute to corrupted democratic contests are particularly important: where they vote, who they vote for, and whether their vote is weighted the same as others.

Returning to Rural Areas to Vote. The rural-urban power divide is reinforced by where voters can register to vote: Whereas urban residents can vote in urban location, migrants are often not legally registered there and therefore-regardless of how much time is spent in urban areas-often return to rural areas for census taking, voting, holidays, and significant events (Gugler 2002; Desai 2010; Beguy, Bocquier, and Zulu 2010).

This is not simply an administrative issue: The close ties that most urban migrants retain with their sending communities results in the 'shifting of political

loyalties to maintain access to state controlled patronage sources' (Galvan 2001, 59-60). This is underscored by the strongly ethnicized experience of migrants through urban social networks and associations that provide access to services, support, and opportunities on an ethnic-club basis. Hence, even urban residents are more likely to resort to patronage voting behavior based on ethnic markers (Desai 2010), as they remain supported by and integrated with rural power structures. These rural political identities limit the abilities of the poor to create and engage in collective action (Platteau 2000; see Robson and Roque [2001] for a critique of Angola's urban community organization). 5 Further, ethnic clustering in urban areas conspires to make urban zones less attractive or accessible regions for competing parties to encourage alternative political leanings.

Vote Buying and Busing. Another way to manipulate democratic contests is by directing migrants and urban poor to register and vote in contested electoral areas. This is an active reallocation of movable votes, where voter registration lists are superficially inflated above the resident population totals. Although increased registration can be due to demographic growth, it could also result from inflated registration and busing, which allows candidates to win contested, pivotal districts through the temporary relocation of migrants and the purchase of urban poor votes (Jensen and Justesen 2012).

There are several recent examples of vote buying and busing in Benin (Wantchekon 2003), Ghana (Lindberg 2003), Sao Tome and Principe (Vicente 2010), Nigeria (Bratton 2008), Kenya (Kramon 2009), Malawi, and Mozambique (Birch 2011). Inflated active registration lists are not a smoking gun but provide the foundations for electoral fraud facilitated by migrants and the urban poor. Active registration lists are updated before an election. This allows for a real-time map of where voters will cluster. Passive lists are less frequently updated. For example, in Kenya's 2013 election, both Central and Nairobi districts had registered voters over 100 percent ('Holding Their Breath' 2013, 1). Nairobi enrollment was 121.6 percent of the expected district electorate and the Central region had 107.2 percent of its electorate. Other areas of the state recorded totals from 60 percent upward, and the national registration total was 78 percent (see Nation Map 21 December 2012). Areas that were strongholds of candidate Uhuru Kenyatta from the Jubilee alliance (now president) had higher than average registration across several territories, 6 but the CORD alliance (in opposition) took Nairobi, as ex- pected. Surpassed target percentages can be attributed to population transfers and settlement (Willis Otieno, Electoral Institute for Sustainable Democracy in Africa, personal communication, 18 February 2013). The center was most affected by distorted voting: Due to constraints and a March election, most of those who traditionally voted in their home districts were forced to register in the city.

Demographic Gerrymandering. The ways in which incumbents stay in power are sophisticated and catered to the local and external pressures experienced by regimes. Governments can manipulate the political geography and demography of states to make migrants and urban growth disappear, thereby reinforcing their largely rural democratic strategy. One simple way to counter urban opposition is to erase its evidence through embellishing favorable demographic trends in rural areas and reducing the impact of urban areas through a form of gerrymandering. This strategy is common in Zimbabwe, as described by O'Donovan (2003) using Electoral Institute of Southern Africa data. By manipulating voting rolls, the ZANU-PF regime in 1994 and 2000 was able to ensure that voters in potentially opposition (often urban) constituencies counted less than voters in rural ZANU-PF constituencies. This was done through the creation of voting profiles in which the demographic growth of Harare, Bulawayo, and other constituencies supportive to opposition candidates experience a stagnating or decreasing voting-age population from 1994 to 2000 (despite a reported potential population increase of 35 percent). Hence, all became electorally less valuable. Yet, rural areas had, as described by independent analysts, voting lists that were inflated up to 30 percent (due to names of dead, migrants, etc.). Indeed, in a number of rural provinces, the 'number of people on the register exceeded that estimated population of the district' (O'Donovan 2003, 5). The practical avenue for fraud is through ballot stuffing on election day.

O'Donovan (2003) noted that a cleaned voter list might indeed lead to voter decreases in opposition areas, but the same effect should have been seen across the state and irrespective of party support. This strategy of making urban residents and migrants politically disappear creates unequal citizenship across urban and rural areas. This practice is ongoing according to reports about Zimbabwe's 2013 election (and also in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Egypt, Sierra Leone, and Nigeria).

## Consequences and Conclusions

Resnick (2012) suggested that, as migration and urban growth continue, the urban poor might respond by insisting on improved urban circumstances through populist, programmatic political parties. Despite research suggesting that opposition candidates are likely to engage in populist appeals in urban areas, however, Bratton and Van de Walle (1992, 440) criticized the formation of opposition parties as often a 'spontaneous convergence of diverse urban interests' and directed toward appealing to wealthier, educated subsections of the population. Indeed, a class distinction is evident in urban voting: Whereas ethnic voting is negatively correlated with levels of wealth in urban locations (Conroy-Krutz 2009), the urban poor might not be active supporters of opposition candidates unless linked to accessible patronage (Desai 2010). This combined research casts doubt on the notion of a monolithic urban constituency and the notion that the urban poor might reorient African democracy. 7

Hence, through administrative, fiscal, and representational constraints, migrants and urban poor are effectively disenfranchised, used, or absent from the political process. Political candidates do not often represent their constituency; they remain outside of active and funded patronage networks, and through the undocumented residence conditions for migrants, their voting practices uphold rural dominance. Politicians respond to a political calculus that maximizes voter support for minimal efforts and costs; hence, demographically strong rural areas are far more attractive sites to position programs designed to increase allegiances. Despite growing urbanization, this political strategy is kept in place through constraints and obstacles for urban voters and potentially urban-focused parties.

This has serious consequences for urban development, as life in urban areas continues to grow more difficult than that in rural areas across African states. Sub-Saharan states are urbanizing without parallel national economic growth. UN-HABITAT projects that urban poverty will account for over 40 percent of total poverty in several African countries by 2020 (Ravallion, Chen, and Sangraula 2007; United Nations 2011). Consequently, the urban poor are excluded from many of the advantages of cities and, in a reversal of trends, are now worse off than the rural poor in some places (Mabogunje 2007; Potts 2010). The weak economic performance is due, in part, to the proliferation of informal work. The best estimates suggest that over 50 percent of the urban laborers are employed in informal livelihoods (Mabala 2011).

The urban poor have limited access to municipal services and are disproportionately affected by disease, violence, pollution, and insecure living conditions. Millions of urban dwellers have unsafe, unreliable, difficult, and possibly privatized access to water (McGranahan et al. 2009) and less than 10 percent of the population is connected to sewers (Satterthwaite 2010). In poorly managed cities, the rate of child mortality (under age five) is 25 percent, with most deaths related to the lack of infrastructure and services (Bolnick et al. 2006). These populations are living on the margins of security and safety.

To sustain a practice that benefits political elites, governments misrepresent and ignore problems by branding needy urban constituencies as largely illegal. In particular, regimes contend that informal urban livelihoods and settlements are illegal, and the lack of authorized resident identities prevents migrants from accessing justice, services, and representation (Desai 2010). Incidents of urban cleaning, where military and police forces destroy illegal slum settlements, are disturbingly common, as evidenced by recent raids in Zimbabwe (2005, 2007), Angola (2007), Kenya (2008, 2009, 2010) Nigeria (2000, 2009, 2013), Sudan (2005), South Africa (2010), Ghana (2002, threatened in 2011), Ethiopia (2011), and Uganda (2011).

By 2025, Africa's urban population is estimated to surpass its rural sector. Will the urban poor then be a key constituency? Perhaps, but presently, this population finds itself subject to a host of new ecological, security, and economic risks, higher rates of poverty, and political structures that limit their agency as citizens. Despite these challenges, migrants still engage in ever increasing rates of circular migration, while being forced to conform to rural and ethnicized political associations.

In conclusion, much of the research on both migration and urbanization does not consider how political institutions direct movement, create risks, and shape community fortunes. Although a debate continues on which factors motivate rural-urban movements, there is little question that rural development agendas are favored over needed urban programs and planning. These political and economic calculations have drastic effects on the lives of migrants, urban residents, and rural residents, whose livelihoods are closely tied to community members in urban locations. The focus on decentralization and democratization in this article, however, reveals how the institutional changes across

sub-Saharan African have motivated governments to downplay risk in urban areas, conflate appeals to rural areas, and actively work against an urban political identity. Although poverty and state capacity are issues within developing states, political calculations-as shaped by changing institutional incentives-are a more compelling and thorough explanation for the increasing dire state of urban areas.

## Notes

1. Circular migration refers to high rates of return and repeat movement, into either urban or other rural areas.
2. Acounter to this is noted by Potts (2010).
3. Bolnick et al. (2006) reported that at least 60 percent of Africa's urban population lives in urban centers of fewer than half a million inhabitants and a large proportion in significantly smaller towns.
4. Other modes to deal with threats to the stability of a central regime are generally removed, delegitimized, or diffused by fragmenting rival political bases (Rakodi and Lloyd-Jones 2002).
5. Exceptions to this are states where unions and urban protest movements in the 1980s encouraged the transition to multiparty politics (Posner and Simon 2002).
6. This is a pivotal point: Kenya's 2010 constitution demanded a national distribution of votes to win national office.
7. The few countries where urban areas have produced competitive parties are characterized by strong union systems present before multiparty democracy (e.g., South Africa, Zambia). In those cases, limited fiscal support has had the greatest effect on the urban poor due to the urban support of opposition (see Resnick 2011; Conroy-Krutz 2012).

## References

- Bates, R. 1981. Markets and states in tropical Africa: The political basis of agricultural policies . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- ---. 1993. Urban bias: A fresh look. Journal of Development Studies 29 (1): 219-28.
- Beauchemin, C. 2011. Rural-urban migration in West Africa. Population, Space and Place 17 (1): 47-72.
- Beguy, D., P. Bocquier, and E. M. Zulu. 2010. Circular migration patterns and determinants in Nairobi slum settlements. Demographic Research 23 (20): 549-86.
- Birch, S. 2011. Electoral malpractice . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Bolnick, J., H. Kanuyi, R. Mabala, G. McGranahan, D. Mitlin, S. Nkhoma, J. Oucho, et al. 2006. A pro-poor urban agenda for Africa: Clarifying ecological and development issues for poor and vulnerable populations. Human Settlements Discussion Paper Series 2 on Urban Change. London: International Institute for Environment and Development.
- Boone, C. 1998. State building in the African countryside: Structure and process at the grassroots. Journal of Development Studies 34 (4): 1-31.
- ---. 2003. Decentralization as political strategy in West Africa. Comparative Political Studies 36 (4): 355-80.
- Bratton, M. 2008. Vote buying and violence in Nigerian election campaigns. Electoral Studies 27 (4): 62132.
- Bratton, M., and N. Van de Walle. 1992. Popular protest and political reform in Africa. Comparative Politics 24 (4): 419-42.
- Brettell, C. 2008. Theorizing migration in anthropology: The social construction of networks, identities, communities and globalscapes. In Migration theory: Talking across disciplines , ed. C. Brettell and J. Hollifield, 113-59. London and New York: Routledge.
- Brooks, R., and J. Waters. 2010. Social networks and educational mobility. Globalisation, Societies and Education 8 (1): 143-57.
- Collinson, M., S. Tollman, K. Kahn, and S. Clark. 2003. Highly prevalent circular migration: Households, mobility and economic status in rural South Africa . Johannesburg, South Africa: University of the Witwatersrand.
- Collyer, M. 2013. A geography of extra-territorial citizenship: Explanations of external voting. Migration Studies 1 (1): 1-18.
- Conroy-Krutz, J. 2009. Who are Africa's (non) ethnic voters? Evaluating theories on the salience of ethnicity in African electoral politics. Paper presented at the conference of the American Political Science Association, Toronto, Canada.
- ---. 2012. What determines the price of a vote? Motive, means, and opportunity in vote-buying practices. Paper presented at the Midwest Working Group Meeting in African Political Economy, December 7-8, Duke University, Durham, NC.
- Conroy-Krutz, J., and C. Logan. 2012. Museveni and the 2011 Ugandan election: Did the money matter? Journal of Modern African Studies 50 (4): 625-55.
- Crook, R. 2003. Decentralization and poverty reduction in Africa: The politics of local-central relations. Public Administration and Development 23 (1): 7788.
- De Haan, A., K. Brock, and N. Coulibaly. 2002. Migration, livelihoods and institutions: Contrasting patterns of migration in Mali. Journal of Development Studies 38 (6): 37-58.
- Desai, R. 2010. The political economy of urban poverty in developing countries: Theories, issues, and an agenda for research. Wolfensohn Center for Development Working Paper 20. Washington, DC: Brookings Institute.
- Dustmann, C. 2003. Return migration and the optimal migration duration. European Economic Review 47 (2): 353-67.
- Foresight. 2011. Migration and global environmental change: Final project report. London: The Government Office for Science.
- Galvan, D. 2001. Political turnover and social change in Senegal. Journal of Democracy 12 (3): 51-62.
- Gould, W. T. S. 1995. Migration and recent economic and environmental change in East Africa. In The migration experience in Africa , ed. J. Baker and T. Akin Aida, 122-48. Uppsala, Sweden: Nordiska Afrikainstitutet.
- Gugler, J. 2002. The son of the hawk does not remain abroad: The urban-rural connection in Africa. African Studies Review 45 (1): 21-41.

- Harding, R. 2011. One for the road: Voting for public goods in Ghana. Working paper. New York: New York University.
- ---. 2012. Urban-rural differences in support for incumbents across Africa. Working Paper No. 120, Afrobarometer.
- Holding their breath. 2013. Africa Confidential . 1 February: 54, 3, p. 1.
- Homewood, K., E. Coast, and M. Thompson. 2004. Inmigrants and exclusion in east African rangelands: Access, tenure and conflict. Africa 74 (4): 567-610.
- Ichino, N., and N. L. Nathan. 2013. Crossing the line: Local ethnic geography and voting in Ghana. American Political Science Review 107 (2): 344-61.
- Jensen, P., and M. Justesen. 2012. The economic origins of vote buying in Africa. Paper presented at the meeting of the European Political Science Association.
- Kasara, K. 2007. Tax me if you can: Ethnic geography, democracy, and the taxation of agriculture in Africa. American Political Science Review 101 (1): 159-72.
- Kramon, E. 2009. Vote-buying and political behavior: Estimating and explaining vote-buying's effect on turnout in Kenya. Working Paper No. 114, Afrobarometer.
- Laclau, E., and C. Mouffe. 2001. Hegemony and socialist strategy: Towards a radical democratic politics. 2nd ed. London: Verso.
- Lilleør, H., and K. Van den Broeck. 2012. Economic drivers on migration and climate change in LDCs. Global Environmental Change 21:S70-S81.
- Lindberg, S. I. 2003. 'It's our time to 'chop' ': Do elections in Africa feed neo-patrimonialism rather than counter-act it? Democratization 10 (2): 121-40.
- Mabala, R. 2011. Youth and 'the hood'-Livelihoods and neighborhoods. Environment and Urbanization 23 (1): 157-81.
- Mabogunje, A. 2007. Tackling the African 'poverty trap': The Ijebu-Ode experiment. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 104 (43): 16781-86.
- McGranahan, G., D. Mitlin, D. Satterthwaite, C. Tacoli, and I. Turok. 2009. Africa's urban transition and the role of regional collaboration . Working paper 5, Human Settlements Working Paper Series, International Institute of Environment and Development.
- Ndegwa, S. 2002. Decentralization in Africa: A stocktaking survey. Africa Region Working Paper Series No. 40, Washington, DC: World Bank.
- Norris, P., and R. Mattes. 2003. Does ethnicity determine support for the governing party: Structural and attitudinal basis of partisan identification in 12 African nations. CSSRWorkingPaperNo.36.CapeTown,SouthAfrica: Center for Social Science Research, University of Cape Town.
- Nugent, P. 1999. Living in the past: Urban, rural and ethnic themes in the 1992 and 1996 elections in Ghana. Journal of Modern African Studies 37 (2): 287-319.
- O'Donovan, M. 2003. Zimbabwe's democracy: quantifying the impact of electoral maladministration. Paper presented at the Electoral Institute of Southern Africa, Johannesburg, South Africa.
- Perch-Nielsen, S., M. B¨ attig, and D. Imboden. 2008. Exploring the link between climate change and migration. Climatic Change 91 (1): 375-93.
- Platteau, J.-P. 2000. Institutions, social norms, and economic development . Amsterdam: Harwood Academic.
- Posner, D. 2005. Institutions and ethnic politics in Africa . New York: Cambridge University Press.
- Posner, D., and D. Simon. 2002. Economic conditions and incumbent support in Africa's new democracies: Evidence from Zambia. Comparative Political Studies 35 (3): 313-36.
- Potts, D. 2005. All my hopes and dreams are shattered: Urbanization and migrancy in an imploding African economy-The case of Zimbabwe. Geoforum 37 (4): 536-51.
- ---.2010. Circular migration in Zimbabwe &amp; contemporary sub-Saharan Africa . Rochester, NY: Boydell and Brewer.
- Rakodi, C., and T. Lloyd-Jones, eds. 2002. Urban livelihoods: A people-centered approach to reducing poverty . London: Earthscan.
- Raleigh, C. 2013. Migration, urbanization and political power in Africa. Brief for the Climate Change and African Political Stability Program, Austin, TX.
- Raleigh, C., and L. Jordan. 2010. Climate change and migration: Emerging patterns in the developing world. In Social dimensions of climate change: Equity and vulnerability in a warming world , ed. R. Mearns and A. Norton, 103-23. Washington, DC: World Bank.
- Ravallion, M., S. Chen, and P. Sangraula. 2007. New evidence on the urbanization of poverty. Population and Development Review 33 (4): 667-701.
- Resnick, D. 2011. In the shadow of the city: Africa's urban poor in opposition strongholds. Journal of Modern African Studies 49 (1): 141-66.
- ---. 2012. Opposition parties and the urban poor in African democracies. Comparative Political Studies 45 (11): 1351-78.
- Robson, P., and S. Roque. 2001. 'Here in the city, everything has to be paid for': Locating the community in periurban Angola. Review of African Political Economy 28 (90): 619-28.
- Roncoli, C., and K. Ingram. 2001. The costs and risks of coping with drought: Livelihood impacts and farmers' responses in Burkina Faso. Climate Research 19(1): 119-32.
- Salih, M., and A. Mohamed, eds. 2003. African political parties: Evolution, institutionalization, and governance . London: Pluto Press.
- Satterthwaite, D. 2010. The scale of urban change worldwide 1950-2000 and its underpinnings. Human Settlements Discussion Paper Series on Urban Change No. 1, International Institute for Environment and Development, London.
- Scarritt, J., and S. McMillan. 1995. Protest and rebellion in Africa: Explaining conflicts between ethnic minorities and the state in the 1980s. Comparative Political Studies 28 (3): 323-49.
- Scarritt, J., and S. Mozaffer. 1999. The specification of ethnic cleavages and ethno political groups for the analysis of democratic competition in Africa. Nationalism and Ethnic Politics 5 (1): 82-117.
- Schedler, A. 2002. The menu of manipulation. Journal of Democracy 13 (2): 36-50.
- Skeldon, R. 2012. Going round in circles: Circular migration, poverty alleviation and marginality. International Migration 50 (3): 43-60.

- Smit, W. 1998. The rural linkages of urban households in Durban, South Africa. Environment and Development 10 (1): 77-88.
- Tacoli, C. 2002. Changing rural-urban interactions in subSaharan Africa and their impact on livelihoods: A summary. Human Settlements Working Paper 7, RuralUrban Interactions and Livelihoods Strategies. London: International Institute for Environment and Development.
- Therkildsen O. 1994. Economic decline and democratic decentralization in sub-Saharan Africa: Conference on democratic decentralization in Asia and Africa . London: Institute of Commonwealth Studies, University of London.
- Todaro, M. 1969. A model of labor migration and urban unemployment in less developed countries. American Economic Review 59 (1): 138-48.
- Tripp, A. 2010. Museveni's Uganda: Paradoxes of power in a hybrid regime . Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner.
- United Nations. 2011. World urbanization prospects: The 2011 revision . New York: United Nations.
- Van de Walle, N. 1989. Rice politics in Cameroon: State commitment, capability, and urban bias. Journal of Modern African Studies 27 (4): 579-99.
- ---. 2001. African economies and the politics of permanent crisis: 1979-1999. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Van De Walle, N., and K. Butler. 1999. Political parties and party systems in Africa's illiberal democracies. Cambridge Review of International Affairs 13 (1): 1428.
- Vertovec, S. 2007. New directions in the anthropology of migration and multiculturalism. Ethnic and Racial Studies 30 (6): 961-78.
- Vicente, P. C. 2010. Is vote-buying effective? Evidence from a field experiment in West Africa. http://www.pedrovicente.org/ (last accessed 1 May 2013).
- Wantchekon, L. 2003. Clientelism and voting behavior: Evidence from a field experiment in Benin. World Politics 55 (3): 399-422.
- World Bank. 2000. The world development report 2000 . Washington, DC: World Bank.
- ---.2008. World development report 2008: Reshaping economic geography . Washington, DC: World Bank.
- Wunsch, J. 2001. Decentralization, local governance and 'recentralization' in Africa. Public Administration and Development 21 (1): 277-88.

Correspondence: Department of Geography, University of Sussex, Brighton, East Sussex, BN1 9RH, UK, e-mail: C.Raleigh@sussex.ac.uk.