<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rtpg20

## Transit Access to Subsidized Food Stores in the U.S. Midwest

Amber D. DeJohn, Michael J. Widener &amp; Jerry Shannon

To cite this article: Amber D. DeJohn, Michael J. Widener &amp; Jerry Shannon (2023) Transit Access to Subsidized Food Stores in the U.S. Midwest, The Professional Geographer, 75:1, 76-89, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2022.2103720

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2022.2103720

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 23 Sep 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 715

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Transit Access to Subsidized Food Stores in the U.S. Midwest

Amber D. DeJohn and Michael J. Widener

<!-- image -->

University of Toronto -St. George, Canada

Jerry Shannon

<!-- image -->

University of Georgia, USA

In the United States, low-income individuals and some racial and ethnic minorities have higher rates of transit use and food insecurity. The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), which provides low-income households with money for groceries at authorized retailers, creates a unique food procurement environment for participants. In this article, transit networks ' effect on access to SNAP retailers is assessed by calculating transit travel times to all transitable SNAP stores of census block groups (CBGs) in thirty-three metropolitan areas in the U.S. Midwest. Low transit access CBGs are identified and compared to U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) low-income, low-access (LILA) census tracts. Store type transit access ratios are analyzed to further specify disproportionate access to healthy food retailers. Findings indicate low transit access is experienced in fringe-urban, majority white, car-dependent CBGs. Approximately 24,380 people receiving public assistance, 145,636 Black people, 135,731 non-Black Hispanic people, and 108,325 low-income people live within these CBGs, however. The USDA ' s LILA census tracts are more expansive than this study ' s low-income, low-transit-access (LILTA) tracts. Despite being classified as rural, LILTA-only tracts had sixty-eight households without a vehicle, on average. Future research and policy should engage populations in suburban and exurban regions to accommodate transportation needs of a nonnegligible portion of potentially food-insecure households. Key Words: food environments, food insecurity, SNAP, transit access, transport poverty.

W ithin the auto-centric built environment of the U.S. Midwest, low-income individuals and some racial and ethnic minorities have been shown to have transportation barriers to accessing essential goods and services (Cormier and Craypo 2000; Cristancho et al. 2008; Jang and Kim 2018). Income, race, and ethnicity are considered social determinants of health, a misnomer, as the cause of lower health outcomes in these groups are the systemic inequalities that disadvantage marginalized individuals from accessing goods and services for maintaining health (McClure et al. 2019). Among these systemic inequalities is spatial segregation, which results in areas of concentrated poverty with lower densities of essential destinations like food retailers, thus creating regions with low access to food (Jang and Kim 2018; Havewala 2021). Roughly one in nine Americans are considered food insecure (Coleman-Jensen et al. 2019), but rates of food insecurity are higher in low-income, racial, and ethnic minority groups (Murthy 2016), and these marginalized groups tend to be spatially concentrated due to a myriad of marginalizing systemic processes like redlining, urban renewal, and gentrification (Nord, Luloff, and Jensen 1995; Jang and Kim 2018; McClure et al. 2019).

Spatial proximity to retailers is not enough to characterize access to food, as spatial segregation operates in tandem with household factors like transport poverty and financial instability to create poor food environments (Farber, Morang, and

Widener 2014; Shannon 2016; Widener 2018). Indeed, our understanding of access to food might be different when considering access to transit, a more affordable mode of transportation used at higher rates by low-income households (Ver Ploeg et al. 2015). A thorough investigation of access to affordable food retail in the United States should especially consider the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), a federal program supplying monetary benefits to low-income households to be used at authorized retailers, which include a variety of establishments from convenience stores to large supermarkets. SNAP participants are only able to use their benefits at participating retailers, who must meet standards for grocery offerings and enroll with the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). A financially precarious household can benefit from both access to transit and SNAP stores to obtain food.

Given the potentially different food retail environments experienced by SNAP beneficiaries, it is important to understand whether individuals reliant on public transit face increased challenges to accessing stores that supply affordable and healthy options. To explore this, we examine access to SNAP retailers, stratified by type, via transit services in thirty-three small to large cities in the U.S. Midwest. In doing so, we provide a novel benchmark assessment of the role transit systems play in facilitating access to different categories of SNAP food retailers, which might have repercussions for

<!-- image -->

purchasing behaviors and could inform transportation planning practices.

## Background

The USDA defines food insecurity as ' a householdlevel economic and social condition of limited or uncertain access to adequate food ' (USDA 2018). The USDA operationalizes this definition by designating census tracts as low-income, low-access (LILA) tracts, which are low-income census tracts 1 where a significant number or share of the population (500 individuals or 33 percent) does not have a grocery store within one mile in urban areas or ten miles in rural areas (USDA 2017). Although the USDA ' s LILA classification provides an extensive mapping of low access to food in the United States, some criticize their measurement for misspecifying areas of low access (Major, Delmelle, and Delmelle 2018). Food environments are complex systems, and how populations navigate them is the result of both supply- and demand-side realities. The USDA only measures supply-side retailer Euclidean proximity and demand-side economic precarity, yet evidence suggests individuals are more concerned about food costs and regularly shop outside of their residential neighborhood (Hendrickson, Smith, and Eikenberry 2006; Shannon and Christian 2017). By focusing on transit and subsidized retailers, and estimating time cost as a proxy for spatial proximity, access to food retail could take on new spatial patterns.

Low-income households have higher rates of transit usage (Ver Ploeg et al. 2015) and transit is often a more affordable option than driving (Curl, Clark, and Kearns 2018; Walks 2018). When transit has been developed to support low-income populations, quality of life and equity have improved for economically marginalized groups (Milan and Creutzig 2017). Low-income populations living in auto-centric built environments could become transit riders if transit access is improved (Yousefzadeh Barri et al. 2021). Although systemically marginalized and low-income households stand to benefit from transit access, conceptualizing access is difficult as individuals might be experiencing physical or economic barriers to accessing transportation networks available to them. This inability to access certain destinations due to failures in the transportation network is called transport poverty (Lucas et al. 2016).

Transport poverty is an umbrella term encompassing several underlying conditions including transport affordability, mobility poverty, and accessibility poverty (Lucas et al. 2016). Due to lack of monetary resources, low-income households might experience transport affordability issues (Murakami and Young 1997), causing them to rely on public transit. If public transit infrastructure is lacking, however, a low-income household might also experience mobility poverty, thus affecting accessibility to goods, services, and employment (i.e., accessibility poverty). By addressing transport poverty through improving transit access, low-income households would have greater mobility and might have improved access to groceries as a result.

Transport poverty, beyond its implications for economic marginalization, is closely related to social exclusion (Lucas 2012). Social exclusion is a constraint-based process that prevents individuals from participating in normal activities within their society (Preston and Raj  e 2007). When investing in transit infrastructure within a social inclusion paradigm, social exclusion can be reduced through increased access to these activities, like grocery shopping (Garrett and Taylor 2003; Preston and Raj  e 2007; Lucas 2012). In general, living in urban environments bolsters social inclusion because these environments tend to have more transit infrastructure to facilitate daily mobility (Casas 2007; Allen and Farber 2020). Social exclusion is prevalent among low-income households in car-dominated suburban communities that experience gaps in transit; this population might struggle to access essential activities like employment (Fransen et al. 2015; Allen and Farber 2020; Bastiaanssen, Johnson, and Lucas 2020).

Transportation planning offers a relatively untapped vein for pursuing improved access to food retail. The U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT) requires state and regional transportation planning authorities to develop performance measures for transit accessibility to jobs and other essential services (DeGood 2020). USDOT performance measures are intended to boost environmental sustainability and include a litany of measures like congestion improvement benchmarks and transit access to essential services (e.g., food retailers). Currently, air quality and safety measures dominate these performance measures, but they present an avenue for measuring and planning for access to food (Singleton and Clifton 2017). Singleton and Clifton (2017) argued that the development of healthrelated performance measures like accessibility, and the data and analysis tools necessary to support these measures, are needed. Accessibility measures are sometimes included in metropolitan planning organization (MPO) transportation plans but lack engagement with public health needs (Singleton and Clifton 2017). Therefore, accessibility measures could be an important step toward health-conscious transportation planning. Further situating these accessibility measures within an equity framework could reduce disparities in health founded on centuries of economic and racial segregation.

Certain demographic groups have been shown to be more food insecure in the United States, including low-income populations and racial or ethnic minorities (Nord et al. 2010; Kaiser et al. 2015). Nord et al. ' s (2010) study of a nationally

representative household sample found that 24.9 and 26.9 percent of surveyed non-Hispanic Black and Hispanic households, respectively, were food insecure, which is well above the U.S. average of 14.7 percent and the white population ' s rate of 11 percent. Furthermore, 40 percent of households with incomes below 130 percent of the poverty line were identified as food insecure (Nord et al. 2010). Racial and ethnic minorities, in addition to those living below the poverty line, should be studied to understand how spatial inequities might affect their access to food.

Given the disproportionate number of economically marginalized households that suffer from food insecurity and the reliance of these same populations on public transportation systems (Garrett and Taylor 2003; Ver Ploeg et al. 2015), several studies have analyzed how transportation affects these groups ' access to their food environment (Clifton 2004; Larsen and Gilliland 2008; Farber, Morang, and Widener 2014; Horner and Wood 2014; Sergenian 2014; Shannon and Christian 2017). Some studies examining transit access among foodinsecure populations have investigated the influence of temporal variation and time cost, with mixed findings between measures of income and transit access (Farber, Morang, and Widener 2014; Widener et al. 2015; Jang and Kim 2018) and evidence that transit could take three times as long as automobiles to travel the same distance (Swayne and Lowery 2021). Conscious of the impact SNAP retailers and rurality could have on food-insecure populations, Major, Delmelle, and Delmelle ' s (2018) case study of transit access to SNAP retailers in North Carolina suggested the USDA ' s LILA metric underclassifies neighborhoods experiencing poor access to SNAP retailers (Major, Delmelle, and Delmelle 2018). Both Major, Delmelle, and Delmelle ' s (2018) study and the USDA ' s LILA classification account for urban and rural contexts, which have been shown to influence access to food (Olendzki et al. 2015). To understand how potentially food-insecure households access SNAP using monetarily efficient transport and how transport planners might build accessibility measures to understand this complex dynamic, more research is needed.

Our study aims to answer three questions linked to the literatures of food access and transport poverty to evaluate the degree of fit between potentially food-insecure populations and SNAP. First, do lowincome, Black, and non-Black Hispanic 2 populations have lower levels of transit access to SNAP authorized retailers? Second, are certain types of SNAP authorized retailers (e.g., convenience stores) more accessible via transit than others (e.g., supermarkets) for low-income, Black, and non-Black Hispanic communities? Finally, do census block groups (CBGs) with lower levels of transit access to SNAP

retail coincide with those classified as LILA to healthy food retail by the USDA?

## Data and Methods

## Study Area

We include thirty-three MPOs in the U.S. Midwest for evaluation. All are a part of the Federal Transit Authority ' s (FTA) Region 5, which includes the states of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin (Figure 1). We selected this region due to its generally consistent urban built form and state-level population sizes, which results in relatively equivalent federal transportation funding (Bureau of Transportation Statistics 2012; FTA 2015; USDOT. 2017). Our study is conducted at the MPO level, which can span multiple cities, counties, and states, therefore providing a more continuous perspective of the food retail environment that could be muddled by using more traditional political boundaries. Transit travel time computations are conducted at the CBG level ( n ¼ 19,664). We excluded the MPO for Chicago, Illinois, due to its unique transit infrastructure and population size, both of which are not typical of the study area. Although all included MPOs do have some form of public transit, it should be noted that these systems vary in geographic scope, modal variety, and temporal operation. This means that service levels will inherently differ between and within regions.

## Data Origins and Quality

Demographic data and census geographies (e.g., MPO boundaries) are from the U.S. Census Bureau ' s American Community Survey (ACS) and TIGER/line repository. Road network data are provided by OpenStreetMap (OSM). We obtained the SNAP data from the USDA Benefit Redemption Division; it includes all SNAP stores in the United States from 2008 through 2018, as well as various attributes of the stores including the store type, years the store was active, and geographic information (i.e., FIPS codes). Although there are eightyone MPOs in FTA Region 5, only thirty-three MPOs, with a total population of 26.6 million people, had publicly available General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS) data at the time of analysis, which are needed to calculate transit travel times. MPOs without GTFS data are excluded. These MPOs tend to be small to midsized communities, and it is unclear if the absence of GTFS data indicates there is no public transit in these areas or if the data are not available. We exclude commuter and passenger rail GTFS data (e.g., Amtrak) due to the low likelihood of individuals using them to grocery shop. We use the USDA food access research

Figure 1 States and metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) included in study.

<!-- image -->

atlas ' s LILA census tracts to evaluate transit access findings.

## Calculating Transit Travel Times

We calculate transit travel times for all MPO CBGs using the OpenTripPlanner (OTP) scripting application programming interface (OpenTripPlanner Project [2011] 2018). Destinations are all SNAP stores within the MPO and a 3-km buffer of its boundary. We employ a 3-km (approximately 1.9 mile) buffer to control for edge effects. Using a buffer larger than one mile, which is used as a threshold for food environments in urban areas by the USDA, helps our analysis account for the lowdensity typical of fringe CBGs in the study (USDA 2017). The OTP router calculates travel times from CBG centroids to all SNAP store destinations for each minute in a one-hour window (9:30 -10:30 a.m.) surrounding the peak errand time (10:00 a.m. according to the National Household Travel Survey [NHTS]) using a weekday transit schedule. This temporal context aids in accurately estimating accessibility (Farber, Morang, and Widener 2014). Transit calculations include walking times, but our router specifications do not allow more than five kilometers walking. Only trips of one hour or less in one direction are considered. We compute means and variance statistics for the trips recorded to

SNAP stores within the 9:30 to 10:30 a.m. hour window. We tested other peak errand times during routing analysis, but these results indicate there is little variation in access throughout the day.

## Obtaining Travel Cost Variables

We construct several variables to explore each CBG ' s level of transit access to SNAP stores. We calculate composite transit access scores using weights associated with store type and travel impedance to the five closest SNAP stores (Equations 1 and 2).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, access A in CBG i is defined as the sum of the travel impedance function f ( t ij ) to store j multiplied by a store quality weight wj , and t ij is the average travel cost or time, in minutes, from origin to destination. We use NHTS data to estimate the travel impedance beta so that the median travel time for errands (ten minutes) equals 0.5 ( b  0.0693). It is assumed that closer stores are preferred, so only the closest five stores are considered. Although the three closest stores have been used elsewhere (Shannon and Christian 2017), early exploratory

analysis suggested that the three closest stores might place too much emphasis on convenience stores.

Store weights reflect the assumed size and quality of the store; for example, supermarkets and grocers receive a weight of 1, whereas other store types with a more limited offering (e.g., convenience stores) have a weight of 0.5 (Table 1). This reflects shoppers ' preference for large retailers where ' one-stop shopping ' is possible (Shannon 2016; Shannon and Christian 2017; Aragon et al. 2019). Two SNAP store types receive a weight of 0 to denote the nebulous nature of the classification or beliefs of selective users (e.g., military commissary). Only three stores received this weight. The lower the travel time to a store, the higher the access score; f ( t ij ) ¼ 1 where t ij ¼ 0. Therefore, the maximum composite transit access score possible is 5.

We also employ a modified access score to compare transit access to supermarkets ( Si ) and small retail ( Ci ) establishments. It refers only to the closest store of either type; therefore, it only has a maximum possible score of 1. This additional computation compares the largest stores (assumed most variety) to the smallest stores (assumed least variety). Given that store type is built in, the store weight is removed (Equation 3). The travel impendence function is the same as in Equation 2. For simplicity, Ai is called transit access, and Si and Ci are referred to as supermarket and small retail transit access, respectively.

Table 1 Store weight classifications for composite transit score computation

| USDA-defined store type           |   w j weight |
|-----------------------------------|--------------|
| Delivery route                    |          0   |
| Military commissary               |          0   |
| Bakery specialty                  |          0.5 |
| Combination grocery/other         |          0.5 |
| Convenience store                 |          0.5 |
| Direct marketing farmer           |          0.5 |
| Farmers ' market                  |          0.5 |
| Fruits/vegetables specialty       |          0.5 |
| Meat/poultry specialty            |          0.5 |
| Nonprofit food buying cooperative |          0.5 |
| Seafood specialty                 |          0.5 |
| Large grocery store               |          1   |
| Medium grocery store              |          1   |
| Small grocery store               |          1   |
| Super store                       |          1   |
| Supermarket                       |          1   |
| Wholesaler                        |          1   |

Note: USDA ¼ U.S. Department of Agriculture. Categories shown in bold were used for Ci , Si computation.

We use a static threshold to identify low-transitaccess CBGs. Although it is true that transit and built environments vary between MPOs, using MPO-specific thresholds makes comparison difficult. Sensitivity analyses conducted by individual and population-grouped MPOs revealed little variation from results using a static threshold. Low-transit CBGs are those where Ai &lt; 0.2, a threshold we selected using the lowest transit access decile for CBGs with transit access. We provide counts of people below the poverty level, those who identified as Black or African American or Hispanic on their census survey, and those receiving public assistance who reside in low-transit-access CBGs using CBGlevel ACS data.

To compare neighborhood Ci and Si scores, which is difficult due to the nature of location decisions between these types of establishments, we use a transit access ratio between a CBG ' s Ci and Si scores normalized in the range of 0 to 1. CBGs with ratios beyond 1.5  the interquartile range are treated as outliers and analyzed. We employ the IQR approach due to the skew of the transit access ratios.

## Results

Populations at Risk of Food Insecurity and Transit Access

We quantify whether low-income, racial, and ethnic minorities have low transit access to SNAP by identifying low-transit-access CBGs. Table 2 displays the counts of different groups of interest living in CBGs with low transit access scores, defined as scores lower than 0.2.

None of the groups with higher rates of food insecurity accounted for more than 3 percent of lowor no-transit-access CBGs. Across all MPOs, though, 7.78 percent of the population below the poverty level (108,325), 3.58 percent of Black people (145,636), 9.83 percent of Hispanic people (135,731), and 8.88 percent of people with public assistance (24,380) live in CBGs with low or no transit access ( Ai ) to SNAP retailers (Table 2). Approximately 3.5 million people live in CBGs with low transit access ( Ai ), with an additional 1.6 million

Table 2 Populations in low transit access (Ai) census block groups (CBGs) based on static threshold of 0.2

| Populations at risk for food insecurity   |   Population in low- or no-transit-access CBGs ( A i ) |   Percentage of total population in low- or no-transit-access CBGs ( A i ) |
|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Below poverty level                       |                                                108,325 |                                                                       2.12 |
| Black                                     |                                                145,636 |                                                                       2.85 |
| Hispanic                                  |                                                135,731 |                                                                       2.66 |
| Receiving public assistance               |                                                 24,380 |                                                                       0.48 |

living in CBGs without any transit access to SNAP. Out of the population living in CBGs with no transit access to SNAP, 31,887 individuals are living below the poverty level (2.05 percent), 24,555 people identify as Black (1.57 percent), 34,540 identify as Hispanic (2.22 percent), and 7,203 are receiving public assistance (0.46 percent).

Our built environment analysis of CBGs classified as having low transit access, no transit access, and high transit access ( Ai ) compared to all CBGs overall shows that low- and no-transit-access CBGs have, on average, lower population density and lower counts of low-income, Black, or Hispanic individuals, those on public assistance, and transit ridership, while having higher counts of people with commute times under thirty minutes (Table 3). The median lowand no-transit-access CBGs have no SNAP retailers, whereas high-transit-access CBGs had 18.9 stores per 10,000. These results reveal that low-transit-access CBGs tend to be those with more affluent, white populations who are dependent on cars, which could explain why there is a lower rate of SNAP stores located in these areas. Interestingly, despite having no transit access to SNAP in our model, individuals in 25 percent of no-transit-access CBGs (241 out of 947) reported using public transit to get to work, indicating there is public transit demand in these areas. Figure 2 maps transit access scores and SNAP store locations in three exemplary MPOs.

## Transit Access by Store Type

Because small- and large-format grocers fill different retail niches in the food envrionment that create dissimilar locational densities (Baviera-Puig, BuitragoVera, and Escriba-Perez 2016; Hood, Clarke, and Clarke 2016; Reigadinha, Godinho, and Dias 2017), we created an access ratio using the transit access scores for either type ( Ci or Si ). Using these ratios, we identify 2,073 outlier CBGs using an IQR approach; all outliers have better access to small retail. Although the population counts are similar to those of the composite transit access score ( Ai ), relative to the other groups examined, Black individuals have slightly higher counts in outlier CBGs than low-transit-access ( Ai ) CBGs. Black individuals account for roughly 8 percent of the population living in outlier CBGs (i.e., CBGs with a greater difference between Ci and Si scores than the majority of CBGs). For comparison, Black individuals account for about 3 percent of the low- or no-transit-access ( Ai ) CBGs, which is generally similar to the other groups included (Table 4).

When examining the spatial distribution of store type transit access ratios across the study MPOs, we see that outlier CBGs do not follow a clear spatial pattern. Using a local Moran ' s I test, we find little significant clustering. Figure 3 depicts an example of an MPO with significant clustering. A table of global Moran ' s I statistics for each MPO is provided in the Appendix.

## Comparison to USDA LILA Tracts

We compare our transit access scores to USDA LILA census tracts to assess how transit access differs from the USDA ' s conceptualization of access. Because our transit access scores are calculated at a higher spatial resolution (block groups) than the LILA scores (census tracts), we aggregated our transit access scores ( Ai ) to the census tract level, accounting for population weights. Ultimately, we find thirty-nine census tracts in the thirty-three MPOs to be low income and low transit access (LILTA) using the USDA ' s low-income criteria and our 0.2 transit access threshold. The USDA classifies 720 tracts as LILA. Table 5 provides counts of populations with higher rates of food insecurity who live in LILA or LILTA census tracts. Of the thirtynine LILTA tracts, twenty-one of them (54 percent) are also classified as LILA tracts, indicating that individuals located in these tracts might experience especially poor access to food. Roughly 46 percent of LILTA census tracts are not accounted for by LILA, but this translates to small population totals: 1,811 people who identify as Black, 2,476 Hispanic people, 3,196 people below the poverty level, and 501 people receiving public assistance.

Table 3 Characteristics of no, low, and high transit access (Ai) census bock groups (CBGs) compared to all CBGs included in study

| At-risk populations and built environment characteristics   | All CBGs           | No transit access    | Low transit access   | High transit access   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|----------------------|----------------------|-----------------------|
| SNAP stores per 10,000 people                               | 4.3 [0.0, 14.2]    | 0.0 [0.0, 0.0]       | 0.0 [0.0, 6.3]       | 18.9 [8.9, 34.5]      |
| Population density (people/km 2 )                           | 1,274 [569, 2,255] | 51 [30, 105]         | 175 [84, 392]        | 2,613 [1,666, 3,989]  |
| Total population                                            | 1,158 [817, 1,667] | 1,462 [1,096, 1,986] | 1,610 [1,116, 2,294] | 933 [680, 1,286]      |
| Black population                                            | 65 [6, 272]        | 0 [0, 18]            | 9 [0, 55]            | 166 [48, 435]         |
| Hispanic population                                         | 26 [0, 81]         | 16 [0, 45]           | 25 [0, 70]           | 35 [0, 133]           |
| Population below poverty level                              | 49 [20, 96]        | 26 [11, 45]          | 28 [12, 55]          | 85 [48, 140]          |
| Population receiving public assistance                      | 7 [0, 19]          | 1 [0, 12]            | 0 [0, 14]            | 12 [0, 30]            |
| Population using public transit                             | 0 [0, 22]          | 0 [0, 1]             | 0 [0, 2]             | 18 [0 ,44]            |
| Population with commutes < 30minutes                        | 315 [203, 472]     | 334 [223, 482]       | 386 [257, 587]       | 237 [148, 362]        |

Note: Values are reported as median [IQR]. SNAP ¼ Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.

Figure 2 Map of composite transit access to Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) in (A) West Central Indiana Economic Development District (Terre Haute, Indiana), (B) Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission (Columbus, Ohio), and (C) East -West Gateway Council of Governments (St. Louis, Missouri). MPO ¼ metropolitan planning organization.

<!-- image -->

Table 4 Counts of people in groups of interest in census block groups (CBGs) identified as outliers experiencing large differences between Ci and Si transit access scores

|                                   |   Population at risk for food insecurity in outlier CBGs |   Percentage of total population in outlier CBGs |
|-----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| Population below poverty level    |                                                  119,998 |                                             3.77 |
| Black population                  |                                                  255,772 |                                             8.03 |
| Hispanic population               |                                                  118,651 |                                             3.73 |
| Population with public assistance |                                                   25,168 |                                             0.79 |

Note: Percentages of the total population in these CBGs provided.

LILA tracts are largely located near downtowns cores, which tend to have better transit infrastructure. LILTA tracts are generally near the edges of MPOs. We find that LILTA-only tracts, all of which the USDA considers rural, have an average of sixty-eight households without a vehicle compared to 180 households in LILA-only tracts, which are all urban. 3 LILTA-only tracts also have a lower average of SNAP beneficiaries compared to tracts only identified as LILA (220 vs. 354, respectively). Figure 4 shows an MPO with census tracts classified as both LILA and LILTA, as well as LILTA tracts that are not classified as LILA by the USDA.

## Discussion and Conclusion

## Discussion of Results

Our results indicate that populations experiencing low transit access to SNAP are predominately in areas farther from the city center. These findings reflect those of past transport poverty studies (Fransen et al. 2015; Allen and Farber 2019, 2020; Swayne and Lowery 2021). Although findings indicate that many low-income, Black, Hispanic, or public-assistance-receiving individuals have adequate transit access to SNAP due to relatively high

Figure 3 Map of local Moran ' s I analysis of transit access ratios between small retail (Ci) and supermarket (Si) Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program stores in East -West Gateway Council of Governments (St. Louis, Missouri). Note: CBGs ¼ census block groups.

<!-- image -->

Table 5 Populations potentially at risk for food insecurity living in low-income, low-access (LILA) or low-income, low-transit-access (LILTA) tracts, and how often these individuals live in tracts that are both LILA and LILTA

|                                        |   LILA tracts |   LILTA tracts |   Both LILA and LILTA |   Percent of LILTA population also in LILA tracts |
|----------------------------------------|---------------|----------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Population below the poverty level     |       234,264 |          7,421 |                 4,225 |                                             56.93 |
| Black population                       |       756,554 |          5,830 |                 4,019 |                                             68.94 |
| Hispanic population                    |       191,826 |          6,902 |                 4,426 |                                             64.13 |
| Population receiving public assistance |        44,354 |          1,345 |                   844 |                                             62.75 |

concentrations of people belonging to these groups living in denser city centers, in this region there are still approximately 145,636 Black people, 135,731 Hispanic people, 108,325 people below the poverty level, and 24,380 people receiving public assistance who reside in CBGs with low transit access to SNAP retail.

Importantly, populations that could be potentially vulnerable to food insecurity reside in many types of CBGs across any given metropolitan region. Even though the percentages of the four groups examined in this study are not disproportionately large in areas with low transit access to SNAP retail, when considered together, there is a sizable number of people who could be at a disadvantage by not having an adequate transit option for food shopping. That said, operating transit services in less dense regions is often not feasible; for households in lowtransit-access CBGs it might be worth developing different mobility or food supply strategies to improve access to affordable food retailers, which we review in the next section.

Figure 4 Tracts with low income and low transit access to Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program outlets and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) low-income, low-access (LILA) tracts in Genesee County Metropolitan Planning Commission (Flint, Michigan). MPO ¼ metropolitan planning organization.

<!-- image -->

Many CBGs might have significantly greater transit access to small retail SNAP stores than to supermarkets in the study MPOs. Exploratory findings suggest that more Black individuals could experience greater disparities in transit access to supermarkets compared to small retail. Due to the relative proximity of small retail, shoppers in urban contexts make more frequent, shorter trips than they might to a larger store, but these stops are often for less healthy goods (Ruff, Akhund, and Adjoian 2016). These small-format stores could be strategic frontiers for connecting food-insecure households with healthier options, and recent research suggests these retailers might support policies in pursuit of this goal (McGuire et al. 2020).

Supermarkets tend to locate in suburban areas (Block and Kouba 2006; Reigadinha, Godinho, and Dias 2017; Jang and Kim 2018), which is logical given the criteria food retail companies use to locate their stores (e.g., supermarkets ' need to receive large deliveries of products from centralized warehouses; Newing, Clarke, and Clarke 2015; Baviera-Puig, Buitrago-Vera, and Escriba-Perez 2016; Hood, Clarke, and Clarke 2016). Our findings show that supermarket transit scores are mainly consistent in city centers, generally dropping off as the distance from the city center increases. Considering the concentration of transit service in dense city centers, it is advantageous for individuals to live there. The main disadvantage, however, is lower access to large supermarkets, which are commonly found in less dense suburbs potentially disconnected from transit services. Although accessing these larger format stores might not be a challenge with a vehicle, lowincome households in suburban communities might lack the necessary transportation resources to reach them without help from a friend or rideshare service. Despite measures like the USDA LILA tracts commonly placing urban ' food deserts ' in downtown cores, it seems evident that colocation of individuals and grocers in suburban communities does not necessitate access.

## Recommendations

Given the demonstrated issue that low-income, Black, Hispanic, and public assistance households in peripheral CBGs are not as easily able to access SNAP retailers via transit, changes are warranted to improve the food procurement environment for these households. Ideally, and perhaps unrealistically, more federal funding would be allocated toward transit so local transit authorities could bolster networks by adding more fixed-route service, higher frequency, or services like park and rides, thereby improving transit access to SNAP stores. Lacking this increased funding,

transit authorities could theoretically shift funding away from the city center to reach suburban populations, but this would likely reduce transit accessibility for residents in the city center while catering to CBGs that, as shown here, are generally car dependent. This model of transit planning has already been shown to be economically inefficient and socially inequitable (Garrett and Taylor 2003).

Although it might seem most reasonable for individuals to simply use personal vehicles, low-income households often have tight monetary budgets that can cause or worsen food insecurity. Encouraging financially strained households to take on additional fees associated with car ownership (e.g., insurance) in addition to volatile changes in the cost to operate this mode of transport (e.g., fuel) might only exacerbate less-than-ideal situations when an alternative transportation option is not available. In fact, car payments are becoming a bigger source of debt for U.S. households (Center for Microeconomic Data 2019; Cross et al. 2019; Bliss 2019a). Recent work has found that cardependent, low-income households are likely to become transit riders if transit access improves (Yousefzadeh Barri et al. 2021). Despite this, the current political environment in many of the states in our study area has shown little interest in substantially overhauling transit systems (Witsil and Lawrence 2016; Kaeding 2021; Dwyer 2022). Beyond increasing funding for transit in suburban communities, more research is needed to support solutions improving transit access in these areas.

First, and perhaps the simplest, is expanding ondemand transit services. Currently, on-demand public transit is available but not necessarily temporally efficient. Boosting infrastructure for these types of services could help populations having difficulty getting to a SNAP store rely on an affordable type of public transit rather than using Uber or Lyft, which are often less cost-effective and have barriers for use (e.g., access to a smartphone). Some cities in Canada and the United States, however, have started subsidizing rideshare providers as a form of public transit (NPR 2016; Bliss 2019b), which is another option for local authorities to consider.

Another possible solution being piloted by the USDA Food and Nutrition Service is a SNAP produce delivery service, which reduces costs associated with getting groceries by private vehicle. Currently available in forty-eight states participating in the pilot, this program could change how households get groceries. The program, which began in April 2019, allows SNAP participants to purchase their groceries from online retailers (e.g., Walmart) and have them delivered to their homes (USDA 2019). SNAP only covers the products participants purchase and not delivery fees, but the convenience of online shopping could help households who suffer from low transit access or temporal restrictions that prevent them from reaching the store. Because this program is being newly piloted, evaluations are needed to assess its long-term viability.

More interventions exist that could improve the conditions for populations at risk of food insecurity in low-transit-access CBGs, like urban agriculture (Metcalf and Widener 2011; McCauley 2021) and community food-sharing platforms (Martinko 2021). It is crucial, however, to give proper voice and agency to food-insecure individuals so they can inform how to address and foster better access to affordable food retailers. The communities affected by policies aimed at improving food environments should inform which changes would most help them, and policymakers should actively seek out and incorporate these voices to foster more equitable outcomes (Milan and Creutzig 2017).

## Study Limitations

This study has several limitations that future studies should consider and address. First, round-trip travel times and trip chaining should be considered, as our study only evaluates home-to-store transit times. Other studies have considered grocery trips that are chained to a work commute (Widener et al. 2015). Additionally, we employ schedule-based transit travel times, whereas other work has shown large variability between scheduled and actual transit travel times (Wessel, Allen, and Farber 2017). Future studies could better model transit access by using this approach and by considering vehicle travel times. Additionally, store operating hours are not available within the SNAP data set and are not considered during travel time generation, which has been shown elsewhere to affect temporal access to food retail (Widener et al. 2017).

Previous work has identified other regions of the United States as having more food-insecure households than in the Midwest (Nord et al. 2010); by expanding the spatial scope of this study and the MPOs included, more insights could be drawn about transit access to SNAP in the United States. Chicago ' s MPO especially deserves similar study and is large enough to warrant independent investigation. Finally, other populations such as single-parent households, older adults, and people with disabilities have high rates of food insecurity and should be considered (Sharkey, Johnson, and Dean 2010; Nord et al. 2010).

## Conclusion

In quantifying and mapping populations that have low transit access to SNAP retailers, patterns reflective of transport poverty literature emerged wherein lowdensity areas on the fringe of urban centers had low transit access scores or no transit access at all. Additionally, we identified more than 2,000 CBGs with substantially higher access to small retail than

large grocers. Census tracts with low transit access to SNAP retail were different from the USDA ' s LILA tracts because they tended to be affluent and car dependent. Despite this, at the regional level, there is a substantial number of potentially food-insecure people with low levels of transit access to SNAP retail.

This study has identified a gap in transit access that local transit authorities and MPOs should seek to fill through tailor-made policies that fit their local contexts and the desires of residents in low-transitaccess CBGs. Despite limitations, this study provides an important perspective into the SNAP food retail environment and how metropolitan populations in the

U.S. Midwest are able to access them via transit. /H17039

## Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Drs. Dionne Gesink and Steven Farber for their input on an earlier version of this study. We would also like to thank the editor and anonymous reviewers for their guidance.

All data used in this manuscript are available online for public use. The following table details the data used.

| Data item                            | Source                                                                                                                   |
|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Demographic data                     | American Community Survey (https://www.nhgis.org)                                                                        |
| Political/census boundaries GTFS     | U.S. Census TIGER/line (https://www.nhgis.org) Various transit authorities (https://www.transit.land)                    |
| SNAP stores                          | USDA Benefit Redemption Division (https:// github.com/jshannon75/snap_retailers)                                         |
| Road network                         | OpenStreetMap (https://www.geofabrik.de/data/ download.html)                                                             |
| Low-income, low-access census tracts | USDA Food Access Research Atlas (https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/ food-access-research-atlas/download-the- data/) |

Note: We used American FactFinder to retrieve census data. This Web site is longer in operation, so we have referenced NHGIS in its place.

## ORCID

| Amber D. DeJohn http://orcid.org/0000-0002- 0746-0355   |
|---------------------------------------------------------|
| Michael J. Widener http://orcid.org/0000-0003-          |
| 3312-6710                                               |
| Jerry Shannon http://orcid.org/0000-0001- 9145-6561     |

## Notes

1 Low-income census tracts meet at least one of the following conditions: (1) Poverty rate is 20 percent or greater; (2) median family income is less than or equal

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

- to 80 percent of the state-wide median family income; and/or (3) is in a metropolitan area and has a median family income less than or equal to 80 percent of the metropolitan area ' s median family income.
- 2 Individuals who identified as Black and Hispanic on the census were classified as Black to avoid double-counting individuals in population totals. Hispanic will be used hereafter for simplicity.
- 3 The Census Bureau considers a census tract urban if the geographic centroid of the tract is in an area with more than 2,500 people.

## Literature Cited

Allen, J., and S. Farber. 2019. Sizing up transport poverty: A national scale accounting of low-income households suffering from inaccessibility in Canada, and what to do about it. Transport Policy 74:214 -23. doi: 10.1016/j.tranpol.2018.11.018.

- Allen, J., and S. Farber. 2020. Planning transport for social inclusion: An accessibility-activity participation approach. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 78:102212. doi: 10.1016/j.trd.2019.102212.
- Aragon, M. C., J. Armstrong Shultz, A. Bush-Kaufman, and K. Barale. 2019. Low-income respondents ' perceptions about food retail and food pantry shopping environments. Journal of Hunger &amp; Environmental Nutrition 14 (1 -2):110 -27. doi: 10.1080/19320248.2018.1434097.

Bastiaanssen, J., D. Johnson, and K. Lucas. 2020. Does transport help people to gain employment? A systematic review and meta-analysis of the empirical evidence. Transport Reviews 40 (5):607 -28. doi: 10.1080/01441647. 2020.1747569.

Baviera-Puig, A., J. Buitrago-Vera, and C. Escriba-Perez. 2016. Geomarketing models in supermarket location strategies. Journal of Business Economics and Management 17 (6):1205 -21. doi: 10.3846/16111699.2015.1113198.

Bliss, L. 2019a. If the economy is so great, why are car loan defaults at a record high? CityLab. Accessed July 13, 2019. https://www.citylab.com/transportation/2019/ 02/subprime-car-loans-buy-automobile-lending-debt-trap/ 582652/.

Bliss, L. 2019b. Uber was supposed to be our public transit. CityLab. Accessed July 13, 2019. https://www.citylab.com/transportation/2019/04/innisfil-transit-ride-hailing-bus-public-transportation-uber/588154/.

Block, D., and J. Kouba. 2006. A comparison of the availability and affordability of a market basket in two communities in the Chicago area. Public Health Nutrition 9 (7):837 -45. doi: 10.1017/PHN2005924.

Bureau of Transportation Statistics. 2012. Federal and state funding of public transit. Accessed November 18, 2018. https://www.bts.gov/content/federal-and-statefunding-public-transit.

Casas, I. 2007. Social exclusion and the disabled: An accessibility approach. The Professional Geographer 59 (4): 463 -77. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9272.2007.00635.x.

Center for Microeconomic Data. 2019. Quarterly report on household debt and credit . New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

- Clifton, K. J. 2004. Mobility strategies and food shopping for low-income families: A case study. Journal of

- Planning Education and Research 23 (4):402 -13. doi: 10. 1177/0739456X04264919.

Coleman-Jensen, A., M. P. Rabbit, C. A. Gregory, and A. Singh. 2019. Household food security in the United States in 2018 . ERR-270, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.

Cormier, D., and C. Craypo. 2000. The working poor and the working of American labour markets. Cambridge Journal of Economics 24 (6):691 -708. doi: 10.1093/cje/24. 6.691.

Cristancho, S., D. M. Garces, K. E. Peters, and B. C. Mueller. 2008. Listening to rural Hispanic immigrants in the Midwest: A community-based participatory assessment of major barriers to health care access and use. Qualitative Health Research 18 (5):633 -46. doi: 10. 1177/1049732308316669.

Cross, R. J., T. Dutzik, E. Mierzwinski, and M. Casale. 2019. Driving into debt: The hidden cost of risky auto loans to consumers and our communities . Denver, CO: U.S. PIRG Education Fund Frontier Group.

Curl, A., J. Clark, and A. Kearns. 2018. Household car adoption and financial distress in deprived urban communities: A case of forced car ownership? Transport Policy 65:61 -71. doi: 10.1016/j.tranpol.2017.01.002.

DeGood, K. 2020. A reform agenda for the U.S. Department of Transportation. Center for American Progress. Accessed June 21, 2021. https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/economy/reports/2020/09/09/490158/ reform-agenda-u-s-department-transportation/.

Dwyer, K. 2022. Bill would ' cancel ' IndyGo ' s Blue Line by banning dedicated bus lanes outside Mile Square. The Indianapolis Star , January 10. Accessed February 5, 2022. https://www.indystar.com/story/news/local/ transportation/2022/01/10/indygo-bill-ban-bus-only-laneswould-cancel-blue-line/9130051002/.

Farber, S., M. Z. Morang, and M. J. Widener. 2014. Temporal variability in transit-based accessibility to supermarkets. Applied Geography 53:149 -59. doi: 10. 1016/j.apgeog.2014.06.012.

- Federal Transit Administration. 2015. The National Transit Database (NTD). Accessed October 31, 2018. https:// www.transit.dot.gov/ntd.

Fransen, K., T. Neutens, S. Farber, P. De Maeyer, G. Deruyter, and F. Witlox. 2015. Identifying public transport gaps using time-dependent accessibility levels. Journal of Transport Geography 48:176 -87. doi: 10.1016/j. jtrangeo.2015.09.008.

Garrett, M., and B. D. Taylor. 2003. Reconsidering social equity in public transit. Accessed July 12, 2019. https:// escholarship.org/uc/item/1gm148mz.

Havewala, F. 2021. The dynamics between the food environment and residential segregation: An analysis of metropolitan areas. Food Policy 103:102015. doi: 10.1016/j. foodpol.2020.102015.

Hendrickson, D., C. Smith, and N. Eikenberry. 2006. Fruit and vegetable access in four low-income food deserts communities in Minnesota. Agriculture and Human Values 23 (3):371 -83. doi: 10.1007/s10460-0069002-8.

Hood, N., G. Clarke, and M. Clarke. 2016. Segmenting the growing UK convenience store market for retail location planning. The International Review of Retail,

- Distribution and Consumer Research 26 (2):113 -36. doi: 10.1080/09593969.2015.1086403.

Horner, M. W., and B. S. Wood. 2014. Capturing individuals ' food environments using flexible space-time accessibility measures. Applied Geography 51:99 -107. doi: 10. 1016/j.apgeog.2014.03.007.

Jang, S., and J. Kim. 2018. Remedying food policy invisibility with spatial intersectionality: A case study in the Detroit metropolitan area. Journal of Public Policy &amp; Marketing 37 (1):167 -87. doi: 10.1509/jppm.16.194.

Kaeding, D. 2021. Coalition of groups propose alternative to I-94 expansion. Wisconsin Public Radio, September 15. Accessed February 5, 2022. https://www.wpr.org/ coalition-groups-propose-alternative-i-94-expansion.

Kaiser, L., V. Chaidez, S. Algert, M. Horowitz, A. Martin, C. Mendoza, M. Neelon, and D. C. Ginsburg. 2015. Food resource management education with SNAP participation improves food security. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior 47 (4):374 -78. doi: 10.1016/j. jneb.2015.01.012.

Larsen, K., and J. Gilliland. 2008. Mapping the evolution of ' food deserts ' in a Canadian city: Supermarket accessibility in London, Ontario, 1961 -2005. International Journal of Health Geographics 7 (1):16. doi: 10.1186/ 1476-072X-7-16.

Lucas, K. 2012. Transport and social exclusion: Where are we now? Transport Policy 20:105 -13. doi: 10.1016/j.tranpol.2012.01.013.

Lucas, K., G. Mattioli, E. Verlinghieri, and A. Guzman. 2016. Transport poverty and its adverse social consequences. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers -Transport 169:353 -65.

- Major, E., E. C. Delmelle, and E. Delmelle. 2018. SNAPScapes: Using geodemographic segmentation to classify the food access landscape. Urban Science 2 (3):71. doi: 10.3390/urbansci2030071.

Martinko, K. 2021. Share surplus food with neighbors using Olio app. Treehugger, March. Accessed September 29, 2021. https://www.treehugger.com/share-surplus-foodneighbors-olio-app-5117074.

- McCauley, D. 2021. Urban agriculture combats food insecurity, builds community. Eos, January 25. Accessed September 29, 2021. https://eos.org/articles/urban-agriculture-combats-food-insecurity-builds-community.

McClure, E., L. Feinstein, E. Cordoba, C. Douglas, M. Emch, W. Robinson, S. Galea, and A. E. Aiello. 2019. The legacy of redlining in the effect of foreclosures on Detroit residents ' self-rated health. Health &amp; Place 55: 9 -19. doi: 10.1016/j.healthplace.2018.10.004.

McGuire, C. M., M. R. Winkler, K. M. Lenk, L. Harnack, D. J. Erickson, and M. N. Laska. 2020. Small food store retailers ' views on healthy food retail policy in response to a local staple foods ordinance. Public Health Nutrition . doi: 10.1017/S1368980020000580.

Metcalf, S. S., and M. J. Widener. 2011. Growing Buffalo ' s capacity for local food: A systems framework for sustainable agriculture. Applied Geography 31 (4):1242 -51. doi: 10.1016/j.apgeog.2011.01.008.

Milan, B. F., and F. Creutzig. 2017. Lifting peripheral fortunes: Upgrading transit improves spatial, income and gender equity in Medellin. Cities 70:122 -34. doi: 10. 1016/j.cities.2017.07.019.

- Murakami, E., and J. Young. 1997. Daily travel by persons with low income. Accessed July 12, 2019. https://rosap.ntl. bts.gov/view/dot/13239.
- Murthy, V. H. 2016. Food insecurity: A public health issue. Public Health Reports 131 (5):655 -57. doi: 10.1177/ 0033354916664154.
- Newing, A., G. P. Clarke, and M. Clarke. 2015. Developing and applying a disaggregated retail location model with extended retail demand estimations. Geographical Analysis 47 (3):219 -39. doi: 10.1111/gean. 12052.
- Nord, M., A. Coleman-Jensen, M. Andrews, and S. Carlson. 2010. Household food security in the United States, 2009 . ERR-108, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
- Nord, M., A. E. Luloff, and L. Jensen. 1995. Migration and the spatial concentration of poverty. Rural Sociology 60 (3):399 -415. doi: 10.1111/j.1549-0831.1995.tb00580.x.
- NPR. 2016. The newest public transportation in town: Uber. NPR.org, April 9. Accessed July 13, 2019. https:// www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2016/04/09/ 473422686/the-newest-public-transportation-in-town-uber.
- Olendzki, B. C., E. Procter-Gray, N. M. Wedick, V. Patil, H. Zheng, K. Kane, T. Land, and W. Li. 2015. Disparities in access to healthy and unhealthy foods in central Massachusetts: Implications for public health policy. Journal of the American College of Nutrition 34 (2): 150 -58. doi: 10.1080/07315724.2014.917058.
- OpenTripPlanner Project. [2011] 2018. OpenTripPlanner 1.3.0 [Java]. Accessed April 10, 2019. https://github. com/opentripplanner/OpenTripPlanner.
- Preston, J., and F. Raj  e. 2007. Accessibility, mobility and transport-related social exclusion. Journal of Transport Geography 15 (3):151 -60. doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2006. 05.002.
- Reigadinha, T., P. Godinho, and J. Dias. 2017. Portuguese food retailers -Exploring three classic theories of retail location. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services 34: 102 -16. doi: 10.1016/j.jretconser.2016.09.015.
- Ruff, R. R., A. Akhund, and T. Adjoian. 2016. Small convenience stores and the local food environment: An analysis of resident shopping behavior using multilevel modeling. American Journal of Health Promotion 30 (3): 172 -80. doi: 10.4278/ajhp.140326-QUAN-121.
- Sergenian, B. 2014. A comparison of food accessibility from 2002 to 2012 in St. Paul, Minnesota. MA dissertation, The University of North Dakota. https://search. proquest.com/docview/1560658372/abstract/C8DABC4 3FF0B4DAAPQ/1.
- Shannon, J. 2016. Beyond the supermarket solution: Linking food deserts, neighborhood context, and everyday mobility. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 106 (1):186 -202. doi: 10.1080/00045608. 2015.1095059.
- Shannon, J., and W. J. Christian. 2017. What is the relationship between food shopping and daily mobility? A relational approach to analysis of food access. GeoJournal 82 (4):769 -85. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10708016-9716-0.
- Sharkey, J. R., C. M. Johnson, and W. R. Dean. 2010. Food access and perceptions of the community and household food environment as correlates of fruit and
- vegetable intake among rural seniors. BMC Geriatrics 10 (1):32. doi: 10.1186/1471-2318-10-32.
- Singleton, P. A., and K. J. Clifton. 2017. Considering health in US metropolitan long-range transportation plans: A review of guidance statements and performance measures. Transport Policy 57:79 -89. doi: 10.1016/j.tranpol.2017.02.003.
- Swayne, M. R. E., and B. C. Lowery. 2021. Integrating transit data and travel time into food security analysis: A case study of San Diego, California. Applied Geography 131:102461. doi: 10.1016/j.apgeog.2021. 102461.
- U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2017. Food access research atlas. U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Accessed October 27, 2018. https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-access-researchatlas/documentation/.
- U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2018. Definitions of food security. Accessed October 27, 2018. https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/ food-security-in-the-us/definitions-of-food-security.aspx.
- U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2019. Online purchasing pilot. Accessed July 14, 2019. https://www. fns.usda.gov/snap/online-purchasing-pilot.
- U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT). 2017. Federal funding allocation. Accessed October 31, 2018. https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/federal-funding-allocation.
- Ver Ploeg, M., L. Mancino, J. E. Todd, D. M. Clay, and B. Scharadin. 2015. Where do Americans usually shop for food and how do they travel to get there? Initial findings from the National Household Food Acquisition and Purchase Survey. AgEcon Search, March 1. doi: 10. 22004/ag.econ.262116.
- Walks, A. 2018. Driving the poor into debt? Automobile loans, transport disadvantage, and automobile dependence. Transport Policy 65:137 -49. doi: 10.1016/j.tranpol. 2017.01.001.
- Wessel, N., J. Allen, and S. Farber. 2017. Constructing a routable retrospective transit timetable from a real-time vehicle location feed and GTFS. Journal of Transport Geography 62:92 -97. doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2017.04. 012.
- Widener, M. J. 2018. Spatial access to food: Retiring the food desert metaphor. Physiology &amp; Behavior 193 (B): 257 -60. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2018.02.032.
- Widener, M. J., S. Farber, T. Neutens, and M. Horner. 2015. Spatiotemporal accessibility to supermarkets using public transit: An interaction potential approach in Cincinnati, Ohio. Journal of Transport Geography 42: 72 -83. doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2014.11.004.
- Widener, M. J., L. Minaker, S. Farber, J. Allen, B. Vitali, P. C. Coleman, and B. Cook. 2017. How do changes in the daily food and transportation environments affect grocery store accessibility? Applied Geography 83 (Suppl. C):46 -62. doi: 10.1016/j. apgeog.2017.03.018.
- Witsil, F., and E. D. Lawrence. 2016. RTA millage rejected by metro Detroit voters. Detroit Free Press , November 9. Accessed February 5, 2022. https://www. freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/detroit/2016/11/09/ rta-regional-transit-authority-millage/93535602/.

Yousefzadeh Barri, E., S. Farber, A. Kramer, H. Jahanshahi, J. Allen, and E. Beyazit. 2021. Can transit investments in lowincome neighbourhoods increase transit use? Exploring the nexus of income, car-ownership, and transit accessibility in Toronto. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 95:102849. doi: 10.1016/j.trd.2021.102849.

AMBER D. DeJOHN is a PhD Candidate in Human Geography, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada. E-mail: amber.dejohn@mail.utoronto.ca. She studies geographies of socializing and health, especially in later life, with a focus on technology adoption and mobility.

MICHAEL J. WIDENER is the Canada Research Chair in Transportation and Health and an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography &amp; Planning, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada. E-mail: michael.widener@utoronto.ca. His work investigates issues relating to health, transportation, and urban geography.

JERRY SHANNON in an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602. E-mail: jshannon@uga.edu. His research investigates how to make urban neighborhoods and food systems healthier and more equitable.

Appendix: Global Moran ' s I statistics by metropolitan planning organization (MPO)

| MPO name                                              | Moran ' s I   | MPO name                                                 | Moran ' s I   |
|-------------------------------------------------------|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| Chippewa-Eau Claire MPO                               | - 0.05        | Grand Valley Metropolitan Council                        | - 0.01        |
| Northeastern Indiana Regional Coordinating Council    | 0.02          | West Central Indiana Economic Development District, Inc. | - 0.03        |
| East - West Gateway Council of Governments            | 0.06                | Oshkosh MPO                                              | - 0.04        |
| McLean County Regional Planning Commission            | - 0.07        | Akron Metropolitan Area Transportation Study             | 0.02          |
| Delaware-Muncie MPO                                   | - 0.04        | Indianapolis MPO                                         | 0.00          |
| Sheboygan MPO                                         | 0.14          | Tri-County Regional Planning Commission (IL)             | - 0.02        |
| Duluth-Superior Metropolitan Council of Government    | - 0.01        | Janesville Area MPO                                      | - 0.04        |
| Appleton/Fox Cities MPO                               | - 0.02        | Madison Area Transportation Planning Board               | - 0.02        |
| Genesee County MPO                                    | 0.06                | Northeastern Ohio Areawide Coordinating Agency           | 0.01          |
| State Line Area Transportation Study                  | 0.13          | Tri-County Regional Planning Commission (MI)             | 0.08                |
| Area Plan Commission of Tippecanoe County             | 0.01          | Kalamazoo Area Transportation Study                      | - 0.02        |
| Bloomington/Monroe County MPO                         | - 0.05        | Bi-State Regional Commission                             | 0.00          |
| Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission                 | 0.02          | Southeast Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission         | - 0.01        |
| Fargo-Moorhead Metropolitan Council of Governments    | 0.09          | Springfield Area Transportation Study                    | - 0.05        |
| Louisville Area MPO                                   | 0.06                | Champaign County Regional Planning Commission            | 0.01          |
| Southeast Michigan Council of Governments             | 0.07                | Metropolitan Council (MN)                                | - 0.01        |
| Ohio-Kentucky-Indiana Regional Council of Governments | 0.04                |                                                          |               |