This article was downloaded by: [University of Saskatchewan Library]

On: 18 March 2015, At: 21:00

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954

Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH,

UK

<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

Ethnic Restructuring in Rural America: Migration and the Changing Faces of Rural Communities in the Great Plains

Holly R. Barcus a &amp; Laura Simmons b

a Macalester College

b University of North Carolina at Charlotte Published online: 09 Mar 2012.

To cite this article: Holly R. Barcus &amp; Laura Simmons (2013) Ethnic Restructuring in Rural America: Migration and the Changing Faces of Rural Communities in the Great Plains, The Professional Geographer, 65:1, 130-152, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2012.658713

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2012.658713

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or

Downloaded by [University of Saskatchewan Library] at 21:00 18 March 2015

indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## Ethnic Restructuring in Rural America: Migration and the Changing Faces of Rural Communities in the Great Plains ∗

Holly R. Barcus

Macalester College

## Laura Simmons

University of North Carolina at Charlotte

Scholars have long documented widespread aging and depopulation of rural communities in the Great Plains. Paralleling these trends is the emergence, growth, and spatial dispersion of new and longtime non-white populations across the region. The dual processes of population loss in many counties combined with the growth of new, non-white population groups suggest that the ethnic structure of the population is changing. In this article we utilize choropleth maps, Hoover and Simpson indexes, and cluster analysis to assess whether the emergence and growth of ethnic minority groups in the Great Plains between 1970 and 2008 is a localized phenomenon or region-wide shift in the ethnic composition of the population. Results suggest that as depopulation is occurring in many counties of this region, the growth of non-white populations, both immigrant and native born, is changing or restructuring the ethnic composition of the Great Plains. Key Words: ethnic restructuring, Great Plains, internal migration, rural population, settlement patterns.

新的和长期的非白人人口在此区域的出现，生长，和空间上的分散。许多县的人口流失结合 新的非白人群体增长的双重进程表明，人口的种族结构正在发生变化。在这篇文章中，我们 利用等值域图，胡佛和辛普森指数，以及聚类分析，来评估在1970年和2008年之间，大平 原地区少数族裔群体的出现和增长是人口的民族组成的一个局部的现象还是一个区域范围的 转变。结果表明，去人口化发生在这一地区的许多县，移民和本土出生的非白人人口的增 长，正改变或重组大平原地区的民族成分。关键词：民族重组，大平原，内部迁移，农村人 口，定居模块。

Desde hace mucho tiempo los estudiosos han documentado el envejecimiento generalizado y la despoblaci´ on en las comunidades rurales de los Grandes Llanos. De manera simult´ anea con estas tendencias ha ocurrido la aparici´ on, crecimiento y dispersi´ on espacial de una nueva y creciente poblaci´ on no blanca en toda la regi´ on. Los procesos duales de p´ erdida de poblaci´ on en muchos condados, en combinaci´ on con el crecimiento de nuevos grupos de poblaci´ on no blanca, sugieren que la estructura ´ etnica de la poblaci´ on est´ a cambiando. En este art´ ıculo utilizamos mapas de coropletas, ´ ındices de Hoover y Simpson y an´ alisis de aglomeraci´ on para establecer si la aparici ´ on y crecimiento de grupos ´ etnicos minoritarios en los Grandes Llanos entre 1970 y 2008 es un fen´ omeno localizado o si se trata de un cambio en la composici´ on ´ etnica de la poblaci´ on a escala regional. Los resultados sugieren que al tiempo que la despoblaci´ on ocurre en muchos condados de la regi´ on, el crecimiento de la poblaci´ on no blanca, tanto de inmigrantes como nativos, est´ a cambiando o reestructurando la composici´ on ´ etnica de los Grandes Llanos. Palabras clave: reestructuraci´ on ´ etnica, Grandes Llanos, migraci´ on interna, poblaci ´ on rural, patrones de poblamiento.

∗ Wewould like to thank the editor and anonymous reviewers for their insightful and constructive comments that greatly improved the quality of this article.

M any rural communities in America are undergoing a demographic transformation. A wide range of rural places struggle to maintain population while some high-amenity areas are experiencing significant population growth characterized by the in-migration of retirees and amenity migrants (Muller, Hall, and Keen 2004; Glasgow and Brown 2006). Other rural areas, including some in America's traditional agricultural regions, are also changing demographically through the in-migration of foreign- and native-born ethnic minority populations (Millard and Chapa 2004; Kandel and Parrado 2006; Kirschner, Berry, and Glasgow 2006). Notably, the growing dispersion of these demographic groups away from gateway areas into rural places suggests that the ethnic and racial diversity common in urban America can increasingly be found in rural America.

Demographic structure includes the age, gender, and racial or ethnic composition of a population in a particular place and time, and demographic restructuring refers to substantive changes in these components. In much the same way that economic restructuring is identified by a shift from one economic state to another (such as from industrial to service-based), demographic restructuring is characterized by 'a qualitative shift from one order to another' (Pandit and Withers 1999, 5). Two primary types of demographic restructuring include changes in age structure and ethnic composition. Because migration is a highly age-selective process, in- or out-migration of a particular age group results in a changing age profile of that region. Likewise, the movement of a minority group into or out of a region changes the balance between minority and nonminority populations. Ethnic restructuring, then, can be identified by a qualitative shift from a small representation of minority population to a much larger representation of that minority in a particular area, brought about by the dual processes of natural increase and migration (Pandit and Withers 1999).

The Great Plains is a region undergoing rural ethnic restructuring. Numerous case studies detail the rapidly changing population composition of counties and places within the region, documenting the emergence of new ethnic groups, including Latino, Bosnian, Chinese, Sudanese, Filipino, Korean, Vietnamese, and Indian populations (see, e.g., Carlo,

Carranza, and Zamboanga 2002; Hansen 2003; Ravuri 2003; Dalla et al. 2004; Gaber et al. 2004; Willis and Fernald 2004; Xie, Xia, and Zhou 2004; Wahl, Breckenridge, and Gunkel 2007). These case studies suggest that changes in the ethnic composition of local populations are not isolated but rather reflect more widespread, regional-scale change. Alongside changes in ethnic composition, several studies have outlined aging and age-restructuring also occurring across the region (Archer and Lonsdale 2003; Ravuri 2003; Johnson and Rathge 2006; Wilson 2009).

In this article, we argue that rural areas in the Great Plains are undergoing a process of ethnic restructuring and that although many case studies document the emergence of new ethnic groups, it is a continuing process for the entire region, with some places experiencing much greater change than others. At the macro scale, three key forces influence this process: globalization, regional economic restructuring, and changes in immigration policy. We utilize four measures of change-choropleth maps, the Hoover and Simpson indexes, and cluster analyses-to provide evidence of widespread change in the ethnic composition of rural communities in this region.

Fouradditional sections follow this introduction. These include an overview of the study's conceptual framework next. After that, we detail data and methods and provide a brief history of the Great Plains and then provide evidence of the changing ethnic composition of the region. Finally, we offer conclusions.

## Factors Influencing Changing Settlement Patterns

Since 1990, Asian and Latino populations, inclusive of immigrants and long-term residents, have grown rapidly and dispersed away from gateway cities to new destinations throughout the United States (Kandel and Cromartie 2004). The processes of globalization, regional economic restructuring within the United States, and changes in U.S. immigration policy have facilitated the recent redistribution of these populations to new locations and, in the Great Plains, the emergence of these groups is stemming population loss and creating a more ethnically diverse population.

## Globalization

Globalization is a process by which regional and national economies and societies are increasingly integrated into the international economy through trade, transportation and communication technologies, capital flows, and migration. It 'include[s] fewer barriers and risks to trade and financial and investment capital flows and, thus, greater global economic integration, greater flexibility in labor markets, a compression of time and space' (Hytrek and Zentgraf 2008, 5). Integration occurs across various geographic scales, altering labor supply and demand, creating large and extensive international migration flows from the Global South to the Global North as well as between countries of the Global South (Castles and Miller 2009). Demand for low-skill, low-wage labor in the Global North coupled with population growth without sufficient corresponding economic growth in the Global South has created a surplus of workers, generating pressure for immigration to the Global North. Thus, through the process of globalization, labor demands and shortages create, through international migration, new populations within Global North countries. Since the 1960s, for example, the legal permanent resident flow to the United States quadrupled from 250,000 during the 1950s to just over 1 million between 2000 and 2007 (Jefferys and Monger 2008). The process of global economic integration and corresponding increase in migration from the Global South has prompted continued review of immigration policies by Global North countries that facilitate the migration of some groups and limit that of others (Castles and Miller 2009).

New immigrants initially settle in gateway cities, but for many this is not the final destination (Newbold 1999). Rather, because many of these cities have saturated labor and housing markets, migrants (either new immigrants or secondor third-generation residents) move to new destinations (Newbold 1999), a process that is facilitated by changing immigration policies (see later discussion of the Immigration Reform and Control Act) and new employment opportunities created by subnational regional economic restructuring.

## Changing U.S. Immigration Policies

Immigration policy changes have historically influenced the magnitude of migrant flows to the United States. Although policy changes tend to be the most clear-cut and documented forces affecting migration, they are often the weakest in actual impact (Massey 1995). For instance, the cessation of mass European immigration in the 1930s is hailed as a resulting success of the 'quota laws' of 1921 and 1924, which limited immigrants by national origin. These laws played a role in stemming the flow of immigrants, but World War I (which effectively halted immigration from Europe prior to the passage of the quota laws), the Great Depression (which occurred just as immigration from Europe began to recover in spite of the quota laws), and World War II (which further deterred international movement before the economy had a chance to recover fromtheDepression) also influenced this trend. Conversely, the lifting of the quotas through the 1965 amendments initiated new immigrant flows from Latin America and Asia.

Early policies increased labor migration to the United States. The Bracero Program (1942-1964), for example, was a labor recruitment program initiated to meet labor shortages for U.S. growers during World War II. The program recruited more than 4.6 million Mexican agricultural laborers during this period. Although it ended in 1964, the flow of employment-seeking migrants continued, penetrating beyond the Southwest and into the Plains (Durand, Massey, and Parrado 1999).

Policies during the 1980s and 1990s also played a role in determining the destinations of immigrant flows and initiating new settlement geographies (Vernez and Ronfeldt 1991; Durand, Massey, and Charvet 2000). The most significant was the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA), which legalized nearly 3 million undocumented immigrants between 1987 and 1990 (Durand, Massey, and Charvet 2000). Although the IRCA was intended to discourage further immigration, its greatest impact was increasing geographic mobility among immigrants already living in the United States, resulting in a wider array of settlement choices across the country. Newly legalized immigrants, many of whom initially moved to a traditional gateway city and did not leave because of their undocumented status, could now leave the crowded labor and housing markets of the gateways and follow economic opportunity to cities and rural areas of the South and Midwest. Patterns of dispersal among both

foreign- and native-born Latinos and Asians, but especially for native-born Latinos, were identifiable as early as 1990 (Frey and Liaw 1999; Gober 1999) and were confirmed by the

2000 Census.

## Regional Economic Restructuring

New rural economies have ushered in new rural migrants from very diverse racial, ethnic, and economic backgrounds: 'Economic restructuring creates new jobs, altering regional and local labor demands and creating new employment opportunities for different segments of the population which may in turn alter the demographic and ethnic composition of the population in a given area' (Barcus 2007, 300, summarized from Pandit and Withers 1999). Regions with historically small immigrant populations as well as rural and suburban locations are increasingly included among these new destinations (Kandel and Cromartie 2004; Barcus 2006; Smith and Furuseth 2006). Expanding job markets create new destinations for migrants, immigrant and nonimmigrant, thereby changing the settlement patterns of social, economic, and ethnic groups.

Economic restructuring in the Great Plains includes agricultural restructuring and the expansion of manufacturing. In agriculture, technology continues to increase productivity per acre and decrease labor demands, a long-standing process that has been increasing the average farm size and decreasing the number of farms and farm families beginning in the 1930s and continuing since the 1950s (Johnson and Rathge 2006). By the 1990s, agribusiness replaced the family farm as the primary unit of agricultural production, and off-farm employment opportunities increased (Hudson 2003). Demographically, agricultural restructuring increased out-migration from the region, particularly of young people; aging and declining populations are common in many counties (Rathge and Highman 1998; Archer and Lonsdale 2003; Hart 2003; Hudson 2003).

Unlike agriculture, the manufacturing sector has expanded since 1970, growing twice as fast as manufacturing in other U.S. rural areas in the 1970s and 1980s (McGranahan 1998). The largest manufacturing growth occurred in meat packing (McGranahan 1998). This industry began restructuring in the 1950s, moving slaughter facilities from urban stockyard districts into cattle-producing areas, increasing plant sizes, andconsolidating packing steps into one facility (Broadway and Stull 2006). Economies of scale within this model reduced the number of employees needed between 1974 and 1997, but low wages and high injury rates resulted in nearly 200 percent labor force turnover per year and created a reliance on immigrant labor, initiating ethnic restructuring in numerous communities throughout the Great Plains and Midwest (see, e.g., Millard and Chapa 2004; Broadway and Stull 2006).

In summary, although these three factors do not cause ethnic restructuring, they create conditions under which internal migration to rural areas, such as in the Great Plains, becomes feasible and desirable for new and long-term minority populations. The process of globalization creates a mechanism by which labor shortages in the Global North catalyze migration of labor surplus from the Global South. This is mediated by national-scale immigration policies that limit or expand legal migration opportunities for particular populations. On arrival in the Global North, subnational regional economic restructuring facilitates, through job creation, the dispersal of migrants from gateway cities to nontraditional destinations. Weargue that these three processes create opportunities for migration and settlement in new and nontraditional destinations-specifically rural counties in the Great Plains.

## Data and Methods

Data for the following analyses come from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 U.S. Decennial Census, the 2008 Population Estimates Program, the 2002 Census of Agriculture (U.S. Department of Agriculture 2002), and the Regional Economic Information System for 1969, 1979, 1989, and 2000 (Bureau of Economic Analysis [BEA] 2002). We focus our analyses on five demographic groups (Latino, black, Asian, Native American, and white populations) within the Great Plains. Although numerous definitions of the Great Plains region exist, we utilize boundaries inclusive of the major regional delimitations (Adamchak et al. 1999; Archer and Lonsdale 2003; Wilson 2009). To evaluate the extent to which ethnic restructuring is occurring in this region, we employ choropleth maps, Hoover and Simpson indexes, and cluster analysis.

The Hoover Index measures the concentration of a population in the study area. First introduced by Hoover in 1941, it remains a viable tool for understanding trends in population concentration and deconcentration at multiple scales, including the county, state, and region (Long and Nucci 1997; Otterstrom and Shumway 2003). Index values range from 0 to 100-the higher the value, the more concentrated the population; the lower the value, the more dispersed the population; a value of 0 indicates a population that is equally distributed (Plane and Rogerson 1994). This index allows us to assess whether overall minority population growth in the region is simply continued growth in the same places or an increase in the number of localities experiencing growth. From a restructuring perspective, a lower value, indicating more dispersed populations over time, would suggest that a particular minority population is present in a greater number of counties.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the preceding equation, ai is a 'fraction of study region's land area' and pi is a 'fraction of entire region's population' (Plane and Rogerson 1994, 28).

Although the Hoover Index provides an overview of concentration levels, it does not indicate where concentration is occurring. The Simpson Index measures the diversity of each county, which can be compared to the index value of every other county in the region. Index values range between 0 and 1, indicating the probability that any two persons selected at random will come from different population groups, with 0 indicating no diversity and a value approaching 1 indicating greater diversity 1 (Plane and Rogerson 1994). Thus, the more counties with an increased index value, the greater the evidence for ethnic restructuring.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Cluster analysis is a data reduction technique that identifies similarities across observations with the purpose of minimizing within-group variation and maximizing between-group variation (Rogerson 2001). This technique is frequently used to group geographic areas, such as block groups or census tracts, based on demographic similarities of their residents (Plane and Rogerson 1994). Unlike the previous two indexes, which simply indicate whether change is occurring, cluster analysis provides insight into the characteristics of places experiencing demographic change. A nonhierarchical cluster analysis with four clusters was specified with clusters based on six categories of variables: economic structure (including the percentage of county employment in manufacturing, agriculture, construction, wholesale-retail trade and service sectors; BEA 2002), percentage Asian (U.S. Bureau of the Census 2000b), percentage Latino (U.S. Bureau of the Census 2000b), proximity to interstates, 2 and presence of universities or colleges and reservations (U.S. Bureau of the Census 2000a). Variables were standardized using z scores, resulting in 64 cases (counties) in cluster 1 (college towns), 224 in cluster 2 (interstate agricultural), 57 in cluster 3 (manufacturing destination), and 216 in cluster 4 (agriculture). SPSS (2008; version 17.0) was used for statistical analysis and ArcGIS (2010; version 9.3.1) for mapping.

## Historical Context

The Great Plains region occupies the central United States, encompassing parts of eleven states and extending south to north from Mexico to Canada (see Figure 1). The history of the Great Plains is marked by the dual processes of economic restructuring and corresponding population expansion and contraction.

Archer and Lonsdale (2003) identified three distinct periods of migration and population change over the last 100-plus years: 'net immigration in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, net emigration in the mid-20th century, and net immigration in the last three decades of the 20th century' (51). Although these periods reflect overall population growth since 1900, this growth has been much slower than for the United States overall (see Figure 2).

During the first period of migration, the Great Plains was still being settled, as land for farming and farm families increased. Fueled by the extension of railways across the region, many areas experienced population gains due to in-migration. Oil field development in Oklahoma and Texas extended the region's

Figure 1 Great Plains study area. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 2 Total population in the Great Plains and the United States, 1900-2008.

<!-- image -->

population gain into the 1920s (Archer and Lonsdale 2003).

Many counties reached peak population between 1910 and 1930, prior to the Dust Bowl and Great Depression of the 1930s, which spurred out-migration (Archer and Lonsdale 2003). World War II further encouraged outmigration for employment in the booming factories of urban centers, and rural populations continued to decline through the 1960s as new developments in agricultural technology decreased the number of laborers needed for farming.

During the 1970s, decentralization of manufacturing from urban centers to rural areas, induced by lower wages and the absence of unions, created jobs in some rural places in the

Great Plains and some saw a brief resurgence of population growth (Archer and Lonsdale 2003). As previously noted, high turnover rates, particularly in packing plants, increased labor demands, exceeding available labor in High Plains towns. In response, packing plants recruited immigrant populations. For example, in the early 1980s, Iowa Beef Packers recruited Southeast Asian refugees as workers; in the 1990s Latinos became the target of recruitment efforts. These new populations transformed small packing towns into multicultural communities (Dalla et al. 2004; Stull and Broadway 2008). Despite these new populations in rural areas, Figure 3 reveals that today much of the region's population growth is concentrated in urban centers on the region's periphery, and

Figure 3 Percentage change in total population.

<!-- image -->

Data source: U.S.Census 1970, 2008

Figure 4 Rates of continuous change per population group.

<!-- image -->

depopulation continues in the interior of the region.

Overall population change, however, masks underlying changes in the composition of the region's population. Despite population decline in many counties, Table 1 shows that the Great Plains is becoming home to an increasing number of minority migrants, resulting in increasing diversity. Latinos, Asians, blacks, and Native Americans are the largest minority groups in the region, and each continues to increase in size. Using rates of continuous change, Figure 4 shows that between 1990 and 2000, minority population growth rates exceeded white and overall regional growth rates. Asians and Latinos are the two fastest growing populations, increasing by 75 percent between 1990 and 2000, whereas the white population increased by only 5 percent. Between 2000 and 2008, these two populations continued to grow faster than any other group, but neither was estimated to be growing as fast as during the previous decade. These differential growth rates suggest that the future ethnic composition of Great Plains counties will be much different than today, with greater representation of minority populations across the region.

## The Latino Population

The Latino population is the largest minority group, at approximately 4.3 million (U.S.

Bureau of the Census 2008). The majority of Latino immigrants come from Mexico, and their presence is the product of the political and economic climates on both sides of the border. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, businesses and industries looking for cheap labor recruited Mexicans to work on farms, ranches, and the railroad (Davis 2001). The 1942 Bracero Program increased immigration to the plains, and the 1986 IRCA continued growth of existing Latino communities (Durand, Massey, and Parrado 1999).

The largest Latino populations are found in Texas, New Mexico, and Colorado. Figure 5 clearly illustrates the increasing dispersion of this population from a core area in the Southwest in 1970 to residence in nearly every county by 2008, albeit at varying levels of concentration. Latino population growth is widespread throughout the rural Great Plains.

## The Black Population

With a traditionally small population, the number of blacks in the plains has steadily increased since the 1940s, when many left the South in the Great Migration (Archer and Lonsdale 2003). Despite dispersal, this group remains primarily concentrated in eastern Texas and Oklahoma, radiating out from the western edge of the Cotton Belt with small but identifiable growth in a few counties in the northern plains (see Figure 6), such as

Table 1 Population change in the Great Plains, 1970-2008

| %change 2000-2008   | 40 . 4 16 . 7 10 . 7        | 2 . 8 39 . 5 2 . 15 9 . 9               | population in 2000 is                                      |
|---------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| %                   | 2 . 67 7 . 39 1 . 92        | 68 . 27 18 . 10 1 . 64 100 . 0          | Islander                                                   |
| 2008                | 622,816 1,725,878 447,748   | 15,938,701 4,226,661 383,866 23,345,670 | in 1970. The Pacific                                       |
| %change 1990-2000   | 75 . 6 20 . 6 13 . 9        | 5 . 0 75 . 2 2 , 306 . 3 15 . 8         | 100 percent are summarized.                                |
| %change 1970-1990   | 857 . 4 50 . 7 121 . 6      | 9 . 5 40 . 2 1 , 917 . 9 26 . 2         | Program (2008). population exceeds Islander groups         |
| %                   | 2 . 1 7 . 0 1 . 9           | 73 . 0 14 . 3 1 . 8 100 . 0             | Estimates so the total and Pacific                         |
| 2000                | 443,492 b 1,479,504 404,370 | 15,509,713 3,029,323 375,792 21,242,194 | Census Population population by race 1990 when Asian       |
| %                   | 1 . 4 6 . 7 1 . 9           | 80 . 5 9 . 4 0 . 09 100 . 0             | Bureau of the the Latino comparable to                     |
| 1990                | 252,570 1,227,182 355,029   | 14,766,669 1,729,292 15,617 18,346,359  | 2000); U.S. disaggregation of 2000 to make it              |
| % a                 | 0 . 18 5 . 60 1 . 17        | 92 . 76 8 . 32 0 . 29 108 . 32          | (1970, 1990, allow for category for                        |
| 1970 a              | 26,078 814,169 170,531      | 13,489,535 1,209,571 41,970 14,542,283  | Bureau of the Census 1970 figures did not Pacific Islander |
|                     |                             | American                                | U.S. includes                                              |
|                     | Asian Black Native          | White Latino Other Total population     | Source : a The available b Asian                           |

Figure 5 Latino population distribution, 1970-2008.

<!-- image -->

Cass (Fargo), Grand Forks (Grand Forks), and Ward counties. All three counties have universities, and both Fargo and Grand Forks are home to new refugee populations, including

Somalians and Sudanese (Hansen 2003). Ward County is home to Minot Air Force Base and Minot State University, both potential drivers of population growth and ethnic diversity.

Figure 6 Black population distribution, 1970-2008.

<!-- image -->

## The Asian Population

The Asian population in the Great Plains (see Figure 7) increased from about 26,000 in 1970 to nearly 622,000 in 2008 (U.S. Bureau of the Census 2008). The presence of this population

Data souroe: V.5. Census 2000

in the region dates to the 1870s, with Chinese migrants arriving first as laborers for railroad expansion. Chinese migrants were followed by Japanese migrants when the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act cut off the flow of Chinese laborers

Figure 7 Asian population distribution, 1970-2008.

<!-- image -->

(Yeung and Hu-DeHart 2004). In the late twentieth century, the IRCA resulted in growth and diversification of the Asian population to include Filipinos, Koreans, Chinese, Indians, and Pakistanis, as well as refugees from South- east Asia (including Vietnamese, Cambodian, Hmong, and Laotian populations).

Figure 7 depicts the incremental change in the Asian population, beginning with a large concentration around the Denver, Colorado,

Figure 8 Native American population distribution, 1970-2008.

<!-- image -->

area in 1970. Unlike the south-to-north dispersion of the Latino population, the Asian population grew in pockets throughout the region. Although there are clear areas of concentration around many rural communities, this group also settles in or near urban centers. The less systematic evolution of Asian settlement patterns is likely related to the attraction of different industries as well as varying levels of human capital of the subgroups within the

Deta sourse: V.5. Census 2000

Figure 9 White population distribution, 1970-2008.

<!-- image -->

Asian population (Ravuri 2003; Yeung and HuDeHart 2004). Asian immigrants to the Great Plains, excluding the Vietnamese, are attracted to cities with large public universities and high average incomes, whereas Vietnamese are more similar to Latino populations, tending to settle in lower income cities and rural meat processing towns (Ravuri 2003).

Figure 10 Diversity index, 1990.

<!-- image -->

## The Native American Population

The Native American population increased to 447,748 by 2008 (U.S. Bureau of the Census 2008). The largest populations are found in Oklahoma and on or near reservations in the northern plains (see Figure 8). Although settlement patterns expanded outside reservation areas since 1970, it is notable that in the northern subregion, most of this growth occurred in counties adjacent to reservation lands, whereas in the southern subregion, population growth increased in some rural counties distant from reservation lands. Although a portion of this increase is attributable to increasing rates of self-identification and changes in census enumeration procedures (Gonzales 2003), it is unclear what role migration might also play in this redistribution.

## The White Population

Finally, maps of the white population dramatically illustrate ethnic change in the Great Plains (see Figure 9). In 1970, minority populations are visible in the southern subregion and in the reservation lands, but the remaining areas are nearly 100 percent white. By 2008, it is clear that the primarily white ethnic structure of some parts of the region has changed, with many areas in the southern subregion comprised of populations that are less than 50 percent white and with noticeably fewer counties

Figure 11 Diversity index, 2000.

<!-- image -->

in the overall region where the population is more than 50 percent white. The southern and central subregions are experiencing the greatest change, whereas some of the most remote counties in Kansas, Nebraska, North Dakota, and Montana remain the least diverse.

These maps help us visualize the substantive change in size and spatial distribution of minority populations in the Great Plains. Maps, however, are limited by the manner in which data are classified. To assess ethnic restructuring in the region more fully, the following section utilizes the Hoover and Simpson indexes to measure changes in the distribution of each group and diversity within each county.

## Regional Population Concentration

The Hoover Index provides a measure of population concentration for the entire region.

Table 2 shows that population is increasingly concentrated in fewer places in the Great Plains. Several scholars have documented the growing concentration of population in the region's metro areas (see, e.g., Archer and Lonsdale 2003; Johnson and Rathge 2006). For this analysis we excluded urban areas to assess changing settlement patterns in the rural Great Plains more cleanly.

Table 2 Hoover Index values for nonmetro areas only

| Population group   | 1970   | 1990   | 2000   | 2008   |
|--------------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| White              | 37 . 5 | 40 . 1 | 41 . 9 | 47 . 0 |
| Black              | 70 . 5 | 70 . 6 | 67 . 5 | 69 . 3 |
| Asian              | 60 . 3 | 65 . 2 | 61 . 2 | 65 . 9 |
| Latino             | N/A    | 62 . 0 | 60 . 6 | 64 . 0 |
| Total              | 37 . 4 | 40 . 1 | 41 . 4 | 46 . 5 |

Figure 12 Diversity index, 2008.

<!-- image -->

Hoover Index values reflect a pattern of concentration-dispersal-concentration. Between 1970 and 1990, the concentration of all groups and the population overall increased, reflecting the long-term rural-to-urban migration trends and growth of the urban nodes previously discussed. Increased concentration indicates that within the nonmetro counties, there are particular places in which growth is occurring more rapidly and substantively than in others. Then, between 1990 and 2000, there was a brief reversal of this trend, with black, Asian, and Latino populations becoming more dispersed among nonmetro counties, suggesting that the overall trends of out-migration from rural areas might have been offset by the in-migration of minority groups. This also indicates greater ethnic diversity in a greater number of places-not just in growth nodes. Between 2000 and 2008, however, the trend toward concentration resumed, suggesting that the 1990 to 2000 dispersion might have been a brief departure from long-standing trends. This volatility at the regional scale is consistent with findings from Long and Nucci (1997) and Otterstrom and Shumway (2003), who found that a long-term trend toward concentration might be interrupted by short-term periods of deconcentration and that this volatility is reflected in the Hoover Index when it is applied to different spatial scales. Although the direct causes of increasing concentration between 2000 and 2008 are unclear, it is likely that economic expansion and prosperity in the 1990s benefited employment and population growth in nonmetro areas, whereas the economic crises

Figure 13 Diversity index change, 1990-2000.

<!-- image -->

of the 2000s resulted in employment contraction, particularly in rural communities, leading to a corresponding reduction of population dispersal.

## Within-County Diversity

The Simpson Index provides a measure of population diversity for each county (see Figures 10-12). Holding the index categories constant, the spatial extent of increasing diversity has clearly expanded over the nearly forty-year period. Whereas the southern Great Plains has historically been quite diverse, and pockets of diversity exist in the northern Great Plains around reservation lands, the central Great Plains has consistently been more homogenous.

Importantly, these maps depict increasing diversity in places with the greatest population loss. New residents are moving into rural Great Plains counties, offsetting overall population loss and increasing local ethnic diversity. Of the 306 counties in the Great Plains that lost population between 1990 and 2000 (the last full decade), the Simpson Index values for 292 (95.4 percent) of them increased, providing evidence that despite overall population loss, ethnic minority populations are expanding, either through natural increase or in-migration. Further, despite a slight overall renewal of concentration between 2000 and 2008, as illustrated by the Hoover Index results, the number of counties experiencing increased diversity continues to grow. Between 1990 and 2000 (and 2000 and 2008), Simpson Index values increased in 95.6 percent (95.8 percent) of counties (see Figures 13 and 14). The

Figure 14 Diversity index change, 2000-2008.

<!-- image -->

twenty-five counties that declined in diversity during the 1990s (twenty-four between 2000 and 2008) are randomly distributed across the study area and only a few (three counties in Texas) that decreased in diversity in the first period experienced further declines in diversity in the second period (see Figures 13 and 14).

We use Sheridan County as an example of a county experiencing population decline while simultaneously witnessing an increase in ethnic diversity. Located in northwestern Nebraska, Sheridan County had a 2000 population of 5,461. Between 1970 and 2000, the total population declined by 14.9 percent. Although the white population declined by 22 percent, the minority population increased by 87 percent, reducing overall population loss and increas- ing ethnic diversity. This is significant because although counties such as Sheridan County have low or no population growth, ethnic diversity is still increasing. Unlike counties that have had significant population growth with corresponding changes in ethnic diversity because of the opening of a manufacturing plant, for example, ethnic restructuring in Sheridan County occurred slowly from 1970 to 2000 through natural decrease and out-migration of the white population and natural increase and slow in-migration of other minority groups. Although the numbers are small, the Latino, Native American, and black populations all almost doubled in size between 1970 and 2000, whereas the white population in 2000 was only 78 percent of its 1970 size.

|                         | College towns   | Interstate agriculture   | Manufacturing destinations   | Agriculture   |
|-------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------|------------------------------|---------------|
| No. of counties         | 64              | 224                      | 57                           | 216           |
| %agriculture            | 4 . 9           | 16 . 1                   | 11 . 5                       | 22 . 7        |
| %construction           | 6 . 3           | 7 . 0                    | 6 . 0                        | 6 . 5         |
| %manufacturing          | 10 . 7          | 8 . 4                    | 16 . 4                       | 5.4           |
| %Wholesale-retail trade | 15 . 5          | 13 . 4                   | 13 . 1                       | 12 . 7        |
| %service                | 62 . 4          | 54 . 8                   | 52 . 6                       | 52 . 8        |
| %Asian                  | 1 . 0           | 0 . 26                   | 0 . 5                        | 0 . 2         |
| %Latino                 | 10 . 0          | 11 . 4                   | 6 . 9                        | 8 . 8         |
| Reservation (0:1)       | 59:5            | 224:0                    | 35:22                        | 216:0         |
| College (0:1)           | 6:58            | 224:0                    | 57:0                         | 216:0         |
| Interstate (0:1)        | 17:47           | 0:224                    | 47:10                        | 216:0         |

Differentiating Counties by Changes in Ethnic Composition Using Cluster Analysis

Finally, cluster analysis results provide more insight into the types of communities that are attracting different minority groups. In choosing these variables, we were interested in whether counties with similar economies, locations, and other amenities (such as colleges) were attractive to different minority groups, particularly the newest and most mobile Asian and

## ClusterAnalysisResults

Figure 15 Cluster analysis results.

<!-- image -->

Latino populations. Four clusters emerged: college towns, interstate and agriculture, manufacturing destinations, and agriculture (see Table 3).

Counties in the college towns cluster are characterized by a low proportion of employment in agriculture and higher levels of employment in service and retail jobs. Few of these counties have reservations. The two most important characteristics of these counties are the presence of universities and proportionally high Asian populations, reflecting the importance of universities in attracting Asian migrants.

Interstate agriculture counties are located in close proximity to the interstates, allowing greater accessibility to urban and rural areas (see Figure 15). In these counties, agriculture is an important component of the local economy,andtheyattract Latino migrants but fewer Asian migrants. These counties have no reservations or colleges.

Agriculture counties are the most remote counties in the region and are found primarily in the central plains. These counties appear to be much less desirable destinations for Asians and Latinos.

Counties in the last cluster, manufacturing destinations, do not have colleges, but ten are close to interstates and twenty-two contain reservations. These counties are attractive to Asian migrants and have a large manufacturing employment base. Finney, Ford, and Seward counties in western Kansas are good examples of this type of county, as exemplified by Broadway and Stull's (2006) examination of Garden City, Kansas.

## Summary and Conclusions

In this article, we demonstrate that the Great Plains has undergone marked ethnic restructuring since 1970. First, the three processes of globalization, immigration policy change, and regional economic restructuring have created conditions conducive to the migration of non-white, sometimes immigrant, populations to rural places that previously had few ethnic minorities, such as the Great Plains. At the regional level, Hoover Index analysis indicates a rural population that has become increasingly geographically concentrated, while, at a finer scale, a wide range of rural counties, not just growth nodes, increased in ethnic diversity, as illustrated by the Simpson Index analysis. Cluster analysis further revealed that the location and economic characteristics of rural counties have contributed to varying levels of diversity, especially the proportions of Latinos and Asians: Counties with large manufacturing operations appeal to Asians, heavily agricultural counties close to interstate highways attract more Latinos but fewer Asians, counties with a college or university and little agricultural activity are highly attractive to Asians and Latinos, and counties that are the most reliant on agriculture and are in the most remote locations are less attractive to both groups.

In the Great Plains, the in-migration of new populations holds hope for changing the trajectory of depopulation. Numerous case studies (see previous discussion) and this analysis reveal that many new residents are ethnic minorities of working age moving for employment opportunities. One outcome is that in 2007, 'the Great Plains had a younger overall age structure than the United States as a whole' (Wilson 2009, 16). The influx of new, working-age residents and their potential future offspring could lessen, if not potentially halt, negative population trends in some places in the Great Plains. Natural increase plus in-migration could mean growth for this region and a resulting increase in potential business owners, employees, young families, and voters.

When viewed at the regional scale, the process of ethnic restructuring in the rural Great Plains warrants continued observation. Release of the 2010 Census will help clarify whether the trend toward increasing ethnic diversity has continued or whether the recent economic crisis has interfered. As demonstrated by the cluster analysis, not all communities will be affected by ethnic restructuring, especially the most remote and agriculturally dependent counties. But as the choropleth maps depict, the vast majority of communities have already begun to experience a shift in the ethnic composition of their population. Many questions remain unanswered: Will these trends continue? Which counties will be the biggest winners with population and economic gain, and which will lose? Are remote, dominantly agricultural counties destined to continue losing population? Finally, what will the Great Plains look like demographically in twenty, thirty, or fifty years? /squaresolid

- Adamchak, D. J., L. E. Bloomquist, K. Bausman, and R. Qureshi. 1999. Consequences of population change for retail/wholesale sector employment in the nonmetropolitan Great Plains: 1950-1996. Rural Sociology 64 (1): 92-112.
- ArcGIS. 2010. ArcMap, Version 10.0. Redlands, CA: ESRI.
- Archer, J. C., and R. E. Lonsdale. 2003. Geography of population change and redistribution within the post-frontier Great Plains. Great Plains Research 13 (Spring): 43-61.
- Barcus, H. R. 2006. New destinations for Latino migrants: An analysis of rural Kentucky. In Latinos in the New South: Transformations of place , ed. H. A. Smith and O. J. Furuseth, 89-109. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
- ---.2007. The emergence of New Latino settlement patterns in Appalachia. The Professional Geographer 59 (3): 298-315.
- Broadway, M., and D. D. Stull. 2006. Meat processing and Garden City, KS: Boom and bust. Journal of Rural Studies 22 (1): 55-66.
- Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). 2002. Regional Economic Information System (REIS) . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
- Carlo, G., M. A. Carranza, and B. Zamboanga. 2002. Culture and ecology of Latinos on the Great Plains: An introduction. Great Plains Research 12:3-12.
- Castles, S., and M. J. Miller. 2009. The age of migration: International population movements in the modern world. 4th ed. New York: Guilford.
- Dalla, R. L., F. Villarruel, S. C. Cramer, and G. Gonzalez-Kruger. 2004. Examining strengths and challenges of rapid rural immigration. Great Plains Research 14 (Fall): 231-51.
- Davis, R. P. 2001. Latinos along the Platte: The Hispanic experience in central Nebraska. Great Plains Research 12 (Spring): 27-50.
- Durand, J., D. S. Massey, and F. Charvet. 2000. The changing geography of Mexican immigration to the United States: 1910-1996. Social Science Quarterly 81 (1): 1-15.
- Durand, J., D. S. Massey, and E. A. Parrado. 1999. The new era of Mexican migration to the United States. The Journal of American History 86 (2): 518-36.
- Frey, W. H., and K.-L. Liaw. 1999. Internal migration of foreign-born Latinos and Asians: Are they assimilating geographically? In Migration and restructuring in the United States: A geographic perspective , ed. K. Pandit and S. D. Withers, 212-30. New York: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers.
- Gaber, J., S. Gaber, J. Vincent, and D. Boellstorff. 2004. An analysis of refugee resettlement pat-
- terns in the Great Plains. Great Plains Research 14:165-83.
- Glasgow, N., and D. L. Brown. 2006. Social integration among older in-migrants in nonmetropolitan retirement destination counties: Establishing new ties. In Population change and rural society , ed. W. A. Kandel and D. L. Brown, 177-96. Amsterdam: Springer.
- Gober, P. 1999. Settlement dynamics and internal migration of the U.S. foreign-born population. In Migration and restructuring in the United States: A geographic perspective , ed. K. Pandit and S. D. Withers, 231-49. New York: Rowman and Littlefield.
- Gonzales, A. A. 2003. American Indians: Their contemporary reality and future trajectory. In Challenges for rural America in the twenty-first century , ed. D. L. Brown and L. E. Swanson, 43-56. State College: The Pennsylvania State University Press.
- Hansen, D. 2003. Bosnian refugees' adjustments to resettlement in Grand Forks, North Dakota. Great Plains Research 13:271-90.
- Hart, J. F. 2003. Small towns, railroads, and ethnicity. Historical Geography 31:55-62.
- Hudson, J. 2003. The big empty. Historical Geography 31:63-69.
- Hytrek, G., and K. M. Zentgraf. 2008. America transformed: Globalization, inequality, and power . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Jefferys, K., and R. Monger. 2008. Annual flow report: U.S. legal permanent residents: 2007 . Washington, DC: Department of Homeland Security, Office of Immigration Statistics.
- Johnson, K. M., and R. W. Rathge. 2006. Agricultural dependence and changing population in the Great Plains. In Population change and rural society , ed. W. A. Kandel and D. L. Brown, 197-217. Amsterdam: Springer.
- Kandel, W., and J. Cromartie. 2004. New patterns of Hispanic settlement in rural America. Rural DevelopmentResearch Report No. 99, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC.
- Kandel, W., and E. Parrado. 2006. Rural Hispanic population growth: Public policy impacts in nonmetro counties. In Population change and rural society , ed. W. A. Kandel and D. L. Brown, 155-75. Amsterdam: Springer.
- Kirschner, A. E., H. Berry, and N. Glasgow. 2006. The changing faces of rural America. In Population change and rural society , ed. W. A. Kandel and D. L. Brown, 53-74. Amsterdam: Springer.
- Long, L., and A. Nucci. 1997. The Hoover Index of population concentration: A correction and update. The Professional Geographer 49 (4): 431-40.
- Massey, D. S. 1995. The new immigration and ethnicity in the United States. Population and Development Review 21 (3): 631-52.
- McGranahan, D. A. 1998. Can manufacturing reverse rural Great Plains depopulation? Rural Development Perspectives 13 (1): 35-45.

- Millard, A. V., and J. Chapa. 2004. Apple pie and enchiladas: Latino newcomers in the rural Midwest . Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Muller, D. K., C. M. Hall, and D. Keen. 2004. Second home tourism impact, planning and management. In Tourism, mobility and second homes: Between elite landscape and common ground , ed. C. M. Hall and D. K. Muller, 15-32. New York: Channel View.
- Newbold, K. B. 1999. Evolutionary immigrant settlement patterns: Concepts and evidence. In Migration and restructuring in the United States: A geographic perspective , ed. K. Pandit and S. D. Withers, 250-72. New York: Rowman and Littlefield.
- Otterstrom, S. M., and J. M. Shumway. 2003. Deserts and oases: The continuing concentration of population in the American Mountain West. Journal of Rural Studies 19:445-62.
- Pandit, K., and S. D. Withers. 1999. Introduction: Geographic perspectives on migration and restructuring. In Migration and restructuring in the United States: A geographic perspective , ed. K. Pandit and S. D. Withers, 1-12. New York: Rowman and Littlefield.
- Plane, D. A., and P. A. Rogerson. 1994. Thegeographical analysis of population: With applications to planning and business . New York: Wiley.
- Rathge, R., and P. Highman 1998. Population change in the Great Plains: A history of prolonged decline. Rural Development Perspectives 13 (1): 19-26.
- Ravuri, E. 2003. Changes in Asian and Hispanic population in the cities of the Great Plains, 1990-2000. Great Plains Research 13 (Spring): 75-96.
- Rogerson, P. A. 2001. Statistical methods for geography . London: Sage.
- Smith, H. A., and O. J. Furuseth, eds. 2006. Making real the mythical Latino community in Charlotte, North Carolina. In Latinos in the New South: Transformations of place , 191-216. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
- SPSS. 2008. SPSS statistics, Version 17.0. Nikiski, AK: Polar Engineering and Consulting.
- Stull, D. D., and M. J. Broadway. 2008. Meatpacking and Mexicans on the High Plains: From minority to majority in Garden City, Kansas. In Immigrants outside megalopolis: Ethnic transformation in the heartland , ed. R. C. Jones, 115-33. Baltimore, MD: Lexington Books.
- U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1970. Census of population and housing . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
- ---.1980. Census of population and housing . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
- ---.1990. Census of population and housing . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
- ---. 1995. Population of counties by decennial census: 1900 to 1990, ed. R. L. Forstall. Washington, DC: Population Division, U.S.
- Bureau the of Census. http://www.census.gov/ population/www/censusdata/cencounts/files/0090doc.txt (last accessed 9 March 2011).
- ---.2000a. 2000AmericanIndian areas/Alaska Native areas/Hawaiian homelands: Cartographic boundary files . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
- ---. 2000b. Census of population and housing . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce. ---. 2008. Population estimates and projections program . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
- U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2002. Census of agriculture 2002. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture. http://www.agcensus. usda.gov/ (last accessed August 2009).
- Vernez, G., and D. Ronfeldt. 1991. The current situation in Mexican immigration. Science 251 (4998): 1189-93.
- Wahl, A.-M. G., R. S. Breckenridge, and S. E. Gunkel. 2007. Latinos, residential segregation and spatial assimilation in micropolitan areas: Exploring the American dilemma on a new frontier. Social Science Research 36:995-1020.
- Willis, M., and C. Fernald. 2004. A view of Sudanese refugee resettlement through Nebraska's print media. Great Plains Research 14:271-92.
- Wilson, S. G. 2009. Population dynamics of the Great Plains: 1950-2007. Population estimates and projections . Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the Census. http://www.census.gov/prod/2009pbus/p251137.pdf (last accessed 11 March 2011).
- Xie, X., Y. Xia, and Z. Zhou. 2004. Strengths and challenges in Chinese immigrant families. Great Plains Research 14:203-18.
- Yeung, M., and E. Hu-DeHart. 2004. Asian Americans. In Encyclopedia of the Great Plains , ed. D. J. Wishart, 133-48. Lincoln, NE: Center for Great Plains Studies.

HOLLY R. BARCUS is an Associate Professor in the Geography Department at Macalester College, 1600 Grand Avenue, Saint Paul, MN 55105. E-mail: barcus@macalester.edu. Her research interests including migration and population change in rural communities of the United States and transnational migration and issues of identity among ethnic minorities in Mongolia.

LAURA SIMMONS is a Social Research Specialist at the UNC Charlotte Urban Institute, 9201 University City Blvd., Charlotte, NC 28223. E-mail: lsimmo19@uncc.edu. Her research interests include migration and immigrant settlement and incorporation in urban, suburban, and rural communities in the United States.