## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Rural Rentierism and the Financial Enclosure of Maine's Open Lands Tradition

Kelly Kay

To cite this article: Kelly Kay (2017): Rural Rentierism and the Financial Enclosure of Maine's Open Lands Tradition, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2017.1328305

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2017.1328305

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 29 Jun 2017.

- [x] Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 49

View related articles

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Rural Rentierism and the Financial Enclosure of Maine's Open Lands Tradition

Kelly Kay

Department of Geography, University of California, Los Angeles

This article looks at the changing nature of property access regimes in northeastern Maine. The state's unique 'open lands' tradition has come under threat as a result of the large-scale restructuring of the timber industry from vertically integrated forest products companies toward individual and institutional investor-owners. Using a large conservation project in the town of Grand Lake Stream as a case study, I argue that new investor-owners have been able to generate profits by enclosing long-standing common access regimes and commanding monopoly rent payments. After reviewing literatures on rent, enclosure, and the commodification of nature, I examine two prominent examples of this process of rent extraction through the enclosure of common access regimes: lease lots and working forest conservation easements. The article concludes arguing for regulatory intervention, as well as the need for more concrete case studies on the impacts of financial investment on the biophysical environment. Key Words: financialization of nature, Maine, rent, TIMO, vertical disintegration.

本 文 检 视 缅 因 州 东 北 部 正 在 改 变 中 的 产 权 取 得 体 制 。 木材 产业从 林 产 品 公 司 的 垂 直 整 合 转 为个人与 机构 投 资 者 -所 有 者 的 大 规 模 再 结 构 过 程 , 导 致 该 州 独特 的 ' 开 放 土地 ' 传 统 受 到 了 威 胁 。 我 运 用 格 兰 德 湖 河 畔 村 镇 中 的 一个 大 型 保 育 计 画 作 为 案 例 研 究 , 主 张 新 的 投 资 者 -所 有 者 , 能 够 透 过 对 长 期 存 在 的 公共 取 得 体 制 进 行 圈地 , 并 控 制 垄 断 地 租 的 给 付 , 从 而 生 产 利 润 。 回 顾 有 关 地 租 、 圈地 和 自 然 的 商 品 化 的相 关 文 献 后 , 我 将 检 视 此 般 透 过 对 公共 取 得 体 制 进 行 圈地 的 地 租 榨 取 过 程 的 两 大 重 要 案 例 。 本 文 于 结 论 中主 张 应 有 规 范 性 的 介 入 , 并 且 必 须 对 于 生 态 环 境 的 金 融 投 资 之 影 响 进 行 更 为 具 体 的 案 例 研 究 。 关 键 词 ： 自 然 的 金 融 化 , 缅 因 州 , 地 租 , 木材 产业 投 资 管 理 组织 (TIMO), 垂 直 分 解 。

Este art  ıculo examina la naturaleza cambiante de los reg  ımenes de acceso a la propiedad en el nordeste de Maine. La singular tradici  on de 'tierras abiertas' del estado est  a siendo amenazada como resultado de la reestructuraci  on a gran escala de la industria de maderera para pasar de las compa ~ n  ıas de productos forestales integradas verticalmente a una econom  ıa de inversionistas-propietarios individuales e institucionales. Usando como estudio de caso un gran proyecto de conservaci  on en el pueblo de Grand Lake Stream, arguyo que los nuevos inversionistas-propietarios han sido capaces de generar ganancias cercando reg  ımenes de acceso com  un de vieja data, y asumiendo el monopolio de los pagos de renta. Despu  es de revisar las literaturas sobre renta, encerramiento y la comodificaci  on de la naturaleza, examino dos prominentes ejemplos de este proceso de extracci  on de la renta por medio del encierro de reg  ımenes de acceso com  un: lotes para arriendo y usufructo de los trabajos de conservaci  on forestal. El art  ıculo concluye abogando por la intervenci  on reguladora, lo mismo que destacando la necesidad de emprender estudios de caso m  as concretos sobre los impactos de las inversiones financieras sobre el entorno biof  ısico. Palabras clave: financializaci  on de la naturaleza, Maine, renta, TIMO, desintegraci  on vertical.

U nless you are an avid angler, you are unlikely to be familiar with Grand Lake Stream, a town of fewer than 100 full-time residents in northeastern Maine. Nestled deep in the woods and surrounded by lakes, this tiny town in the heart of Washington County has always been dependent on its natural resource base. During the late nineteenth century, as a result of its abundant hemlock forests, the township was home to the largest tannery in the world.

After the tannery closed, Grand Lake Stream and its neighboring forests came to play a central role in Maine's vertically integrated timber extraction and processing economy (Atkinson 1920). Although timber extraction has continued, for most local residents the legacy of their small town is its long and enduring history as a destination for camping, fishing, and hunting. The walls of the town museum are plastered with photos of the area's most beloved sporting guides, and

exhibits display the handmade canoes, rods, and flyfishing lures that belonged to these local legends. As home to one of the only remaining landlocked salmon fisheries, Grand Lake Stream has attracted anglers from around the world. The area's nine sporting camps and the largest concentration of registered guides in the state have played host to a range of regular visitors for the last two centuries-ranging from legendary baseball player Ted Williams to the attendees of the elusive Camp Kotok, a secretive retreat for financiers and economists that has been compared to Davos (Jakab 2014; personal communication, 8 July 2015). The pulp and paper mill in Woodland, about thirty miles away, is the largest employer in the county, with around 300 employees (personal communication, 17 July 2015). Yet, recreational tourism is the primary economic activity within Grand Lake Stream and nearly all of the town's businesses are reliant on it in one form or another. One informant, a guide himself, estimated that there are between thirty-five and forty registered outdoors guides operating in Grand Lake Stream and the immediate surrounding rural townships (personal communication, 22 July 2015).

As a researcher, I became interested in the area after reading that a small local land trust had successfully enrolled nearly 20,000 acres with the Climate Action Reserve, generating 200,000 compliance-eligible carbon offsets to sell on the state of California's carbon market (Finite Carbon 2012). The land trust, in addition to generating these carbon credits, had raised more than $60 million to protect its access to the unorganized lands surrounding its township through the creation of a community forest (personal communication, 21 July 2015). In trying to determine how it was that a small community group was able to accomplish so much, it became clear that it was not possible to understand this specific conservation project outside of the broader context of forest ownership change and timberland transformation across their region, the state of Maine, and the United States more generally.

This article explores the changing legal and economic landscape of northern Maine to better understand the impetus for conservation projects like the one in Grand Lake Stream. In particular, I consider the changing nature of ownership and common access regimes, spurred on by the restructuring of the timber industry and the incursion of financial investment into rural communities. Drawing from a case study of the Farm Cove Community Forest project in Grand Lake Stream, I argue that financial investors in Washington County have generated profit primarily by enclosing common access regimes (Ribot and Peluso 2003). These common access regimes are a legacy of Maine's unique history and legal geographies, and are rapidly being eroded through land purchases by financial investors (Acheson 2006). Through the strategic enclosure of these common access regimes, financial actors are able to demand monopoly rents (Marx 1981). These payments are being made by nonprofit conservation organizations, the taxpayers of the state of Maine, and the Forest Legacy Program of the U.S. Forest Service to protect social and environmental goods, including access to the necessary means of production for a range of user groups that include guides and camp owners.

This study draws on data collected during two months of fieldwork, including nineteen semistructured interviews (each ranging from one to two hours in length) with relevant actors, including land trust staff and volunteers, sporting camp owners, timber economists, foresters, longtime residents of the area, and representatives from the neighboring Passamaquoddy Tribe; parcel ownership data from the James W. Sewall Company; news articles from the local press (i.e., Bangor Daily News , Portland Press Herald ); and archival resources and historical maps from the Maine State Archives, Princeton Public Library, and the Woodland Pulp Mill. The names of all informants have been removed and all identifying information has been omitted from interview quotes to respect informant confidentiality.

The article begins by reviewing the literature on the commodification of nature, rent, and enclosure. I then detail the state of Maine's unique legal and customary landscape, which has historically allowed the public to use privately held land. I then detail shifts in Maine's forest ownership and management, from vertically integrated forest products companies (VIFPCs) to financial actors like timber investment management organizations (TIMOs) and timber real estate investment trusts (REITs). I then describe the historical evolution of forest ownership in Grand Lake Stream and surrounding Washington County since the large-scale sale of land by the VIFPC Georgia-Pacific and the related history of the community forest project. The next two sections detail two major avenues through which rents are being commanded by new investorowners: working forest conservation easements (WFCEs) and lease lots. The article concludes by contextualizing the case within the broader U.S. context and geographical literature and by raising the possible need for federal regulatory intervention.

## Literature Review: Rent, Enclosure, Nature

Within geography, there is a voluminous body of work on the commodification of nature (McCarthy and Prudham 2004; Bakker 2005; Heynen et al. 2007), which looks at the growing use of markets as a means of managing environmental problems and allocating environmental 'goods' and 'bads.' In general, critiques of this research center on the fact that too broad a range of phenomena are described singularly and that commodification should be understood as a number of distinct processes, including privatization, individuation, and abstraction (Castree 2003). Following from this critique, I argue that it is important to isolate rent extraction in analyses because, although it might play a role in producing nature as commodity, rent extraction is a separate, dynamic process that has its own distinctive aims and outcomes. To emphasize the importance of highlighting rent seeking in environmental markets, I draw on recent work by Felli. Felli (2014) argued that carbon trading and the creation of other ecosystem service markets-processes that are frequently used as key examples of the ongoing commodification of nature (Bumpus and Liverman 2008; Lohmann 2012)-are not actually producing new commodities. Examining how the value relation operates with respect to global carbon trading shows that it functions, first, by assigning private property rights to emit and, second, by the sale of those rights or, as he put it, drawing from Marx, the sale of access to the 'necessary conditions of production' (Felli 2014, 269). He continued:

The extraction of rent thus amounted to a redistribution of the surplus value extracted in the production process, to a landed class which derived its economic power merely from the ability to maintain this barrier. Indeed, the ownership of the access to a condition of production allows its owner to 'obstruct' the process of accumulation and derive an income from it. (269)

This process of obstruction is critical, both for how emissions trading functions and for how accumulation occurs for investor-owners in Grand Lake Stream. Understanding profit making in these cases not as a process of generating new commodities but instead as one of creating barriers and collecting rents reorients how one might think about resistance (Felli 2014).

For Marx (1981), landed property presupposes that 'certain persons enjoy the monopoly of disposing of particular portions of the globe as exclusive spheres of their private will to the exclusion of all others' (752). Once landed property owners have created excludable property, they can demand payments of rent for access; 'the landowner can exact a tribute-appropriate a portion of the surplus value-in return for the use of the land as a condition or means of production' (Harvey 2006, 73). Marx's theory of rent was developed as a critique of Ricardo and consists of two major categories of rent: absolute and differential (Bryan 1990). Differential rents explain how differences in profit from similar parcels of land can be seen to result from variations in land fertility (differential rent I) or capital investment (differential rent II). Absolute rent is the base rent that a landowner can command for restricting access or supply. Monopoly rent, a form of absolute rent, 'arises because social actors can realize an enhanced income stream over an extended time by virtue of their exclusive control over some directly or indirectly tradable item which is in some crucial respects unique and non-replicable' (Harvey 2009, 94).

As I argue in the following sections of this article, the enclosure and privatization of common access regimes by new investor-owners and the subsequent sale of conservation easements, lease lots, and carbon offset credits as a means of regaining that access is at its core a process of extracting monopoly rent payments for permission to access the nonreplicable 'necessary conditions of production' for the various groups whose livelihoods are dependent on long-standing common access regimes. Also relevant to this case is the literature on land grabbing, which considers large-scale land acquisitions by governments and investors, generally in the Global South, and related displacements of communities and transformations in agrarian livelihoods and property norms (e.g., White et al. 2012). Many scholars in this field draw on Marx's work on primitive accumulation or its more recent incarnation, 'accumulation by dispossession' (Harvey 2003). In Capital Vol. 1 , Marx (1992) defined primitive accumulation as the 'historical process of divorcing the producer from the means of production' (874). This process serves as a necessary precondition for creating an industrial labor force that is able to sell its labor power on the market. In The New Imperialism , Harvey (2003) argued, as others have (De Angelis 2001; Glassman 2006), that so-called primitive or original accumulation, as described by Marx, is not only an ongoing process but a fundamental component of capitalist accumulation. Glassman (2006) raised the potentially problematic nature of applying Marx's

concept to the Global North, noting that the enclosure of the commons, as Marx theorized it, was intended as a precursor to proletarianization. Although the case in Grand Lake Stream indisputably involves the enclosure of common access regimes, these enclosures are taking place in a context of deindustrializing late capitalism (Mandel 1999). The enclosures in question do not seek to generate any new subjects or induce new forms of laboring. Unlike Marx's example of the enclosure of the English commons, the workers in question are already proletarianized peoples who are actively seeking industrial labor opportunities amidst the large-scale closure of mills and other major industrial firms, and the land in question is passing from multinational forest products companies to financial investors. Marx's theory of rent, in contrast, is formulated to describe a scenario where land ownership is private and production takes place in fully capitalist contexts (Ball 1977). It is for these reasons, in addition to the fact that the financial landowners in question are not creating any new economic value (see Gunnoe 2014; Kay 2017), that although I argue that this case involves active processes of enclosure, I do not seek to explain this case primarily as one of primitive accumulation.

With the growing power of financial actors and intermediaries and the ongoing creation of new forms of property, there has been a resurgence of interest in land rent in geography, particularly within urban geography (e.g., Haila 2015; Ward and Aalbers 2016). Authors working on land, water, and green grabbing are also increasingly starting to address rent directly (e.g., Campling and Havice 2014), but this work tends to be focused on enclosures and land acquisitions in the Global South, missing some of the particularities that Western law and property norms play in shaping these processes and their outcomes. By studying rent extraction in rural landscapes in the Global North, this work begins to bridge these two lines of inquiry.

Arguments about emerging rentierism in industrial commodity landscapes in the Global North are not entirely novel. Recent work has looked at the role that financial investment has played in agricultural lands and markets (Fairbairn 2014), and others have undertaken macroscale analyses of the role that TIMOs, REITs, and other financial players have taken in altering profit making in the U.S. timber market (Gunnoe and Gellert 2011; Gunnoe 2014). Sayre (2011), in a commentary on amenity migration, noted that it is critical to consider rent when theorizing rural change, as the increasing scale, rate, and magnitude of global capital accumulation and circulation have widened rent gaps in ways that facilitate investment. Darling's (2005) study of rural gentrification in the Adirondacks looks at the formation of rent gaps in rural real estate in a similar regional context as this study. Correia (2009) also looked at rentierism in Maine's timber industry but with a focus on sustainable forestry certification schemes. McCarthy (2004), although he did not actually use the term rent at any point, argued in a similar vein as this article that freetrade agreements like the North American Free Trade Agreement draw on law to enclose the necessary conditions of production.

## Private Ownership and the Open Lands Tradition

Private land ownership has historically been the norm in Maine: 90 percent of all land and 94 percent of forested land in the state is privately owned (Hagan, Irland, and Whitman 2005; Maine Tree Foundation 2015). The coexistence of a robust outdoors tradition and a strong culture of private ownership has been made possible by long-standing common access regimes, some of which were normalized by the long history of the vertically integrated forest products industry, whereas others are codified by state law. My use of the term access draws on the work of Ribot and Peluso (2003), who defined the term, in contrast to ownership, which is often understood as a bundle of rights, as a bundle of powers, 'embodied in and exercised through various mechanisms, processes, and social relations-that affect people's ability to benefit from resources' (154). These common access regimes have allowed individuals to hunt on private land (Acheson and Acheson 2009), to collect nontimber forest products like wild plants and fungi (Ginger et al. 2012), to ride snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) on logging roads and trails through private land, to camp on industrial timberland, and to recreate along the Golden Road, a ninety-mile privately owned logging road that provides some of the only access to the most remote areas of the state (Lang 2012).

These norms of access are, at least in part, the result of state-specific laws. Acheson (2006) identified several laws that distinguish what he described as Maine's open lands tradition, including the Great Ponds Law and the presence of strong landowner liability laws. The Great Ponds Law was passed in 1820 and guarantees that the public may cross any unimproved land to

gain access to a 'great pond' (Cote 2008). The state of Maine defines a 'great pond' as 'any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of 10 acres and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of 30 acres' (State of Maine 1989, c. 403, x 4 [AMD]). Following this definition, there are 2,600 bodies of water in the state that are held publicly in trust and that citizens are legally allowed to access (University of Maine 2012). The law supports the rights of the public to fish and hunt fowl, cut ice, swim, and boat (Waite 1965), which has created openings for both individual and commercial recreational use. The Great Ponds Law has been revisited by the state legislature several times and was updated in 1973 to include penalties to those who prevent others from gaining access to a 'great pond': 'the Attorney General shall, upon complaint of a person being denied said access or egress, if in his judgment the public interest so requires, prosecute criminally or civilly any person who denies such right of access or egress' (State of Maine 1973, c. 530, x 2 [NEW]).

The second major way that the open lands tradition has been reinforced by the state is through its landowner liability laws. Maine has a doctrine of implied access, meaning that it is assumed that unless a property is posted against trespass, citizens are free to recreate on privately owned land. To facilitate the public use of private land, the state of Maine has implemented strong laws that release a landowner from responsibility if an individual who is 'recreating or harvesting' on his or her land is injured or harmed in some way (Acheson 2006). These laws remove the need to seek prior permission to enter another person's property and also ensure that the landowner does not need to actively upkeep his or her property specifically for public recreation. As the statute says, the landowner 'does not have a duty of care to keep the premises safe for entry or use by others for recreational or harvesting activities or to give warning of any hazardous condition, use, structure or activity on these premises to persons entering for those purposes' (State of Maine 2009, c. 156, x 1 [AMD]). Individuals may freely enter unposted private land and do so at their own risk. Combined with the fact that much of Maine's forested land has historically been owned in very large tracts that almost always contain a 'great pond,' these laws have ensured that private timberland is open for recreation. Finally, although there are many aspects of Maine's open lands tradition that are arguably unique, it is important to keep in mind that there are, of course, other examples of long-standing and relatively functional common access regimes in the Global North. These include community-based fisheries management, nontimber forest products collection in the United States and United Kingdom, and 'gleaning' of fruits and vegetables on farms and urban streets (Emery and Pierce 2005; St. Martin 2006; Nordahl 2014).

For places like Grand Lake Stream, which are deeply dependent on tourism, the existence of common access regimes is essential. Although many people in Maine rely on open access for personal enjoyment, 'the tradition of using other people's property for recreation has enormous economic implications for the state' (Acheson 2006, 21). Tourism is the number one industry in Maine, and one study from the Maine Development Foundation argued that the tourism industry brings $2 billion a year into the state and supports more than 50,000 jobs (Acheson 2006). This legacy of private property ownership overlaid with open access regimes came up very frequently in interviews. The following extended quotation, from a representative of the local land trust, illustrates the fact that the common access regimes, both legal and customary, that comprise the open lands tradition in Maine are the foundation upon which Washington County's tourism economy is constructed:

The guiding, the sporting camps, and the lodges that are basically the lifeblood of the town, depend on free public open access to all of this land [points to map of conserved land in the area]. Which, traditionally, this was allwell, first it was owned by the mills, and then later it was owned by separate paper companies-and there was just sort of a general tradition and unwritten rule that people in Maine had free and public access to that land for recreation. So that's sort of an unusual situation nationwide, but you end up with all of this private land that has public access, that for generations people have benefited from. And you have an entire economy and way of life that's built up around that. So, with the changes in land ownership in the past twenty years or so, which are largely driven by changes in the timber market, the old paper companies started to break up and divest themselves of land and it became investment land, that's owned by TIMOs, or purchased by developers, or purchased by individuals who treat it as 'kingdom' estates, where they put up gates and it becomes kind of their own private reserve.

About fifteen years ago, this big chunk of land over here came up for sale [points to map, to a land parcel along the town boundary]. And the concern was, basically, the

town was very concerned because presumably anyone could buy that land, and they could choose to no longer allow public access as it had been in the past. And they could put up a gate, or they could close the roads and decommission them, and that would cut off all of this land that the guides, and therefore the camps and the stores in town, really depends on. I think it was a turning point in realizing that basically, the way of life that people have enjoyed here in Grand Lake Stream is really dependent on having public access. And, that if that public access goes away, that would be the end of it. (personal communication, 8 July 2015)

## Maine's Timber History

In many ways, Maine's unique legal landscape goes hand-in-hand with its long history as a major producer of timber. Land in northern Maine has historically been held by large landowners, whether they were family-run milling operations or, as became more common in the early 1900s, by large VIFPCs, who used the forests as an input to produce saw logs, pulp, and paper in company or family-owned mills (personal communication, 17 July 2015). VIFPCs saw their land, first and foremost, as an input to production. This meant that these landowners had little reason to post against trespass or to limit recreation on their properties.

Since the 1980s, there has been a slow and steady shift from ownership by VIFPCs to ownership by financial investors and individual large landowners. Since 1998, 40 percent of Maine's north woods (8.9 million acres) have changed hands (Natural Resource Council of Maine 2015). The largest share of Maine's forests (6.2 million acres, or 35 percent) continues to be owned by nonindustrial private owners, including longtime large landowners like the Pingree and Irving families, and neo-land barons like media mogul John Malone (Maine Tree Foundation 2015). What has

Figure 1. Changing composition of Maine's forestland owners, 1994 to 2005. Source : Map from Hagan, Irland, and Whitman (2005). (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

largely changed is the ownership of land that was classified, in the recent past, as industrial timberland (see Figure 1). As Figure 1 shows, industrial ownership (displayed in red) has been largely displaced by various categories of investor ownership (shown in blue and purple). Currently, investors (including banks, university endowments, insurance companies, and mutual and pension funds) own more than 2.6 million acres of Maine's forestland, or approximately 15 percent. Conservation organizations have also had some success purchasing former paper company lands and now hold a collective 251,000 acres in fee simple or approximately 1 percent of Maine's forests (Maine Tree Foundation 2015).

Of particular interest for this study are institutional investors, who commonly manage their lands through TIMOs. The investors put up the funds, and TIMOs act as brokers for their client groups, locating properties, managing the land, and determining the best ways to generate returns. One major difference between TIMOs and the industrial owners that they are coming to replace is that whereas VIFPCs held their land for long time horizons, most TIMOs will only hold timberland for ten to fifteen years before selling it (Binkley 2007). This has generated substantial concern that Maine's northern forest, which has historically consisted of large, single-owner parcels, will become increasingly fragmented (Harper, Falk, and Rankin 1990) as land continues to be sold and resold in short time horizons. Evidence indicates that this is a valid concern. For example, one 2005 study followed a single property, a 2.3 million acre parcel that was sold in 1989 by the Great Northern Paper Company. The study found that, as of 2005, the property lay in the hands of at least fifteen different landowners and that 60 percent of the acreage was now held by TIMOs (Hagan, Irland, and Whitman 2005). Furthermore, changing patterns of ownership and uses of timberland are of general concern to Mainers, where forest products constitute an $8 billion industry that employs 39,000 people (Cousins and Cox 2014).

Why have investors taken such an interest in owning timberland? Forest Investment Associates (FIA), a TIMO, lists on its Web page five major reasons to invest in timberland, which tend to be echoed in similar language across the industry. These include the following:

-  Portfolio diversification. Timber is particularly appealing for diversifying investments because it has low correlation with other major asset classes.
-  Competitive returns. FIA offers 6 to 8 percent inflation-adjusted returns.
-  Inflation protection. As they put it, 'Few assets have the intrinsic and proven long-term ability to preserve capital in the face of rising consumer prices.'
-  Biological growth. Not only are trees a store of value, but trees continue to grow and increase in value during all manner of economic climates.
-  Timber has a 'promising future.' 'A growing U.S. and global population with a rising standard of living will continue to increase demand on a finite supply of timberland' (FIA 2015).

The rise of investor-owners in asset classes like timber (Gunnoe and Gellert 2011) and farmland (Fairbairn 2014) has been a major defining feature of resource landscapes over the past three decades. This was largely spurred on by a confluence of factors related to changing tax policies and the 'financialization' of the U.S. economy (Krippner 2011). For the sake of space, I refrain from going into detail, but for an excellent account of the national-scale political and economic conditions that led to the rise of TIMO ownershipincluding the passage of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), the Volcker Shock, and the Reagan-initiated Tax Reform Act of 1986-see Gunnoe's (2014) work on the financialization of industrial land ownership in the United States.

## Land Sales and the Creation of a Community Forest

In 1999, Georgia-Pacific, a large VIFPC, sold off 446,000 acres of land in Washington County that they had held since the early 1960s (see Figure 2). This land was primarily sold to two major buyers: Wagner Timber Partners, a TIMO that manages land on behalf of a number of individual and institutional investors, including the Yale University endowment, and McDonald Investment Corporation, an investment firm out of Birmingham, Alabama. The total sale price was $55 million, or a relatively inexpensive $125 per acre (Natural Resource Council of Maine 2015). This was part of a broader set of sell-offs in the area: During the late 1990s and early 2000s, a large portion of Washington County's industrial timberland was transferred to various institutional and individual investor-owners. Figure 3 illustrates the increase in investor-ownership in Washington County, which largely mirrors the trends displayed in the statewide map in Figure 1.

Prior to 1999, the majority of the timberland in the area was held by family owners or pulp and paper companies; in 1999, 414,522 acres were under investorownership, and in 2015, the figure increased to

612,955 acres (author calculation using geospatial data from Figure 3)-a 32 percent increase.

In response to the land sales around Grand Lake Stream, a community group was formed, which later

Figure 2. A 1995 map of Georgia-Pacific ownership in Washington County, Maine, and New Brunswick, Canada. Parcels in yellow are owned in fee simple, waterways are shown in pink. Original map scanned by the author with permission. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 3. Investor-ownership in Washington County: 1999 and 2015. Green parcels in the 2015 map are the land trust properties. Source : Data from James W. Sewall Company, maps by the author. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

became a land trust. With the guidance and assistance of a number of state, regional, and national nonprofit conservation organizations, the land trust took on what would become a fourteen-year, $60 million project to protect the land surrounding their community from being gated, clear cut, or developed. This ultimately involved negotiating a number of complex real estate transactions with the new landowners, which included the acquisition of purchase options, the purchase of conservation easements, the sale of carbon credits, and the negotiation of tax credits through Maine's New Markets Capital Investment Program, a community development program related to the federal New Markets Tax Credit program. The primary aim of the trust was to secure access to a sufficiently large land base to allow local guides and camp owners to continue to operate. This aim is echoed in a large sign, at the entrance to the now completed community forest project, which reads 'Donations from you provide access for all.'

The impetus for undertaking such a large project came from a near-ubiquitous community fear that local livelihoods were at risk of extinction. Within the community of sporting camps and outdoors guides, the possibility of new norms of land ownership was very troubling. This was one of the most frequent topics raised during interviews. One informant, a local outdoors guide, described strong feelings of unease within the guiding community during the early 2000s. He recounted that during this period, he would be out 'guiding or getting ready for a guiding outing and I'd go up a dirt road that used to be open and then find a gate or a fence in the way.' He explained that finding that his access was blocked or decreased was always very surprising because 'most of the land sales in the area were very secretive, and most people would usually only find out about them when they read about them on the front page of the Bangor paper' (personal communication, 13 July 2015). Although some properties have been gated or fenced, most commonly, land held by TIMOs or REITs was simply posted against trespass, revoking access to favored hunting areas or limiting the ability to get to waterways for fishing and boating. Another informant, who was involved in the initial creation of the land trust, noted:

The word was that the financial investors had a twelveyear cycle of tax credits, and that they would sell after twelve years, and harvest pretty heavily to get their return. And they did. So, when land started changing hands out here, they started cutting pretty heavily, and that made us really nervous. So it's those two things: lack of access, and cutting really heavily in places that might be important for deer habitat, or riparian zones, all legal. We wanted more control over what was happening around us, and so, the pragmatic way was to buy it.

I followed up by asking whether the informant felt as if the community had more control in the past, and he responded:

Yes. Absolutely yes. There was local management and when we had issues, we could talk to them. Sometimes it didn't come out in our favor, sometimes it did. They were very willing to sell us the land out here, for example, but they got the money they wanted out of it. I would call it good. Sure, sometimes we'd butt heads, but we knew where to go and butt heads. With these investment companies, they're quite often agents for endowments-for instance, that are kind of shielded. (personal communication, 21 July 2015)

This idea that some of the historic large landowners, including multinational corporations like GeorgiaPacific, were more integrated in the community recurred frequently during interviews. For example, one informant, a lifelong resident of Grand Lake Stream said:

Wagner [Forest Management] bought the land, and they had a different perspective on things because they didn't have local people working for them . . . they were out of a big national company. So we started talking to them, telling them, you know, the forest had been harvested pretty hard before they bought it, so we figured, they're probably just going to sit on it and let it grow back and then do some cutting. Well, as soon as they got the land, they started cutting, heavy, and areas we thought shouldn't be cut, and we got scared that they were just going to liquidate all the forest and then start developing the shorelines. That would change the character of this area . . . a lot. And then we thought that might happen was that some 'kingdom' buyer might come along and purchase a big chunk of land and then block it all off. That was starting to happen at that time, around this area. It wasn't even a threat back in the old days, we didn't even think about it, but in this new day and age, we saw this as a real possibility, and that would really . . . if a big chunk of that land were blocked off and if we couldn't access it, that would change how we operate as guides and camp owners, and the whole tourist industry would be adversely impacted. (personal communication, 22 July 2015)

## Another citizen of Grand Lake Stream noted,

They were more worried about public opinion, because a lot of them, like I said, Georgia-Pacific, they lived right in the area, they owned the mill down in Woodland, too. A bunch of their head people were local, and they didn't want local residents coming and saying, 'Hey, you're ruining our forest, you're destroying everything.' The new company was based out of somewhere else, and you know, it was money, all that mattered was money. (personal communication, 20 July 2015)

I include these quotes because they portray investorowners as anonymous individuals from a 'big national company,' which is 'based out of somewhere else.' This portrayal is interesting, because TIMOs are contrasted with the equally large, if not larger, industrial timberland owners of the past. This captures an interesting paradox, where less monopolistic forms of land management have intensified extractive relations and lessened community sense of democratic control. Wagner Forest Management, to take the example raised earlier, is headquartered just over the Maine border in New Hampshire. The widespread perception that things were different during the era of vertically integrated processing is likely an accurate one, though. Alongtime employee of the local mill, formerly owned by Georgia-Pacific, explained to me that 'GeorgiaPacific had a very open policy on land use, and the mill still does for the land it continues to own' (personal communication, 17 July 2015).

As the two preceding quotes both illustrate, many VIFPCs had local representatives in the communities where their timberland was located to oversee the properties and manage their saw or paper mills. With hundreds of thousands of acres of land, generally inaccessible except by dirt roads or ATV trails, paper company lands had geographies that made them difficult to oversee and control (Prudham 2004). This fact, in combination with the local presence of mill employees in timber-producing communities, historically meant that large landowners had a vested interest in maintaining good community relations. Although I am not aiming to glamorize the vertically integrated timber economy-it certainly has had its share of troubling labor practices and dangerous working conditions-it is widely recognized that, for better or for worse, the long-term production of merchantable timber was the singular management objective for most private industrial landowners in this part of Maine. Because timber owners held vast swaths of land that were difficult to monitor or manage and wanted to keep local

communities happy, they were unlikely to regulate activities like recreation or the harvesting of nontimber forest products on their properties (personal communication, 4 August 2015). In fact, they might have even encouraged recreation through the leasing of lots for primitive cabins and sporting camps. With the large-scale restructuring of the timber industry came a large-scale restructuring of the social relations of production. In the case of Grand Lake Stream, this meant, among other things, the renegotiation of what were formerly customary property relations and common access regimes.

## Rent Extraction in the Woods: Enclosing Common Access

To guarantee their access to the necessary conditions of production, the citizens of Grand Lake Stream formed a land trust, which worked hard to come up with the necessary funds to ensure continued access to the lands that support their livelihoods. Since 2001, 370,000 contiguous acres of forests, lake and river frontage, and wildlife habitat have been protected from development by conservation easement, including a 56,000-acre community forest, owned in fee simple by the land trust and maintained for open access and multiple uses for citizens of and visitors to the town (Downeast Lakes Land Trust 2015). Worth noting, however, is that these efforts cost nearly $60 million, paid in large part out of public coffers, to institutional investors who were able to demand monopoly rents for the guarantee that they would not liquidate timber and close off access, thereby eliminating the tourism economy on which the community depends.

In what follows, I explicate some of the particular ways in which common access regimes have been enclosed and identify the rents that were demanded or paid, and by whom, in exchange for access. In particular, I look at two examples: the sale of various options and rights-including the sale of development rights through WFCEs-and the conflict surrounding sporting camp leases. This approach is unique because it attempts to capture the rents charged to maintain former customary rights, or the amount that has been spent to maintain 'business as usual.' Thus, rather than focusing on generalized shifts in purchase and sale price over time, I look instead at payments made to TIMO landowners to ensure outcomes that are essential to the functioning of the local economy.

## Sporting Camp Leases

The state of Maine has a decades-old tradition of sporting camps in the woods. An estimated 17,000 Mainers have camps or second homes, primarily held on lots leased from mills and paper companies (Maine Sporting Camp Heritage Foundation 2015)-another enduring legacy of the history of large industrial landownership in the area. As a state government committee convened to investigate the emerging issues surrounding lease lot property explained, 'The lessorlessee relationship was beneficial to both parties. The lessee was able to build, maintain and enjoy the use of a camp and its environs. The lessor received income from lease fees; however, the income was often secondary to other considerations such as building relationships with business associates, and having outposts in remote areas to aid in fire protection and general oversight of the property' (Friedman and Ippoliti 2001, 3). Given the mutually beneficial nature of the relationship, leases were generally negotiated at a nominal yearly rate, as they were less about generating revenue and more about building relationships and community support.

Many of these lease agreements have endured through multiple generations of family ownership. Grand Lake Stream, despite its small size, is home to nine different sporting camps, each an integral part of the town's history. These camps are also a vital part of the town's economy, as they provide a place for visitors to stay and provide a means of connecting visitors with boat rentals and local outdoors guides (Maine Sporting Camp Association 2015). A number of camp owners were interviewed for this research, and each described the unique relationships that the camps have with their visitors-one informant even noted that a couple who had honeymooned at his camp had just returned for a visit to celebrate their fortieth wedding anniversary by staying in the same cabin.

Data on the lease agreements with the now-defunct Great Northern Paper Company (GNP) in Millinocket (approximately eighty-five miles northwest of Grand Lake Stream) offer a window into the lease situation in the area. As of 2001, GNP had 969 separate lease agreements on their properties, the majority of which dated back to the 1950s and 1960s and were negotiated with GNP employees and area residents to provide them with recreation opportunities (Friedman and Ippoliti 2001, Appendix C). In 1915, when the first GNP leases were negotiated, lessees paid $5 per year; in 2001, leases were 5 percent of the land's assessed value plus a $55 administrative fee. Today, leases based

on assessed value will vary wildly depending on the presence and number of structures. During a 2006 interview, Stu Kallgren, president of the Maine Leaseholders Association said, in opposition to the increasing tax burdens for leaseholders, 'We're the ones who have improved the property, making it what it's worth today. The landowners have done nothing to improve the property. The leaseholders have built the camps, cleaned up the shorefront around the lakes. We have improved the property, not the landowners' (All Maine Matters 2006).

With the sale of industrial timberland has come the transfer of lease lots, presenting something of a crisis for sporting camp owners in Grand Lake Stream and beyond. In 2010, there was a major flare-up in the local paper between the president of the land trust and a local sporting camp owner and outdoors guide, Randy Spencer. The land trust had agreed to involve an intermediary buyer in one of the transactions that would eventually make up the community forest. This intermediary, Lyme Timber, described in its promotional materials as a conservation-minded TIMO, used its short tenure to generate returns for investors through a number of avenues, including, notably, by acquiring $19.8 million in public funds through the New Markets Tax Credits Program (Spies 2014)designed to attract public and private-sector funding for community development projects in distressed rural areas (Rubin and Stankiewicz 2005) and through the sale of historic camp lease lots.

As one informant explained it:

The private camp lots went from Prentiss and Carlisle (the former land manager) to Lyme, and then Lyme started selling them, and they really, asked, a pretty high price [chuckles]. And some of it was negotiated down, some people just bought it, others walked away, and some were still leasing and trying to figure out how they could buy it.

The sales prompted an editorial by one of the camp owners, who received notification from Lyme that he had the option to buy his property before it was publicly auctioned off. He wrote: 'What 33 camp owners didn't know was that their contribution to that economy, in fact their very presence, was in jeopardy. Lyme Timber had folded the sale of their historic lease lots into its financial blueprint' (Spencer 2010). The editorial continued:

Independent appraisals of 12 lots came in with a fair market value of one-third to one-half of Lyme Timber's prices. Fearful of losing their camps, each owner made counteroffers adding an average of $30,000 to their appraisals. In a chill letter, Lyme's response was threefold: Their leases were going up, their lots were going on the public block, and their counteroffers were rejected. (Spencer 2010)

This case is perhaps the most straightforward example of monopoly rent control by TIMOs. Landowners were offered a single opportunity to buy, at above-market value, properties that were an integral part of their livelihoods and that, for decades, were available for nominal and rolling yearly rent payments. The appraised value of these properties had little to no bearing on historical values and also failed to reflect local demand, market rates, or property conditions. As one example of this, many of the camps in question are very, very remote-accessible by dirt logging roads, if by any roads at all. One informant, whose camp was relatively well connected to major roads, explained that during winters, snow builds up so quickly that the only way to get in and out is by snowmobile. Lyme offered this same informant a purchase option for three acres of underlying land on which she had already built several structures. The price for which she ultimately purchased this land, $130,000, was about 1,000 times the $125 per acre charged by GeorgiaPacific in 1999.

## Working Forest Conservation Easements, Options, and Rights

A WFCE is a legal agreement between a landowner and a conservation organization that is specifically designed to protect forested landscapes from development pressures and to ensure their long-term protection and the continued viability of forest products economies (Tesini 2009). Within Maine, there are two major sources for funding WFCEs: the U.S. Forest Service's Forest Legacy Program and the Land for Maine's Future program. Forest Legacy was established in 1990 as an incentive-based program for slowing conversion of forests to nonforestry uses (Owley and Tulowiecki 2012). The program provides 75 percent match grants to states, tribes, and nonprofit groups like land trusts that are seeking federal assistance with forest conservation projects. Land for Maine's Future is a voter-approved bond program, established in 1987 and administered to fund land conservation efforts statewide (Land for Maine's Future 2015).

Various phases of the conservation effort in Grand Lake Stream were funded by Forest Legacy and Land

for Maine's Future. The land trust had two different project proposals ranked first in the nation for Forest Legacy funding and received $3.4 million in 2009 (U.S. Forest Service 2009) and $6.6 million in 2011 (U.S. Forest Service 2011). Similarly, in 2011 the land trust received the largest grant in the history of the Land for Maine's Future program, $1.25 million (Miller 2011). The town has also voted, unanimously on three separate occasions, to appropriate a total of more than $50,000 in funds for the conservation efforts. These public funds have gone toward the acquisition of conservation easements, as well as the purchase of the community forest, both of which will give community members access to the forests and waters that are the heart of the town's economy. One community member described the emotional town meeting where he was asked to introduce the idea of appropriating $5,000 of the town surplus to help fund the project:

I wasn't sure how it was going to go, the place was packed. I got up and told them what it was all about, and of course everybody knew about the project. . . . I said that brings up another discussion. A lot of you in here are lifelong residents of Grand Lake Stream, and your mothers, fathers, grandmothers and grandfathers have likely contributed to that surplus. And when we authorize this money, do you think they would be happy with it? Do you think this is a legacy they would be proud to support? And some people got real emotional, and one guy raised his hand, and said 'Can we double it?' (personal communication 21 July 2015)

The majority of the 370,000 acres that are protected in Washington County, whether the land is owned by the land trust or an investor-owner, is protected from subdivision and real estate development by WFCEs. In 2001, the New England Forestry Foundation, a nonprofit conservation organization that operates throughout northern New England, teamed up with the land trust to help acquire an easement on 312,000 acres of forest land owned by two TIMOs-Wagner Forest Management and Typhoon LLC, a shell company formed to manage a portion of the Yale University endowment. The Sunrise Easement, as the project came to be named, cost $30 million, or approximately $40 an acre (personal communication, 12 May 2014). The easement allows for timber harvest but prohibits development and limits subdivision to 1,000-acre lots. It effectively maintains the area's status quo of large parcels, held by a handful of owners and actively managed as working timberland. The project was not easy to fund; as one informant who was involved in the acquisition said:

I do know that after that option was negotiated and the project got started and was taking longer to raise the money, the partners went back to Wagner and tried to negotiate an extension, and didn't get it. And that was because the real estate values had increased, and from Wagner's perspective at that time, the option was no longer a good deal for them. So they would have happily allowed the option to fail because they could have capitalized more if it hadn't succeeded. The New England Forestry Foundation bravely rescued the project by mortgaging a property they owned in Massachusetts, and allowing the closing to happen on time. (personal communication, 31 July 2015)

The TIMO financial strategy, which demands shortterm returns while being indifferent to their source, is echoed by another informant, a citizen of Grand Lake Stream:

[T]he one sort of positive thing of that land being in investment-management is that the owner ultimately doesn't care where the money comes from. They're sort of equally happy to have it come from conservation, or to have it come from real estate development. (personal communication, 21 July 2015)

The demand for timely payments extends beyond the acquisition of conservation easements. At all stages of the community forest acquisition, the owners demanded payment for cooperation. The land trust first had to buy a purchase option from the landowner, which gives them first right to buy. Following this, they were forced to purchase the timber rights from the TIMO landowner, who was harvesting aggressively leading up to the sale. As a town official explained:

We actually paid them to stop cutting . . . because we signed a deal with them [purchase option] that we were going to buy the land, but they were going to continue cutting until we purchased it, so we paid them extra, to stop cutting. (personal communication, 20 July 2015)

Beyond Grand Lake Stream, investor-landowners are also using the threat of real estate development to sell conservation easements. In a case famous across the state of Maine, Plum Creek, a vertically integrated paper company turned REIT, purchased 409,000 acres on Moosehead Lake in Greenville and successfully lobbied to rezone 16,900 acres of lakefront property for real estate and resort developments (Plum Creek

Figure 4. Asign welcoming visitors to the entrance of Plum Creek's Moosehead Forest conservation easement. Source : Photo by the author, 2015. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

2015). An informant from Grand Lake Stream, who had connections to the Plum Creek project, noted that, although 'not a spade of earth has been turned' for real estate development, the only profits that have been made on the project thus far have been from conservation. Plum Creek was able to sell conservation land and a WFCE to the Forest Society of Maine and the state of Maine for a total cost of $30.4 million (The Nature Conservancy 2015). Plum Creek now proudly touts their conservation credentials with a number of oversized signs along the main road around Moosehead Lake (see Figure 4). One hopes that the irony is not lost on the reader: Plum Creek, once one of the largest VIFPCs in the United States, has been paid $30 million for a WFCE that permits it to commercially harvest timber-an activity that was once the sole remit of their company.

## Conclusions

This article has argued that timberland investors are generating profits for their shareholders by enclosing the common access regimes that have been at the core of Maine's open lands tradition (Acheson 2006), demanding the payment of rents in exchange for access to the 'necessary conditions of production.' In Grand Lake Stream, a small rural community with an economy that is heavily reliant on outdoors tourism, free and open access to forests and waterways is a necessary condition of production for the town's sporting camp owners and outdoors guides. Access is regained through the payment of monopoly rents to TIMOsfor conservation easements to prevent real estate development and timber rights to protect against ecologically harmful forestry practices-and guarantees that the longtime leased lots that underlay resident's sporting camps will not be sold out from under them.

This case provides a locally grounded, empirically driven explication of how financial profit making works in and through the biophysical world. Although many scholars have done in-depth case research on the financialization of the built form (Newman and Wyly 2004; Farmer 2014), I would argue that there is a dearth of similarly detailed work on the financialization of working landscapes and protected areas and that there is a real need for more case studies like the one presented here. This need for empirical work is especially critical when it comes to rent extraction, which has been a major topic of interest for urban and economic geographers in recent years (Haila 2015; Ward and Aalbers 2016) but is also vitally important for understanding how financial actors are able to profit from investments in nature. Furthermore, the case adds to existing work on rural landscape change

and the commodification of amenity landscapes by exposing not just tensions between old and new landowners (Walker and Fortmann 2003) but tensions between new forms of capitalization and customary rights. Finally, this work contributes to an emerging body of work that aims to understand the mechanisms and outcomes of land and resource grabbing (White et al. 2012) in contexts outside of the Global South and specifically the impacts of investor-ownership on rural resource landscapes (Fairbairn 2014; Gunnoe 2014) and associated communities.

Although its histories of timber extraction and cultural and legal norms make Maine an ideal place to study the behavior of timberland investors and the impacts of these behaviors on rural communities, the trends described in this article are not at all unique to the state. In Montana, community members have expressed concern that the merger of Plum Creek and Weyerhaueser-two of the country's largest timber REITS-will alter long-standing norms surrounding hunting and fishing access, potentially replacing open access with a fee-based system (Chaney 2015). In Alachua County, Florida, Plum Creek attempted to alter county land-use norms to rezone former timberland for mixed-use development (Magoc and Lorenzo 2016). Financial investor-owners are now the largest single landowner type in the majority of timber-dependent communities in the United States (Stein 2011) and, as one former timber executive put it, 'Timberland is no longer part of an entire system but rather an input into another system; namely the investment market' (Binkley 2007, 2). As financial actors continue to acquire rural land and resources with the aim of extracting rents and making profits through novel channels, rural property relations, norms of use, and livelihoods will continue to be altered in ways that warrant further study.

To conclude, in a 1999 piece for the Forest Ecology Network, Jym St. Pierre, Director of the nonprofit RESTORE: The North Woods, wrote that 'the pressure to get paid for easements on the backlands comes close to extortion of the public.' Whether it was extortionary or not is up for debate, but in Grand Lake Stream, maintaining the status quo of working forests with public access came at significant costs to the public. Citizens of the town put up more than $50,000 of their own tax revenues, the state of Maine gave more than $1.25 million, and the federal government, through the U.S. Forest Service's Forest Legacy Program, granted close to $10 million for WFCEs. These funds were a significant expenditure, paid by the public to financial investors, as a guarantee that they would neither undertake significant real estate development in the middle of working forests nor limit the access of community members whose livelihoods depend on it.

The Forest Legacy Program was created in 1990 at the height of U.S. neoliberal environmental policymaking, as a means of encouraging market-based, voluntary solutions to the very real threat of forestland conversion. The aims of the program, initially, were to collaborate with private forest landowners to provide incentives to keep forested lands in sustainable production, for the good of local communities. When the program becomes, as the case in Grand Lake Stream has illustrated, a major source from which financial actors can demand monopoly rent payments, it might be worth considering the need for nonmarket, legal and regulatory solutions to the ongoing financialization of land and resources.

## References

- Acheson, J. M. 2006. Public access to privately owned land in Maine. Maine Policy Review 15 (1): 18-30.
- Acheson, J. M., and J. Acheson. 2009. Maine land: Private property and hunting commons. International Journal of the Commons 4 (1): 552-70.
- All Maine Matters. 2006. A discussion with Stu Kallgren, Maine Leaseholders Association. http://www.allmaine matters.com/May06/Stu.html (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Atkinson, M. 1920. Hinckley Township; Or, Grand Lake Stream Plantation, A sketch . Newburyport, MA: Newburyport Herald Press.
- Bakker, K. 2005. Neoliberalizing nature? Market environmentalism in water supply in England and Wales. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 95 (3): 542-65.
- Ball, M. 1977. Differential rent and the role of landed property. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 1 (1-4): 380-403.
- Binkley, C. S. 2007. The rise and fall of the timber investment management organizations: Ownership changes in US forestlands . Washington, DC: Pinchot Institute for Conservation.
- Bryan, D. 1990. 'Natural' and 'improved' land in Marx's theory of rent. Land Economics 66 (2): 176-81.
- Bumpus, A. G., and D. M. Liverman. 2008. Accumulation by decarbonization and the governance of carbon offsets. Economic Geography 84 (2): 127-55.
- Campling, L., and E. Havice. 2014. The problem of property in industrial fisheries. Journal of Peasant Studies 41 (5): 707-27.
- Castree, N. 2003. Commodifying what nature? Progress in Human Geography 27 (3): 273-97.
- Chaney, R. 2015. Plum Creek sale raises questions about public access, land deals, mill closures. The Missoulian 9

- [November. http://missoulian.com/news/local/plumcreek-sale-raises-questions-about-public-access-landdeals/article\_bb442f5b-f2b4-5322-9281-3d2eba1f6f2e. html (last accessed 4 June 2017).](http://missoulian.com/news/local/plum-creek-sale-raises-questions-about-public-access-land-deals/article_bb442f5b-f2b4--5322--9281--3d2eba1f6f2e.html)
- Correia, D. 2009. The certified Maine North Woods, where money grows from trees. Geoforum 41 (1): 66-73.
- Cote, J. 2008. Preserving Maine's open access tradition: Public access to private land. http://www.mainecf.org/portals/0/ pdfs/6/ps/jamescote.pdf (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Cousins, C., and T. Cox. 2014. Mill to add two tissue machines, 80 jobs in Washington County. Bangor Daily News 12 March. http://bangordailynews.com/2014/03/ 12/business/mill-to-add-2-tissue-machines-80-jobs-inwashington-county/ (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Darling, E. 2005. The city in the country: Wilderness gentrification and the rent gap. Environment and Planning A 37 (6): 1015-32.
- De Angelis, M. 2001. Marx and primitive accumulation: The continuous character of capital's enclosures. The Commoner 2 (1): 1-22.
- Downeast Lakes Land Trust. 2015. Farm Cove Commu nity Forest. https://www.downeastlakes.org/conserva tion/conservation-successes/farm-cove-community-for est/ (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Emery, M. R., and A. R. Pierce. 2005. Interrupting the telos: Locating subsistence in contemporary US forests. Environment and Planning A 37 (6): 981-93.
- Fairbairn, M. 2014. 'Like gold with yield': Evolving intersections between farmland and finance. Journal of Peasant Studies 41 (5): 777-95.
- Farmer, S. 2014. Cities as risk managers: The impact of Chicago's parking meter P3 on municipal governance and transportation planning. Environment and Planning A 46 (9): 2160-74.
- Felli, R. 2014. On climate rent. Historical Materialism 22 (3-4): 251-80.
- Finite Carbon. 2012. Finite Carbon and Downeast Lakes Land Trust register the first CAR improved forest management carbon project outside California. http://www. finitecarbon.com/2012/09/12/first-car-ifm-project-out side-california-registered (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Forest Investment Associates. 2015. Why timber? http:// www.forestinvest.com/why-timber/ (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Friedman, D. C., and J. Ippoliti. 2001. Final report of the Committee to Study Issues Concerning Changes to the Traditional Uses of Maine Forests and Lands. Portland: State of Maine.
- Ginger, C., M. R. Emery, M. J. Baumflek, and D. E. Putnam. 2012. Access to natural resources on private property: Factors beyond right of entry. Society &amp; Natural Resources 25 (7): 700-15.
- Glassman, J. 2006. Primitive accumulation, accumulation by dispossession, accumulation by 'extra-economic' means. Progress in Human Geography 30 (5): 608-25.
- Gunnoe, A. 2014. The political economy of institutional landownership: Neorentier society and the financialization of land. Rural Sociology 79 (4): 478-504.
- Gunnoe, A., and P. K. Gellert. 2011. Financialization, shareholder value, and the transformation of timberland ownership in the US. Critical Sociology 37 (3): 265-84.
- Hagan, J. M., L. C. Irland, and A. A. Whitman. 2005. Changing timberland ownership in the Northern Forest and implications for biodiversity. Report No. MCCSFCP-2005-1, Brunswick, ME: Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences.
- Haila, A. 2015. Urban land rent: Singapore as a property state . Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
- Harper, S. C., L. L. Falk, and E. W. Rankin. 1990. The Northern Forest Lands Study of New England and New York . Rutland, VT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Governors' Task Force on Northern Forest Lands.
- Harvey, D. 2003. The new imperialism . New York: Oxford University Press.
- ---.2006. The limits to capital . London: Verso.
- ---.2009. The art of rent: Globalisation, monopoly and the commodification of culture. Socialist Register 38:93110.
- Heynen, N., J. McCarthy, S. Prudham, and P. Robbins, eds. 2007. Neoliberal environments: False promises and unnatural consequences . London and New York: Routledge.
- Jakab, S. 2014. The bright lights of finance head to low key camp. Wall Street Journal 7 August. http://www.wsj. com/articles/bright-lights-of-finance-head-to-low-keycamp-1407425447 (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Kay, K. 2017. A hostile takeover of nature? Placing value in conservation finance. Antipode . Advance online publication. doi:10.1111/anti.12335
- Krippner, G. R. 2011. Capitalizing on crisis . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Land for Maine's Future. 2015. Land for Maine's Future. http:// www.maine.gov/dacf/lmf/ (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Lang, S. 2012. The golden road. Maine Magazine August. http://www.themainemag.com/travel/location/2025the-golden-road.html (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Lohmann, L. 2012. Financialization, commodification and carbon: The contradictions of neoliberal climate policy. Socialist Register 48:85-107.
- Magoc, E., and A. Lorenzo. 2016. 18 hours of public meetings later, Alachua County commissioners vote against Plum Creek's plan. http://www.wuft.org/news/2016/03/ 01/18-hours-of-public-meetings-later-alachua-countycommissioners-vote-against-plum-creeks-plan/ (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Maine Sporting Camp Association. 2015. Maine Sporting Camp Association. http://www.mainesportingcamps.com/ https://icma.org/node/16823 (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Maine Sporting Camp Heritage Foundation. 2015. Land acquisitions and leasing. http://www.sportingcampfoun dation.org/programs/land-acquisition-leasing/ (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Maine Tree Foundation. 2015. Who owns Maine's forests? http://www.mainetreefoundation.org/forestfacts/Who %20Owns%20Maine's%20Forest.htm (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Mandel, E. 1999. Late capitalism . London: Verso.
- Marx, K. 1981. Capital: Vol. 3. A critique of political economy . London: Penguin Classics.
- ---. 1992. Capital: Vol. 1. A critique of political economy . London: Penguin Classics.

- McCarthy, J. 2004. Privatizing conditions of production: Trade agreements as neoliberal environmental governance. Geoforum 35 (3): 327-41.
- McCarthy, J., and S. Prudham. 2004. Neoliberal nature and the nature of neoliberalism. Geoforum 35 (3): 275-83.
- Miller, K. 2011. Two Washington County projects among 22 to receive Land for Maine's Future funds. Bangor Daily News 13 July. https://bangordailynews.com/2011/ 07/13/environment/22-projects-to-receive-land-formaine%E2%80%99s-future-conservation-funds/? ref D videos (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Natural Resource Council of Maine. 2015. Major land sales in Maine since 1998. http://www.nrcm.org/projectshot-issues/woods-wildlife-and-wilderness/north-woodsprotection-lupc/major-land-sales-in-maine-since-1998/ (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- The Nature Conservancy. 2015. The Moosehead Forest Project: Frequently asked questions. http://www.nature. org/ourinitiatives/regions/northamerica/unitedstates/ maine/explore/moosehead-forest-project-faq.xml#Pri ce\_Paid (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Newman, K., and E. K. Wyly. 2004. Geographies of mortgage market segmentation: The case of Essex County, New Jersey. Housing Studies 19 (1): 53-83.
- Nordahl, D. 2014. To glean and forage in the city. In Public produce , 81-106. Washington, DC: Island Press/Center for Resource Economics.
- Owley, J., and S. J. Tulowiecki. 2012. Who should protect the forest?: Conservation easements in the forest legacy program. Public Land and Resources Law Review 33:2013.
- Plum Creek. 2015. Moosehead Lake. http://www.plum creek.com/land/development/moosehead-lake (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Prudham, W. S. 2004. Knock on wood: Nature as commodity in Douglas-fir country . London and New York: Routledge.
- Ribot, J. C., and N. L. Peluso. 2003. A theory of access. Rural Sociology 68 (2): 153-81.
- Rubin, J. S., and G. Stankiewicz. 2005. The new markets tax credit program: A midcourse assessment. Community Development Investment Review 1 (1): 1-11.
- Sayre, N. F. 2011. Commentary: Scale, rent, and symbolic capital: Political economy and emerging rural landscapes. GeoJournal 76 (4): 437-39.
- Spencer, R. 2010. Camp owners sacrificial lambs to conservation. Bangor Daily News 18 March. http://bangordai lynews.com/2010/03/18/opinion/camp-owners-sacrifi cial-lambs-to-conservation/ (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Spies, C. 2014. Revitalization the new markets tax credits way. Public Management Magazine November. https:// icma.org/node/16823 (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- St. Martin, K. 2006. The impact of 'community' on fisheries management in the US Northeast. Geoforum 37 (2): 169-84.
- St. Pierre, J. 1999. Doing big deals in Maine. Forest Ecology Network . http://www.forestecologynetwork.org/tmwfall99\_07. html (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- State of Maine. 1973. Maine Revised Statutes: Title 17: CRIMES, Chapter 127: TRESPASS. http://legislature. maine.gov/statutes/17/title17sec3860.html (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- ---. 1989. Maine Revised Statutes: Title 38: Waters and navigation, Chapter 3: Protection and improvement of waters, Subchapter 1: Environmental protection board. http://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/38/ title38sec436-a.html (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- ---. 2009. Chapter 7: Defenses Generally. http://legisla ture.maine.gov/statutes/14/title14sec159-A.html (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Stein, P. 2011. Trends in forestland ownership and conservation. Forest History Today Spring/Fall:83-86.
- Tesini, D. 2009. Working forest conservation easements. The Urban Lawyer 41:359-75.
- University of Maine. 2012. Maine lakes. http://umaine.edu/ mitchellcenter/files/2012/06/maine\_lakes.pdf (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- U.S. Forest Service. 2009. Fiscal Year 2009, Forest Legacy funded projects. http://www.fs.fed.us/spf/coop/library/ fy09\_funded\_projects.pdf (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- ---. 2011. Fiscal Year 2011, Forest Legacy funded projects. http://www.fs.fed.us/spf/coop/library/fy2011\_%20 funded\_project.pdf (last accessed 4 June 2017).
- Waite, G. G. 1965. Public rights in Maine waters. Maine Law Review 17:161.
- Walker, P., and L. Fortmann. 2003. Whose landscape? A political ecology of the 'exurban' Sierra. Cultural Geographies 10 (4): 469-91.
- Ward, C., and M. B. Aalbers. 2016. 'The shitty rent business': What's the point of land rent theory? Urban Studies 53 (9): 1760-83.
- White, B., S. M. Borras, Jr., R. Hall, I. Scoones, and W. Wolford. 2012. The new enclosures: Critical perspectives on corporate land deals. Journal of Peasant Studies 39 (3-4): 619-47.

KELLY KAY is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095. E-mail: kellykay1@gmail.com. Her research interests include the political economy of conservation and forestry, with a focus on North America.