<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rtpg20

## The Commodification of Security in Brazil: UrbanRural Divide in Household Adoption of Safety Protective Devices

Temidayo James Aransiola, Vania Ceccato &amp; Marcelo Justus

To cite this article: Temidayo James Aransiola, Vania Ceccato &amp; Marcelo Justus (2022) The Commodification of Security in Brazil: Urban-Rural Divide in Household Adoption of Safety Protective Devices, The Professional Geographer, 74:2, 364-376, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2021.1993280

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2021.1993280

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

© 2022 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor &amp; Francis Group, LLC.

Published online: 11 Jan 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1692

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

## FOCUS: THE GEOGRAPHIES OF CRIME AND POLICING IN THE GLOBAL COUNTRYSIDE

<!-- image -->

## The Commodification of Security in Brazil: Urban -Rural Divide in Household Adoption of Safety Protective Devices

Temidayo James Aransiola

and Vania Ceccato

<!-- image -->

KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden

Marcelo Justus

<!-- image -->

University of Campinas, Brazil

This study aims to assess the determinants of using safety devices in Brazilian households, taking into account different urban -rural country contexts and income distribution. Probit models are estimated using microdata from the 2009 Brazilian National Household Sampling Survey. On average, less than half of the underprivileged population adopts safety devices, whereas almost double as many do so among the wealthy. Findings also indicate an inverse association between the level of urbanization and adoption of safety protective devices, especially of modern ones -a pattern mediated by individual levels of victimization and safety perceptions. For example, previous victimization by theft or robbery is more decisive for adopting safety protective devices among economically underprivileged households compared to wealthier ones. These results provide evidence of the perverse effects of unequal commodification of security across a country that penalizes, in particular, the rural poor. Key Words: Global South, household protection, probit models, safety perceptions, victimization.

F eeling safe is a basic human right -a right that in a country such as Brazil is threatened by high rates of crime and violence and chronic, deepening socioeconomic inequalities (Ribeiro and Cano 2016; Ceccato and Ceccato 2017; Instituto de Pesquisa Econ ^ omica Aplicada e F  orum Brasileiro de Seguranc ¸a P  ublica 2019). Ineffective, failing criminal justice and poor policing practices (Caldeira 2013; Cavalcanti 2017, 2020; Ceccato, Melo, and Kahn 2018; Oliveira 2018) are two further reasons that make Brazilians seek self-protection. Moreover, the adoption of generic social policies for crime control in Brazil compared to specific local crime prevention approaches adopted in the United States makes households resort to private safety measures (Beato and Silveira 2018). Those who can afford these measures resort to solutions provided by an ever-increasing private security industry that offers a combination of various traditional and technological safety devices ranging from padlocks to gates, alarms, closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras, and light sensors (Oliveira 2018).

such a context of lack of access to safety devices, natural surveillance and community neighborhood watches are deemed crucial for crime prevention (Yarwood and Edwards 1995; Sutton and Wilson 2004; Messner et al. 2017; Louderback and Sen Roy 2018). Most studies on the use of safety devices focus on their effect in preventing crimes, whereas in this study we investigate why people use these devices in the first place.

As with any other product, safety protection devices have been reported to be unequally vastly consumed among the urban rich (Oliveira 2018); however, little is known about their adoption by different income groups in different geographical contexts, from megalopolises to remote rural areas. In

This study investigates the determinants of adopting safety devices in Brazilian households, taking into account different urban -rural country contexts. The question posed in this study is this: What are the determinants of the adoption of safety protection devices in Brazilian households? In addition, we identify the differences in the effect of these determinants by income strata to better understand the motivations for the use of household safety devices. Safety protection devices include an array of private precaution technologies ranging from window bars, extra locks, and dogs to modern gadgets such as alarms, electric fences, light sensors, and CCTV. This study builds on the study by Oliveira (2018) that first estimated probit models to assess the adoption of private safety technologies using microdata from the 2009 Brazilian National Household Sampling Survey -a sample covering the entire country.

# 2022 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor Francis Group, LLC.

This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way.

<!-- image -->

Brazil constitutes an interesting case study, first because it contributes to the geographical and interdisciplinary body of knowledge on crime and safety beyond big cities (Donnermeyer 2012; Donnermeyer and DeKeseredy 2013). Such a contribution is important to other countries similar to Brazil, a country with high levels of violence and increasing income inequality (Fajnzylber and Araujo 2001; Pochmann 2015; Aransiola, Ceccato, and Justus 2021). In addition, the international literature on this topic is overrepresented by evidence from North American and European countries, whereas examples from countries of the Global South like Brazil are lacking because either they do not exist or are not published in the international Anglophone literature.

## Why Do People Use Household Safety Devices?

There are several reasons why individuals decide to invest in safety protective devices. One of them can be the fear of being victimized, namely, fear of crime. Previous research has produced evidence of how fear of crime triggers the adoption of housing safety measures (da Costa and Ceccato 2015). Fear can be personal or related to the safety or well-being of others, such as fear for family members and friends, which is often referred to as altruistic fear (Heber 2009), or the fear of others (Sandercock 2000).

Another important reason is the actual perceived risk of victimization, because crime does not happen randomly (Weisburd 2015), and researchers have shown that it tends to be highly concentrated in space and time. Individuals opt to buy safety protection devices to reduce the risk of victimization of themselves, families, or properties. Another reason is the fact that certain crimes are difficult to solve, such as residential burglary (Coupe and Griffiths1996), which makes individuals decide to act before it occurs. Even if some type of evidence is left behind that can be used to identify the offender, the police and the criminal justice system must be efficient and work hard to catch the thief and reduce the risk of near-repeat victimization. In countries like Brazil, distrust in the police capacity to prevent crime and solve cases is high, a factor that in recent decades propelled the security industry (Kahn 2003; Silva and Beato 2013; Cavalcanti 2017).

At the core of this adoption is the attempt to increase the effort required for criminals to commit a crime, reduce the potential benefits of crime, and increase the risk of punishment (Clarke 1983, 1995). These safety solutions are not free of charge, however, and their prices have been steadily on the rise in the market. Moreover, it has been argued that the commodification of security has given rise to new forms of consumption of products and services (Goold, Loader, and Thumala 2010) that are bound to be unequal, resulting in inequalities in victimization and fear across societal groups.

For those who can afford them, purchasing safety protective measures represents a promise of reduced risk of victimization, despite the poor evidence that they can avoid or reduce crime (Oliveira 2018). In urban areas and especially in periurban areas, this demand for safety has transformed the housing market by creating enclosed residential enclaves, often called gated communities, that materialize the rise of private policing and security. The commodification of security has also been reflected in the increase of modern devices such as household alarms and CCTV cameras beyond the ' city of walls ' (Caldeira 2001). Moreover, in extreme cases, it has led to the creation of fortified residential spaces in which an exclusive social-spatial order is defined and enforced and a culture of fear and othering also prevails (Freitas 2008), retro-feeding the industry of fear.

Knowledge about possible interlinkages between previous victimization, fear, and adoption of private security measures by individuals by income groups and geographical contexts is still in its infancy. This is particularly true for those living in the most remote areas of the country.

There is an imminent need to investigate the differences in the adoption of safety devices in households across four contexts of urbanization, namely, urban, periurban, accessible rural, and remote rural contexts. In particular, for each context, the most common type of safety device for prevention against property crimes must be identified. Finally, it is also important to verify and compare the impact of economic and family structure on the use of household safety devices while controlling for previous victimization, safety perceptions, and other contextual factors.

Following the recent research strand of international literature, we define our research questions as follows:

1. Do income and victimization vary over the urban -rural continuum? If so, how?
2. Does the adoption of safety protective devices follow an urban -rural and income divide?
3. Which are the most common types of safety protective devices by area?
4. How do safety protective devices relate to an individual ' s victimization and safety perception?
5. Are the determinants of adopting safety protective devices in urban areas different from those observed in rural areas?

## Case Study and Methods

Brazil is a Global South country located in Latin America with twenty-six states and one federal

Figure 1 The study area: Brazilian geography divided into states and municipalities.

<!-- image -->

district that comprises 5,570 municipalities with a total population of about 210 million. The geography of the study is illustrated in Figure 1. The country has one of the highest homicide rates in the world and, according to the Instituto de Pesquisa Econ ^ omica Aplicada e F  orum Brasileiro de Seguranc ¸a P  ublica (2019), its homicide rate in 2016 was around 30.3 per 100,000 population, a rate three times the world average, twice the average of countries in North America, and thirty times the average of countries in Europe. Crime is far from being homogenously distributed in the country, and its rural areas provide favorable conditions for different types of crime (Scorzafave, Justus, and Shikida 2015; Justus, Scorzafave, and Sant ' Anna 2016; Ceccato and Ceccato 2017). The country is also known for its high degree of socioeconomic inequalities (C  ardia and Schiffer 2002) that are bound to affect victimization, perceived safety, and, not least, one ' s capacity to adopt safety protection measures and safety devices.

## Data and Sample

The individual data used in this study were obtained from the 2009 Brazilian National Household Sampling Survey and its special supplement on safety. All individual data were weighted using the sample expansion factor provided by the Brazilian Institute for

Geography and Statistics. This database contains unidentified information from a large number of randomly surveyed individuals such that reliable estimates are obtainable for the entire Brazilian population. This database covers details regarding individual characteristics, family structure, household living conditions, income, and work. The 2009 database also includes victimization and public safety data.

Given that the safety devices addressed in this study are those employed to protect a household, the unit of analysis is the household. For this reason, the sample is restricted to the reference individuals who represent the households contained in the sample (including single-family households). This reduced the overall sample from 399,387 to 121,163 individuals who represent their households (i.e., 121,163 households). Note that despite the reduction of the number of individuals, the filtered sample remains representative of the entire population of Brazilian households for the year 2009.

## Empirical Models

This study combines descriptive analysis with probabilistic regression -probit -to answer the research questions put forward. The probit model is deemed more appropriate (compared to the logit model) as suggested by Hahn and Soyer (2005), given that the

| Variables                                                                                                                                                                                     | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| safety device familyincome victimized aggression safety feeling house house owns family size children age race male married Urbanization levels urban periurban accessible rural remote rural | 1 if the individual uses any home safety device Average family per capita income 1 if the individual was a victim of theft or robbery, 0 if otherwise 1 if the individual was a victim of aggression, 0 if otherwise 1 if the individual declared feeling safe in his or her household, 0 if otherwise 1 if the individual lives in a residential house and 0 if an apartment 1 if the individual owns the house he or she lives in, 0 if otherwise The number of residents in the household 1 if the household has children/adolescents, 0 if otherwise Age in years 1 if the person is White, 0 if otherwise 1 if the individual is of the male, 0 if female 1 if the individual is married, 0 if single 1 if the individual resides in an urban area 1 if the individual resides in a periurban area 1 if the individual resides in an accessible rural area 1 if the individual resides in a remote rural area |

sample size is relatively large and the variables are not extremely independent. The dependent variable of the probit models is a binary, which is 1 if individuals use safety devices (irrespective of type) to protect their households and 0 if otherwise. The regressors considered in the empirical model are classified and specified as follows (Table 1):

1. Economic factor: Average household income, measured in Brazilian currency (real [R$]). Household income is divided into ten classes separated by deciles that are used throughout the analysis of this study.
2. Level of urbanization : A set of four binary variables for different contexts of urbanization: urban, periurban, accessible rural, and remote rural. Following the classifications of the Brazilian National Household Sampling Survey survey, urban areas are cities with completely urbanized areas (reference group); periurban areas are cities with unurbanized areas or isolated urban areas; accessible rural areas are rural agglomerates of urban extension or isolated populated or rural agglomerates; and remote rural areas are detached isolated or rural agglomerates combined with other isolated rural agglomerates and zones.
3. Criminogenic factors : Binary for burglary or robbery (1 if victimized); binary for aggression (1 if victimized); and binary for feeling of safety in the household (1 if the individual feels safe).
4. Type of residence : House (1 if the individual lives in a house and 0 if in an apartment) and own residence (1 if the individual owns the residential unit and 0 if it is rented).
5. Family structure : Family size (number of members) and a set of five binary variables that control for the presence of children in the household: without children
6. (reference group), with children below age fourteen, with children above age fourteen, with children above and below age fourteen, and other family structures.
6. Individual attributes : Age, skin color (1 if White and 0 if otherwise), gender (women as the reference group), and marital status (single or divorced individuals are used as the reference group).
7. Binary for states: A set of twenty-seven binary variables to control for geographicspecific effects for the twenty-six Brazilian states and Federal District.

## Results and Discussion

Characterization of Income Levels in the Urban -Rural Continuum

Figure 2 shows that the distribution of the average per capita income of Brazilian households is significantly unequal across income strata. The first and second deciles are approximate strata of households in extreme poverty and poverty, which are considered underprivileged groups, whereas the last two deciles represent high-income households. The significant increase of the average income from the ninth and tenth deciles shows the existence of high income inequality between the rich, middle-class, and poor in Brazil, as discussed by Ribeiro and Cano (2016). Figure 2 also shows that the average income is similar across urbanization levels within each income strata, except for the tenth decile, where income distribution varies significantly between urbanization levels.

Characterization of Victimization by Income Levels in the Urban -Rural Continuum

Wealthier households are economically more attractive to criminals and offer more opportunities for

4000

<!-- image -->

eUrban

■Full Sample

Incomestrata

Peri-urbanAccessible ruralRemote rural

Figure 2 Mean of household per capita income (Brazilian currency, reals), by distribution deciles and different contexts of urbanization.

Figure 3 Percentage of individuals victimized by robbery or theft, by distribution deciles and different contexts of urbanization.

<!-- image -->

crime. Consequently, similar to the results from Justus and Kassouf (2013), we found that average and high-income households are targeted relatively more often by criminals for robbery and theft compared to low-income households (Figure 3). Justus and Kassouf (2013), however, suggested that the relationship between income is nonlinear, whereby victimization risk increases when income

Figure 4 Percentage of individuals victimized by assault (physical aggression), by distribution deciles and different contexts of urbanization.

<!-- image -->

increases but is reduced at very high income levels after reaching a maximum level.

Similar to Scorzafave, Justus, and Shikida (2015), we found that urban households are more often victims of robbery and theft compared to rural ones, irrespective of income levels. Specifically, rural households from almost all income strata run half of the risk of being victimized compared to remote urban households. Figure 3 also highlights that the average risk of theft and robbery victimization varies more significantly over urbanization levels compared to income. Nonetheless, the opposite is observed when addressing aggression victimization, whereby income seems to play a more significant role (Figure 4). Specifically, there is no clear association between victimization and urbanization levels, but the inverse association between income and aggression victimization is clear. This observation indicates that property crimes are more income related, whereas violent crimes are mostly associated with geographic space and context (Scorzafave, Justus, and Shikida 2015).

## Patterns of Adoption of Safety Protective Measures in Urban -Rural Areas

Individuals assume the responsibility for their own protection when they feel that the state is unreliable in providing public safety. The combination of such dissatisfaction with victimization risk and available income makes private consumption of public safety a reasonable choice. Different from other types of spending, however, the ' consumption ' of safety by individuals is ' grudge ' spending (Goold, Loader, and Thumala 2010). According to these authors, this is because security consumption is ' experienced as an irritant, a hassle, even as a de facto form of taxation ' (Goold, Loader, and Thumala 2010, 11).

In this study, we found that the adoption of safety protective devices follows an urban -rural divide; namely, we observe a clear inverse association between the level of urbanization and the use of safety devices (Figure 5). This divide is also vastly reflected by the predominance of the literature on the use of modern safety devices in urban areas compared to rural areas (Aransiola and Ceccato 2020). On average, less than half of the underprivileged population (e.g., first and second decile who have average household per capita income below R$159.09) uses safety devices, whereas more than twice this percentage of the wealthier population uses safety devices. Although this direct relationship between income and the adoption of protective devices is observed for all locations, it is important to note that those living in urban and periurban households adopt these devices more often than those living in accessible and remote rural areas. Figure 6 illustrates the percentage of households that use safety devices in Brazil, divided into twenty-six states and the Federal District. The use of safety devices for household protection is highest in the Federal District, followed by the states of S ~ ao Paulo and Mato Grosso do Sul, whereas the states with the lowest percentage of adoption were Alagoas, Acre, and Piau  ı , in decreasing order.

<!-- image -->

■FullSample

Figure 5 Percentage of households where there are safety devices (traditional, modern, or both), by distribution deciles and different contexts of urbanization.

Figure 6 The use of household safety devices by states ( % ) in Brazil, 2009.

<!-- image -->

## Adoption of Traditional and Modern Safety Protective Devices by Area and Income Levels

As discussed by Aransiola and Ceccato (2020), although households in urban areas concentrate most of the adoption of safety protective devices, such adoption varies by type of safety devices and income levels. The devices we refer to as traditional ones consist of locks, gates, private security, and security dogs, whereas technological devices consist of security alarms and cameras (CCTV). Although we address these safety measures in two separate categories in this study, Oliveira (2018) showed that most households combine these devices (traditional, modern, or both) to fit their needs. Oliveira also noted that, although the use of modern safety devices is on the rise, the traditional ones are the most commonly used in Brazilian households (see Figure 7). A general comparison of the use of modern and traditional devices in Figure 7 shows that poor households resort mostly to traditional prevention measures, whereas a majority of wealthier ones adopt both traditional and modern prevention measures. It is worth highlighting, however, that the discrepancy observed in the use of safety protective devices between urban and remote rural areas is more pronounced for the use of technological devices compared to traditional ones. The geographical illustration of the adoption of these categories of safety devices in Figure 8 shows that the use of traditional safety devices is more homogeneously distributed across Brazil compared to the use of modern measures. It is also clear that the residents of the Federal District are the predominant users of private crime prevention measures.

The adoption of modern safety protective devices implies a better guarantee of a proper criminal investigation if a crime occurs. The use of surveillance cameras is predominant in wealthy urban and periurban households. Given that CCTV is the major, if not the only, surveillance measure that efficiently assists the investigation of crimes by the police (Nieto 1997), these data, aside from

A. 90

Figure 7 Percentage of households where there are (A) traditional and (B) modern safety devices, by income deciles and different contexts of urbanization.

<!-- image -->

illustrating inequality, indicate a natural bias in households ' access to modern intelligent policing. Figure 9 specifically focuses on the use of CCTV cameras to further emphasize the role of income on the use of safety protective devices. CCTV is predominantly found in wealthy urban and periurban households and rarely used in other contexts of urbanization and income strata. In this context, on one hand, poor and rural households solely depend on a significant communication and sociable relationship with the police, which is not always the case, and, on the other hand, wealthier households have footage from surveillance cameras to provide to the police as criminal evidence to aid investigations.

<!-- image -->

Figure 8 The use of (A) traditional and (B) modern household safety devices by states ( % ), Brazil, 2009.

<!-- image -->

eUrban

Full Sample

Peri-urbanAccessible ruralRemote rural

Figure 9 Percentage of individuals using closed-circuit television (CCTV) devices, by distribution deciles and different contexts of urbanization ( % ).

## Determinants of the Adoption of Household Safety Protective Devices

Table 2 shows the average marginal effects obtained from the probit model for the use of security devices per decile of the per capita household income distribution, where the response variable is the adoption of household safety protective devices. The estimation of separate models for each income strata shows how the effect of the determinants of the use of safety devices varies by income group; that is, the same factor might have distinct magnitudes of importance to different income groups. The marginal effects presented in Table 2 indicate the effect of a 1 percent increase in continuous variables and discrete changes in discrete variables on the use of safety devices.

The result obtained in the ' full sample ' model, which represents the whole Brazilian population without income classification, confirms that the use of safety devices is higher in urban households (reference group), followed by households located in periurban, accessible rural, and remote rural

Table 2 Average marginal effects obtained from probit models for the use of security devices per decile of the per capita household income distribution

## Response variable: Use of safety device

| Decile 10           | 11,748 - 0.0342  (0.002) - 0.0842  (0.003)                                                                                | - 0.287  (0.001) 0.0481                                   | (0.000) 0.00524  (0.000) 0.0254  (0.002) - 0.00305  (0.000) - 0.0604  (0.000) 0.0537  (0.000) 0.0173  (0.000) 0.00674  (0.000) - 0.000551  (0.000) 0.00456  (0.000) - 0.0445  (0.000) 0.0350  (0.000) Yes                                                                                                                   | - 0.950  (0.014)                     |
|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|
| Decile 9 11,724     | - 0.128  (0.002) - 0.214  (0.002) - 0.258  (0.001)                                                                                | 0.151  (0.001)                                  | 0.0429  (0.001) 0.0113  (0.002) - 0.00582  (0.000) - 0.100  (0.000) 0.0546  (0.000) 0.0179  (0.000) 0.0478  (0.000) 0.000204  (0.000) 0.0311  (0.000) - 0.0308  (0.000) 0.0220  (0.000) Yes                                                                                                                   | - 2.918  (0.028)                     |
| Decile 8 11,719     | - 0.160  (0.002) - 0.239  (0.002) - 0.269  (0.001)                                                                                | 0.0829  (0.002)                                  | 0.0282  (0.001) 0.0810  (0.002) - 0.0519  (0.000) - 0.122  (0.001) 0.0629  (0.000) 0.0276  (0.000) 0.0243  (0.001) - 0.000980  (0.000) 0.0451  (0.000) - 0.0565  (0.000) 0.0351  (0.000) Yes                                                                                                                   | - 1.169  (0.039)                     |
| Decile 7 11,719     | - 0.102  (0.002) - 0.282  (0.002) - 0.254  (0.001)                                                                                | 0.192  (0.003)                                  | 0.0617  (0.001) - 0.0392  (0.002) - 0.0225  (0.000) - 0.161  (0.001) 0.0359  (0.000) 0.0261  (0.000) 0.0138  (0.001) - 0.000998  (0.000) 0.0310  (0.000) - 0.0485  (0.000) 0.0367  (0.000) Yes                                                                                                                   | - 2.844  (0.045)                     |
| Decile 6 11,683     | - 0.0816  (0.002) - 0.178  (0.001) - 0.248  (0.001)                                                                                | 0.496  (0.006)                                  | 0.0349  (0.001) 0.0280  (0.002) - 0.0395  (0.000) - 0.170  (0.001) 0.0234  (0.000) 0.0289  (0.000) 0.0177  (0.001) - 0.00146  (0.000) 0.0334  (0.000) - 0.0762  (0.000) 0.0662  (0.000) Yes                                                                                                                   | - 8.056  (0.101)                     |
| Decile 5 11,717     | - 0.0590  (0.002) - 0.228  (0.002) - 0.255  (0.001)                                                                                | 0.218  (0.003)                                  | 0.0849  (0.001) - 0.0173  (0.002) - 0.0330  (0.000) - 0.110  (0.001) 0.0206  (0.000) 0.0153  (0.000) 0.0364  (0.001) - 0.000753  (0.000) 0.0419  (0.000) - 0.0165  (0.001) 0.0275  (0.000) Yes                                                                                                                   | - 3.175  (0.042)                     |
| Decile 4 11,702     | - 0.0775  (0.002) - 0.137  (0.001) - 0.238  (0.001)                                                                                | 0.162  (0.003)                                  | 0.0788  (0.001) - 0.0116  (0.002) - 0.0146  (0.000) - 0.125  (0.001) 0.0181  (0.000) 0.00686  (0.000) 0.0341  (0.001) - 0.000989  (0.000) 0.00976  (0.000) - 0.0307  (0.001) 0.0243  (0.000) Yes                                                                                                                   | - 2.290  (0.042)                     |
| Decile 3 11,699     | - 0.0774  (0.002) - 0.228  (0.001) - 0.232  (0.001)                                                                                | 0.166  (0.003)                                  | 0.0602  (0.001) 0.00604  (0.002) - 0.0211  (0.000) - 0.195  (0.001) 0.0111  (0.000) 0.00361  (0.000) 0.0289  (0.001) - 0.000352  (0.000) 0.00816  (0.000) - 0.0279  (0.001) 0.0401  (0.000) Yes                                                                                                                   | - 1.998  (0.039)                     |
| Decile 2 11,681     | - 0.0327  (0.002) - 0.182  (0.001) - 0.251  (0.000)                                                                                | 0.175  (0.002)                                  | 0.0698  (0.001) 0.0212  (0.001) - 0.0180  (0.000) - 0.170  (0.001) 0.000235 (0.000) - 0.000568  (0.000) 0.0204  (0.001) 0.000428  (0.000) 0.0345  (0.000) - 0.0157  (0.000) 0.0307  (0.000) Yes                                                                                                                   | - 2.011  (0.023)                     |
| Decile 1 10,076     | - 0.0367  (0.002) - 0.176  (0.001) - 0.200  (0.000)                                                                                | 0.0371  (0.000)                                  | 0.105  (0.001) - 0.0183  (0.001) - 0.0234  (0.000) - 0.145  (0.002) - 0.00336  (0.000) - 0.00631  (0.000) 0.0431  (0.001) 0.00112  (0.000) - 0.00485  (0.000) - 0.0262  (0.000) 0.0384  (0.000) Yes                                                                                                                   | - 0.253  (0.010)                     |
| Full sample 118,794 | - 0.108  (0.001) - 0.250  (0.000) - 0.299  (0.000)                                                                                | 0.00919  (0.000)                                  | 0.0757  (0.000) - 0.0179  (0.000) - 0.0128  (0.000) - 0.216  (0.000) 0.0422  (0.000) - 0.0106  (0.000) 0.0228  (0.000) 0.000277  (0.000) 0.0568  (0.000) - 0.0260  (0.000) 0.0600  (0.000) Yes                                                                                                                   | 0.451  (0.002)                     |
|                     | Number of observations Baseline: Urban Periurban Accessible rural Remote rural | Control variables Log (household | income) Robbery or theft Assault Safety feeling House Own home Family size Children Age Race Male Married Dummies | for states Constant |

.

%

%

Significant at 5

Significant at 1





Note : The values in parentheses are the standard errors.  Significant at 10 % .

.

areas, respectively. This inverse relationship between the level of urbanization and the use of safety devices is observed across all income strata. The disparity of adoption between urban and other households increases, however, as income increases (increasing coefficients from cecile 1 to decile 10). The role of income is further confirmed by the positive sign observed in all of the models for the control for the value of per capita household income.

As observed by Scorzafave, Justus, and Shikida (2015), individual characteristics and previous victimization matter for the adoption of safety protective devices, but they vary by crime type. Females and the White population adopt safety protective devices more often; however, marital status does not seem to have the same effect across income strata. Having been previously victimized by theft or robbery is a strong predictor of the adoption of safety protective devices across all income strata, but the comparison of the strata-wise models shows that victimization by theft or robbery is more decisive for the adoption of safety protective devices among economically underprivileged households compared to wealthier ones. As discussed by Goold, Loader, and Thumala (2010), using safety devices is a decision based on the necessity to protect a household in poverty contexts, whereas the use of safety devices in wealthier households is not. The inverse relationship between assault levels and adoption of safety protective measures is most likely related to the fact that violence, in general, is often linked to underprivileged contexts. Safety perceptions also affect the adoption of safety protective devices. The result confirms that those reporting feeling safer in their household are less inclined to adopt safety protective devices.

Regarding household structure and infrastructure, the results show that people who live in single-family houses are less likely to adopt protective devices compared to those living in condominiums or apartments. This preference does not appear to be directly associated with income levels. Housing ownership is a determinant for the adoption of security devices -this effect of housing tenancy seems to increase as income increases. This might be because many poor and middle-class individuals do not have their own homes and wealthier households have more property to protect. Larger poor families are less inclined to use safety devices, but middle-class and wealthier households with more members are more likely to use them. The presence of children in the household increases the probability of using safety devices, and this probability is significantly higher in poor households compared to wealthier ones. This further emphasizes the role of the necessity of caring for family members in the choice of poor households to adopt safety devices as discussed in Goold, Loader, and Thumala (2010) and Oliveira (2018). Among those having families with children, findings corroborate the potential effect of altruistic fear in the process of adopting household safety devices, as suggested by previous literature (Snedker 2006; Heber 2009; da Costa and Ceccato 2015).

## Conclusions and Recommendations

This study identifies some determinants of the adoption of safety protection devices in urban -rural contexts in Brazil, taking into account different urban -rural and income distribution contexts -after controlling for the previous victimization and declared safety perception. Its findings show an inverse association between the level of urbanization and adoption of safety protective devices, especially of modern ones -a pattern that is mediated by individual levels of victimization and safety perceptions. On average, less than half of the underprivileged population adopts safety devices, whereas twice as many do so among the wealthy. The adoption of safety protective measures is typically common among White, wealthier, urban households, often located in privately owned condominiums or apartments. This overall evidence indicates that commodification of security in Brazil serves to reinforce current inequalities determined by differences in income groups, gender, and ethnic background. The process of securitization provides better bases for the protection of wealthier urban dwellers and less so of less privileged ones, including those living in most remote areas.

The commodification of security reflected in the vast use of private safety devices (modern and traditional) to protect oneself or the household is a flag that individuals have lost faith in the provision of public safety by the state. Given the high level of income inequality in Brazil, however, a large portion of the population cannot afford the ' grudge ' consumption of basic conventional protective measures, not to mention more modern ones. Studies have shown that Brazil has long preferred the use of general social policies for crime prevention compared to specific prevention programs adopted in, for instance, the United States (Goold, Loader, and Thumala 2010). The results from this study, however, indicate that specific crime prevention policies might help to cover specific gaps in the heterogeneous distribution of safety across specific income strata, urbanization levels, and regions. Specifically, for rural areas and underprivileged communities, we recommend the promotion of funding schemes for the adoption of safety devices as seen in Australia (Sutton and Wilson 2004) and the promotion of natural surveillance through Neighborhood Watch programs with collaboration with local law enforcement authorities as seen in the United Kingdom (Yarwood and Edwards 1995) and China (Messner et al. 2017).

Safety perceptions and previous victimization mediate the adoption of safety protective measures.

It is unclear, however, why different types of crime affect their adoption differently in different socioeconomic and geographical contexts. Future research should devote time to testing potential interaction effects between housing ownership and safety protective devices in households located on the urban -rural spectrum. Concerning victimization, endogeneity is a recognized methodological challenge when studying the use of private security measures. This means that it is not always possible to identify the direction of causation (victimization -adoption) or vice versa, but often high levels of adoption of safety devices are recorded after individuals become crime victims. In the future, studies should also address potential differences in police practices as well as crime prevention initiatives by region, which are bound to affect protection and safety perceptions and trust in the police. Another limitation of this study is that it is based on a data set from 2009, which does not include the use of drones and apps that are currently being employed to collect data on safety conditions. Data permitting, panel data and comparable data sets should be used to test the progress of adoption of safety protective measures over time and across space.

Despite its limitations, this study makes a contribution to the understanding of the process of adoption of safety protective devices beyond urban areas in Brazil and, consequently, to the Global South international literature. /H17039

## ORCID

Temidayo James Aransiola http://orcid.org/ 0000-0001-5578-0065

Vania Ceccato 5302-1698

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-

Marcelo Justus 8660-1779

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Literature Cited

- Aransiola, T. J., and V. Ceccato. 2020. The role of modern technology in rural situational crime prevention: A review of the literature. In Rural crime prevention , ed. A. Harkness, 58 -72. London: Routledge.
- Aransiola, T. J., V. Ceccato, and M. Justus. 2021. The effect of absolute and relative deprivation on homicides in Brazil. Homicide Studies 25 (4):361 -26. doi: 10.1177/ 1088767921989068.
- Beato, C., and A. Silveira. 2018. Some conceptual basis for crime prevention in Brazil and USA: Generic public policies and control crime programs. International Journal of Criminology and Sociology 7 (1):184 -95. doi: 10. 6000/1929-4409.2018.07.13.
- Caldeira, P. R. 2001. City of walls: Crime, segregation, and citizenship in Sao Paulo . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Caldeira, P. R. 2013. The paradox of police violence in democratic Brazil. In Policing and contemporary governance: The anthropology of police in practice , ed. W. Garriott, 97 -124. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
- C  ardia, N., and S. Schiffer. 2002. Viol ^ encia e desigualdade social [Violence and social inequality]. Ci ^ encia e Cultura 54 (1):25 -31.
- Cavalcanti, R. P. 2017. ' Over, under and through the walls ' : The dynamics of public security, police -community relations and the limits of managerialism in crime control in Recife, Brazil. PhD diss., King ' s College London.
- Cavalcanti, R. P. 2020. A Southern criminology of violence, youth and policing: Governing insecurity . London and New York: Routledge.
- Ceccato, V., and H. Ceccato. 2017. Violence in the rural Global South: Trends, patterns, and tales from the Brazilian countryside. Criminal Justice Review 42 (3): 270 -90. doi: 10.1177/0734016817724504.
- Ceccato, V., S. Melo, and T. Kahn. 2018. Trends and patterns of police-related deaths in Brazil. In The Palgrave handbook of criminology and the Global South , ed. S. R.-A. a. P. Carrington, 521 -50. London: Palgrave.
- Clarke, R. V., ed. 1983. Situational crime prevention: Its theoretical basis and practical scope . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Clarke, R. V. 1995. Situational crime prevention. Crime and Justice 19:91 -150. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1147596.
- Coupe, T., and M. Griffiths. 1996. Solving residential burglary . London: Home Office Police Research Group.
- da Costa, B., and V. Ceccato. 2015. Assessing the adoption of household safety protection (HSP) in Stockholm, Sweden. Crime Science 4 (1):1 -12. doi: 10.1186/s40163-015-0027-4.
- Donnermeyer, J. F. 2012. Rural crime and critical criminology. In Routledge handbook of critical criminology , ed. W. S. DeKeseredy and M. Dragiewicz, 289 -302. London and New York: Routledge.
- Donnermeyer, J. F., and W. S. DeKeseredy. 2013. Rural criminology . London and New York: Routledge.
- Fajnzylber, P., and A. Araujo, Jr. 2001. Viol ^ encia e criminalidade [Violence and criminality], Discussion Paper No. 167, Federal University of Minas Gerais -Cedeplar-UFMG, 333 -394.
- Freitas, E. L. H. 2008. Loteamentos fechados [Closed allotments]. Tese de Doutorado, Faculdade de Arquitetura e Urbanismo, Universidade de S ~ ao Paulo, S ~ ao Paulo. doi: 10.11606/T.16.2008.tde-18012010-230029.
- Goold, B., I. Loader, and A. Thumala. 2010. Consuming security? Tools for a sociology of security consumption. Theoretical Criminology 14 (1):3 -30. doi: 10.1177/ 1362480609354533.
- Hahn, E. D., and R. Soyer. 2005. Probit and logit models: Differences in the multivariate realm. The Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 67:1 -12.
- Heber, A. 2009. ' The worst thing that could happen ' : On altruistic fear of crime. International Review of Victimology 16 (3):257 -75. doi: 10.1177/026975800901600302.
- Instituto de Pesquisa Econ ^ omica Aplicada e F  orum Brasileiro de Seguranc ¸a P  ublica. 2019. Atlas da viol ^ encia. Technical report, Instituto de Pesquisa Econ ^ omica Aplicada (IPEA) e F  orum Brasileiro de Seguranc ¸a P  ublica (FBSP), Bras  ı lia, Brazil.

<!-- image -->

- Justus, M., and A. L. Kassouf. 2013. Evidence of the effect of wealth observed by criminals on the risk of becoming a victim of property crimes. Economia 14 (2):88 -101. doi: 10.1016/j.econ.2013.08.006.
- Justus, M., L. G. Scorzafave, and E. G. Sant ' Anna. 2016. Crime and victimization in rural Brazil. In The Routledge international handbook of rural criminology , ed. J. Donnermeyer, 211 -21. London and New York: Routledge.
- Kahn, T. 2003. Seguranc ¸a p  ublica e trabalho policial no brasil: Promoting human rights through good governance in Brazil . Oxford, UK: Centre for Brazilian Studies, University of Oxford.
- Louderback, E. R., and S. Sen Roy. 2018. Integrating social disorganization and routine activity theories and testing the effectiveness of neighbourhood crime watch programs: Case study of Miami -Dade County, 2007 -15. The British Journal of Criminology 58 (4):968 -92. doi: 10. 1093/bjc/azx062.
- Messner, S. F., L. Zhang, S. X. Zhang, and C. P. Gruner. 2017. Neighborhood crime control in a changing China: Tiao-Jie, Bang-Jiao, and neighborhood watches. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 54 (4):544 -77. doi: 10.1177/0022427816682059.
- Nieto, M. 1997. Public video surveillance: Is it an effective crime prevention tool? Sacramento: California Research Bureau, California State Library.
- Oliveira, C. A. 2018. The impact of private precautions on home burglary and robbery in Brazil. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 34 (1):111 -37. doi: 10.1007/ s10940-016-9325-6.
- Pochmann, M. 2015. Ajuste econ ^ omico e desemprego recente no brasil metropolitano [Economic adjustment and recent unemployment in metropolitan Brazil]. Estudos Avanc ¸ados 29 (85):7 -19. doi: 10.1590/S010340142015008500002.
- Ribeiro, E., and I. Cano. 2016. Vitimizac ¸ ~ ao letal e desigualdade no brasil: Evid ^ encias em n  ı vel municipal [Lethal victimization and inequality in Brazil: Evidence at the municipal level]. Civitas -Revista de Ci ^ encias Sociais 16 (2):285 -305. doi: 10.15448/1984-7289.2016.2.23066.
- Sandercock, L. 2000. When strangers become neighbours: Managing cities of difference. Planning Theory &amp; Practice 1 (1):13 -30. doi: 10.1080/14649350050135176.
- Scorzafave, L. G., M. Justus, and P. F. A. Shikida. 2015. Safety in the Global South: Criminal victimization in Brazilian rural areas. Journal of Rural Studies 39:247 -61. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2014.12.002.
- Silva, G. F., and C. Beato. 2013. Confianc ¸a na pol  ı cia em Minas Gerais: O efeito da percepc ¸ ~ ao de efici ^ encia e do contato individual [Trust in the police in Minas Gerais: The effect of perception of efficiency and individual
- contact]. Opini ~ ao P  ublica 19 (1):118 -53. doi: 10.1590/ S0104-62762013000100006.
- Snedker, K. A. 2006. Altruistic and vicarious fear of crime: Fear for others and gendered social roles. Sociological Forum 21 (2):163 -95. doi: 10.1007/s11206-006-9019-1.
- Sutton, A., and D. Wilson. 2004. Open-street CCTV in Australia: The politics of resistance and expansion. Surveillance &amp; Society 2 (2 -3):310 -22. doi: 10.24908/ss. v2i2/3.3380.
- Weisburd, D. 2015. The law of crime concentration and the criminology of place. Criminology 53 (2):133 -57. doi: 10.1111/1745-9125.12070.
- Yarwood, R., and B. Edwards. 1995. Voluntary action in rural areas: The case of neighbourhood watch. Journal of Rural Studies 11 (4):447 -59. doi: 10.1016/07430167(95)00030-5.

TEMIDAYO JAMES ARANSIOLA is a PhD in Economics from the University of Campinas, Campinas S ~ ao Paulo, Brazil and a visiting scholar at the Department of Urban Planning and Environment, School of Architecture and the Built Environment, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, Teknikringen 10, 11428. E-mail: tjara@kth.se. His primary research areas are child protection, public health, and crime economics using econometrics and other quantitative methods.

VANIA CECCATO is a Professor in the Department of Urban Planning and Environment, School of Architecture and the Built Environment, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm 11428, Sweden. Email: vania.ceccato@abe.kth.se. Geographic information systems (GIS) and spatial methods underlie her research, which includes the geography of crime and fear in urban and rural environments. She is coordinator of the Safeplaces network, a partner of the UNHabitat SaferCities program.

MARCELO JUSTUS is an Associate Professor in the Center of Research in Applied Economics, Agriculture, and Environment (NEA þ ) at the Institute of Economics of the University of Campinas, Campinas S ~ ao Paulo 13083-857, Brazil. E-mail: mjustus@unicamp.br. He is a research productivity scholar of CNPq. He is the Founder, Coordinator, and Professor of the specialization course (university extension) in Law and Economics at Unicamp. He has dozens of published scientific papers in national and international journals in economics, criminology, and related areas.