

    

## MEXICAN URBAN COLONIAS IN THE SALT RIVER VALLEY OF ARIZONA

## CHRIS LUKINBEAL, DANIEL D. ARREOLA, and D. DREW LUCIO

abstract. The history of the Salt River Valley is often characterized as a boomtown narrative that highlights the exploding Anglo population and rapid suburban sprawl that followed World War II. Frequently overlooked is the fundamental role that Mexicans played in the early suburbanization process through the formation of urban colonias, or suburban Mexican settlements. Early Mexican suburbs, despite their rural atmosphere, were connected to the pre-World War II urbanization process in the Salt River Valley. Our research seeks to amend and clarify the urban historical record by documenting the diverse and dispersed array of Mexican suburban settlements, a process generated by industrial agriculture, decentralization, and residential segregation. Keywords: cotton camps, industrial agriculture, Mexican settlement patterns, suburban history, urban colonias.

I n  the  Salt  River Valley, 1   commonly known as the 'Phoenix metropolitan area,' comprised a vast sprawling, horizontal geography with  .  million residents. Modern settlement of this region derives from a massive post-World War II Anglo population immigration and suburbanization (Gammage  ; Gober  ). 2 This characterization comes from the 'popular perception that suburban development is essentially a postwar phenomenon, with the  s being the touchstone decade' (Harris and Larkham  ,  ). Mexicans were central to the early suburbanization process of the Salt River Valley through colonia settlements on the urban periphery, yet the notion that Phoenix developed as an almost entirely Anglo metropolis persists despite evidence of substantial Mexican roots in the city (Oberle and Arreola  ).

In this article we show how and why urban colonias emerged across the Salt River Valley before the post-World War II-boom industrial agriculture practiced on the periphery shaped the area's early-twentieth-century economy. 'Industrial agriculture' refers to the extraction of a primary resource and achieves economies of scale when high levels of agricultural productivity and the size of production (in acreage) leads to low costs and high profits. Mexicans were critical to the success of this  enterprise owing to their presence in the valley, their underclass status, and their knowledge of irrigation skills and labor practices in arid environments.

Urban colonias in the Salt River Valley formed in one of three ways: as workingclass neighborhoods on the fringe that filtered down from Anglos to Mexicans, as settlements based on real estate promotions in environmentally sensitive areas or on unproductive lands, known as 'disamenity zones,' or as settlements forged by company-sponsored housing schemes. The first process is characteristic of Phoenix's southern fringe beyond the Salt River, neighborhoods abandoned by Anglos after

/ornament11 Dr. Lukinbeal is a technical associate professor of geography at Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona  , where Dr. Arreola is a professor of geography. Mr. Lucio is an independent scholar based in Washington, D.C.

F ig .  Cotton camps in the Salt River Valley, Arizona, in  . Source: Brown and Cassmore  , xvi. (Cartography by D. Drew Lucio and Barbara Trapido-Lurie)

<!-- image -->

the disastrous  flood  (Luckingham  ,  ;  Dimas  ,  - ).  The second method is responsible for the majority of urban colonias, most of which were proximate to industrial agricultural areas or existing Anglo towns (Vinson  ; Reynolds  ; Harner  ; Benitez  ). The third type came in the form of cotton camps associated with industrial agriculture (Figure  ). These highly decentralized settlements spurred Mexican peripheral population concentration greater than previously recorded in the valley (Arreola and others  ). Cotton was the first form of industrial agriculture to achieve economies of scale heralding the destruction of the small-farming landscape as 'large-acreage agglomerations with absentee land owners, tenant operators,' all served by a large pool of cheap Mexican labor, took over the valley (Hill  ,  ).

We contend that the latter two formation processes were central to the history of early suburbanization in the Salt River Valley. In the United States suburbs are commonly 'defined as political entities, democratically run and with constitutional power' (Harris  ,  ; see also, Ashton  ; Binford  ; Keating  ). But this definition  only  describes  a  portion  of  the  formation  and  experience  of  the suburbanization process, especially as it relates to the United States before the  s (Harris and Lewis  ). Suburbs are conceived in a number of different ways, which include being peripheral to the urban core (Clawson and Hall  ; Gardner  ;

Harris  ,  ), being residential or industrial (Douglass  ; Harris and Ullman  ), comprising low-density settlements (Clawson and Hall  ;  Gardner  ; Harris  ,  ), having high levels of owner occupance (Jackson  ), and exhibiting a distinctive way of life that is characteristic of the middle and upper classes (Sies  ).

Though not politically autonomous communities or emphasizing the middle to upper classes, urban colonias in the Salt River Valley fit within the new urban history definition of suburban formation in the pre-World War II era, especially as it  relates to industrial decentralization and the marketing of inexpensive land on the urban fringe (Harris  ,  ,  ;  Harris  and Larkham  ;  Harris and Lewis  ,  ; Gardner  , Wiese  ). Industrial decentralization in the Salt River Valley led to the formation of suburbs in the pre-World War II era through the creation of cotton camps and through real estate ventures that marketed cheap land in and outside disamenity zones (Curtis  ). These processes allowed Mexicans to become homeowners at a period in the past when homeownership by members of the group was uncommon.

Our research follows a hermeneutical method, an interpretative and iterative process of querying existing textual assumptions and primary source materials to develop new knowledge (Bohman  ; Gadamer  ). We stitch disparate theories and information from urban history, the history of the Salt River Valley, and ethnic geography to expand our knowledge of the process of Mexican urban colonia formation in the region. Most of the primary sources we consulted came from three special collections at the Arizona State University Libraries: the Chicano Research Collection; the Arizona Collection; and the Litchfield Park Collection. Other primary documentation came from the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company archives at the University of Akron and from the Litchfield Park Historical Society. In addition, we interviewed key informants about the Mexican history of Litchfield Park. Historical maps and aerial photographs, along with field reconnaissance, substantiate claims from those interviews and corroborate map data.

We focus first on the early years of settlement (  - ) in the Salt River Valley to highlight the role of Mexican irrigators and laborers in establishing an urban economy based on agriculture. Next, we show how Mexican labor was central to the formation of industrial agriculture, especially as it relates to the production of cotton where Mexicans came to serve as an agricultural labor force. These sections lay the foundation for understanding how the Salt River Valley's decentralized urban economy created a dispersed urban colonia settlement pattern. Finally, drawing on this foundation, we map and discuss the urban colonias that formed throughout the valley from the early  s through  .

## Mexican Irrigators and Farm Laborers

In  the U.S. Army founded Fort McDowell, on the eastern edge of the Salt River Valley, to protect residents in the mining districts of Prescott and Wickenburg to the north. The military post also attracted Mexicans to the valley (Simkins  ), the

majority being Sonorans with roots in Arizona that stretched back to the Mexican and Spanish periods (Rosales n.d.). At almost every step, Mexicans guided their Anglo counterparts in developing the valley's agricultural economy, digging the trunk canals and providing labor to plant and harvest crops. Mexicans not only engaged in canal construction as common laborers and to benefit their own agricultural homesteads but also served as contractors on canal projects (Kupel  ;  Solliday  ; Dimas  ,  - ). They inherited their knowledge of irrigation farming from their Spanish forebears, who, under royal charter, had founded settlements in the river valleys of the Sonoran desert (Sheridan  ; Officer  ). Mexicans brought that know-how to the Salt River Valley settlements, where skilled workers became 'ditch bosses' who oversaw irrigation systems (Solliday  ,  ) (Figure  ).

The construction of early canals led to further economic development, increasing the labor market, which Mexicans filled. In the  U.S. federal census half of Phoenix's population was Mexican (Luckingham  ,  ).  Mexicans worked on the original survey of the town site and maintained the first public streets. They also built many of the early structures in the valley, relying on adobe to create a vernacular landscape that reflected their Sonoran roots (Oberle and Arreola  ).  Ironically, they built many of those earthen structures and dwellings for Anglos (Garcia  ).

The completion of the Maricopa and Phoenix Railway brought intercontinental service to the Salt River Valley in  , an event that hastened the destruction of the early  adobe built environment (Lamb  ;  Pierce  and  Parish  ;  Dean and Reynolds  ).  The arrival of the railroad caused a wave of Anglo immigration and replacement of adobe buildings with brick construction, allowing Anglo transplants to re-create the familiar cultural landscapes of their eastern homes (Martínez  ,  ; Luckingham  ).

Land-acquisition practices transformed the once-significant Mexican farming class into a landless peasantry (Dimas  ,  - ). During the recession of the  s many Mexicans could not obtain enough capital or supplies to sustain an agricultural homestead. This made them susceptible to financial arrangements that placed liens on their property so that they could receive money for seeds. Through these means, land speculators, such as Michael Wormser, a merchant from Prescott, held title to many Mexican homesteads and owned the canal system for those homesteads as well. Wormser, therefore, could persuade reluctant landowners to sell their homesteads at his price by cutting off their water allotment, thus rendering them unproductive (Dean and Reynolds  ). Wormser eventually controlled  ,  acres south of the Salt River, between the towns of Phoenix and Tempe (Dean and Reynolds  ; Rosales n.d.).

Yet Mexicans in the Salt River Valley proved indispensable to the development of an urban economy wholly manifested in industrial agriculture. Anglo farmers laid the early groundwork for this economy by organizing and funding canal construction and switching to more labor-intensive crops in the late nineteenth century. Increasingly marginalized from the economy, Mexicans participated in this endeavor chiefly as unskilled labor. That dependence was cemented as early as the  s, when Anglos moved to bar Mexicans from operating new farm machinery,

F ig .  Mexican workers were responsible for maintaining and operating early agricultural canals in Arizona's Salt River Valley. (Historic postcard from the Arreola Postcard Archive)

<!-- image -->

such as threshers, reapers, and headers (Rosales n.d.). Thus the early imprint of Mexicans in the Salt River Valley was significant and critical to the foundation of the farming systems, built environments, and communities, but a wave of Anglo migration to the area coinciding with the railroad began to erase and overwhelm the earliest Mexican landscapes of the region.

## The Agricultural Underclass and the Cotton Economy

An urban economy based on industrial agriculture in the Salt River Valley depended on stabilizing the water supply. The capricious nature of the Salt River thwarted the ambitions of local farmers: The river displayed cycles of violent flood and dry periods lasting nearly a decade. Local leaders envisioned a water-storage system that would provide stability and sought federal funding through the National Reclamation Act of  .  However, the act limited corporate use of water, thus restricting farmers in the Salt River Valley, where private water rights meant that users were outside the scope of the public interest. The principal sticking point was removal of the overlapping water rights of multiple users, especially large landowners who stood to gain at the expense of potential small farmers, the principal beneficiaries of the reclamation work. The result was the incorporation of the Salt River Valley Water Users Association ( srvwua ) in February  , which consolidated individual water rights under the authority of a public-private cooperative. By eliminating the contentious issue of multiple water users, the secretary of interior deemed the Salt River Valley suitable for federal reclamation funds on  March  . Despite arguments for local oversight instead of centralized control, the srvwua subscribed more than  , 

acres of land by June  ; the cap was set at  ,  acres (K. L. Smith  ,  ). The crowning achievement of the National Reclamation Act for the srvwua was the Roosevelt Dam, completed in  east of the valley in an upland zone. The dam created the major keystone reservoir to impound and regulate water use in the region.

Construction of the Roosevelt Dam created one serious hurdle: full repayment of debt in ten years. The project cost four times the original estimate, but users were still required to repay it in the original time allotted. New settlers had to shoulder these costs in addition to their normal operating expenses, such as home construction, clearing and improving land, and regular srvwua water assessments. Responsibility for this outcome lay with the Reclamation Service, which failed to coordinate the physical resources of the project with the human resources (K. L. Smith  ,  - ).  Although farmers in the Salt River Valley had the highest average crop value per farm, paying for project overruns left little profit at the end of the year. For sufficient profit, local farmers had to expand production while reducing costs, so they turned to migrant Mexican labor (Reisler  ,  - ).

The Mexican Revolution ignited in  , sending large numbers of refugees into the United States, many of whom came to the Salt River Valley. They too were incorporated into the burgeoning Mexican agricultural underclass. Farmers exploited Mexicans to realize their profits from the increased acreage delivered by water from the Roosevelt Dam. The crop that most epitomized this profit motive was cotton. Long-staple Egyptian cotton became important to the manufacture of tires and airplane cloth, especially as the United States entered World War I. Industries scrambled to acquire adequate supplies to manufacture these goods because Great Britain had embargoed imports from Egypt to protect its own supplies in  , and a boll-weevil infestation had decimated the only United States domestic source, Sea Island, South Carolina (Hill  ).

The introduction of cotton to the Salt River Valley began in  , but not on an industrial scale (Christy  ). In  the U.S. government opened an experimental  farm at Yuma, Arizona, to develop a variety of cotton amenable to the state's climate. After successive tests, the Department of Agriculture's Office of Foreign Seed and Plant Introduction released a domestic variety, known as 'Pima' (Christy  ;  S.  M.  Smith  ;  Hill  ).  This  achievement led to the first commercial planting in  ;  and,  with  that  success,  local  growers  formed cotton exchanges. These cooperative enterprises provided proper ginning facilities and secured sufficient labor to pick the cotton. The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company of Akron, Ohio, a major consumer of long-staple cotton, conducted extensive tests of the cotton grown in the Salt River Valley. It concluded Arizona Pima to be the best available cotton. Goodyear purchased land, invested in the construction of ginning facilities, and granted loans to individual growers in the valley. As the price of longstaple cotton soared, the small, family homesteads gave way to speculative operators who created 'desert sweatshops' practicing 'a large-scale industrialized type of agriculture' (McWilliams  ,  ). For cotton producers in the valley, revenues of  ,  in a single season during the  s were not uncommon.

Cotton agriculture demanded a stable labor supply, but the  Immigration Act  the nation's first comprehensive immigration policy  placed the supply in peril. Because Mexican nationals were obliged to appear before local draft boards, large numbers of migrant laborers returned home for fear of military conscription (Reisler  ,  ).  The Arizona Cotton Growers Association ( acga )  estimated more than  ,  Mexicans had been repatriated by fears of conscription (Knox  ).  Furthermore, the  act effectively banned a corporation, association, or society from paying for contracting of foreign laborers, either skilled or unskilled. From  to  , the acga was short  ,  laborers.

The  Immigration Act contained a discretionary clause, however, that authorized the commissioner of immigration, with prior approval from the secretary of labor, to 'exact bonds to control admission of those otherwise inadmissible aliens applying for admission' in the event of a labor shortage (Bennett  ,  ; Scruggs  ,  ). Local farmers and organizations lobbied the secretary of labor to grant the commissioner authority to exempt Mexican labor. The secretary did so, validating his actions because of the reliance on Mexican labor. During the  - growing season, special trains ferried thousands of Mexicans and their families across the border (Luckingham  ,  - ; Dimas  ,  - ).

The acga enlisted the services of labor recruiters, or enganchadores, an influential force in the regional labor market since the late nineteenth century. The recruiters contracted Mexicans at border crossings, at railroad stops inside the United States, or by traveling into Mexico (Solliday  ). In total, the acga had brought  ,  Mexican laborers into the valley by the end of the  - growing season, for which it had paid nearly  ,  (U.S. Congress  ). The savings to valley growers was an estimated  ,  ,  (J. Smith  ,  ). The cotton boom saw the Mexican population of Maricopa County clustered in the Salt River Valley increase to  ,  ,  or  percent of the population in  (Dean and Reynolds  ,  ).

Planting of cotton peaked in the  - season, with a record  ,  acres in production. The large harvest required a substantial labor force, but falling cotton prices led farmers to withhold laborers' pay. An investigation found that Mexican wages went unpaid and that commissaries operated at the various cotton camps built by growers were charging exorbitant prices. Excessive transportation costs deducted from Mexicans' wages caused additional suffering. By  incomes averaged only  a  week; half went to cover transportation costs, and the remainder stood as credit at the commissaries (McWilliams  ,  - ). Due to falling cotton prices, thousands of Mexicans were unemployed or stranded with no means of returning home (Peterson  ,  - ;  Luckingham  ,  - ).  Unemployed farmworkers drifted to Glendale, Tempe, Mesa, or Phoenix, where employment opportunities and relief were available. Local newspapers reported that most were without shelter and 'literally starving' (Kotlanger  ,  ).

Growers had to pay for return transportation to Mexico, but due to the  cotton bust, many could not pay this cost. Other farmers chose to ignore their obli-

gations, thus saving by not paying to transport additional workers for the following season. In Phoenix, the city manager collected hundreds of Mexican families and deposited them at the doorstep of the acga headquarters in Tempe, instructing them 'to take these people of yours until they can be deported' (McWilliams  ,  ). The acga reached an agreement with the Mexican government to return Mexicans free of charge and reimburse them for all unpaid wages. Of those stranded, estimates suggest that repatriation amounted to only one-tenth of the  ,  - ,  Mexicans in the Salt River Valley (Hoffman  ,  ; Luckingham  ,  ).

Although the price of cotton revived in  , valley growers had learned a hard lesson and diversified agricultural production, harvesting cotton alongside other labor-intensive cash crops, such as citrus, vegetables, and other produce. The result of the cotton boom, however, kept agriculture a corporate enterprise. The scale of this agriculture forced operators to continue to rely on inexpensive Mexican labor. U.S. Department of Labor statistics revealed the importance of Mexicans to the regional economy: They constituted  percent of all railroad-track workers,  percent of all vegetable, fruit, and beet pickers, and  percent of all cotton pickers (Reisler  ,  ).

New immigration legislation in  and  , using country-of-origin quotas, continued to exclude Mexicans from immigration control. This exclusion drew protests from anti-immigrant forces in the Congress, prompting representatives to testify before the Committee on Immigration and Naturalization in early  to defend the practice of bringing seasonal farm labor in from Mexico (U.S. Congress  ). One representative, appealing to the need for the continued exemption of Mexicans, testified to the committee that without the requisite labor the valley would go back to growing grains, '[sending] upon the market a commodity of which a distressing surplus' already existed (p.  ). The acga representative testified before the committee that the association's attempts to contract domestic labor had proved unfruitful.

The stock market crash of  silenced these debates, as local and state governments repatriated Mexicans in order to reduce welfare rolls (Hoffman  ). Some Mexican nationals decided to voluntarily leave the United States, thus avoiding official repatriation (Titcomb  ). Southwestern growers fought repatriation, seeing the frenzied actions of government agents as potentially impacting their very livelihoods. Repatriated Mexicans reported that contractors were attempting to recruit workers to pick cotton in Texas and Arizona on their arrival home (Balderrama and Rodriguez  ).

Despite the repatriation of thousands in the  s, Mexicans remained firmly entrenched in both resident and migratory farm-labor positions in Maricopa County (Urtuzuastegui  ; Hoffman  ,  ; Dimas  ,  ). The importance of Mexicans to Salt River Valley cotton producers was underscored in  when cotton growers came up short  ,  field hands because local Mexicans refused to work for low wages. Farmers asked the governor to order welfare boards to introduce a 'no work, no eat' policy to force pickers back into the fields (Kotlanger  ,  ).

These historic events shaped the rise of a decentralized urban economy based on agriculture and cotton. To achieve economies of scale utilizing Mexican labor, urban colonias, the settlements that housed many in this population, needed to be close to places of employment.

## Urban Colonias in the Salt River Valley

The earliest Mexican settlers in the Salt River Valley labored for Anglos, building canals and working agricultural fields (D. Smith  ; Solliday  ; Cofflet St. Clair and St. Clair  ; Burruel  ; Barrios  ; Vega  ). The large influx of Mexicans in the  s coincided with the full maturation of Anglo capitalism across the Southwest, evidenced in an industrial-style agricultural economy (Camarillo  ; Gonzalez  ). As industrial agriculture gave birth to cotton gins and packing sheds, urban colonias spread throughout the Salt River Valley. In this way, Mexicans became active agents in the early suburbanization of the region. In many cases they participated in suburbanization by purchasing real estate, for the lack of onerous building regulations in unincorporated fringes meant that they could build their own houses.

Most of these urban colonias formed along Phoenix's south side, extending from the Southern Pacific railroad tracks to the Salt River (Figure  ). The original Mexican community of Phoenix had been established much earlier, during the formative  s. That community existed in a four-block neighborhood east of Central Avenue, the city's main north-south arterial, along Monroe Street (Oberle and Arreola  ). The local Anglo press dubbed this area the 'Sonoran Corner of Phoenix.'

South side settlements began to emerge in the  s, when unemployed Mexican and Chinese railroad workers migrated to the Salt River Valley to work in nearby agricultural fields (Murray and Solliday  ).  The zone became a working-class area after the railroad arrived in  , as factories and warehouses took over the best sites  along the route (Barrios  ,  - ).  A  major flood in  created a classic disamenity zone, and later redlining of properties effectively deeded the area to Mexicans (Luckingham  ; Brunk  ). Anglos departed for higher ground north of town, and areas on the south side became ethnically and racially diverse (Reynolds  ; Arreola  ). The oldest colonia to develop on the south side was La Palestina (later Grant Park), which began when a local real estate speculator sold and mortgaged land to people of Mexican ancestry. Property records suggest that most of the property owners in the neighborhood had Spanish surnames by  (Reynolds  ).  The Mexican communities of Grant Park, La Sonorita, and Harmon Park evolved from the subdivision of agricultural land west of Central Avenue (Dean and Reynolds  ,  - ).

The colonias established east of Central Avenue became some of the poorest in the entire south side (Kotlanger  ; Luckingham  ). Among them was Golden Gate. The name is thought to derive from the metal gate that the Valenzuela family  refugees displaced by the Mexican Revolution  built at the entrance to their property. For poor Mexicans, the gate reflected the prosperity of the family (Dean

F ig .  Urban colonias established along Phoenix's southern fringe between  and  . Sources: Luckingham  ,  ; Reynolds  ,  ; Dean and Reynolds  ,  . (Cartography by D. Drew Lucio and Barbara Trapido-Lurie)

<!-- image -->

and Reynolds  ,  ). The majority of Mexicans who settled Golden Gate arrived during the  s, seeking the opportunity to buy inexpensive lots that homesteaders made available (Dimas  ).

Several blocks west of Golden Gate the colonia of Cuatro Milpas formed in a similar fashion (Dean and Reynolds  ,  ). The original four property owners subdivided land in the mid- s, offering commercial and residential lots to prospective buyers. Mexicans lived east of  th Street; Anglos, on the west side. The poorest communities in this southern cluster were the colonias of El Campito and Little Hollywood, situated just to the north of Cuatro Milpas. Social researchers of the time described the smaller Little Hollywood as a 'foul slum, the like of which can probably not be found elsewhere in the United States' (Phoenix Community Chest  ,  ). The destitution of some residents forced them to rent their property and set up tents or fashion adobe bricks from local soil to make a home. These colonias formed outside the city limits and lacked all manner of city services.

Mexicans also founded numerous colonias in Tempe,  miles up the Salt River and east of Phoenix (Figure  ). The origins of one of the oldest and largest Mexican communities in the Salt River Valley came from the completion of the first irrigation canal, the San Francisco canal on the south side of the Salt River, in  .  Nearby,

F ig .  Mexican communities established at Tempe, Arizona, between  and  . Source: Vinson  ,  . (Cartography by D. Drew Lucio, Barbara Trapido-Lurie, and Chris Lukinbeal)

<!-- image -->

Mexican laborers received land in lieu of cash payment; those receiving title to the land sold lots at auction in  to  finance the construction of a Catholic church. Completed in  , the house of worship was situated at the southern base of Hayden Butte, near the canal the Mexicans had built to carry water to Hayden's flour mill. Anglos of the time described one of the colonia communities, San Pablo, as resembling a Sonoran village, for it comprised several blocks of flat-roofed adobe houses. Although it was later incorporated by the city of T empe, San Pablo remained peripheral; its streets were irregular and offset from T empe's grid, reflecting a different tradition of land use. This separation would carry into the provision of public services: Company No.  of the T empe Fire Department alone protected the property of Mexicans living on the east side of town (Lamb  ; D. Smith  ; Kupel  ; Solliday  ).

Tempe's Mexican population expanded in the twentieth century, and new colonias formed. One such colonia was Barrio del Mickey Mouse, an offshoot of San Pablo, separated from the latter by the Hayden Canal and a rail line. Other Mexican communities  Barrio del Wilson and Barrio del Abajo  formed inside Tempe's incorporated boundary, near downtown along the Southern Pacific rail line where industries tied to agricultural production on the periphery were located. Outside the incorporated limits several colonias formed, the first being the Sotelo

F ig .  Urban colonias established along the Glendale, Arizona, fringe between  and  . Sources: Smith and Ilardo  ; Cofflet St. Clair and St. Clair  . (Cartography by D. Drew Lucio, Barbara Trapido-Lurie, and Chris Lukinbeal)

<!-- image -->

Addition in  , in what became Barrio del May's. This colonia consisted of twentyfive  large  lots  situated  south  of  a  rail  line,  extending  eastward  from Rural Road along the Hayden Canal (Solliday  ). T o the south was Barrio del Hoyo, a community that formed in an abandoned brickyard and extraction pit. In  a local farmer subdivided his land into residential lots, creating the newest colonia, Victory Acres, on Tempe's fringe. Those who purchased land were farmworkers looking for an affordable location in which to build a home and raise a family and displaced residents from Tempe colonias that had been encroached upon by the expansion of Arizona State University (Vinson  ). Victory Acres epitomizes the close of the early Mexican suburban era, as county and municipal governments began to regulate unplanned residential subdivisions.

The northwestern Salt River Valley began to attract Mexicans as early as  . They came to work on the construction of the  -mile-long Arizona Canal and stayed on in the area, working in the surrounding agricultural fields. The importance of agriculture to the Glendale economy grew when William J. Murphy, the project manager of the Arizona Canal, brought road and rail access to the area. He attempted to grow sugar beets, but the alkaline soil turned out to be unsuitable, and full production ceased by  (Smith and Ilardo  ). The soil proved to be excel-

F ig .  Mexicans harvesting cantaloupes in the eastern Salt River Valley, circa  - . (Historic postcard from the Arreola Postcard Archive)

<!-- image -->

F ig .  Colonias founded on the urban fringe of Mesa, Arizona, between  and  . Sources: City of Mesa  ,  ; Benitez  ,  . (Cartography by D. Drew Lucio, Barbara Trapido-Lurie, and Chris Lukinbeal)

<!-- image -->

lent for produce, however, and, with the development of an ice dock in  , Glendale would grow into the 'Vegetable Capital of Arizona' (Luckingham  ). Moreover, the soil was 'admirably adapted' to cotton production, first planted by Herbert B. Atha in  (Christy  ,  ). The success of cotton caught the attention of the American Thread Company, which led Atha to form the Arizona-Egyptian Cotton Company in  .

The original Mexican community, known as Sonorita, formed on the south side of the trunk line built to the sugar-beet factory (Figure  ).  Mexican residents in Glendale found work in the town's agricultural economy (Cofflet St. Clair  ). During the Great Depression, Mexican miners from the copper towns in central Arizona migrated to the Glendale area seeking work as agricultural laborers. They congregated at a location west of the original Mexican colonia, across the tracks of the Atchison, Topeka, &amp; Santa Fe Railroad. The community came to be known as 'Gunnysack Barrio,' a comment on the residents' habit of using gunnysacks filled with water as a form of early evaporative cooling (Smith and Ilardo  ).

The farming town of Mesa, which developed in the  s as a Mormon colony, witnessed the formation of several Mexican colonias along its unincorporated fringe during the early twentieth century (Simkins  ). The soil being extremely fertile, pioneers set about turning the area into a veritable cornucopia of agricultural production, growing alfalfa, sugar beets, citrus, almonds, grapes, and cantaloupes (J. Smith  ) (Figure  ). Mexicans began to arrive in large numbers around  , taking jobs as agricultural workers, especially with the increasing production of cotton in the Mesa area (Melvin  ). On the northern border of Mesa real estate speculators created a new residential subdivision for Mexicans. Verde Vista had small lots, narrow streets, and no deed restrictions that allowed industrial uses in an otherwise strictly residential zone. The major north-south thoroughfares of Verde Vista had Spanish surnames, 'García' and 'Martínez,' later changed to 'Sirrine' and 'Pasadena,' respectively (City of Mesa  ). This community grew into the barrio of Washington Park /Escobedo, which included a black neighborhood created in  from the homestead of a veterinarian named James Livingstone (City of Mesa  ) (Figure  ).

In Mesa more colonias formed around agricultural centers. The largest was on the south side of town, along the railroad tracks, near the citrus packinghouse and cotton gin. A smaller colonia, Little Juarez, was nestled in citrus groves west of the town cemetery (Benitez  ; J. Smith  ).

A Mexican colonia developed in Scottsdale around  , a town located about  miles north of Tempe (Harner  ).  The  land  that  would  become the city of Scottsdale had originally been part of a  -acre tract purchased by Winfield Scott in  . The land was agriculturally productive, for it received sufficient water from the Arizona Canal (see Figure  ). Scott transformed his homestead into a fruit ranch and became one of the principal commercial citrus producers in the valley. The need for labor brought Sonorans from Mexico to the area, most of whom sought job opportunities and refuge from the Mexican Revolution. The first homes constructed in Scottsdale's Mexican colonia were located on the east side of the town

site. Over time, the original makeshift structures built by the first Mexican residents became adobe homes. By  local residents called Scottsdale's Mexican community 'Eskatel' (Burruel  ,  - ).

The first Mexicans in the Chandler area were ranch hands attached to the  ,  -acre ranch of Dr. Alexander John Chandler. Unable to profit from land he had acquired through speculative activities as manager of the Consolidated Canal Company, Chandler subdivided the property into lots and founded a town (Simkins  ).  Chandler, the town, exemplified how design and amenities could promote urban growth. The centerpiece was the Hotel San Marcos, which grew into one of the nation's leading winter resorts (Solliday  ).  The  first  Mexicans settlers in Chandler were contractors who built many of the new town's structures, including the San Marcos Hotel, and agricultural workers on the farms that developed from the subdivision of Chandler's land (Figure  ).

The first colonia in Chandler, known as 'Southside,' was located in an area zoned for industrial use. The community expanded southward toward Pecos Road. Residents who lived outside the corporate limits were squatters on land deemed unproductive by farmers because it comprised sand hills. No Mexicans lived north of Chandler Boulevard, the main east-west thoroughfare, because deed restrictions there required homes to be appraised at  ,  or more (Jensen  ). Mexicans also founded a colonia west of town first known as 'El Chamizo,' a reference to a type of scrub brush that grew in the area. Its residents were refugees from the Mexican Revolution who provided labor to nearby farms. The population of El Chamizo increased during the  s and  s, causing the landowner to separate the tract from his land and register the subdivision of Hightown, or Pueblo Alto (Killoren n.d.) (see Figure  ). Residents built their own homes, using whatever materials were available, such as salvaged metal, scrap lumber, and cardboard.

Cotton production first came to the fields around Chandler in  (Reynolds  ). The crop's success prompted the formation of the Egyptian Cotton Growers Association, which subsequently received permission from the Chandler Improvement Company to build a cotton gin and warehouse (Christy  ). Chandler and his team of promoters marketed his former ranch land as prime real estate for cotton production (Reynolds  ).  Such  activity  attracted  the  attention  of  the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, which sought new supplies of cotton to augment diminishing supplies in the midst of World War I. Goodyear, acting through its  local  subsidiary,  the  Southwest  Cotton Company, purchased  ,  acres  of Chandler's land. The presence of such a large corporate industry in the Salt River Valley commercialized agriculture and provided another pathway for Mexicans to participate in the suburbanization process via cotton camps.

## Cotton Camps

The arrival of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company in the Salt River Valley ushered the full frenzy of commercialized agriculture. The magnitude of its cottonfarming operations south of Chandler was industrial in scope, necessitating a labor

F ig .  Urban colonias established near Chandler, Arizona, between  and  . Sources: Jensen  ; Killoren n.d. (Cartography by D. Drew Lucio, Barbara Trapido-Lurie, and Chris Lukinbeal)

<!-- image -->

force to match. In order to stabilize the labor force, the company built a full community for its Mexican workers. Such actions were an expression of welfare capitalism or corporate paternalism, meant to extract loyalty from the workers (Alamillo  ). Local producers in the Salt River Valley followed suit as the price of long-

staple cotton skyrocketed, reproducing a paternalistic farmworker landscape that was populated largely by families. Provision of housing was important, because cotton picking was a family endeavor (U.S. Congress  ). According to E. D. Tetreau (  ),  square mile of irrigated farmland required  .  families. At the peak of cotton production in  , and assuming that the average Mexican family consisted of two parents and eight children, the approximate size of the farm-labor force in the Salt River Valley approached  ,  people (Solliday  ,  ). The result was a dispersed network of farm-labor camps throughout the valley (see Figure  ).

Cotton camps often formed at the intersection of major roads (Hill  ). Vehicles were essential to the cotton camps: They ferried workers to the fields and transported picked cotton to the numerous gins built in the late  s (Christy  ). According to Solliday (  ,  ), the Southwest Cotton Company standardized the form and location of cotton camps by building Mexican villages at strategic points on its property. Dwellings were in the native style of houses with ramadas shaded by vines. Permanent Mexican workers and their families resided in these houses, whereas others who only worked seasonally stayed in tents and camped outside. Cotton-camp conditions reflected the finances of individual operators (McWilliams  ; Hill  ). Lacking the capital of larger, corporate owners, small growers  the bulk of growers in the Salt River Valley  chose to neglect the needs of their laborers, consigning them to shelters hastily erected on a property. To maintain economies of scale, costs had to remain low and one way of assuring that they did was to exploit labor. The quick cash that cotton farmers could make in a season, combined with the fluidity of the farm-labor market, led small growers to view proper camps as an added expense that cut into their profits. Basic services were extremely limited: no electricity, water from tanks or directly out of nearby irrigation canals, and only common privies as toilets. Camps were fertile ground for any number of diseases, leading the Arizona State Board of Health to declare that operating 'under such conditions should be prohibited by law in the interest of public health and common humanity' (Urtuzuastegui  ,  ). The typical cotton camp was a landscape of simple canvas tents often erected on sun-baked mud flats, although some did offer barrack housing (Urtuzuastegui  ).

Workers who could not secure accommodation in the grower camps typically found shelter in informal camps (McWilliams  ,  ),  many of which were located along a major roadway or intersection, where canals provided adequate water (see Figure  ). Conditions were much more primitive in such camps. Cotton pickers built shacks, erected tents, or lived out of their cars; the most unfortunate of them sought shelter under railroad trestles and bridges (Kotlanger  ). The typical informal camp in the Salt River Valley contained an average of fifty families; one camp outside Phoenix contained more than  ,  families,  percent of them Mexican (McWilliams  ,  ). Growers who did not provide shelter hired labor from the informal camps (Toepel  ;  Urtuzuastegui  ).  Pickers preferred informal camps built by entrepreneurs because families were free from the high prices charged by growers' field commissaries. At informal camps private businesses sprang up to

provide a variety of services, including such as gas stations, grocery stores, and bars. Such services also gave Mexicans an opportunity to earn extra money from side jobs. Informal camps were the genesis of the predominantly Mexican farm towns of Agua Fria and Marinette (Toepel  ; Duran  ).

Corporate growers like Goodyear were well financed and, therefore, provided shelters for their entire workforce, both Mexican and Anglo. Litchfield Park, as one example, constructed camps with well-managed living facilities that included stores, churches, and schools (Arreola and others  ). Mexicans were nonetheless segregated from Anglos, in wood frame or adobe homes. These early segregated suburbs were later incorporated or annexed by cities. Even though the post-World War II era dramatically expanded suburban sprawl that razed many urban colonias, the last cotton camps in Litchfield Park did not close until  .

## The Mexican Legacy in the Salt River Valley

The history of Mexican suburbanization in the Salt River Valley began well before the city of Phoenix incorporated (  ) and Arizona became a state (  ). Mexican labor was crucial to the early decentralized agricultural economy and helped to expand this labor-intensive economy far beyond the floodplain of the Salt River. The result was the founding of numerous Mexican colonias scattered throughout the urban fringe of the valley, linked by a network of canals, rail lines, and roads. Originally, most colonias formed outside city limits and thus lacked city services, had no ethnic/racial deed restrictions, and no minimum construction standards. In time, land speculators created segregated subdivisions that attracted Mexicans to peripheral settlements. The end of urban colonias in the Salt River Valley came in  with the establishment of Victory Acres in Tempe. Thereafter, municipalities began to regulate unplanned residential subdivisions.

Postwar suburbanization in the Salt River Valley largely erased earlier urban colonias or transformed them into urban barrios as cities expanded through incorporation or annexation. Some colonias, such as Golden Gate were simply razed in the name of progress. The city of Phoenix used eminent domain to purchase the community in order to make way for airport expansion in the  s (Dimas  ).  Scottsdale  destroyed its  original  Mexican neighborhood in the  s  for civic-center redevelopment (Harner  ). In the  s Arizona State University purchased and cleared the Mexican settlement of San Pablo for expansion (Solliday  ). Mexican residences in the former cotton town of Marinette had to move to make way for the world's first retirement community, Youngstown (McHugh and Fletchall  ). Goodyear's original town site south of downtown Chandler held on until  ,  but  agricultural  production  diminished greatly after Goodyear moved most of its operations to Litchfield Park in  and many Mexicans followed (Reynolds  ).  The Mexican population of Chandler diminished even further after World War II as surrounding fields were converted into cookie-cutter residential lots and mauve-colored strip malls. The Mexican communities at Litchfield Park met a similar fate when Goodyear decided to turn its large land-

Fig .  West Valley mixed commercial development uses the Spanish word for 'irrigator,' zanjero, to identify a new district that occupies land once farmed by Mexican labor. Source: Zanjero News  . (Reproduced courtesy of Diane M. Smith, Marathon Commercial Development)

<!-- image -->

holdings into a premier suburban development (Lucio  ). Architects sought to build a master village plan that paid homage to romanticized suburbs and did not incorporate its Mexican heritage.

As Mary Sies put it, 'we are sometimes guilty of using a post-World War II suburban stereotype to describe the residential suburbs of earlier eras' (  ,  ). Urban colonias in the Salt River Valley are a case in point. These suburban settlements began in the late nineteenth century and continued through the mid-twentieth century. New urban historians are breaking down the normative view that pre-World War II suburbs are defined strictly in terms of political entities. In the Salt River Valley urban colonias mark a distinct chapter in suburban formation, one tied to industrial decentralization and the need for a large labor pool to support economies of scale. Pre-World War II urban colonias proliferated on the urban fringe where an absence of deed restrictions permitted real estate promotions to target Mexicans, allowing them to become homeowners. Many settlements based on real estate promotions were in peripheral zones. Company-sponsored housing forged suburban communities through the formation of cotton camps. The era of cotton camps lasted fifty years and spanned the pre- and post-World War II suburbanization period. Although most of the early settlements no longer exist,

their legacy in the early suburbanization process should not be overlooked, for they played a major role in establishing peripheral settlement patterns that persist to this day in the Phoenix metropolitan area.

The persistence of the Salt River Valley's boomtown narrative continues the neglect of the Mexican roots of early settlement in the region (Oberle and Arreola  ).  In the northwestern portion of the valley, for example, recent commercial development is paving over fields once worked by Mexican labor, yet the name attached to one of these new mixed-use spaces  Zanjero  harks back to the era of the first colonias where most irrigators ( zanjeros ) were Mexican (Figure  ). In the Salt River Valley, landscapes have come full circle over nearly a century. Yesterday, agriculture helped create the first suburban settlements, and Mexicans helped build those places. Today, suburban development transforms those fields, and ethnic Mexicans, along with others, live, work, dine, shop, and play in the new spaces. The historical geography of urban colonias sheds light on this contemporary transformation, alerting us to the deep roots and place-making significance of valley's Mexican communities.

In just over a century the Salt River Valley has seen a dramatic shift in its demographic makeup. In  Mexicans constituted roughly half of the population of the city of Phoenix, and the city projects that it will be predominantly Hispanic by  (Arizona Republic  ).  Placing this recent demographic shift within a historic and geographical framework is essential to explaining how Mexicans have played, and continue to play, a critical role in the urbanization process of the fifth-largest city in the United States.

## Notes

-  . 'Salt River Valley' refers to the drainage area encompassing the lower Salt and Verde Rivers in central Arizona (Haschenburger  ,  ). The area is largely defined historically by the Salt River Project ( srp ) lands south of the Arizona Canal and west of the Eastern Canal and includes the communities of Scottsdale, Glendale, Phoenix, Tempe, Mesa, and Chandler (Comeaux  ,  Map  .  ).  The  Gila River to the south and the Agua Fria River to the west are technically on the outer margins of the srp , although irrigated agriculture was practiced in those drainages as well (Gober  ,  ). In contemporary Phoenix, the 'Valley' is a term used by the leading daily newspaper, the Arizona Republic, to define its local and state section, thus the term is understood by residents to be the near equivalent of metropolitan Phoenix.
-  . The term 'Anglo' is used colloquially in the U.S. Southwest to refer to white Americans or non-Hispanic/Latino persons. In its original usage it may have referred to Anglo-Saxons or anyone descended from early English or Northern European colonists (Meier and Rivera  ,  ), but today it refers chiefly to persons of European descent  other than Mexicans  in the Southwest (Grebler, Moore, Guzman  ,  ; Camarillo  ,  ).

## References

- Alamillo, J. M.  . Making Lemonade out of Lemons: Mexican American Labor and Leisure in a California Town,  - . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Arizona Republic.  . The New Majority. Arizona Republic [Phoenix],  January, §B,  .

- Arreola, D. D.  . Appendix A  Map Summaries. In City of Phoenix Asian American Historic Property Survey, edited by V . Murray and S. Solliday,  - . [Prepared for the] City of Phoenix, Office of Historic Preservation. Tempe: Arizona Historical Research.

- Arreola, D. D., D. D. Lucio, C. L. Lukinbeal, and G. Cuadraz.  . Mexican Litchfield Park: A Forgotten Colonia of the Salt River Valley. Journal of Arizona History  (  ):  - .
- Ashton, P. J.  . Urbanization and the Dynamics of Suburban Development under Capitalism. In Marxism and the Metropolis: New Perspectives in Urban Political Economy, edited by W. K. Tabb and L. Sawers,  - . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Balderrama, F. E., and R. Rodriguez.  . Decade of Betrayal: Mexican Repatriation in the  s . Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Barrios, F. M.  . Mexicans in Phoenix . Charleston, S.C.: Arcadia Publishing.
- Benitez, J. A.  . The Hispanic Protestant Landscape of Mesa, Arizona. M.A. thesis, Arizona State University.
- Bennett, M. T.  . American Immigration Policies: A History . Washington, D.C.: Public Affairs Press. Binford, H. C.  . The First Suburbs: Residential Communities in the Boston Periphery,  - . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Bohman, J.  . New Philosophy of Social Science: Problems of Indeterminacy . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
- Brown, M., and O. Cassmore.  . Migratory Cotton Pickers in Arizona . Washington: Government Printing Office.
- Brunk, L. M.  . A Federal Legacy: Phoenix's Cultural Geography. Palo Verde: Magazine of Student Writing and Art  (  ):  - .
- Burruel, J. M.  . Mexicans in Scottsdale . Charleston, S.C.: Arcadia Publishing.
- Camarillo, A.  . Chicanos in a Changing Society: From Mexican Pueblos to American Barrios in Santa Barbara and Southern California,  - . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
- Christy, W. B.  . American Egyptian Long-Staple Cotton in Arizona. M.A. thesis, University of Chicago.
- City of Mesa.  . Washington Park Neighborhood: Its Present and Future. FE EPH GCI- .  Arizona Historical Foundation, Arizona State University Libraries, Tempe. Typescript.
- ---.  . Temple, Evergreen, and Escobedo Neighborhood Historic Building Survey, vol.  , Final Summary Report. Tucson, Ariz.: Architecture Company and Harris Sobin.
- Clawson, M., and P. Hall.  . Planning and Urban Growth: An Anglo-American Comparison . Baltimore, Md.: John Hopkins University Press.
- Cofflet St. Clair, C. J.  . Interview with D. Drew Lucio, Glendale, Ariz.,  March.
- Cofflet St. Clair, C. J., and C. S. St. Clair.  . Glendale . Charleston, S.C.: Arcadia Publishing.
- Comeaux, M. L.  . Arizona: A Geography . Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
- Curtis, J. R.  . Barrio Space and Place in Southeast Los Angeles, California. In Hispanic Spaces, Latino Places: Community and Cultural Diversity in Contemporary America, edited by D. D. Arreola,  - . Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Dean, D. R., and J. A. Reynolds.  . Hispanic Historic Property Survey: Final Report. [Prepared for the] City of Phoenix, Historic Preservation Office. Mesa, Ariz.: Athenaeum Public History Group.
- Dimas, P. R.  . Progress and a Mexican American Community's Struggle for Existence: Phoenix's Golden Gate Barrio. New York: Peter Lang.
- Douglass, H. P.  . The Suburban Trend . New York: Century Co.
- Duran, A.  . Interview with D. Drew Lucio. El Mirage, Ariz.,  September.
- Gadamer, H.  . Truth and Method.  nd rev. ed. Translation revised by J. Weinsheimer and D. Marshall. New York: Continuum.
- Gammage, G., Jr.  . Phoenix in Perspective: Reflections on Developing the Desert .  nd ed. Tempe: Arizona State University, College of Architecture and Environmental Design, Herberger Center for Design Excellence.
- Garcia, K.  . Early Phoenix . Charleston, S.C.: Arcadia Publishing.
- Gardner, T.  . The Changing Residential Status of Cities and Suburbs in the United States,  - . Journal of Urban History  (  ):  - .
- Gober, P.  . Metropolitan Phoenix: Place Making and Community Building in the Desert . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Gonzalez, G.  . Labor and Community: Mexican Citrus Worker Villages in a Southern California County,  - . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- Grebler, L., J. W. Moore, R. C. Guzman.  . The Mexican-American People: The Nation's Second Largest Minority . New York: Free Press.

- Harner, J.  . The Mexican Community in Scottsdale, Arizona. Yearbook, Conference of Latin American Geographers  :  - .
- Harris, C., and E. L. Ullman.  . The Nature of Cities. Annals of the Academy of Political and Social Science  :  - .
- Harris, R.  . Unplanned Suburbs: Toronto's American Tragedy,  - . Baltimore, Md.: John Hopkins University Press.
- ---.  . Introduction. Special Issue on 'North American Cities and Suburbs.' Journal of Urban History  (  ):  - .
- ---.  . Creeping Conformity: How Canada Became Suburban,  - . Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
- Harris, R., and P . Larkham.  . Suburban Foundation, Form and Function. In Changing Suburbs: Foundation, Form and Function, edited by R. Harris and P . Larkham,  - . New York: Taylor and Francis Group.
- Harris, R., and R. Lewis.  . Constructing a Fault(y) Zone: Misrepresentations of American Cities and Suburbs,  - . Annals of the Association of American Geographers  (  ):  - .
- ---.  . The Geography of North American Cities and Suburbs,  - : A New Synthesis. Journal of Urban History  (  ):  - .
- Haschenburger, J. K.  . Regional Introduction. In The Salt and Gila Rivers in Central Arizona: A Geographic Field Trip Guide, edited by W. L. Graf,  - . Arizona State University, Department of Geography Publication  . Tempe.
- Hill, N.  . The Imprint of Cotton Production on Arizona Landscapes. Ph.D. diss., Arizona State University.
- Hoffman, A.  . Unwanted Mexican Americans in the Great Depression: Repatriation Pressures,  - . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- Jackson, K. T.  . Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Jensen, E.  .  Seek Historic Status for 'Silk Stocking' Area. Arizona Republic,  September, Chandler Republic §,  .
- Keating, A. D.  . Building Chicago: Suburban Developers and the Creation of a Divided Metropolis . Columbus: Ohio State University Press.
- Killoren, D. N.d. Ralph and Margaret Lozano. Biographical Research and Biography. Chandler Historical Society, Chandler, Ariz. Typescript.
- Knox, W. H.  . Letter from the Secretary for the Arizona Cotton Growers Association to Edward F. Parker of the Southwest Cotton Company,  April. Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Company, Records,  - . University of Akron Libraries, Regional History Collections.
- Kotlanger, M. J.  . Phoenix, Arizona:  - . Ph.D. diss., Arizona State University.
- Kupel, D. E.  . Tempe's First Families: Soza, Sotelo, and Elias. MM CHSM- . Arizona State University Libraries, Chicano Research Collection.
- Lamb, B. P.  . Historical Overview of Tempe, Arizona,  - . FM MSM- . Arizona Historical Foundation, Arizona State University Libraries, Tempe.
- Lucio, D. D.  . Mexican Suburbanization in the Salt River Valley: Resurrecting the Memory of Litchfield Park. M.A. thesis, Arizona State University.
- Luckingham, B.  . Phoenix: The History of a Southwestern Metropolis . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- ---.  . Minorities in Phoenix: A Profile of Mexican American, Chinese American, and African American Communities . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- Martínez, O. J.  . Mexican-Origin People in the United States: A Topical History . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- McHugh, K., and A. Fletchall.  . Memento Mori: The Death of Youngtown. Professional Geographer  (  ):  - .
- McWilliams, C.  . Ill Fares the Land: Migrants and Migratory Labor in the United States . Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
- Meier, M. S., and F. Rivera.  . Dictionary of Mexican American History . Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press.
- Melvin, H.  . A History of Mesa. M.A. thesis, University of Arizona.
- Murray, V., and S. Solliday.  . City of Phoenix Asian American Historic Property Survey. [Prepared for the] City of Phoenix, Office of Historic Preservation. Tempe: Arizona Historical Research.

- Oberle, A. P., and D. D. Arreola.  . Resurgent Mexican Phoenix. Geographical Review  (  ):  - .
- Officer, J. E.  . Hispanic Arizona,  - . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- Peterson, H. B.  . A Twentieth-Century Journey to Cíbola: Tragedy of the Bracero in Maricopa County, Arizona,  - . M.A. thesis, Arizona State University.
- Phoenix Community Chest.  . The Citizens Survey of Family and Child Welfare, Health, Recreation, and Community Organizations in Metropolitan Phoenix. Arizona Historical Foundation. MS FM MSS  . Arizona State University Libraries, Tempe.
- Pierce, J., and P . Parish.  . Rosson House: The Story of a Historic Phoenix Landmark . Phoenix: PDP Publishers.
- Reisler, M.  . By the Sweat of Their Brow: Mexican Immigrant Labor in the United States,  - . Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press.
- Reynolds, J. A.  . 'We Made Our Life as Best We Could with What We Had': Mexican American Women in Phoenix,  - . M.A. thesis, Arizona State University.
- ---.  . Interview with D. Drew Lucio. Chandler, Ariz.,  July.
- Rosales, F. A. N.d. 'Lost Land': Origins of Mexicans in the Salt River Valley of Arizona,  - . MM CHSM- . Arizona State University Libraries, Chicano Research Collection, Tempe.
- Scruggs, O. M.  . Braceros, 'Wetbacks,' and the Farm Labor Problem: Mexican Agricultural Labor in the United States,  - . New York: Garland Publishing.
- Sheridan, T. E.  . Los Tucsonenses: The Mexican Community in Tucson,  - . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- Sies, M. C.  . North American Suburbs,  - : Cultural and Social Reconsiderations. Journal of Urban History  (  ):  - .
- Simkins, L. D.  . The Rise of the Southeastern Salt River Valley: Tempe, Mesa, Chandler, Gilbert,  - . Ph.D. diss., Arizona State University.
- Smith, D.  . Tempe  Arizona Crossroads: An Illustrated History. Chatsworth, Calif.: Windsor Publications.
- Smith, D., and P. Ilardo.  . Glendale: A Century of Diversity: An Illustrated History. Glendale, Ariz.: City of Glendale.
- Smith, J.  . Making Water Flow Uphill: The History of Agriculture in Mesa, Arizona .  Mesa, Ariz.: Mesa Historical Society.
- Smith, K. L.  . The Magnificent Experiment: Building the Salt River Reclamation Project,  - . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- Smith, S. M.  . Litchfield Park and Vicinity. M.A. thesis, University of Arizona.
- Solliday, S. W.  . The Journey to Rio Salado: Hispanic Migrations to Tempe, Arizona. M.A. thesis, Arizona State University.
- Tetreau, E. D.  . Arizona's Farm Laborers . Tucson: University of Arizona.
- Titcomb, M. R.  . Americanization and Mexicans in the Southwest: A History of Phoenix's Friendly House,  - . M.A. thesis, University of California-Santa Barbara.
- Toepel, E. J.  . A Migrant Town in Transition: El Mirage, a Case Study. M.A. thesis, Arizona State University.
- U.S. Congress. House.  . Committee on Immigration and Naturalization. Seasonal Agricultural Laborers from Mexico: Hearing before the Committee on Immigration and Naturalization,  th Cong.,  st Session,  and  January,  ,  ,  ,  and  February  . Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office.
- Urtuzuastegui, F.  . The Farmworkers' Conditions in Arizona during the  s. MM CHSM- . Arizona State University Libraries, Chicano Research Collection, Tempe.
- Vega, S. C.  . Mexicans in Tempe . Charleston, S.C.: Arcadia Publishing.
- Vinson, M. C.  . Cultural Continuity and Change in a Mexican American Vernacular Landscape. M.A. thesis, Arizona State University.
- Wiese, A.  . Stubborn Diversity: A Commentary on Middle-Class Influence in Working-Class Suburbs,  - . Journal of Urban History  (  ):  - .
- Zanjero News.  . The Districts at Zanjero. Area Amenities. Zanjero News. [www.districtsatzanjero .com/areaAmenities.aspx].