## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Urban-Rural Differences in Disaster Resilience

Susan L. Cutter, Kevin D. Ash &amp; Christopher T. Emrich

To cite this article: Susan L. Cutter, Kevin D. Ash &amp; Christopher T. Emrich (2016): Urban-Rural Differences in Disaster Resilience, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2016.1194740

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2016.1194740

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 13 Jul 2016.

Submit your article to this journal

View related articles

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

## Urban-Rural Differences in Disaster Resilience

Susan L. Cutter,* Kevin D. Ash, y and Christopher T. Emrich*

* Department of Geography, Hazards &amp; Vulnerability Research Institute, University of South Carolina y School of Geosciences, University of South Florida

The concept of disaster resilience has gained attention in political spheres and news outlets over the past few years, yet relatively few empirical measures of the concept exist. Furthermore, research into urban resilience has dwarfed our understanding of disaster resilience in rural places. This schism in what is known about the differences between urban and rural places becomes the topic of this article. Employing a suite of spatial and statistical techniques using an established measure of community resilience, the Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities (BRIC), we focus on two key questions to better explain the resilience divide between urban and rural areas of the United States. Nonparametric rank analysis, analysis of variance, and logistic regression help describe the relationships between rurality and disaster resilience in contrast to resilience in urban areas. Pinpointing the driving factors, or characteristics, of resilience in rural America compared to metropolitan America, accomplished through binary logistic regression, revealed notable distinctions. Resilience in urban areas is primarily driven by economic capital, whereas community capital is the most important driver of disaster resilience in rural areas. Within rural areas there is considerable spatial variability in the components of disaster resilience. This suggests that attempts to enhance resilience cannot be approached using a one-size-fitsmost strategy given the variability in the primary drivers of disaster resilience at county scales. Key Words: disaster resilience, rural, United States, urban.

过 去 几 年 来 ， 灾 害 回 復 力 的 概 念 ， 在 政 治 领 域 和 新 闻 报 导 中 获 得 了 关 注 ， 但 相 对 而 言 ， 却 鲜 少 对 此 一 概 念 进 行 经 验 评 量 。 此 外 ， 城 市 回 復 力 的 研 究 ， 阻 碍 了 我 们 对 于乡 村 地 区 灾 害 回 復 力 的 理 解 。 此 般 以 城 市 和 乡 村 地 方 之 间 的 差 异 而 为人 所 知 的 分 裂 ， 则 成 为 本 文 的 主 题 。 我 们 採 用 一 组 运 用 已 建 立 好 的 社 群 回 復 力 评 量 --社 群 的 基 线 回 復 力 指 标 （ BRIC ） --之 空 间 与 统 计 技 术 ， 关 注 两个 关 键问 题 ， 以 更 佳 地 解 释 美 国 城 市 和 乡 村 地 区 的 回 復 力分 歧 。 非 参 数 等 级 分 析 、 变 异 分 析 ， 以 及 罗 吉 特 迴 归 ， 有 助 于 描 绘 对 照 城 市 地 区 回 復 力 的 乡 村 性 与 灾 害 回 復 力 之 间 的 关 係 。 透 过 二 元 罗 吉 特 迴 归 来 精 确 定 位 美 国 乡 村 之于 大 都 会 的 回 復 力 的 驱 动 因 素 或 特 徵 ， 揭 露 出 可 观 的 差 异 。 城 市 地 区 的 恢 復 力 主 要 是 由 经 济 资 本 所 驱 动 ， 而 社 区 资 本 则 是 乡 村 地 区 的 灾 害 回 復 力 最 重 要 的 驱 力 。 乡 村 地 区 的 灾 害 回 復 力 组 成 具 有 可 观 的 空 间 变 异 ， 而 此 一 现 象 指 出 ， 有 鉴 于乡 村 尺 度 中 灾 害 恢 復 力 的 主 要 驱 力 具 有 多 样 性 ， 因 此 增 进 回 復 力 的 企 图 并 不 能 只 藉 由 运 用 单 一 的 策 略 来 达 成 。 关 键 词 ： 灾 害 回 復 力 ， 乡 村 ， 美 国 ， 城 市 。

Desde no hace mucho tiempo, el concepto de resiliencia ante el desastre est  a llamando la atenci  on en las esferas pol  ıticas y en los canales noticiosos, aunque son relativamente pocas las medidas emp  ıricas que se conocen sobre tal concepto. Adem  as, la investigaci  on sobre resiliencia urbana ha relegado nuestra comprensi  on de la resiliencia ante el desastre en los lugares rurales. Tal cisma en lo que se sabe acerca de las diferencias entre los lugares urbanos y rurales es el t  opico de este art  ıculo. Empleando un juego de t  ecnicas espaciales y estad  ısticas que usan una medida reconocida de resiliencia comunitaria, los denominados Indicadores Est  andar de Resiliencia para las Comunidades (BRIC, por el acr  onimo en ingl  es), enfocamos nuestro inter  es sobre dos cuestiones claves para mejor explicar la divisoria de la resiliencia entre  areas urbanas y rurales de los Estados Unidos. El an  alisis no param  etrico de rango, el an  alisis de varianza y la regresi  on log  ıstica ayudan a describir las relaciones entre la ruralidad y la resiliencia ante el desastre, en contraste con la resiliencia en  areas urbanas. Al precisar los factores determinantes, o caracter  ısticas, de la resiliencia en el entorno rural de los EE.UU. en comparaci  on con la de sus  areas metropolitanas, gracias a la regresi  on log  ıstica binaria, se ponen de manifiesto notorias distinciones. La resiliencia en  areas urbanas es orientada primariamente por el capital econ  omico, mientras que el capital comunitario es el m  as importante determinador de la resiliencia ante el desastre en las  areas rurales. Dentro de las  areas rurales se presenta una considerable variabilidad espacial en los componentes de la resiliencia ante el desastre. Tal cosa sugiere que los intentos por mejorar la resiliencia no pueden abocarse utilizando una estrategia de aplicaci  on general dada la variabilidad en los controladores primarios de la resiliencia ante el desastre a escala de condado. Palabras clave: resiliencia ante el desastre, rural, Estados Unidos, urbano.

P rinciples of disaster resilience were first articulated decades ago and are now embodied in international policy instruments such as the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction's (UNISDR) 2015 Sendai Framework and its predecessor, the 2005 Hyogo Framework. In addition to broad policy, international engagement with disaster resilience includes specific efforts such as UNISDR's Making Cities Resilient campaign (UNISDR 2013), the World Bank's resilience initiatives through its Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR; World Bank and GFDRR 2013), and the United Kingdom Department for International Development's (UKDFID 2011) resilience framework. The private sector and philanthropic communities are equally engaged in resilience (Rodin 2014), with the Rockefeller Foundation's 100 Resilient Cities initiative among the most prominent efforts to date (Rockefeller Foundation 2016).

In the United States, eight federal agencies asked the National Research Council (NRC) to address the broad question of enhancing the nation's resilience to disaster and produce a consensus report that (1) defined disaster resilience and framed issues relating to enhancing resilience; (2) identified baseline conditions, goals, and performance metrics for measuring progress toward resilience at the national level; (3) described the state of integrated knowledge about disaster resilience from diverse fields; (4) outlined gaps and obstacles to enhancing resilience across the nation in terms of capacity building from local to national scales; and (5) presented recommendations to link community and governance structures to build a culture of resilience for the nation (NRC 2012). The report defined resilience as 'the ability to prepare and plan for, absorb, recover from, and more successfully adapt to adverse events' (NRC 2012, 1). This definition of disaster resilience is used in this article. Further, we constrain our discussion (as did the NRC) to those disasters arising from natural hazard events and their associated impacts.

The adoption of resilience by the United States policy community is relatively recent (NRC 2012). Although a focal point of the 1999 Assessment of Natural Hazards in the United States (Mileti 1999), it was not until 2005 that resilience became a guiding tenet of disaster loss reduction (U.S. Subcommittee on Disaster Reduction 2005); from there it rapidly expanded throughout the U.S. federal bureaucracy. Presidential policy directives focus on various aspects of resilience and federal funding agencies, notably the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric

Administration (NOAA), both possess large resiliencerelated portfolios. New centers of excellence on resilience were funded by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS). Additionally, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) embarked on a National Disaster Resilience Competition (NDRC) to support resilience projects in communities recently affected by a major disaster, based on its successful Rebuild by Design effort after Hurricane Sandy. HUD's announcement of the winners of the NDRC put resilience in the spotlight with $1 billion in funding for resilient housing and infrastructure projects in eight states and five cities or counties affected by major disasters between 2011 and 2013 (HUD 2016).

There is also regional and local interest in understanding resilience to natural hazards and their impacts. This is not surprising given that natural hazards cost the United States on average more than $15.6 billion in losses annually (Hazards and Vulnerability Research Institute 2015) and that both crop and property losses have escalated since the 1990s (Gall et al. 2011). Although many of the focal points for disaster losses are coastal areas (subject to tropical storms, including hurricanes), persistent losses occur routinely in the more rural and agricultural regions of the heartland and Great Plains of the United States, mostly caused by seasonal flooding and severe weather. Such pervasive losses, especially their repeated occurrences, seriously affect the long-term resilience of communities and most certainly affect the future sustainability of these places. Nowhere is this issue more salient than in rural counties, where a lack of reliable access to health care, goods, and other services has become an increasing concern in nondisaster times (Reschovsky and Staiti 2005).

## Variable Meanings of Urban and Rural Resilience

Considerable discussion in the literature revolves around the basic nature of disaster resilience, including the utility of the concept itself (Klein, Nicholls, and Thomalla 2003; Alexander 2013) as well as its transition from a descriptive concept to a normative agenda (Matyas and Pelling 2015; Weichselgartner and Kelman 2015). Some researchers suggest that it is merely an attribute of a system (Adger 2000; Bruneau et al. 2003; NRC 2006; Rose 2007), others describe it as a process of capacity building for communities (Norris et al. 2008;

Sherrieb, Norris, and Galea 2010), and some suggest both (Cutter et al. 2008; Cutter, Burton, and Emrich 2010; Sempier et al. 2010). There are discrepancies in the literature as to the type of resilience-economic, social, infrastructure, ecological-each of which has its own body of knowledge, methods of assessment, and data. The result is little integration across the different types of resilience for specific places or communities (Cutter 2015).

Over the past two decades a strong research base has emerged for understanding urban vulnerability and resilience (Godschalk 2003; Pelling 2003; Vale and Campanella 2004; Borden et al. 2007; Leichenko 2011), but less exists for rural vulnerability and resilience. There is some research in the international arena on disaster risk and rural vulnerability, especially in a developing country context (Sabates-Wheeler et al. 2008; UNISDR 2009). Less is known about those specific characteristics that influence disaster resilience (McManus et al. 2012; Boon 2014), however, especially in rural places in developed countries. The challenges in urban areas are different from those in rural places. For example, rural areas often struggle to maintain government and business operations in normal times and do not have the excess capacity and resources needed during and after a disaster (Kapucu, Hawkins, and Rivera 2013; Cox and Hamlen 2015). The lack of human and financial resources can reduce resilience in rural places (Tootle 2007), a problem often not encountered in urban places. On the other hand, the self-reliant nature of rural places with a strong sense of community, knowledge of and ties to natural resources, and strong social networks can enhance resilience, again features that are less common in many urban areas. Finally, social inequalities might be magnified in both rural and urban areas, leading to less disaster resilience, but at the same time economic diversification in metropolitan areas helps to promote disaster resilience compared to the single-sector economic dependence often seen in rural areas.

Understanding the fabric of rural places is important because the context and capabilities for hazards management are distinctly different. For example, there has been a steady population decrease in rural populations in the United States, but that decline is not spatially consistent. Losses occurred in agricultural counties in the heartland and in counties stretching from the Pacific Coast to Maine that depend on extractive resource industries (e.g., nonenergy mining, timbering). The only counties experiencing population growth are in the scenic areas of the Rocky Mountains and southern Appalachian Mountains, and the energy boom counties of the northern Great Plains (U.S. Department of Agriculture [USDA] 2015), yet this isolated growth is insufficient to alter the overall downward trend in the population of rural America. The variability in declining growth has made it difficult to discern the pattern of disaster losses for rural areas and their impacts (both short term and long term). We know, for example, that property losses are greater in urban areas because of the density and value of structures, yet the relative impact of those losses might be greater in rural areas (Ash, Cutter, and Emrich 2013). Fatalities and injuries might also be greater in urban areas for some hazards (e.g., heat, earthquakes) but not for others (lightning, flooding). Computing standardized mortality ratios (which control for population size and the age of the population) confirms differences between urban and rural disaster mortality (Borden and Cutter 2008).

The role of disaster resilience in the attenuation of vulnerability and the enhancement of risk reduction is not well understood, especially in the rural context, as noted earlier (Tobin and Whiteford 2002). For example, Elliott and Pais (2010) found that the redistribution of vulnerable populations after a disaster was different in urban versus rural areas. They found that in urban areas, long-term recovery displaces vulnerable residents outside the hardest hit areas, whereas in rural places, postdisaster recovery leads to a concentration of socially vulnerable populations.

There is little empirically based research on community-level natural hazard resilience indicatorscomposite measures that would permit an examination or comparison among places as to their present levels of resilience (Barnett, Lambert, and Fry 2008; Burton 2015; Cutter 2015). We know little about whether such indexes are meaningful and whether they, in fact, capture the outcomes or processes of resilience. We also do not know whether the pattern of resilient places shapes or is shaped by the relative impact of disaster losses and social vulnerability, especially between and among rural places. Understanding and applying empirically based measures of what makes rural communities more or less resilient than urban ones illustrates the landscape of differences across the nation. It provides guidance on structural, economic, or social actions that might lessen the impacts of disasters and accelerate recovery following them. To develop a spatial understanding of disaster resilience, however, we need to address two broad research questions:

1. Is there a relationship between rurality and community resilience in the contiguous United States? In

Table 1. Variables included in the Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities index

| Resilience concept                                      | Variable description/data source                                                                                                 | Variable name   |
|---------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|
| Social resilience                                       |                                                                                                                                  |                 |
| Educational attainment equality                         | Negative absolute difference between %population with college education and %population with less than high school education (1) | MEDU_EQ         |
| Preretirement age                                       | %population below 65 years of age (1)                                                                                            | MQNOELDER       |
| Transportation access                                   | %households with vehicle (1)                                                                                                     | MQVEHICLE       |
| Communication capacity                                  | %households with telephone (1)                                                                                                   | MQPHONE         |
| English language competency                             | %population proficient English speakers (1)                                                                                      | MQNOESL         |
| Nonspecial needs                                        | %population without sensory, physical, or mental disability (1)                                                                  | MQNONDISABL     |
| Health insurance                                        | %population under age 65 with health insurance (1)                                                                               | MQINSURED       |
| Mental health support                                   | Psychosocial support facilities per 10K persons (1)                                                                              | MPSYCH10K       |
| Food provisioning capacity                              | Food security rate (2)                                                                                                           | MFOODSECUR      |
| Physician access                                        | Physicians per 10K persons (1)                                                                                                   | MPHYSN10K       |
| Economic resilience                                     |                                                                                                                                  |                 |
| Homeownership                                           | %owner-occupied housing units (1)                                                                                                | MQHMOWNER       |
| Employment rate                                         | %labor force employed (1)                                                                                                        | MQEMPLOYED      |
| Race/ethnicity income equality                          | Negative Gini coefficient (1)                                                                                                    | MINCOMEQL       |
| Nondependence on primary/tourism sectors                | %employees not in farming, fishing, forestry, extractive industry, or tourism (1)                                                | MQNOPRIME       |
| Gender income equality                                  | Negative absolute difference between male and female median income (1)                                                           | MGENINCEQL      |
| Business size                                           | Ratio of large ( > 100) to small ( < 10) businesses (1)                                                                          | MLGBUSRAT       |
| Large retail-regional/ national geographic distribution | Large retail stores per 10K persons (1)                                                                                          | MBIGBOX10K      |
| Federal employment                                      | %labor force employed by federal government (1, 3)                                                                               | MQFEDEMP        |
| Community capital                                       |                                                                                                                                  |                 |
| Place attachment-recent immigrants                      | %population not foreign-born persons who came to United States within previous five years (1)                                    | MQNORECIM       |
| Place attachment-native- born residents                 | %population born in state of current residence (1)                                                                               | MQNATBORN       |
| Political engagement                                    | %voting-age population participating in 2012 presidential election (4)                                                           | MQVOTED         |
| Social capital-religious organizations                  | Persons affiliated with a religious organization per 10K persons (5)                                                             | MRELADH10K      |
| Social capital-civic organizations                      | Civic organizations per 10K persons (1)                                                                                          | MCIVORG10K      |
| Social capital-disaster volunteerism                    | Red Cross volunteers per 10K persons (6)                                                                                         | MRCVOL10K       |
| Citizen disaster preparedness and response skills       | Red Cross training workshop participants per 10K persons (6)                                                                     | MRCPREPTRN      |
| Institutional resilience                                |                                                                                                                                  |                 |
| Mitigation spending                                     | Ten-year average per capita spending for mitigation projects (7)                                                                 | MAVGMIT10K      |
| Flood insurance coverage                                | %housing units covered by National Flood Insurance Program (7)                                                                   | MQNFIP          |
| Jurisdictional coordination                             | Governments and special districts per 10K persons (1)                                                                            | MGOVTS10K       |
| Disaster aid experience                                 | Presidential disaster declarations divided by number of loss- causing hazard events from 2000 to 2009 (7, 8)                     | MPDDHAZ         |
| Local disaster training                                 | %population in communities with Citizen Corps program (7)                                                                        | MQCITICORP      |
| Performance regimes-state capital                       | Proximity of county seat to state capital (9)                                                                                    | MCAP_DIST       |

( Continued on next page )

Table 1. Variables included in the Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities index (Continued)

| Resilience concept                      | Variable description/data source                                                           | Variable name   |
|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|
| Performance regimes- nearest metro area | Proximity of county seat to nearest county seat within a Metropolitan Statistical Area (9) | MNEARURBAN      |
| Population stability                    | Population change over previous five-year period (1)                                       | MPOPSTABIL      |
| Nuclear plant accident planning         | %population within 10 miles of nuclear power plant (10)                                    | MQNUKEPOP       |
| Crop insurance coverage                 | Crop insurance policies per square mile (11)                                               | MCRPINSDEN      |
| Housing/infrastructural resilience      |                                                                                            |                 |
| Sturdier housing types                  | %housing units not manufactured homes (1)                                                  | MQNOMOHO        |
| Temporary housing availability          | %vacant units that are for rent (1)                                                        | MVACRNT10K      |
| Medical care capacity                   | Hospital beds per 10K persons (1)                                                          | MHOSBED10K      |
| Evacuation routes                       | Number of major roads that cross a county boundary per 10K persons (9)                     | MEGRSPT10K      |
| Housing stock construction quality      | %housing units built prior to 1970 or after 2000 (1)                                       | MQNOOLDHS       |
| Temporary shelter availability          | Hotels/motels per 10K persons (1)                                                          | MHOTEL10K       |
| School restoration potential            | Public schools per 10K persons (12)                                                        | MSCHL10K        |
| Industrial resupply potential           | Rail miles per square mile (13)                                                            | MRAILSQMIL      |
| High-speed Internet infrastructure      | %population with access to broadband Internet service (14)                                 | MQINTACCS       |
| Environmental resilience                |                                                                                            |                 |
| Local food suppliers                    | Farms marketing products through community-supported agriculture per 10K persons (15)      | MCSA10K         |
| Natural flood buffers                   | %land in wetlands (9)                                                                      | MQWETLAND       |
| Efficient energy use                    | Megawatt hours per energy consumer (16)                                                    | MENERGCONS      |
| Pervious surfaces                       | Average percentage perviousness (9)                                                        | MQPRVSSURF      |
| Efficient water use                     | Inverted Water Supply Stress Index (17)                                                    | MH2OSTRES       |

Note: Key to sources: (1) U.S. Census; (2) Feeding America; (3) Bureau of Labor Statistics; (4) The Guardian ; (5) Association of Religion Data Archives; (6) American Red Cross; (7) Federal Emergency Management Agency; (8) Spatial Hazard Events and Losses Database for the United States; (9) U.S. Geological Survey; (10) U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission; (11) Environmental Working Group; (12) U.S. Department of Education; (13) Oak Ridge National Laboratory; (14) U.S. Federal Communications Commission; (15) Department of Agriculture Census; (16) U.S. Energy Information Administration; (17) U.S. Forest Service. See Cutter, Ash, and Emrich (2014) for more detail on the data sources.

other words, are rural areas more or less resilient to disasters arising from natural hazards than urban areas?

2. Are the indicators or driving factors contributing to disaster resilience different in rural places than in urban places?

## Data and Approach

## Resilience Data

Toexplore the relationship between community disaster resilience and rurality in the United States, we use an index called the Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities (BRIC; Cutter, Burton, and Emrich 2010; Cutter, Ash, and Emrich 2014). BRIC is a quantitative version of the inherent resilience portion of the disaster resilience of place framework (Cutter et al. 2008). BRIC was designed to allow periodic updates to baseline data (five-year intervals) and computational ease for emergency managers and planners.

BRIC includes forty-nine indicators of community disaster resilience, categorized into six different subtypes of resilience or forms of capitals: social, economic, community capital, institutional, infrastructural, and environmental. The indicators included in the model (Table 1) were chosen because previous research provided evidence from disaster case studies or made compelling logical arguments, suggesting that each indicator might be used as one of many proxy variables for estimating community disaster resilience. As a baseline measure of resilience, BRIC is gaining national and international attention as one of the very few community-level resilience metrics

currently available (Singh-Peterson et al. 2014; Winderl 2014; Burton 2015).

The BRIC input data are largely drawn from free and openly available data sets produced and maintained by entities such as the U.S. Census Bureau. In this article we use data compiled from secondary sources (U.S. Census) for the target year 2010. Some of the data sets are not available for the year 2010, however, so the input data sets range from 2006 to 2012. Additionally, some variables are constructed as annual averages rather than point estimates at a specific point in time. For example, most variables taken from the U.S. Census Bureau's American Community Survey (ACS) actually represent averages over the period from 2006 to 2010. Each of the forty-nine variables was transformed (from raw counts to percentages, ratios, differences, or averages) and then normalized using the min-max technique common to social indicators research (Tarabusi and Guarini 2013). This transformation method subtracts the minimum value of the variable from each observation and then divides by the range (maximum value minus minimum value, so that the minimum score is 0 and the maximum is 1). Prior to the normalization the variable scales were adjusted (inverted) where necessary so that higher values reflected more resilience (e.g., 1 D more resilience based on that variable, 0 D less resilience). The primary selection of the min-max method for normalization was based on ease of computation by emergency managers using a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and the ability to compare places over time (and thus benchmarking progress). Although the outliers in the variable range are not accounted for in this method (and thus the assumptions of normal distributions that would be found in nonlinear transformations such as Log10), the transparency in the logic for end users was our primary concern.

The variables were then summed within each of the six subindexes and the average produced for each subindicator set (e.g., social, economic). The subindicator average scores were again summed to produce the final BRIC score. Each of the subindexes was equally weighted and there was no weighting of input variables. In the absence of any theoretical justification for unequal weights, the equal weighting seemed like a prudent decision, especially given the national scope of the analysis. More localized studies could use weights based on local values, contexts, and expertise and apply them to either the individual variables or each subindex.

The theoretical range for the BRIC score is 0 to 6, with higher values corresponding to more disaster resilience. The observed range is from 2.06 to 3.10 for the 3,108 counties in the analysis. More detailed explanation and documentation of BRIC including data sources and construction is found elsewhere (Cutter, Burton, and Emrich 2010; Cutter, Ash, and Emrich, 2014). Due to limitations in data, only counties located in the conterminous United States (excludes Alaska and Hawaii) were used ( N D 3,108).

## USDARural-Urban Continuum Codes

There are many ways to differentiate a rural place from an urban one or to distinguish one rural place from another. For the purpose of this analysis, we use the USDA rural-urban continuum codes (RUCC; USDA 2013). This classification places each county into one of nine categories based on the size of their respective populations (Table 2) and location vis- a-vis Census-defined Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). In the USDA classification, codes 1 through

Table 2. U.S. Department of Agriculture rural-urban continuum codes

|                   | Code        | Metro population                                                                                                                                                                           |
|-------------------|-------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Metro counties    | 1 2 3 Code  | 1 million or more 250,000 to 1 million Fewer than 250,000 Urban population, adjacency toMSA                                                                                                |
| Nonmetro counties | 4 5 6 7 8 9 | 20,000 or more, adjacent 20,000 or more, nonadjacent 2,500 to 19,999, adjacent 2,500 to 19,999, nonadjacent < 2,500 or completely rural, adjacent < 2,500 or completely rural, nonadjacent |

Figure 1. U.S. Department of Agriculture rural-urban continuum codes. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

3 include counties located within MSAs (Figure 1). Non-MSA counties (codes 4-9) are classified by the sizes of their urban populations, as well as their adjacency to the nearest MSA. To be considered adjacent to an MSA, a non-MSA county must share a boundary with at least one MSA-designated county. In addition to being geographically adjacent, a non-MSA county must also be economically tied to a nearby MSA through at least a 2 percent rate of employees traveling to work in an MSA central county (USDA 2013).

## Approach

Several statistical analyses, data visualizations, and maps are used to address our research questions and facilitate discussion of how resilience, as measured using the BRIC index, differs in rural and urban counties and between rural counties in the conterminous United States. We performed all statistical procedures in SPSS Version 23 (IBM Corp. 2015). We have a mix of measurement levels of the data (ordinal, interval), and the majority of our input variables do not have normal distributions. For some of the variables this is a function of the large differences and variability in the attribute data among the counties. Other variables are positively or negatively skewed and clearly nonnormal. Nonparametric tests of association (Spearman's rank) and linear models such as logistic regression can relax the normality assumptions-particularly with a large number of observations, as in our case with more than 3,000 counties-and use ordinal or nominal data sets (e.g., the USDA codes or an urban-rural binary classification) in addition to interval measurements. Rather than providing a protracted methodology section detailing each of these procedures, we introduce and briefly justify use of the relevant methods within each of the following sections.

## Urban-Rural Differences in Baseline Disaster Resilience

The first research question asks to what extent disaster resilience in urban and rural places is distinguishable from the other. We use the composite scores developed from the BRIC index as our measure of resilience and explore the quantitative relationship between disaster resilience and the USDA rural-urban classification for the contiguous United States using Spearman's rank correlation coefficient (Spearman's rho). We use Spearman's because the USDA codes are ordinal data (hence the need for a nonparametric test of association). We also assume that a USDA code of 1 represents the least rural (most urban) counties and that counties are monotonically more rural with an increase in the USDA code values up to 9, the most rural (least urban) counties. Higher values of BRIC would correspond to greater estimated levels of disaster resilience. We anticipate that urban counties will score higher on the index than rural counties given

their size, complexity, and diversity across the data sets, thus producing a negative correlation between the two variables. The findings show a significant negative correlation between disaster resilience and the USDA codes ( r s D -0.25, p &lt; 0.001). Counties with USDA codes closer to 9 (more rural areas) tend to have less resilience (based on lower BRIC scores), although the association is not very strong.

## Overall Resilience

To further clarify differences in disaster resilience across urban and rural places, we employ analysis of variance (ANOVA) and logistic regression procedures, again using the composite measure of resilience (BRIC) as well as its six subindicators across the USDA rural-urban classification. We begin by comparing county mean BRIC scores across all nine USDA codes. As expected, the ANOVA result supports the conclusion that county mean BRIC scores are not equal across USDA codes, F (8) D 24.6, p &lt; 0.001.

Box and whisker plot comparisons (Figure 2) further demonstrate that BRIC scores are lower in rural counties. Statistical post hoc multiple comparisons (using the least square difference [LSD] method) indicate that USDA codes 1 through 4 (urban counties to varying degrees) are not statistically different from each other in terms of their overall disaster resilience, but all have higher resilience scores, on average, than

Figure 2. Box and whisker plots of Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities scores by USDA codes. Refer to Figure 1 for the interpretation of the USDA codes. BRIC D Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities; USDA D U.S. Department of Agriculture. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

USDA codes 5 through 9 (nonmetropolitan and rural counties; Table 3). This test confirmed our reclassification of USDA codes into the binary urban (USDA codes 1-4) and rural (USDA codes 5-9) classification, which is the focal point of our research questions.

We further explore the differences in disaster resilience between urban and rural counties using binary logistic regression. We choose logistic regression as the method of analysis because it allows us to see the relationship between each respective resilience subindex and the urban-rural categories, holding all other subindexes constant. In other words, this statistical procedure allows us to unpack the overall resilience measure (BRIC) into composite scores representing the six resilience types to discover not only the overall drivers but how they influence rural resilience and urban resilience differentially. The urban-rural dichotomy serves as the dependent variable in the model (USDA codes 1-4 D urban, then recoded as 1; codes 5-9 D rural, then recoded as 0). The independent variables are the six resilience subindexes: community capital, economic, environmental, infrastructural, institutional, and social. To facilitate the statistical analysis, the six subindexes were standardized using z scores before being input into the logistic regression. 1

The logistic regression model is statistically significant, x 2 (6) D 981.58, p &lt; 0.001, and correctly distinguishes between the attributes of disaster resilience for urban and rural counties in 73 percent of the 3,108 cases. Rural counties (76 percent of 1,734 cases) are correctly classified at a slightly higher rate than urban counties (69 percent of 1,374 cases). The Cox and Snell and Nagelkerke R 2 values (0.27 and 0.36, respectively) indicate a moderate amount of variance explained. We present the preceding model diagnostics primarily as a matter of transparency and convention. Our principal purpose in using the logistic regression, however, is for the exploration of the significance and direction of the relationship of the six resilience subindicators with the urban-rural classification as discussed in the following section.

## Distinguishing Counties Based on Community Resilience Capitals

Each of the six resilience subindexes provides significant power in distinguishing rural and urban counties (Table 4). Using the direction of the beta coefficient

Table 3. Multiple comparisons of Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities means across U.S. Department of Agriculture codes using least square difference

| LSD post hoc comparison p values   | LSD post hoc comparison p values   | LSD post hoc comparison p values   | LSD post hoc comparison p values   | LSD post hoc comparison p values   | LSD post hoc comparison p values   | LSD post hoc comparison p values   | LSD post hoc comparison p values   | LSD post hoc comparison p values   |
|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| USDA code                          | 1                                  | 2                                  | 3                                  | 4                                  | 5                                  | 6                                  | 7                                  | 8                                  |
| 2                                  | 0.65                               | -                                  |                                    |                                    |                                    |                                    |                                    |                                    |
| 3                                  | 0.29                               | 0.55                               | -                                  |                                    |                                    |                                    |                                    |                                    |
| 4                                  | 0.25                               | 0.45                               | 0.82                               | -                                  |                                    |                                    |                                    |                                    |
| 5                                  | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | 0.01 *                             | -                                  |                                    |                                    |                                    |
| 6                                  | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | 0.98                               | -                                  |                                    |                                    |
| 7                                  | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | 0.11                               | < 0.01 *                           | -                                  |                                    |
| 8                                  | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | 0.10                               | < 0.01 *                           | 0.78                               | -                                  |
| 9                                  | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | < 0.01 *                           | 0.08 *                             | < 0.01 *                           | 0.77                               | 0.97                               |

Note: Statistical significance is indicated (*); the nominal alpha level is p D 0.05. USDA = U.S. Department of Agriculture; LSD = least square difference.

as our guide (negative beta coefficient indicates a more rural association and a positive coefficient a more urban association), two resilience subindexes distinguish rural from urban particularly well when all other subindexes are held constant. As the community capital scores increase by one unit, counties are 2.29 times more likely to be rural than urban. In contrast, economic resilience appears to be a distinctly urban characteristic. As economic resilience scores increase by unit, counties are 2.4 times more likely to be urban. Similarly, urban counties are likely to see higher institutional scores (1.6 times more likely with a one-unit increase), although the effect is somewhat less pronounced than in the economic subindex. Counties are also about 1.3 times more likely to be urban with one-unit increases in infrastructural and social resilience scores. Environmental resilience scores are least effective for distinguishing rural from urban counties, when all other subindex scores are held constant. Although the effect is subdued relative to community capital, the direction of the relationship is the same: As environmental scores increase, counties are about 1.1 times more likely to be rural rather than urban.

## Characterization of County Disaster Resilience Drivers

The second research question focuses on differences in the specific driving factors of resilience in urban and rural counties. As noted earlier, there are differences among urban and rural places in terms of the relative importance of the six broad components of community resilience-in particular economic resilience and community capital. To further assess each subindex and the independent variables within them, we also use binary logistic regression to explore which individual variables best distinguish between urban and rural resilience. In this analysis, we employ a forward stepwise procedure (using the Wald statistic) with forty-eight variables entered as candidates for inclusion. Our aim in using a forward stepwise procedure is to only include those variables with the

Table 4. Binary logistic regression results for six resilience subindicators, presented in descending order by values of the Wald statistic

| Subindicator      | Beta coefficient   |   Wald statistic | p value   | Odds ratio   | Likely category with one-unit increase   |
|-------------------|--------------------|------------------|-----------|--------------|------------------------------------------|
| Community capital | ¡ 0.827            |           240.83 | < 0.001   | 2.29 a       | Rural                                    |
| Economic          | 0.884              |           196.78 | < 0.001   | 2.42         | Urban                                    |
| Institutional     | 0.473              |            81.38 | < 0.001   | 1.60         | Urban                                    |
| Infrastructural   | 0.283              |            30.25 | < 0.001   | 1.33         | Urban                                    |
| Social            | 0.255              |            18.21 | < 0.001   | 1.29         | Urban                                    |
| Environmental     | ¡ 0.134            |             7.56 | 0.006     | 1.14 a       | Rural                                    |

Note: Negative beta coefficients denote positive associations with rural counties; positive beta coefficients denote positive associations with urban counties. a Inverted odds ratio.

strongest relationships to the binary urban-rural dependent variable, rather than entering all fortyeight variables simultaneously into the model. At each step, the independent variable that contributed the most significant explanatory power was added to the model. As noted earlier, each independent variable was standardized to z scores prior to the analysis.

The one excluded resilience indicator is the variable measuring distance to the nearest metropolitan area; this variable would obviously be significantly associated with whether a county is classified as urban or rural. We exclude it to investigate the relationships of the individual variables in characterizing urban versus rural disaster resilience. Of the remaining forty-eight variables, twenty-three are retained after performing the forward stepwise procedure (Table 5). The stepwise process terminated when there were no more independent variables with significant p values ( p &lt; 0.05) that could be added to the model. As each variable contributes significant distinguishing information, this is what facilitates our discussion of differences in the drivers of disaster resilience between urban and rural counties.

The logistic regression model is statistically significant, x 2 (23) D 2,093.68, p &lt; 0.001, and correctly distinguishes disaster resilience between urban and rural counties in nearly 86 percent of the 3,108 cases. Rural counties (89 percent of 1,734 cases) are correctly classified by their resilience at a slightly higher rate than urban counties (81 percent of 1,374 cases). The Cox and Snell and Nagelkerke pseudoR 2 values are 0.49 and 0.66, respectively. The results of the logistic model are used to discuss the significance and direction of the independent variables and as likely drivers of the urban-rural differences in disaster resilience. Variables from all six resilience composite categories are significant in the logistic model. Six infrastructural indicators are retained, five for both institutional and social, three for both economic and community capital, and one for environmental resilience. The following sections present the results in greater detail for each component of community disaster resilience.

Although the aggregate infrastructural resilience composite was not the most important indicator of rural or urban resilience when compared to the other five

Table 5. Binary logistic regression results for six resilience subindicators, presented in descending order by values of the Wald statistic

| Indicator   | Beta coefficient   |   Wald statistic | p value   | Odds ratio   | Likely category with one-unit increase   | Category          |
|-------------|--------------------|------------------|-----------|--------------|------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| MQNFIP      | 0.744              |            50.73 | < 0.001   | 2.10         | Urban                                    | Institutional     |
| MQNOELDER   | 0.569              |            43.51 | < 0.001   | 1.77         | Urban                                    | Social            |
| MQNOPRIME   | 0.666              |            42.31 | < 0.001   | 1.95         | Urban                                    | Economic          |
| MQPRVSSURF  | ¡ 1.56             |            25.31 | < 0.001   | 4.74 a       | Rural                                    | Environmental     |
| MEGRSPT10K  | ¡ 0.98             |            23.83 | < 0.001   | 2.65 a       | Rural                                    | Infrastructural   |
| MHOTEL10K   | ¡ 0.60             |            20.78 | < 0.001   | 1.82 a       | Rural                                    | Infrastructural   |
| MQEMPLOYED  | 0.39               |            18.39 | < 0.001   | 1.47         | Urban                                    | Economic          |
| MPSYCH10K   | ¡ 0.38             |            18.16 | < 0.001   | 1.46 a       | Rural                                    | Social            |
| MQHMOWNER   | 0.35               |            17.49 | < 0.001   | 1.41         | Urban                                    | Economic          |
| MCRPINSDEN  | ¡ 0.31             |            16.67 | < 0.001   | 1.36 a       | Rural                                    | Institutional     |
| MRELADH10K  | ¡ 0.28             |            16.58 | < 0.001   | 1.33 a       | Rural                                    | Community capital |
| MQINTACCS   | 0.28               |            16.26 | < 0.001   | 1.32         | Urban                                    | Infrastructural   |
| MHOSBED10K  | ¡ 0.42             |            15.82 | < 0.001   | 1.52 a       | Rural                                    | Infrastructural   |
| MPHYSN10K   | 0.28               |            15.06 | < 0.001   | 1.32         | Urban                                    | Social            |
| MCIVORG10K  | ¡ 0.34             |            14.29 | < 0.001   | 1.41 a       | Rural                                    | Community capital |
| MQNATBORN   | ¡ 0.21             |             9.43 | 0.002     | 1.24 a       | Rural                                    | Community capital |
| MGOVTS10K   | 0.67               |             8.56 | 0.003     | 1.95         | Urban                                    | Institutional     |
| MQNODISABL  | 0.22               |             8.07 | 0.005     | 1.25         | Urban                                    | Social            |
| MQPHONE     | 0.19               |             7.69 | 0.006     | 1.21         | Urban                                    | Social            |
| MRAILSQMIL  | 0.31               |             7.61 | 0.006     | 1.36         | Urban                                    | Infrastructural   |
| MQNUKEPOP   | 0.16               |             6.4  | 0.011     | 1.17         | Urban                                    | Institutional     |
| MPOPSTABIL  | ¡ 0.16             |             5.23 | 0.022     | 1.18 a       | Rural                                    | Institutional     |
| MSCHL10K    | 0.37               |             4.89 | 0.027     | 1.45         | Urban                                    | Infrastructural   |

Note: Negative beta coefficients denote positive associations with rural counties; positive beta coefficients denote positive associations with urban counties. See Table 1 for variable abbreviation meanings.

a Inverted odds ratios.

aggregates (Table 4), six individual infrastructural variables are significant in the expanded driver model. We expect that those infrastructural drivers that are population dependent would most likely be more pronounced in urban areas (positive association) rather than in rural areas (negative association), and this is the case. For example, unit increases in three indicators-broadband Internet access (MQINTACCS), railroad density (MRAILSQMIL), and schools (MSCHL10K)-are 1.32 to 1.45 times more likely to characterize urban resilience. Similarly, unit increases (represented by negative beta coefficients and inverted odds ratios) in the number of evacuation routes (MEGRSPT10K), hotels (MHOTEL10K), and hospital beds (MHOSBED10K) per 10,000 population are, respectively, 2.65, 1.82, and 1.52 times more likely to characterize rural resilience. Many of the significant infrastructure indicators are essentially per capita measures and are generally higher where population is lower. The significance of Internet access and railroad density as urban resilience indicators is important in terms of communications connectivity (Internet) and transportation access. Transportation access is especially important in terms of the movement of materials and goods from break of bulk points to producers and consumers and from raw material source regions to manufacturing centers to consumers. In the aftermath of disasters, rail transport could be one of the most significant modes of bulk resupply for affected regions.

Five institutional variables are important discriminators between urban and rural resilience. Flood insurance coverage (MQNFIP), jurisdictional coordination (MGOVTS10K), and nuclear plant accident planning (MQNUKEPOP) are more likely attributes of urban disaster resilience than rural. Flood insurance coverage is the most distinguishing indicator of disaster resilience; it is 2.1 times more likely to be present in urban counties than in rural ones, when holding all other independent variables constant. There is less need for flood insurance in many rural places because of less development in flood-prone areas and fewer structural assets at risk. Similarly, nuclear power plants are often located proximate to the populated regions that they serve and thus are less significant drivers of disaster resilience in rural counties. The significance of the population around nuclear power plants is the mandatory emergency planning zone (ten-mile buffer) where the plant operators and community must engage in emergency preparedness training, drills, and exercises. This experience of working together builds institutional capacity that carries over to nonnuclear disasters. On the other hand, two variables are specific drivers of rural resilience: crop insurance (MCRPINSDEN) and population stability (MPOPSTABIL). Crop insurance is obvious given the economic livelihoods in many of the U.S. rural counties. The importance of population stability is also a characteristic of resilience, especially the rapidity of change. Rapid population changes (either increases or decreases) put strains on local governments and institutions. Rapid increases can stress the provision of municipal services (police, fire, water, sewage), especially in small, rural areas. Rapid decline in population can reduce the tax base and have a deleterious impact on disaster preparedness, response, and recovery (Cutter, Burton, and Emrich 2010; Sherrieb, Norris, and Galea 2010).

Out of five variables in the social category, oneunit increases in four of them are more likely to drive urban disaster resilience than rural disaster (Table 5). These include age groups that have not retired (MQNOELDER), few disabled residents (MQNODISABL), communication (telephone) access (MQPH ONE), and access to health professionals (MPHYS N10K). Only one variable, mental health care access per capita (MPSYCH10K), is more associated with rural counties. Because the odds ratio is inverted, it means that a one-unit increase relative to the national county mean number of mental health facilities per capita is 1.46 times more likely to be observed in rural counties than urban ones.

As in the results for the aggregate community capital subindex, all three community capital variables in the logistic model are likely greater in rural counties. The most important urban-rural differences in community capital resilience drivers are religious adherents (MRELADH10K),civic organizations (MCIVORG10K), and native-born residents (MQNATBORN). The attachment to place as measured by native-born residents coupled with the social capital of civic organizations and religious affiliation leads to enhanced disaster resilience, where rural counties are 1.24 to 1.41 times more likely to possess these resilience characteristics than urban counties.

The three economic indicators in the model are all positively associated with urban counties: nonprimary or tourism sector employment (MQNOPRIME), employment rate (MQEMPLOYED), and homeownership rate (MQHMOWNER). These are rather obvious indicators of disaster resilience-a diversified economic base, livelihood stability, and wealth accumulation within the community-and are 1.41 to 1.95 times more prevalent in urban counties than in rural ones. Only one

environmental indicator significantly improves the ability to differentiate urban or rural disaster resilience: the amount of pervious surfaces (MQPRVSSURF). Counties with more pervious surfaces are 4.74 times more likely to distinguish rural from urban disaster resilience.

The individual indicators that drive disaster resilience are different between urban and rural places. For rural areas, measures of place attachment, social capital, and population stability exert the most influence on overall resilience. Mitigation drivers also help distinguish between urban and rural areas as well. In the former it is the presence of flood insurance, whereas in the latter it is crop insurance, an expected result. Similarly, the amount of pervious surface is also a driver of rural resilience-again, an expected result. Economic indicators are less influential in driving rural resilience than in urban counties where more diversified economies (in contrast to single-sector economic activity in rural areas) predominate. Higher employment rates and increased homeownership are also distinguishing features of urban resilience. Other distinguishing drivers of urban resilience are higher numbers of schools per capita, potential for industrial resupply, and access to information via high-speed Internet service.

## Spatial Patterns of Rural Resilience

The six subtypes that constitute rural community resilience manifest themselves quite differently across the national landscape. For example, the strongest (high to medium high) social resilience (Figure 3) is found in the northern tier of counties stretching from

Figure 3. Aggregate drivers of rural resilience. The six components of disaster resilience illustrate the geographic variability in drivers between rural counties. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

the west to New England, areas with greater educational equality, physician access, and health insurance. In contrast, the weakest rural social resilience is found in border counties along the Rio Grande, eastern Kentucky, areas in the historic cotton belt, the lower Mississippi River region, and the Native American tribal lands in New Mexico and Arizona. These areas are characterized by low educational attainment, younger populations, those that are not as proficient in English, and lower levels of access to health care (health insurance, physicians, and mental health facilities).

Economic resilience is the lowest in the western half of the nation's rural counties-primarily those dependent on agriculture and extractive industries. Pockets of low-medium and low economic resilience also appear in eastern Kentucky and the lower Mississippi border counties of Arkansas, Mississippi, and northern Louisiana. The latter are primarily a function of racially diverse income inequalities. The strongest economic resilience is a function of homeownership, and a diversified economy-both characteristics found in rural counties in Midwestern states.

The western rural counties again show a pattern of weak community capital when compared to Great Plains and Midwestern rural counties. The attachment to place coupled with religious social capital and political engagement is the primary determinant of higher scores. The lack of community volunteers and engagement in formal disaster preparedness programs accounts for the relatively low scores in the rural west.

Institutional resilience also shows a western locational pattern with the rural counties in this region registering low to medium scores on this subindex. This is largely attributed to connectivity (long distances) to the state capital and less experience with disaster aid. The highest scores on institutional rural resilience occur in the agricultural belt from Indiana west to Nebraska and north to western Minnesota and South Dakota. The attributes of stronger resilience in rural areas are related to crop insurance and little population change, which is reflected in the stability of local institutions and governments in providing municipal-level services to residents.

A slightly different regional pattern appears with infrastructural resilience where rural areas in the South exhibit weak capacities in this area. The low values on this subindex are related to the nature of the building stock (less resilient mobile homes), in addition to limited access to broadband Internet. High scoring on infrastructural resilience is found in the rural counties in the Great Plains states and most of Iowa. A combination of good quality housing, broadband Internet, and access to medical facilities explains the distribution and dominance of rural Kansas counties in this subindex.

Finally, environmental resilience shows a completely different geographic pattern than the other five capitals. Strong environmental resilience is concentrated in northern Minnesota, Wisconsin and Michigan, and Maine. It is also found throughout the rural south and in portions of the lower Mississippi Valley. Natural flood buffers are the dominant variable, along with energy efficiency.

## Discussion

Webeganthis exploration of the patterns of urban and rural disaster resilience with two distinct questions. Our first question examined the relationship between rurality and community resilience, questioning whether rural counties were more or less resilient to disasters arising from natural hazards than urban counties. Using the USDA definitions of rural-urban continuum, there is a negative relationship between USDA codes and resilience scores; however, this relationship is more like a step function. For example, the resilience scores in USDA codes 1 through 4 (metro counties and large adjacent nonmetro counties) are not significantly different from one another but are higher than codes 5 through 9 (nonmetro counties). Mean resilience scores in USDA codes 5 and 6 are not different from one another (larger nonmetro counties) but are higher than codes 7 through 9 (small nonmetro and rural counties). Finally, mean resilience scores in USDA codes 7 through 9 are not different from one another but are lower than all other USDA codes. This indicates a distinct difference in resilience between more urban counties and more rural counties. A reclassification of counties into the binary urban (USDA codes 1-4) versus rural (USDA codes 5-9) illustrates distinct differences in disaster resilience between the two groupings, with rural counties exhibiting less disaster resilience when compared to their urban counterparts.

The second research question anticipated differences in disaster resilience between urban and rural places. We worked on the assumption that urban areas were more resilient given the redundancies in infrastructure, greater institutional capacity, and more diversified economies. We also speculated, though, that urban counties would be weaker on environmental resilience, social equality,

community ties, and social capital. Using the resilience subfields identified by BRIC (social, environmental, economic, institutional, infrastructural, community capital), we found that each of these subindexes significantly contributes to the differentiation of rural and urban disaster resilience. Economic and community capital were the most influential in differentiating resilience in urban versus rural counties. Specifically, community capital and the environmental subindex were the main drivers of rural resilience, whereas the economic, institutional, infrastructural, and social subindexes were the drivers of urban resilience.

A more nuanced analysis of individual drivers (e.g., independent variables) again showed contributions from all six of the subindexes, with nearly half of the independent variables appearing as significant drivers of either rural or urban resilience. The most important drivers for disaster resilience in urban areas were individual institutional variables-flood insurance coverage and jurisdictional coordination, followed by nondependence on extractive industries or tourism (a surrogate for a diversified economic base) and employment rate. The lack of large percentages of elderly rounded out the top five drivers for urban resilience.

In the case of rural resilience, the most significant driver was an environmental variable-average percentage perviousness, again not a surprise. Whereas community capital was an important aggregate driver of rural resilience, individual infrastructure variables were more dominant in the disaggregated model, specifically number of major roads, hotels and motels, and hospital beds (all based on the number of each per 10,000 people). Although these infrastructural assets might be more numerous in urban areas, the access to them might be less given the larger population size. The same is true for the other top variable driving rural disaster resilience, mental health support facilities (also measured as the number per 10,000 people).

We found distinct spatial patterns of rural resilience especially in the aggregate drivers. The strongest levels of rural resilience occur in northern counties stretching from Kansas eastward to northern New England. The weakest rural resilience is confined to the western rural counties, border counties, and throughout Appalachia. Not only do the overall scores show regional variability but so do the aggregate drivers. Social resilience, for example, is the strongest in rural counties in the Midwest and Great Plains, as is community capital. Economic and institutional drivers also dominate in the Midwest's rural counties. Infrastructural resilience is strongest in rural counties in the southern Great Plains and weakest in the South. Environmental resilience is at its weakest in western rural counties and strongest in rural counties bordering the Great Lakes and Canada and in the rural coastal plains of the South and Lower Mississippi Valley.

Despite the robustness of these findings, there are a number of caveats in using such a top-down approach to explore disaster resilience. First and foremost, it might not adequately measure the microscale nuances of disaster resilience, especially the assets and capacities of individual (subcounty) communities. Second, the subset of environmental resilience indicators is especially problematic and might or might not be reflective of the true environmental assets within communities. Improved environmental data at county scales could ameliorate this issue. Third, BRIC represents one snapshot of conditions and does not include any dynamic measures that local places can take to enhance resilience. For example, it does not adequately capture 'actionable interventions' employed by local communities such as enhancing social capital or improving citizen preparedness training. Notwithstanding these caveats, the BRIC approach does provide an empirically derived starting point and, as we have demonstrated, there are differences not only between resilience drivers in urban and rural counties but also between rural counties. In this respect, both place and space play an important role in understanding disaster resilience.

There are other alternative measures for exploring place-based resilience such as scorecards or community-based self-assessments. Scorecards are attractive but would have to be based on some national standard or guidelines and then implemented locally. Agreement on those standards or guidelines might prove problematic, especially if imposed top-down, such as through a specific federal agency program. Community-based self-assessments such as Zurich's flood resilience measurement tool (Zurich Insurance Group 2016), the Coastal Resilience Index (Sempier et al. 2010), or the Community Assessment of Resilience Tool (CART; Pfefferbaum, Pfefferbaum, and Van Horn 2013) might show greater promise in measuring resilience at the local level, but scaling this tool up to some broader comparison (among counties, states, or regions) would be difficult. The mesoscale indicators in BRIC coupled with locally based efforts could provide the best pathway for determining where resilience needs to be improved and the opportunities for doing so. The juxtaposition of both spatial and place-based approaches shows the

greatest promise and is consistent with the combination of top-down and bottom-up approaches suggested in the seminal National Research Council report (NRC 2012).

## Conclusion

There is a clear distinction between how disaster resilience from natural hazards manifests itself in urban and rural counties. The drivers of disaster resilience are different, suggesting that efforts to improve disaster resilience must be customized to the local context and not applied universally to all places, not even all urban areas or all rural ones. The social, economic, and environmental processes that have transformed the nation provide the underlying context for the patterns of disaster resilience-regional specificity, unique differences between urban and rural places within and between geographic regions, and variations in the drivers among similarly classified areas such as rural counties.

Using the USDA codes for defining the urban-rural continuum provides one approach for differentiating resilience based on their rural or urban nature. It is not without problems, however. Given the county unit of analysis, many counties have both urban and rural attributes within them but are classified by the entire county. This poses significant challenges not only for measuring disaster resilience but for the development of mitigation and preparedness activities to increase resilience. The classic example is San Bernardino County, California, the largest county (20,105 square miles) in the conterminous United States. The population of the Inland Empire is over 2 million but is concentrated in the western third of the land area. The remainder of the high desert county is sparsely settled, with challenges in disaster preparedness and response from the perspective of a sparsely populated rural area, which in turn influence its resilience. Quantifying these settlement patterns could be accomplished by rerunning the analysis using dasymetric mapping techniques to more effectively spatialize footprints of populated and nonpopulated areas within the county. Such analysis techniques might be incorporated in future work but are beyond the scope of this article.

The next important steps are to (1) conduct longitudinal analyses to see a snapshot of not just current geographic patterns of resilience but places where resilience trajectories might point to the need for targeted interventions and (2) downscale resilience indicators to more localized geographies. If a policy goal is to develop programs to improve community resilience to disasters (in terms of assets, capacities, or outcomes), a one-size-fits-all strategy for disaster reduction or mitigation policy actions is inappropriate, as it ignores the underlying inherent variability in capabilities among the nation's communities (or counties). Some of these are based on the rural-urban character of places, but others are based on the historic development patterns that produce the contemporary social and economic landscapes. Our findings suggest that donor programs and disaster resilience planning should have locally customized actions to ensure the greatest success in achieving community resilience milestones. The ability to highlight the strengths and weaknesses in resilience that could be addressed by government agencies, nongovernmental organizations, and the communities themselves is a critical first step, but the evidentiary basis for measuring disaster resilience must be credible and built on sound science and understanding.

## Acknowledgments

Any opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations are those of the authors who take full responsibility for the article's content. We appreciate the comments of the anonymous reviewers who helped improve the article and its message.

## Funding

This research was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant SES-1132755.

## Note

1. The six subindicators are standardized scores with a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. This was done to facilitate the interpretation of the odds ratios. Thus, a one-unit change represents a change of one standard deviation in the independent variable (Kaufman 1996; Menard 2010).

## References

Adger, W. N. 2000. Social and ecological resilience: Are they related? Progress in Human Geography 24 (3): 347-64.

- Alexander, D. E. 2013. Resilience and disaster risk reduction: An etymological journey. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences 13:2707-16.
- Ash, K. D., S. L. Cutter, and C. T. Emrich. 2013. Acceptable losses? The relative impacts of natural hazards in the United States, 1980-2009. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 5:61-72.
- Barnett, J., S. Lambert, and I. Fry. 2008. The hazards of indicators: Insights from the Environmental Vulnerability Index. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 98 (1): 102-19.
- Boon, H. J. 2014. Disaster resilience in a flood-impacted rural Australian town. Natural Hazards 71 (1): 683-701.
- Borden, K., and S. L. Cutter. 2008. Spatial patterns of natural hazard mortality in the United States. International Journal of Health Geographics 7:64.
- Borden, K., M. C. Schmidtlein, C. T. Emrich, W. W. Piegorsch, and S.L. Cutter. 2007. Natural hazards vulnerability in U.S. cities. Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management 4 (2): Article 5.
- Bruneau, M., S. E. Chang, R. T. Eguchi, G. C. Lee, T. D. O'Rourke, A. M. Reinhorn, M. Shinozuka, K. Tierney, W. W. Wallace, and D. von Winterfeldt. 2003. A framework to quantitatively assess and enhance the seismic resilience of communities. Earthquake Spectra 19 (4): 733-52.
- Burton, C. G. 2015. A validation of metrics for community resilience to natural hazards and disasters using the recovery from Hurricane Katrina as a case study. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 105 (1): 67-86.
- Cox, R. S., and M. Hamlen. 2015. Community disaster resilience and the rural resilience index. American Behavioral Scientist 59 (2): 220-37.
- Cutter, S. L. 2015. The landscape of disaster resilience indicators in the United States. Natural Hazards 80 (2): 741-58.
- Cutter, S. L., K. D. Ash, and C. T. Emrich. 2014. The geographies of community disaster resilience. Global Environmental Change 29:65-77.
- Cutter, S. L., L. Barnes, M. Berry, C. Burton, E. Evans, E. Tate, and J. Webb. 2008. A place-based model for understanding community resilience to natural disasters. Global Environmental Change 18:598-606.
- Cutter, S. L., C. G. Burton, and C. T. Emrich. 2010. Disaster resilience indicators for benchmarking baseline conditions. Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management 7 (1): Article 51.
- Elliott, J. R., and J. Pais. 2010. When nature pushes back: Environmental impact and the spatial redistribution of socially vulnerable populations. Social Science Quarterly 91 (5): 1187-1202.
- Gall, M., K. A. Borden, C. T. Emrich, and S. L. Cutter. 2011. The unsustainable trend of natural hazard losses in the United States. Sustainability 3:2157-81.
- Godschalk, D. R. 2003. Urban hazard mitigation: Creating resilient cities. Natural Hazards Review 4 (3): 136-43.
- Hazards and Vulnerability Research Institute [HVRI]. 2015. Spatial hazard events and loss database for the U.S. http://hvri.geog.sc.edu/SHELDUS/docs/Summary\_ 1960\_2014.pdf (last accessed 23 April 2016).
- IBM Corp. 2015. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 23.0. Armonk, NY: IBM Corp.
- Kapucu, N., C. V. Hawkins, and F. I. Rivera. 2013. Disaster preparedness and resilience or rural communities. Risk, Hazards &amp; Crisis in Public Policy 4 (4): 215-33.
- Kaufman, R. L. 1996. Comparing effects in dichotomous logistic regression: A variety of standardized coefficients. Social Science Quarterly 77 (1): 90-109.
- Klein, R., R. Nicholls, and F. Thomalla. 2003. Resilience to natural hazards: How useful is this concept? Environmental Hazards 5:35-45.
- Leichenko, R. 2011. Climate change and urban resilience. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 3:164-68.
- Matyas, D., and M. Pelling. 2015. Positioning resilience for 2015: The role of resistance, incremental adjustment and transformation in disaster risk policy. Disasters 39 (Suppl. 1): S1-S18.
- McManus, P., J. Walmsley, N. Argent, S. Baum, L. Bourke, J. Martin, B. Pritchard, and T. Sorensen. 2012. Rural community and rural resilience: What is important to farmers in keeping their country towns alive? Journal of Rural Studies 28:20-29.
- Menard, S. 2010. Logistic regression: From introductory to advanced concepts and applications . Los Angeles: Sage.
- Mileti, D. 1999. Disasters by design: A reassessment of natural hazards in the United States . Washington, DC: Joseph Henry.
- National Research Council (NRC). 2006. Facing hazards and disasters: Understanding human dimensions . Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
- ---. 2012. Disaster resilience: A national imperative . Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
- Norris, F. H., S. P. Stevens, B. Pfefferbaum, K. F. Wyche, and R. L. Pfefferbaum, 2008. Community resilience as a metaphor, theory, set of capacities, and strategy for disaster readiness. American Journal of Community Psychology 41:127-50.
- Pelling, M. 2003. The vulnerability of cities: Social resilience and natural disaster . London: Earthscan.
- Pfefferbaum, R. L., B. Pfefferbaum, and R. L. Van Horn. 2013. Communities advancing resilience toolkit (CART): The CART integrated system . Oklahoma City: University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Terrorism and Disaster Center. http://www.oumedicine.com/psychiatry/ research/terrorism-and-disaster-center (last accessed 22 April 2016).
- Reschovsky, J. D., and A. B. Staiti. 2005. Access and quality: Does rural America lag behind? Health Affairs 24 (4): 1128-39.
- Rockefeller Foundation. 2016. 100 resilient cities. http://www. 100resilientcities.org (last accessed 1 February 2016).
- Rodin, J. 2014. The resilience dividend . New York: Public Affairs.
- Rose, A. 2007. Economic resilience to natural and manmade disasters: Multidisciplinary origins and contextual dimensions. Environmental Hazards 7 (4): 383-95.
- Sabates-Wheeler, R., S. Devereux, T. Mitchell, T. Tanner, M. Davies, and J. Leavy. 2008. Rural risaster risk-poverty interface . Sussex, UK: University of Sussex.
- Sempier, T. T., D. L. Swann, R. Emmer, S. H. Sempier, and M. Schneider. 2010. Coastal community resilience index: A community self-assessment. MASGP-08-014, Mississippi-Alabama Sea Grant Consortium, Ocean Springs, MS.

- Sherrieb, K., F. H. Norris, and S. Galea. 2010. Measuring capacities for community resilience. Social Indicators Research 99 (2): 227-47.
- Singh-Peterson, L., P. Salmon, N. Goode, and J. Gallina, 2014. Translation and evaluation of the Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities on the Sunshine Coast, Queensland Australia. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 10:116-26.
- Tarabusi, E. C., and G. Guarini. 2013. An unbalance adjustment method for development indicators. Social Indicators Research 112 (1): 19-45.
- Tobin, G., and L. M. Whiteford. 2002. Community resilience and volcano hazard: The eruption of Tungurahua and evacuation of the faldas in Ecuador. Disasters 26 (1): 28-48.
- Tootle, D. M. 2007. Disaster recovery in rural communities: A case study of southwest Louisiana. Southern Rural Sociology 22 (2): 6-27.
- UK Department for International Development (DFID). 2011. Defining disaster resilience: A DFID approach paper. UK DFID, London. https://www.gov.uk/govern ment/uploads/system/uploads/attachment\_data/file/ 186874/defining-disaster-resilience-approach-paper. pdf (last accessed 23 April 2016).
- UN International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR). 2009. Risk and poverty in a changing climate: 2009 global assessment report on disaster risk reduction . Geneva: United Nations.
- ---.2013. Making cities resilient: Summary for policy makers . Geneva: UNISDR.
- U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2013. Rural-urban continuum codes: Documentation . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service. http:// www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/rural-urban-continuumcodes/documentation.aspx (last accessed 23 April 2016).
- ---. 2015. Rural America at a glance, 2015 edition. http://www.ers.usda.gov/media/1952235/eib145.pdf (last accessed 23 April 2016).
- U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2016. HUD awards $1 billion through National Disaster Resilience Competition. http://portal.hud. gov/hudportal/HUD?src D /press/press\_releases\_media\_ad visories/2016/HUDNo\_16-006 (last accessed 23 April 2016).
- U.S. Subcommittee on Disaster Reduction. 2005. Grand challenges for disaster reduction . Washington, DC: National Science and Technology Council. http://www.sdr.gov/ docs/SDRGrandChallengesforDisasterReduction.pdf (last accessed 23 April 2016).
- Vale, L. J., and T. J. Campanella, eds. 2004. The resilient city: How modern cities recover from disaster . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Weichselgartner, J., and I. Kelman. 2015. Geographies of resilience: Challenges and opportunities of a descriptive concept. Progress in Human Geography 39 (3): 24967.
- Winderl, T. 2014. Disaster resilience measurements: Stocktaking of ongoing efforts in developing systems for measuring resilience . Geneva: United Nations Development Programme. http://www.preventionweb.net/ publications/view/37916 (last accessed 23 April 2016).
- World Bank and GFDRR. 2013. Building resilience: Integrating climate and disaster risk into development . Washington, DC: The World Bank.
- Zurich Insurance Group. 2016. Beyond response and recovery: An introduction to the Zurich flood resilience program . Zurich, Switzerland: Zurich Insurance Group. http://www.preventionweb.net/publications/ view/47378 (last accessed 20 April 2016).

SUSAN L. CUTTER is Carolina Distinguished Professor and Director of the Hazards &amp; Vulnerability Research Institute at the University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208. Email: scutter@sc.edu. Her research interests are in environmental hazards, especially the development of resilience and vulnerability metrics, and the inherent social and spatial inequality of hazard impacts and disaster recovery.

KEVIN D. ASH is Postdoctoral Fellow at the School of Geosciences, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620-5550. E-mail: kevinash@usf.edu. His research interests are in vulnerability and resilience metrics, risk communication and perception, and hazard preparedness and response behaviors.

CHRISTOPHER T. EMRICH is Associate Research Professor and Associate Director of the Hazards &amp; Vulnerability Research Institute at the University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29209. E-mail: emrich@mailbox.sc.edu. His research interests include the application of geospatial technologies to disaster response, recovery, and mitigation decision making and developing new approaches to understand and ameliorate hazard vulnerability.