## The 1  948 Israeli-Palestinian War and its Aftermath: The Transform  at  ion and De-S  ign  ification of Palestine's  Cultural Landscape

Ghazi Falah

Department o f   Geography, University o f   Wales,  Lampeter hange  in  the  cultural  landscape  generally occurs slowly; unless there are good reasons  for  altering the  visible  appearance of a  place,  it  continues  to  preserve  its original features. Having invested effort, money, and time in these livable places, inhabitants are usually unreceptive to radical change. Indeed  places  even  resist  death  and  cultural dissolution  as  when,  for  example,  residents displaced by war  return  to  their  destroyed homes and make a new start. This attachment to  habitations  is  heightened  perhaps  because their  appearance  merges  into  the  texture  of everyday  life.  From  this  perspective,  changes in  the cultural landscape tend to be evolutionary  rather  than  revolutionary  because  places are malleable and change with the surrounding landscape.

Various empirical studies serve as guideposts for  a  humanistic  approach to  place  and  landscape  (Cosgrove and  Jackson 1987;  Gregory and Ley 1988; Agnew and Duncan 1989; Cosgrove and Daniels 1988; Baker and Biger 1992; Duncan  and  Ley  1993a). As  Norton  pointed out '[a] cultural  landscape can  be seen as the end  product  or,  more  correctly,  the  dynamic product of  many  individual  decisions  made at different times within  social and physical  environments' (1  989:76). These decisions  can  be attributed to the 'actions and attitudes' o f   ideologically motivated individuals or societies (Baker  1992:7).  By viewing  ideologies  as  a manifestation of authority,  Baker  reminds  us that  '[ildeologies  compete  with  each  other, . . .' that  'a given  society  and  landscape may have several different systems o f   symbolic representations  existing  within it  simultaneously and antagonistically' (1  992:4-5). Landscape thus  may  be conceived as  the  outcome of a struggle among  conflicting interest groups seeking domination  over  an  immediate  environment.  When  one group  imposes  its  wellbeing  over the  places  o f another,  the former completely  or  partially  replaces the landscape symbols o f   the latter.  In  such cases,  landscape (re)creation  requires  an  appreciation  o f the ideological  'sediment'  (Duncan  and  Duncan 1988) buried  beneath  the  layer  deposited  by the last group in  power. But that reading alone does not  free  the  interpreter  from  distortion (Stock 1993). Pivotal questions require answers prior  to generalization:  Who is  the  reader?  In which  discourse i s   a  representation  made? As Ley  and  Duncan  conclude:  'any presentation o f a  landscape,  whether  popular  or  scholarly, is  best thought o f   as a representation, that is,  a construction that is contingent, partial and unfinished'  (1  993:329; emphasis  in  original). Indeed, the association o f   ideology with  landscape has  sparked  renewed  interest  in  landscapes and their translations into metaphors o f text, theater,  and spectacle (Duncan and Duncan  1988;  Cosgrove  and  Daniels  1989;  Gregory and Ley  1988; Ley  and Olds 1988; Cosgrove 1990).  These studies share one common denominator-a critical reading o f   landscape in search  o f   alternative meanings.

The  case  under  scrutiny  here  is  the  exodus/expulsion o f   the Palestinian  people during the 1948 war that preceded the establishment of   State o f   Israel. The act of expulsion  is  conceptualized as part o f   an Israeli strategy o f   'total war'  that targeted both Palestinian civilian population  and their landscapes. In  a total war, an  entire  society  is  mobilized  (economically, politically, and  ideologically)  in  support o f   the military struggle (Shaw 1987:lSl). Yet the 1948 war  did  not  end  this  process.  Mindful  o f   the

centrality of  control  of the land,  landscape, and its meanings  for  political  hegemony, Israeli authorities  pursued  a  strategy  which, by removing the  past cultural traces  of other  peoples from the  landscape,  undercut and weakened Palestinian  claims  to this territory, i . e . , a strategy  of  'de-signification.' A  cultural  landscape  that  reflected  hundreds of years  of sequent occupance was eradicated in some four decades.

In this process of cultural landscape transformation,  one  party systematically  attempted to eliminate the other's  attachment to their  habitat.  Places that were the loci for Palestinian culture and national identity,  the vessels of a collective memory of the region's  palimpsest-like cultural  landscape,  were  obliterated  in acts of de-signification. Understanding  that process involves an articulation of factors  central to Israeli ideology and political claims to the land of Palestine.  Israel's  denial  of  the  reality  of  the Palestinian connection to their homeland has a long history,'  which continues in reconstituted form  even  as  the  peace  process  moves forward. Toward these ends,  this paper addresses t w o  interrelated themes: first, the war's  uprooting of people  from  their  places;  second,  the political  strategy obliterating  vacated places. With these themes  in mind,  the analysis is organized  as  follows:  after  presenting the  conceptual  framework  of total  war, I review  the controversial historiography of the 1948 IsraeliPalestinian  war and then discuss  the nature of this war with respect to its civilian aspect.  The paper then turns to an in-depth analysis of the spatial  pattern  of depopulation in one  region, i.e.,  the Safad sub-district.  The ensuing section concentrates  on  another  kind  of  war  aimed against  the  'enemy's'  former  places,  i.e., the 41  8 depopulated  Palestinian  villages  left  behind. I  use field research data to assess the level of destruction  at the village  sites over the past forty  years  and to report on the current status and  utility  of the  remaining  public  structures and holy places. A concluding section sums up the findings and their implications. It should be pointed out that the Israeli strategy of removing the cultural imprint of another  group from the landscape is not unique.  In post-World War  II Czechoslovakia,  for example, a similar process of landscape erasure has unfolded: 'The desire to eradicate all signs of  the centuries-long presence of Germans  in the  Sudetenland  led not only to the prohibition of German place names and removal of German signs and street nameplates,  but in some places even to the removal stones'

of  German inscriptions on t o mb (Schieder 1960:91).

## Conceptual Framework: Total War,  'Ethnic Cleansing,'  and Place Annihilation

Three concepts of war provide the theoretical framework  for this  paper.  As  the term  implies,  total war  involves unrestrained  violence (Liddell-Hart 1967:9) that often produces largescale  devastation  (Shaw 1987:151). The  concept  thus  contains  elements  of  both  'ethnic cleansing' and place annihilation. Historic buildings and other treasures of civilization are subject  to  destruction.  From  a  strictly  military perspective,  according to Gyorgy,  '[glreat  cities,  densely  populated capitals  have  become the focal points of new war strategy,  mainly on account of their  helplessness and poor defensibility. . . .' (1943:359). Total  war  differs  significantly from 'limited war' in  which adversaries  agree  to  the  rules  of  engagement  (Aron 1954; Edmonds 1972:ll-13) and  with  the probable levels  of damage  they  are  prepared to  accept.  In  the  case  of  total  war,  the  rules designed to protect civilian populations are callously  violated  in  many  respects  (Liddell-Hart 1967:61). Civilian populations are often directly targeted  because  military  leaders  regard them as  decisive  for  the  collapse  of the  enemy.  A case  in  point  is  the  strategy  of  a  'starvation blockade.'  This  essentially  inhumane  method of warfare has its greatest impact on non-combatants, especially  the  weak  and  the  old; it functions  to  undermine  the  resistance  of the opposing  armies  by inflicting misery  on their families  (Liddell-Hart 1967:63). In  short,  these means are justified  by the ultimate end of victory.

'Ethnic cleansing'  is  a  key  component  of total  war.  It targets  specific  population groups (Bell-Fialkoff 1993; Cox and Eibner 1993) and takes many forms. In the Middle Ages, religious cleansing  sought  to  'purify' the  society of 'nonbelievers.'  In modern times,  cleansing has targeted 'politically  unreliable' segments of the population  for  forced  resettlement  or  expulsion.  In cases  where  the  aggressor  seeks  the ultimate  aim  of  purifying the  space  of  'alien

groups,'  expulsion orders may be issued without warning and  implemented within a short time.  Some of these  orders  may  be aimed  at terrorizing the  largely  unarmed  and  defenseless civilian population. In such situations,  massacre and rape of women are not uncommon, and may be carried out by civilian combatants and/or  the  regular  government  troops  (Szaz 1960:94).  Because  of the  inhumane aspect of such atrocities,  governments and military leaders usually  decline to admit war-crime respon- sibility  once the war  has been terminated.

'Ethnic  cleansing' is currently taking place in Bosnia-Hercegovina  where Muslims are being driven from  their  homes  (Meron  1993;  BellFialkoff 1993;  Pfaff 1993). There are a number of  other  such  cases  in  the  present  century where complete settlements have been wiped out or houses abandoned to decay or reoccupation by others,  while the original inhabitants have little alternative but to go  in to exile.  Ethnic cleansing reached its height with the Nazi campaigns against the  Jews  (1  933-1 945)campaigns that were intended to remove Jews from  the  territories of the  Reich  (Bell-Fialkoff 1993:114).  The Armenians o f Turkey's  eastern provinces  experienced  a  similar  fate  in 1915 (Walker 1980;  Ternon 1981  :209-219). The expulsion  of  the  German  population  from  the territories  east of the  Oder-Neisse-Line  (East Germany and Poland) and Czechoslovakia toward the end o f World War ll i s   also  a  welldocumented  case  (Schieder  n.d.;  1960).  Less well-known is the expulsion of 500,000  Asians from  Uganda  in  1972  (Twaddle  1975;  Ramchandani 1976). To underscore the  universal nature of these  tragic  events  does  not  imply that I condone their  perpetrators  nor wish to console  (or  downplay  the  burden  of)  one group of victims by citing the suffering of others.  Such events should be known and documented in order to prevent their  repetition.

Total  war  also  involves  the  annihilation  of living space  i.e., of place (Hewitt 1983;  1987). In  studying these  annihilations, it  is  important t o  differentiate  between places that were annihilated as  side  effects  of the  battlefield  (i.e., a village  caught  in the midst of heavy fighting is devastated  by  the  fire  of  both  armies)  and those that were destroyed as a result of military strategies  deliberately  designed  to  devastate civilian and non-military  areas.  Warfare  during the American  Civil War was often of this latter type (Weigley 19733  28-1 52; Liddell-Hart

1967:68).  In either  case,  places that shelter  human beings  or  symbolize their  existence  are erased.  The  1948  Israeli-Palestinian war, described  in  Israeli  literature  as  'Israel's  War  of Independence'  and  in  Palestinian  (or  Arab) writing as 'a/-Nakba' (the catastrophe or disaster), arguably  offers  an  instance  of  total  war characterized  by  ethnic  cleansing  and  place annihilation, i.e., landscape  erasure. In  this case, Jewish and Israeli forces were mobilized in  behalf  of  a  total  war  against  the  majority Palestinian  population.  Palestinian  places  consequently  experienced  significant  devastation and depopulation during the 1948 war and into 1949.

## The 1948 a/-Nakba

## War Revisited

The 1948 war uprooted the Palestinian people  from  their  places.  Palestinians  were  radically and  involuntarily  separated from  their habitations, and  sections  of  their  homeland were totally  evacuated. Two key terms,  'fled' and  'expelled,' offer  a  clue  to  the  differing interpretations  (and  ideological stances)  of Israelis  and Palestinians  (Glazer  1980;  Hitchens 1988). Palestinian  and some Western  scholars (including  Jews) have attributed the Palestinian 'exodus'  to deliberate action on the part of the Zionist  leadership  in Palestine during the war. Most Israeli commentators claimed meanwhile that  Palestinians 'fled,' in response to appeals by Arab  leaders.  The  latter  thus  bore responsibility  for  depopulation  ( e g ,   via  radio  messages  broadcast from various Arab capitals ordering the flight of most of  the Palestinians; see Glazer  1980:97-100). Proof  of  this  claim  has never been  furnished, however (Palumbo 1987;  Hitchens 1988). In an attempt to document the Arab  role in depopulation,  the  Irish journalist Dr. Erskine Childers conducted a meticulous  search.  Visiting  Israel  in  1958 as  the guest  of the  Foreign Office,  he asked  to see the proof of the Arab radio broadcasts. ' I was assured they existed,  and was promised them. None had been offered when I left,  but I  was again assured. I asked to have the material sent on t o me. I am still waiting' (Childers 1971  :796). Childers then decided that the only scholarly  recourse  was  to  test  the  undocumented charge by other means. He found that the BBC had monitored all Middle East broadcasts throughout 1948, and that the transcripts,

corroborated by  those from an American monitoring  unit,  were  available  at  the  British Museum.  Childers  read  them  all  and  concluded:  'There  was  not a single  order,  or appeal,  or suggestion about evacuation from Palestine  from  any  Arab  radio  station, inside  or outside  Palestine,  in  1948.  There  is  repeated monitored  record of Arab  appeals,  even flat orders,  to the civilians of Palestine to stay put' (italics  in  the  original)  (Childers  1971  :798).  A similar conclusion had been reached earlier by Khalidi  (1959; 1961).  In  his  review  of  official papers of the Arab Higher Committee,  Khalidi furnished  evidence  that  Arab  and  Palestinian leaders  ordered  Palestinian  natives  to  stay  in their  places.  Khalidi also  noted a  Zionist  war plan known as  Plan  Dalet  (Plan  D) which  involved 13 military operations  aimed at driving Palestinians  from  their  villages.  Some  of  the code names given to these operations-Matate (Broom),  and Bi'ur  Chametz  (Passover  Cleanup)-suggest that the war  involved aspects  of ethnic cleansing. Palumbo's (1  987) and Masalha's (1  992a; 1992b)  recent  work  also supports Khalidi's  arguments  in noting that Plan D was  drafted  several  years  before  the  war began.

According  to  Meir  Pa'il,  an  Israeli  historian and veteran  of the 1948 war,  Plan D was  the first  strategic  plan and its underlying objective was  the  nationwide conquest  and  control of territories (1  972:ll).  As  officially  stated, Plan D's  broad objectives  were  to  gain  control of the area allotted to the Jewish State (within the framework  of the 1947 United Nations' partition of Palestine;  see inset map in Figure 1 ) and t o   defend  its  borders as  well  as  the  blocs of Jewish settlements and such Jewish population as were outside those borders against a regular or  pararegular enemy  operating  from  bases outside  or  inside the area  of the Jewish State (1972:ll). According to Lorch, commanders of territorial  brigades were  instructed to plan for and execute  several  tactical  objectives  including  occupying 'all police fortresses/stations evacuated  by British  forces,  and  of  Arab  villages close to  Jewish settlements;  creating continuity  between Jewish cities and neighbouring Jewish settlements; gaining control of lines  of communications;  besieging enemy cities;  capturing  forward  bases  of  the  enemy;  counter attacks  both inside and outside the borders of the  State' (1  968:90-91). Pa'il  observed  that Arab  villages near  to  existing  Jewish  settle- ments were to be cleansed (in Hebrew tihur) in  order  to  prevent  the  possibilities  of  their being used as  'bases for active (enemy) armed bases'  (1  972:ll).  According to Pa'il,  this process of  cleansing2  was meant  to  be  implemented at three  levels  of intensity:  1) a moderate  level that involved only police cleansing; 2) a medium cleansing that involved besieging the village  and undertaking  search  operations inside  (in  case  of  opposition,  enemy  armed forces should be destroyed and the population expelled  across  the  state  border);  and  3) the high intensity level that involved complete destruction of villages  by blowing up the remaining  debris.  The  latter  type  of  cleansing  was applied  to  those  villages  that  presented difficulties in maintaining continuous control (1  972:ll-12).

Contextually,  these strategies of cleansing left just t w o  alternatives for local Arab villages. First, they had little choice but to accept any condition dictated by the Jewish forces/lsraeli Army. From this perspective,  the Israeli tactical definitions of 'hostile  population' and 'who  attacks whom?'  are crucial for Israeli decisions whether  to  completely  destroy  a  village or leave it intact. Nor should one dismiss the possibility of an intentional provocation on the part of the advancing army units in order to classify a village  as  militarily  hostile.  Second,  even villages whose inhabitants did not wish to resist could not be assured  that there would  be no expulsion.  indeed some villages  were  already 'listed'  and singled  out for  cleansing  because they  fell  within  the category  of the third  level of intensity  in Plan D. This  partly  explains why some  Arab  villages friendly with pre-I  948 Jewish settlements  were  not  exempted  from expulsion (Finkelstein 1991  :74-75; Masalha 1992b:168-173).

Studies by  Israeli  historian  Benny  Morris (1  986a;  1987;  1990) have shifted the direction of the  debate.  After  the  declassification of Israeli documents  on the war,  Morris obtained a copy of a report by the intelligence  branch of the Israeli Defense Forces (hereafter IDF) entitled  The Emigration of the Arab of Palestine in  the  Period 1/12/1947-1/6/7948 (Morris 1986a).  During this  six-month  period,  almost half  of the 1948/1949 Palestinian  refugees  left their  homes.  IDF  intelligence  made  a  careful study of the departure of these  391,000  Palestinians  (this number doubled by the end of the war).  The  report  categorized  the  reasons  for

Figure 1. Safad Sub-district:  Pattern of  Depopulating Palestinian villages,  1948-1 949.

<!-- image -->

this  mass  exodus  as  follows:  1) Haganah (Hebrew for  "defense"; an  illegal,  mainstream  of the Zionist paramilitary organization which op- erated semi-secretly in Palestine during the period of the  British  Mandate)  and  IDF  operations--"at least 55 percent"; 2) operations by

IZL Jewish underground armed groups (Irgun Zva'i  Leumi,  Hebrew for 'National  Military Organisation')  and  Lehi  (Lohamei Herut Yisrael, Hebrew  for  'Freedom  Fighters  of Israel'')-I 5 percent;  and  3) the  rumor  campaign  of psychological  warfare, evacuations  ordered  by I D F ,   and general fear-I4 percent.  In his  later work,  Morris faults  the  report for  minimizing the  role played  b y  direct expulsion  orders  in bringing about  part of the  Palestinian  exodus. He notes that  '[tlhe  proportion of villages  expelled is computed incorrectly and a large grey area of 'semi-expulsions'  is included under the category of flight due to 'military operations' or some other 'non-expulsion' category' (1  990:84).  According to Morris (1 987), the actions of  eviction, expulsion, and  massacre were  a  by-product  of the  war  and  a  consequence  of  a  certain  mood  prevalent  among Israeli soldiers;  in other words,  they were local initiatives,  and  not guided  by higher  levels of command. Yet,  if the 1948 war  is conceptuali z ed as  a  case  of  'total  war,' the  rank  of the military  implementing civilian  expulsion  is  not relevant. What happened on the ground is the primary concern.

## The 1948 War as a 'Total

## War'

It is commonly agreed that the origins of war can be traced to the U.N. General Assembly's adoption of resolution no. 181 (November 29, 1947). This resolution partitioned Palestine into t w o  states,  one Palestinian-Arab and the other Jewish,  with Jerusalem  and Bethlehem  constituting an  international  zone.  The  city  of Jaffa was left as  an Arab enclave surrounded by the territory  of the Jewish  state. The U.N. proposal suggested increasing Jewish landholdings from about 7 percent of the Palestine Mandate to 55 percent,  while placing 42 percent of the Palestinian population under the control and sovereignty  of the  proposed Jewish state.  The  war broke out on December 3,  1947 in Jerusalem. Not until May 15,  1948,  the day the last British soldiers  left the country (after 30 years of Mandatory rule),  did any Arab army enter Palestine to assist  the Palestinian civil population  against the Jewish  force^.^  Hence,  prior to the departure of the British Army,  Jewish forces initiated a war of demographic and territorial expansion which took on the dimension of space purification-expulsion and prevention of the return of the expellees. At least until May 15, 1948, there was  no  regular  army  pitched  against  Jewish forces.  Their enemy was essentially the indigenous civilian Palestinian  population.  Expulsions proceeded  in  accordance  with  Plan  D.  As Palumbo comments:  'It is clear  .  .  .  that  when Ben-Gurion and his associates drew up Plan D they  were  well aware  that  victory  in the war with  Arabs  would  be  meaningless  unless  the resulting Jewish state  was  territorially  and de-

mographically viable'  (1 987:41)

The Jewish forces thus opted to launch a war against  the  Palestinian  masses with the aim of capturing territory  inside  the  enemy  frontier. The task  was  a formidable  one given the relative weakness of the Jewish forces on the eve of  the  war.  Jews  constituted  one-third  (estimated  at  608,225 persons  on  December  31, 1946) of the country's total population (1,972,559 for the same date) (Khalidi 1992a:102).  The Jewish armed forces of 65,000 also  lacked  the  manpower  (Khalidi  1971:858; Gilmour  1980:64)  for a  multi-dimensional  war against  an  indigenous  population.  In order  to overcome  this  disadvantage, Zionist leaders mobilized all able-bodied  Jews in Palestine to fight  with the  army-a situation  described  by Liddell-Hart  as  a 'nation-in-arms' (1  967:9).  As part  of  their  army  duties, civilian  Jews were required,  among other things,  to settle  in the depopulated Palestinian  villages  already  occupied by Jewish army units so as to prevent the return of Palestinians (Masalha 1992a:189190). They also assisted the army in demolishing villages  that posed strategic  threats.

The  Jewish  civilian population also performed  two  other  types of  military duties. These  included  the  imposition  of  economic sanctions, the  dissemination  of  war propaganda,  and,  with  the  assistance  of the  army, prevention of Palestinian villagers from harvesting their fields (Nazal 1978;  Morris 1986b; GoIan 1992). As Morris (1  986b) notes '[ilt  was  in the Negev,  where the wheat and barley fields ripened  earliest,  that  a  general  policy  of destruction  of Arab  fields  was  first  considered' (1  986b:673).  Morris  points  out  several  examples of Jewish settlements harvesting the fields of both existing and abandoned  Arab  villages (in the  coastal  area,  Mount  Carmel  and  the Galilee)-an activity that was seen as  'crucial to the war  effort'  (1986b3675).  Expulsion  also  involved a propaganda campaign,  a sort of 'gentle' cleansing (Bell-Fialkoff 1993:119). Members of Jewish settlements in contact with Palestinian villages  were  urged by military commands

to  "whisper"  in the ears  of Arabs that  a  great Jewish  reinforcement  had  arrived  to  burn  all the  villages  of the  area  and  that  these  Arab friends should escape while there was still time (Khalidi 1961 :28; Glazer 1980:103).

Jewish military weakness is likewise reflected in  the  massacres  perpetrated  in  selected  villages and towns (Sayigh 1979:75-77; Schechla 1993:260).  This  calculated  aspect  of war  was carried out in small villages (e.g., the villages of Nasir  al-Din  and khirbat al-Wa'ra  al-Sawda'  in Tiberias sub-district and al-Husayniyya in Safad sub-district)  and  in  villages  which  had  good neighborly relations with the pre-I  948 Jewish population and settlements  (e.g., Dayer  Yasin in  Jerusalem  sub-district  and  Zarnuqa  in  alRamla  sub-district).  Such  massacres  did  not reflect the  level of local  resistance,  but rather were  intended to provide  "lessons  in toughness''  to the  Palestinians  so  that  other  neighboring villagers  would panic  and leave voluntarily.  Based on  British and Israeli archival material,  Masalha was able to reconstruct  (for the period May 20,  1947-March  31,  1948) at least 92  cases  of terrorist  activities  and  massacres perpetrated  against  the  Palestinians  (Figure  2). These were organized by regular Jewish forces (Hagana)  and  by  the  lrgun  and  Stern  Gang (1992b:142-8). As Figure 2 indicates,  there is a clear  pattern  where  small villages  were  carefully  selected  as  exemplary  "victims." Moreover, these  chosen  villages  were  located  in close proximity to major cities with Palestinian populations.  Perhaps the most famous  case is the April 9,  194.8 massacre of at least 254 Arab civilians of Dayr Yasin village (Reynier 1950:6974;  Gilmour 1980:62)  located near the western suburbs of Jerusalem. Other examples include the April 11 or 12,  1948 massacre  in Nasir  alDin village  near  Tiberias;  six  massacres  in villages  near  Safad  (i.e., the villages  of 'Ayn  alZaytun, Jish,  al-Saliha, Safsaf, a-Husayniyya, and  Sa'sa')  between  March 12 and  October 30,  1948;  the massacre  in Balad al-Shaykh  village  near  Haifa (committed on December 31, 1947);  and two massacres  in Eilabun  (on October  30,  1948) and Arab Al-Mawasi  (Khirbat al-Wa'ra  al-Sawda'  in late October or early November,  1948)  villages  located  half-way  between Safad and Nazareth city.  In these cases, Jewish forces singled out the weakest group in the  rural  community  for  massacre.  They  encountered minimum resistance even when dispatching small  military  units for  such tasks.  In t w o  cases massacres  in the town of Lydda (alRamla  sub-district) and  the  village of  ljzim (Haifa  sub-district)  were  carried  out  during  a truce-fire period. The Israelis thus not only violated  one  of the  rules  of war,  but they  used these rules to dispatch large-size military units and  organize  a  successful  operation  without worrying about  ongoing operations  on  other fronts.

No less calculated a war  crime than massacres  was  the  rape  of  Palestinian  women  by Jewish soldiers. Two well-known cases of combined massacres and rapes occurred in Safsaf village  (Safad sub-district)  and in al-Dawayima (Hebron  sub-district). Both  massacres  were carried  out on October 29,  1948 during army operations  Hiram  (for  Safsaf)  and  "Yo'av" (for al-Dawayima). In these cases,  gender was subordinated  to  the  ultimate  end  of  military  triumph. Palestinian  society  (composed of both Muslims and Christians),  like many other traditional societies, places great value on  the honor o f their  women.

If  Israeli  strategy  and  tactics  derived  from weakness,  observers may be inclined to justify their actions. A case in point is the criticism  of Morris's  work  by the  Israeli geographer,  BenArtzi.  By accusing Morris of ignoring the frustrations of  those who experienced the war (i.e., the Jewish forces) and those who were apprehensive about its outcome (1  992:164),  he indirectly justifies Jewish war  crimes.  Similar  sentiments have been expressed by the Israeli historian  Pappe':  "By  recognizing the  acute  fear of another Holocaust among the Jews of Palestine  at  the  time,  w e   may  understand  part  of Israel's  behaviour  both in the war  of 1948 and that of 1967,  and perhaps later also"  (1  992:45).

After the departure  of the British Army from the country  (May 15,  19481,  the war  entered a new phase. Israel proclaimed its independence. Arab  armies  responded  by penetrating  into  Palestine  (especially  the  Egyptian, Arab  Legion  of  Jordan,  and  Iraqi), but  they were unable to regain much of the area already conquered  by the Jews (Figure  2).  They  succeeded, however, in  blocking  Israeli  forces from occupying the areas which eventually became the West Bank and Gaza Strip.4 The limited advance  of the Arab  armies  is of key  importance  for  the  faie  of  Palestinian  villages. They  were  depopulated  as  a  result  of  local confrontations between  Israeli/Jewish  forces (organized army units)  and the local defenders

Figure 2. Locations of popular massacres and incidents of terrorist attacks on Palestinians during the 1948 War.

<!-- image -->

I

of   t h e  respective villages, and not as a result o f t h e   confrontation  o f organized  armies.  Apart from  perhaps  two  dozen  villages  o f   the  418 depopulated  villages  (located  mainly  in  Gaza and in  the Baysan  sub-districts which  became a battlefield  between the Jewish forces and the Egyptian and Iraqi armies), the vast  majority  o f Palestinian  villages and cities confronted  Israeli troops using civilian weapons, mostly rifles and handguns.

It   is  difficult to assess the degree o f   devastation during the war because of  the absence of studies  based  on  complete  aerial  or  surface photographs.  Morris' studies provides  a useful account  o f the  destruction  o f houses  during t h e  war.  H e  concluded that  '[mlost o f   the destruction in  the 350 villages was due to vandalism  and looting,  and to deliberate demolition, with  explosives,  bulldozers  and,  occasionally, handtools, by  Haganah and IDF units or neighbouring Jewish settlements in the days, weeks and months after their conquest' (1  987:156). I t is  reasonable  to  hypothesize  that the annihila- tion  o f   Palestinian  places can be attributed to a process that began during the war and continued  after  it.

## The Case of Safad Sub-district

The Safad sub-district (Figure 1)  offers an array  o f   insights  on the ways  in  which  the Jewish/lsraeli  forces cleansed  the region  o f its  indigenous  population.  This  area  was  selected for  analysis  for  several  reasons:  1)  it  contains the largest  number o f   depopulated Palestinian localities-77 o f the  41 8 villages  depopulated during the war (see Table 1 ); 2) the sub-district bounds  two Arab  states,  Syria  and  Lebanon, which  facilitates  a  test  o f   the  scope o f   the  involvement  o f their  respective  armies  in  the war; 3 ) the sub-district's  boundaries fall mainly within  the area designated  to the Jewish State according to  the U.N. Partition  Plan  o f   1947, albeit with a small extension into the Arab State proposed  by  the  same plan  (this is  important

Table 1. Palestinian  Villages Depopulated  in  1948 by  Levels o f   Housing Destruction  and Occupancy and by Sub-district.

|              | Pre-1948 Localitiesa   | Pre-1948 Localitiesa   | Total Depopulated Villages   | Levels of Destruction and Occupancyb   | Levels of Destruction and Occupancyb   | Levels of Destruction and Occupancyb   | Levels of Destruction and Occupancyb   | Levels of Destruction and Occupancyb   | Levels of Destruction and Occupancyb   | Levels of Destruction and Occupancyb   |
|--------------|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Sub-district | Total                  | Urban                  | Total Depopulated Villages   | 1                                      | 2                                      | 3                                      | 4                                      | 5                                      | 6                                      | 7                                      |
| Acre         | 56                     | 1                      | 26                           | 1                                      | 13                                     | 3                                      | 6                                      | 1                                      | 2                                      | 0                                      |
| Beersheba    | 4                      | 1                      | 3                            | 1                                      | 0                                      | 2                                      | 0                                      | 0                                      | 0                                      | 0                                      |
| Baysan       | 32                     | 1                      | 29                           | 17                                     | 8                                      | 3                                      | 1                                      | 0                                      | 0                                      | 0                                      |
| Caza         | 58                     | 3                      | 45                           | 10                                     | 17                                     | 5                                      | 11                                     | 1                                      | 1                                      | 0                                      |
| Haifa        | 61                     | 2                      | 51                           | 8                                      | 20                                     | 7                                      | 7                                      | 1                                      | 5                                      | 3                                      |
| Hebron       | 37                     | 1                      | 16                           | 3                                      | 7                                      | 2                                      | 2                                      | 0                                      | 2                                      | 0                                      |
| jaffa        | 24                     | 1                      | 23                           | 4                                      | 0                                      | 0                                      | 10                                     | 1                                      | 8                                      | 0                                      |
| Jerusalem    | 87                     | 4                      | 38                           | 0                                      | 13                                     | 8                                      | 5                                      | 3                                      | 8                                      | 1                                      |
| jinin        | 68                     | 1                      | 6                            | 1                                      | 3                                      | 1                                      | 1                                      | 0                                      | 0                                      | 0                                      |
| Nablus       | 94                     | 1                      | -                            | -                                      | -                                      | -                                      | -                                      | -                                      | -                                      | -                                      |
| Nazareth     | 25                     | 1                      | 4                            | 0                                      | 2                                      | 1                                      | 1                                      | 0                                      | 0                                      | 0                                      |
| al-Ramla     | 74                     | 2                      | 58                           | 10                                     | 12                                     | 8                                      | 10                                     | 7                                      | 5                                      | 5                                      |
| Ramallah     | 60                     | 2                      | -                            | -                                      | -                                      | -                                      | -                                      | -                                      | -                                      | -                                      |
| Safad        | 82                     | 1                      | 77                           | 17                                     | 27                                     | 14                                     | 14                                     | 1                                      | 3                                      | 1                                      |
| Tiberais     | 29                     | 1                      | 25                           | 4                                      | 13                                     | 6                                      | 1                                      | 0                                      | 0                                      | 1                                      |
| Tulkarm      | 72                     | 1                      | 17                           | 5                                      | 4                                      | 0                                      | 5                                      | 2                                      | 1                                      | 0                                      |
| Total        | 863                    | 18                     | 418                          | 81                                     | 140                                    | 60                                     | 74                                     | 17                                     | 35                                     | 11                                     |
| %            | 100                    | 2                      | 100                          | 19.4                                   | 33.5                                   | 14.3                                   | 17.7                                   | 4.1                                    | 8.4                                    | 2.6                                    |

Notes: aThe number of pre-1948 Arab localities is based on Government of Palestine 1940;  1946. bThe seven subcategories included here are: 1  ) complete obliteration; 2 ) complete destruction;  rubble of original houses clearly identified; no walls standing; 3 ) houses are mostly demolished; rubble contains walls standing but without roofs; 4) most houses demolished; at least one house standing with roof intact; no Jewish-family-occupied  houses intact; 5 ) most houses demolished; one or two houses occupied by Jewish  families;  6) partial destruction;  more than two Jewish families occupy houses;  7) inaccessible villages.

Sources: Based on field research by the author and a research team o f Bir  Zeit University during the period 1987-1990.  Government of Palestine 1940;  1946.

in the context of Plan D); 4) the area contains a  number  of pre-1948 Jewish colonies  which took part in  the fighting beside the Jewish  regular  military  forces; 5)  the  sub-district  exhibits significant  religious diversity  (Moslems,  Christians,  and  Druze),  thus  enabling  a test  of the relationship between religious  affiliation of the Arab  population and depopulation and expulsion  processes;  6) the timing of depopulation and expulsion in this sub-district  (January 1948 to  February 1949)  is  comparable  to  that  in other places in Palestine; and 7) the sub-district was  the  site  of  several  Israeli  military  operations.

On the eve of the war, the Safad sub-district contained 82  permanently  inhabited  Arab localities (see Table 1); an additional 820 persons were classified  as  'nomads.'  The total number o f Arabs  was  estimated  at  46,920  persons  in 1945.  The  sub-district  also  contained 6,700 Jews,  more than  one-third  of  whom  lived in the  town  of  Safad  (Government  of  Palestine 1946).  The  rest  of the  Jewish population  resided in a dozen colonies located mainly in the northern part of the sub-district  known as the Hula Valley.  Although the Jewish population of 6,700  did not exceed 12.5  percent of the total population of this sub-district,  the U.N Partition Plan of 1947 allotted most of  the area, including the town of Safad, to the Jewish state (see Figure  1).  The  1948 war  sharply  altered  the  region's  ethno-demographic  composition. Over 95 percent of the sub-district's  Palestinian Arab population  was  expelled  or  fled  to  Lebanon and  Syria, leaving  behind  77  abandoned villages  and  one  town  (Safad).  Only  five  Arab villages  remained when  the  war  ended  (see discussion below).  Based on Morris (1  987) and Khalidi's (1 992b) work on the 77 depopulated villages, 32 villages (41.5 percent) were definitely  depopulated  before  May 15,  1948; an additional 13 villages (1 7 percent) were depopulated during the war,  though no precise date has been established,  and;  the remaining 32  villages  (41.5  percent) were  depopulated after May 15. The limited areas captured by  the Lebanese  and the Syrian  army  after  May 15, 1948 (Figure  1) contained no more than  nine villages-the only ones that could have experienced the side-effects of battles  between the regular  armies.  Yet,  as  Figure  1 indicates,  four of these  villages  (Tulayl,  al-Husayniyya, Kirad al-Ghannama,  and Kirad al-Baqqara)  were depopulated  before  May 5, 1948 and the  inva- sion  of  the  Syrian  army  into  Palestine.  That leaves 72 villages,  constituting 93.5  percent of the depopulated villages  in the sub-district, that were depopulated  by clashes  between civilian and Jewish forces.

Using Morris's (1 987) categorizations  of expulsions and Khalid's  (1  99213) dates of depopulation,  it  is  possible  to  identify  the  causes  of depopulation for 59 of the localities (out of  total 77) in our  study area (Figure 3). Depopulation occurred in three  general phases.  First,  21  villages  were  depopulated  before the conquest of the town Safad on May 10-11, 1948. Second,  27  villages  were  depopulated  between the fall of Safad and the end of May. Third,  1 1 villages  were  depopulated  five  months  later. Morris  (based on Israeli  military  declassified data) attributes the first and third depopulations to 'military  assault' and 'expulsion'  associated with  two  military  operations (sub-operation Matate and Hiram). The second depopulation he attributes  to  military  operation Yiftach  and more specifically  to 'military assault,'  especially in the case of the district capital Safad and another seven villages.  Causes  such as  'psychological  warfare,' 'influence of  the  fall of  a neighboring town,' and 'fear  of Jewish attack' appear to coincide with those localities subject t o  'military  assault.'  None of the 59 villages  or any other locality in Safad sub-district,  according to Morris (1  987),  was subject to 'abandonment by Arab orders'-a popular reason cited in Israeli geographic  writing (Reichman 1990).

Figure 3 reveals a temporal clustering pattern of the depopulated villages.  Given the norm of total  village  depopulation and the occurrence of massacres and serious atrocities in several of these  villages, this  pattern  can  only  be  explained by the impact of overwhelming military force  on the  local defenders.  Before the conquest of the town of Safad,  three massacres or serious  atrocities  were  committed  in  various locations in the sub-district (e.g.,  along  the border  with  Syria, near  Jewish settlements,  and near a major Arab town). The village  of Mansurat  al-Khayt  first  came  under  attack  by the Haganah on January 18,  1948, and then again on the night of February  6-7.  The second attack  was  confirmed  by the New  York  Times (Brewer 1948a:46).  The case  of aCHusayniyya massacre  was  also  reported in the New  York Times (Brewer 1948b:17).  This village came under  two  fierce  attacks by  Jewish  forces in March 1948.  The total  death  toll was  put  by

<!-- image -->

Israeli sources at several dozen (Morris 1987:157). The massacre of 'Ayn al-Zaytun is a well-documented  case.  It was  reported that a total of seventy men  were massacred in a gully between  'Ayn al-Zaytun  and  Safad  (Morris 1987:102). Massacres continued after the conquest of Safad,  this time  under Operation Hiram  (see  discussion  below).  Four  additional massacres  were  committed  in the villages  of Safsaf, Jish, Saliha, and Sa'sa' (Finkelstein 1991:82). (For  discussion o f these villages  and others in the nearby Acre sub-district based on material reported in the files of the United Nations  War  Crimes  Commission,  see  Palumbo 1987:163-I 74, 227).

The spatial pattern of depopulation over time and space  is  illustrated in Figure 1. The Safad sub-district  provides an  excellent  test  case  of the  operational  objectives  of  Plan  D.  Village depopulation occurred in four phases or waves. The first wave (before May 5, 1948) in Safad  sub-district  focused  on  military  objectives: 1 )  creating  a  continuous  territory between  Jewish  settlements in  lower Galilee (specifically in Tiberias  sub-district) and Upper Galilee via the settlement of  Rosh Pinna. (Operation Matate, Operation 'Broom'-a sub-component of Operation Yiftach-was intended to cleanse all Arab localities along the Rosh Pinna-Tiberias  road;  Morris 1987:121); 2) taking  control over  strategic  points along the Syrian  border by means of emptying Arab villages suspected  as  serving as  enemy bases or susceptible to enlisting on the Syrian side in a critical situation;  and 3) strengthing the defensive capability of existing Jewish settlements by the removal of the nearby Arab villages.

The second wave o f depopulation occurred during the week  of May 9. Among the major objectives  of the Jewish forces  was  the occupation of the town of Safad,  establishment  of control over all communication lines connecting the town from the west and east,  and the occupation  of  police  fortress/stations  evacuated by British forces (at Mount Canaan and al Jau'na/Rosh  Pinna).  The  police fortress  of alNabi Yusa' was considered the most vital since it stood on a major road from Lebanon into the Hula  Valley.  Jewish forces  made  at  least  two attempts to capture this fortress  before it was finally  captured on the night of May 16-17, at a cost of heavy Jewish  casualties (Lorch 1968:107,  179). The  village  of al-Nabi  Yusha' was  occupied  and  depopulated  on  May 16.

The remaining villages  occupied and depopulated during this week were all to the north of al-Nabi Yusha',  along the major road in the Hula Valley.  Two  explanations  can  be offered  here for  the  depopulation of these  villages. First, Jewish forces were attempting to take control over  villages located  along  the  north-south main road and,  ultimately,  to occupy al Khalisa village  (ca. 1,840 inhabitants in 1945), the second largest Palestinian locality after Safad in the sub-district,  a  popular  market place for  many Lebanese, Syrian, and Palestinian villages in the area,  and the site of a police station and Friday mosque  (Khalidi 1992b:462-463). Second,  in order  to  enhance  communication  between (and eventually control over) the Jewish settlements  in this  area  and that  of the  rest  of the region,  Jewish  forces apparently thought it was necessary to remove some of the Arab villages on the internal roads leading to Jewish settlements (Oren 1983:827-831).

The third wave of village depopulation came during the last ten days of May (19-28). It can be  regarded  as  a  turning  point  because  this wave coincided with the termination of Operation Yiftach. By this juncture,  a major part of  the sub-district had been cleansed of its Palestinian population.  Depopulation  thus  was  probably guided  by demography,  i.e., the desire for the creation of a territory devoid of Arabs after the long isolation of Jewish settlement in this part of  Palestine.  The  removal  of  the  remaining Arab  villages  from the  Hula Valley  would provide Jewish colonies with plenty of land.

The fourth wave of occupation and depopulation involved nine villages on October 29-30. This wave marked the last exodus of Palestinian villages  from Safad sub-district  in war time. Morris (1  987:230) attributed  these  depopulations  to  'military  assault,'  in which  extensive atrocities  were  committed,  principally  by the 7th Brigade  within  Operation  Hiram.  The  villages of the Safad subdistrict constituted,  however, only  a  small  portion  of  a  much  more extensive depopulation process that took place under  Operation  Hiram  (July  18-November 1948). Palumbo (1  987:166-I  67) noted  two main reasons for the more brutal Israeli actions during the October offensive.  First,  Israelis realized that no one could stop them from creating a larger Jewish state with a relatively small Arab  population;  second,  the Israelis encountered  more  difficulty in  expelling  the  Arabs who had learned that  if they  left their  homes,

they  probably would never return.  The location of the Safad sub-district  villages  occupied and depopulated  during this  wave thus  had a specific  value.  These  villages  were  located  in an area astride the proposed boundary of the Jewish State in the U.N. Partition Plan. As Figure 1 indicates,  nine villages  of Safad sub-district were located within the territory  assigned t o   t he  Arab  State  in  the  U.N.  Partition  Plan. Although a delegation of the Jewish Agency to t h e   United  Nations  demanded  to extend  the boundary of the Jewish state to the west,  only minor changes  were  made  (Oren 1983:820). Yet what was not fully achieved by diplomatic means was  gained  militarily  by Operation  Hiram.  Thus,  the depopulation of Palestinian villages  here  can  be  viewed  as  an  attempt  to create a new territorial reality as a fait accompli in any future  peace settlement.

Only five villages (2,300-2,500 persons) survived  the  war  in  the  Safad  sub-district,  and each has its own story:  Hurfeish and Rihaniya were  Druse  and Circassian  (Muslim)  villages which  retained  most of their  population.  The bedouin village  of Tuba  (Muslim) persists  because a member of this village,  along with their tribal  leaders,  agreed  to  fight  with  the  jews against  the  rest  of  the  Arab  villages (Lorch 1968:181). Members of the village who did not agree with this arrangement fled to Syria (Falah 1993:60): In A'kbara,  the original residents left, but they were replaced by refugees from other depopulated  villages. Consequently A'kbara can be regarded as  both (in Figure 1 ) depopulated and still extant. The village jish is the largest  village  to  survive  intact.  The village's  prewar population of 740 Moslems and 420 Christians  was  sharply  reduced,  however,  as  Moslems  fled or  were  forced  to  leave, while Christians  stayed  put  (Morris 1987:225). But matters were not so clear cut in Kafr Bir'im  and two  neighboring  villages  in  Acre  sub-district (al-Mansura and Iqrit) where the Christian  inhabitants of these  villages were expelled. Similarly,  the Christian  communities in Safad town and Abil al-Qamh  were forced to leave along with the rest of the residents.  And in one case, Christians  in  Eilabun  village  were  massacred (documented by a U.N observer,  U.S. Air Force Captain E. J.  Zeuty;  Palumbo 1987:163-I  66). In short,  explaining  the survival of villages  solely on the  basis  of their  religious  composition  is not sufficient.

## Forty  Years Later: An  Emerging Regional Pattern of Destruction and Israeli Occupancy

In the forty some years since the war,  housing in the depopulated  Palestinian  villages  has been  destroyed  and  a  new  landscape  constructed.  The  author's  field  survey  of the villages during the  period 1987-91 attempts to assess  these  changes.  What  happened to the 418 depopulated  villages? What is the look of the cultural  landscape of these villages  today? How have  the  new  occupants  treated  these abandoned  places? Despite  the  fact  that  the major portion of cultural material (e.g., houses and  infrastructure)  has  disappeared  and  the original inhabitants of places are no longer on site,  the  remaining  material  in  these  villages may be viewed as an 'actual  landscape' (Baker 1992), as  a  'visible  tip of an iceberg' (1  992:8).

It  should  be noted  that  the  study  encompasses 407 of the 418 villages  in the  original list.  Eleven villages  (see Table 1 )  were inaccessible  because  they  have  been closed  off and turned into military areas. Of the 407 remaining villages,  I  identified six levels of destruction that range from complete to partial destruction (Figures 4 and 5). Each of these levels has,  in turn, three sublevels.

## High levels of

## Destruction

The  three  sublevels of  destruction  in  this category-complete obliteration,  complete destruction with rubble of original houses clearly identified but no walls standing;  houses mostly demolished  with  rubble  containing  standing walls  but without  roofs-constitute over twothirds (67.2 percent) of the Palestinian  villages depopulated  during the 1948 war  (Table 1). In the first level of destruction,  the village site has been completely obliterated.  It has  been levelled and turned into a completely new landscape form.  Hardly any  traces  of building materials  can  be found on the  original  site  (see Figure 6). In some cases,  building stones  have been removed from the original built-up area. Physical  obliteration  involved  radical changes in land use,  e g ,  conversions  into citrus  plantations,  irrigated crop fields,  and fishing pools as  in al-Ashrafiyya  and  Masil al-Jizl in Baysan sub-district and al-Mansura and al-Dawwara in

Figure 4. Palestinian  villages depopulated in 1948: High Levels of housing  destruction as observed in 1987-1 990.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5. Palestinian  villages depopulated in 1948: Major housing destruction and partial occupancy as observed in 1987-1 990.

<!-- image -->

northern Hula-Safad  sub-district  or  into a garbage dump as  in ljlil al-Shamiliyya  in Jaffa subdistrict.  Eighty-one villages,  or 19.4  percent of all  depopulated  villages,  fall  into this  category. With  the  exception  of two  mountainous  villages,  all the villages are in the plains area,  with the majority located below the 200-meter contour line (Figure 4)  and closer to the Mediterranean coast than other villages.

Historical  and  geographical  factors  contributed to the  obliteration  of a  cultural  heritage. Historically,  villages  in  the  plains  of  Palestine have been small and sometimes even seasonally  inhabited.  Obviously, small  villages  with small built-up areas  have less cultural material, and hence it is easier to "purge"  their  remains. It should also be emphasized that the building materials  for  houses  in the  plains  villages  are traditionally  different from  hilly and  mountainous villages (Conder 1879:237-38).  Solid stone houses with concrete roofs are more common in rocky  areas.  In contrast,  houses  in the villages  on  the  plains  were  often  made  of  less durable  materials,  including adobe  brick  and wood for roofs,  rendering them more vulnerable to human destruction.

The  second  (and  largest)  sublevel  of complete destruction (rubble remains but no standing walls) accounts for one-third of all depopulated villages.  The 140 village  sites in this category  are visible  in many parts of the country- side (Figure 7). From the highway, for instance, one can easily spot cactus  bushes growing on slopes  and hilltops as  well as  abandoned olive groves-both clear  indicators  of  past  human habitation.  Field  work  indicates  that  some  of these  sites  have  been  hidden  among  thick plantations  of forest,  planted  apparently  after the houses  were levelled  in the early years  of the  Israeli  State.  In some  of these,  the area  is left empty with the forest all around;  seen from higher  hilltops  nearby, these  sites  resemble small  islands  located in the middle of a sea  of green forest (e.g., the villages  of U m m  al-Zinat in  Haifa  sub-district  and Sar'a  and  Khirbat  alLawz in Jerusalem sub-district). At other village sites,  wild bushes and thorn grasses combined with  past  habitations  results  in a  combustible mix that  can create environmental hazards  in the  summer heat.  As most  villages in  this sublevel  are  located  close  to  Jewish settlements,  forests,  or  crop fields,  the Jewish settlers  or forestry  authorities  have  attempted to control fires;  hence these  sites are undergoing continuous  change.  Controlled  burns  occur periodically,  and  bulldozers  are  often  sent  in afterward  to  mix  soil  with  stone  and  burnt grass.  These  sites  are  widespread  (Figure  4); most of them dot the hilly areas of Palestine on the  northeastern  and  western  slopes  of  the Galilee mountains and in eastern lower Galilee, Mount Carmel,  and the  al-Rawha  hills.  Large

Figure 6. An example of complete obliteration: A view of al-Khayma  village (At-Ramla sub-district) as observed in May 1990.

<!-- image -->

I

Figure 7. An example of complete destruction with rubble of original houses clearly identified: A view of Saris (Jerusalem  sub-district) southern village site as  observed in December 1987.

<!-- image -->

concentrations  of these  villages  also  occupy the hilly areas  between the coastal  plains and the Jerusalem mountains.

The third sublevel of destruction  resembles the  second  except that  some  houses  among the  rubble  contain clearly identifiable walls with windows  and doors (see  Figure  8). The spatial  distribution  of these  villages  closely  resembles that of villages in the second sublevel (Figure 4).  Yet why do some destroyed villages in the region have standing walls  while others do not?  Four reasons can be suggested: 1)  The locations  of the  village  sites,  either  on  slopes of mountains or hilltops, makes access for bulldozers difficult;  hence the destruction that has occurred has been wrought either by the human hand or  the  environment; 2) villages  in this category are usually small or medium-sized and  situated  further  from  Jewish  settlements than villages in the other sublevels,  hence their inaccessibility  poses  no  immediate  environmental  danger (most  of  these villages are fenced  in  and  neglected);  3)  some  of  these villages,  together  with  the  area  around them, have been allocated to Jewish settlements for grazing  cattle  or to  individual Jews who have occupied the site for many years (since the site is  in Jewish hands,  the authorities tend not to interfere with their use of the site);  4) on some sites  (e.g., 'Ayn  Ghazal  in  Haifa  sub-district, lslin and 'Aqqur  in Jerusalem sub-district)  covered  with  thick  forests, crumbled  walls  rise among the trees.  At these  sites,  forests  were planted  among the  remains  of the  houses  in the early years of the state,  and once the trees grew,  bulldozer access was impossible without destroying  the trees  as  well.  Ironically,  forests were planted here to conceal the site,  yet ultimately those  same forests  have protected the walls  from  further  destruction  and  hindered full-scale de-signification and obliteration. Sum  ming  up, human  interference  is  the  major cause for changes  in these  village  landscapes. Geographical factors also play a moderate role, in both directions:  in some cases accelerating the process of obliteration,  and in other cases

Figure 8. An example of a village with houses mostly demolished. Rubble contains walls standing but without roofs: A group of roofless houses on al-Kunayyisa village (Al-Ramla sub-district) site a s   observed in June 1990.

<!-- image -->

preserving and protecting the site from further destruction.

## Major Destruction and Partial Occupancy

The  126  villages  in  this  destruction  level comprise some 30 percent of the total depopulated villages.  The first  sublevel consists of 74 villages  where  some  houses remain intact while  the  rest  have  been  demolished  (Figure 9). These villages are unevenly distributed over areas with different topography (Figure 5). This  pattern  suggests  that  the  houses  themselves may account for their  survival.  In some cases,  these  houses  were  used for  residential purposes for short periods after 1948, and then abandoned  or  used  as  warehouses.  In  other cases,  the surviving houses were located outside the  built-up area of the  village  which  allowed them  to  escape the  bulldozers sent  to raze  village  houses.  In still  other  cases,  some of  the  remaining  houses  are  uncharacteristi- tally  large,  eg.,  two-storey  units  constructed to  reflect  the  wealth  of  their  owners.  These houses are usually found in small villages in the plains  area,  where  entire  villages  sometimes belonged to wealthy individuals. Houses in the villages of al-Manshiyya, Wadi 'Ara  (Haifa subdistrict),  Ghabat  Kafr  Sur  and  Bayyarat Hanun (Tulkarm  sub-district)  and  ljlil  al-Qibliyya  (Jaffa sub-district)  fall within this  group.

The  last  two  sublevels  of  destruction  (Figure 5) differ only in numbers of houses remaining and occupied. They are similar in their distribution  patterns:  in  both,  Jewish settlements have been built on the village sites or immediately  adjacent thereto (Figures  10  and  11). Some of the  surviving houses  remain  exactly as  they  were,  while  others  have  been  renovated  and  new additions  made.  Villages with only one or two occupied houses are likely to have  belonged  to  the  third  category  some years  ago,  with  once-occupied  houses  subsequently abandoned. Some of the Jewish settlements built on the village sites took the origi-

Figure 9. An example of a village where most houses have been demolished with at least one house standing with roof intact. No Jewish  family occupied houses intact. A deserted village house in Khulda (AI-Ramla sub-district) as observed in June  1990.

<!-- image -->

nal Arabic  name of the village,  phonetically altered to Hebrew. Falah (1991) listed the names of 56 of the 418 depopulated  villages  assigned t o   n e w Jewish settlements  that  were  built on or  near the original Arab  site.  Figure  5  shows the spatial  distribution  of villages  in these  last t w o  sublevels.  Note the strong correlation with the  major  pre-I948  Palestinian  cities.  In  fact, most of these villages  are  located in the  suburbs of cities which were occupied in the 1948 war. In  these  cases, large  numbers  of  Jews moved  in  and  took  over  abandoned Arab housing  stock  which  was  generally  of  high quality.  The  villages  in the  third  sublevel  that were not located beside major  urban centers generally  were occupied  in the immediate  aftermath of the 1948 War as  part of the Zionist settlement  strategy  which  sent  Jewish  immigrants to occupy vacated Arab villages (Morris 1987:170-I  96).

## Remaining Public Buildings and Cultural Relicts

Controversy over the plight of the Palestinians  should  not  obfuscate  the  importance  of cultural material produced by that  society  before  it  took  the  road to exile.  From  this  perspective,  the works  of Graham-Brown (1  980) and Khalidi (1984) are invaluable sources.  Assembling hundreds of photographs,  they present a diversified portrait of everyday Palestinian  life  from  about  1880  down  to  May  15, 1948.  With their  captions  and  accompanying text,  the photographs present a population engaged  in  a  broad  spectrum  of  activities.  An earlier  work,  Neil's  Everyday  Life in the  Holy Land (1  91  3),  contains  an  equally  valuable  description  of Palestinian  traditions  and customs based on thirty-two paintings.

Before discussing the extant cultural relicts at village  sites,  it  is  useful to take  a  brief look  at patterns  of  the  pre-1948  Palestinian  mode of village  life and habitation among the  fellaheen (cultivators).  Like  many  other  Middle Eastern societies,  the peasants that formed the bulk of the  population had  a  strong  attachment  to land,  places,  and nature. The physical character  of the Palestinian  traditional  villages  generally reflects  the  terrain  and  locally  available building materials.  Wood  was  used  sparingly since it was scare in most areas. The hill  villages give  an  impression  of  greater  permanence,

Figure 10.An example of a village with most houses demolished with one or two houses occupied by jewish families:AviewoftheremaininghouseunitinQalunya(Jerusalemsub-district).

<!-- image -->

partly owing to the solidity  of stone  buildings, and  partly  because  most of them  had  longer histories  of continuous  occupation than those on the plains (Graham-Brown 1980:36). Yet by the turn of the twentieth century, following the introduction of new building material (such as reinforced  concrete  and  cement)  and  new transportation systems,  villages  in  the  plains significantly altered their  use of building materials. The expansion of citrus plantations in the 1930s and  1940s helped  to  intensify  agriculture,  improve standards of living,  and spur the construction of modern  houses, some  of which were two-storey buildings with artificial ponds  on  the  roof  (e.g., in  the villages  of Bayyarat Hannun and Ghabat Kafr Sur).

The  concept  of  place  among  Palestinian peasants was not confined to the village core, i . e . ,   as  defined by an agglomeration of houses; a  place  irradiated  outward  to  include  village fields,  terraces,  orchards,  springs,  roads lead- ing  from the  village, cemeteries, threshing floors, trees, and  nearby  holy  shrines  and tombs.  In addition,  peasants occasionally  created  new  places  to  commemorate  events, honor ancestors,  or simply  reclaim  new land. Many of these  landscape elements  were designated by specific names passed on from one generation to the next in the form of a complex or  topographic  package  of  places  informing the peasant's world and cementing its identity. Two dimensions  of Palestinian life are likely to have encouraged  persistence of their sense of place: 1  )  a way of life focused  on outdoor activity;  and 2) the collective  management of resources.  In their  everyday  lives,  peasants  engaged in a wide range of pursuits. Apart from sleeping and seeking shelter from cold or rain, most  activities  took  place  outdoors  in  courtyards, at the front door,  and in the street (Graham-Brown 1980:66).  In some villages, animal husbandry necessitated dwelling with the flock

Figure 11. An example of a village that has  partial destruction. More than two Jewish  families occupy  houses: A group o f houses in Dayr Yasin  (Jerusalem  sub-district).

<!-- image -->

in caves or in open fields during the summer. Given  the  small  size  of the  villages,  and the absence of gender segregation of house space (Sayigh  1979:21), outdoor  activities  rendered peasant social life more "visible" in villages than in  towns  or  bedouin  encampments; the  village's  spatiality  was  more "externalized."  Contextually,  the peasant  home was  extended,  its boundaries amplified.

Collective management of resources was another salient aspect of village  life. This  was  imperative  in  a  society  where, as Sayigh  observed,  the village  population was a "family  of families," and  the  language  of  kinship  dominated everyday  life (1979:21).  Neil provided a detailed description  of the annual assembly  of all the villagers in the guest-house of the village or the main square (saha) for  the public distribution of land (1  91  3:89-91).  Conder noted the existence of a custom where some land is "cultivated  by  the  villagers  for  any  one  of  their [rnelrnbers  who  is  unable  to  till  it  himself"

(1879:256).  While a collective mode of life was adapted as  a defensive  mechanism against tax collectors and bedouin raids (Sayigh 1979:1517), it  was also necessary for dealing with natural hazards such as  floods and combatting locusts.  In connection  with village  preparations t o  fight  locusts,  Goodrich-Freer  referred to an incident in March 1923 when villagers  in the plains had to take their children from school to help in the fight against locusts: an event which "occupied  the  mind  of  the  people  far  more than  the  World  War"  (1  924:244). Nature  remained harsh.

To accommodate their economic,  social and spiritual needs,  the villagers established various public places and sacred structures.  The guesthouse or coffee house (diwan) was the popular informal gathering  place  in the  village.  It  was the locus for  "the  discussion of public events, and for  story-telling  . . . playing  games,  and, especially  during  ramadan and at  other  festivals,  is often enlivened with music. The coffee

.  .  . the  substitute  for  the  public- house  is house,  theatres, concert-halls, and  all  else' (Goodrich-Freer 1924:153). Visitors could stay in the village's guest-house and entertain themselves freely.  For longer  stays,  visitors  and foreigner travellers  preferred the khans (caravansaries) and monasteries usually found in towns and along major thoroughfares (Leary 1911  :I 42-1  45).

Educational institutions in the modern sense were sparse in Palestinian villages. These were staffed by teachers  invited from  towns to the villages.  Conder (1879) noted that  in his time peasant children received no formal education; nonetheless, 'they acquire a wonderfully accurate  knowledge  of the country  round the village .  .  .  [and] are the great authorities as  to the names  of  ruins  or  springs' (1879:252). Until 1908 the  Turkish  Government  had  neglected educational services in Palestine. This situation improved  slightly  after  the  establishment of  a constitutional  government  in  Turkey  in 1908 (Abcarius 1946:lOO) and  significantly  during the British administration  of Palestine between 1922 and 1947 (Khalidi 1984:163). Schoolhouses in Arab villages were often among the most sturdy and largest structures, constructed of stone and concrete. The quality of construction reflects financing from various sources including  the  village  council,  the  government authorities,  and the  Islamic  waqif for  the  purchase  of  materials  and  the  services  of  good workmen and builders. Schools were generally located at the edge of the village.

The group  of  remaining physical  structures in the Palestinian villages depopulated in 1948, identified  and  mapped  in  Figure 12, reflects the diverse functions of villages within the regional  settlement  system.  Some  were  located at  crossroads.  Others with  railway  stations or police stations  had long been service centers for their subregions. Certain cultural relicts such as a khan or caravansary, castle,  and fortress indicated the rich history of certain localities  in the  countryside.  In  addition,  the  presence of structures  such as  the diwan or coffee houses, mills, and artificial pools or ponds illustrated  community  life  and  resource  management. Most of the items identified in Figure 12 are  in a state of neglect and decay. The Israeli authorities  made no attempt to preserve such cultural  relicts,  and  only  a few  buildings,  particularly  schools  in areas  where  villages were also  occupied  by Jewish families,  have  been maintained for  local use.

But why have these structures  not been demolished along with the abandoned houses in their  villages?  The answer  is not entirely clear, but some speculations are possible. In the first place, assuming that Israeli policy aimed at demolishing residences  in order  to  prevent the return of the original inhabitants,  non-residential  structures  probably  were  not  regarded  as high-priority  candidates  for  demolition.  Their continued presence in a de-signified topography may not have been considered as  threatening.  Second,  the  Israelis may  not have  demolished them because of their utility for some future  function.

The absence of any  Israeli government policy  to  preserve  Palestinian  cultural  relicts  as monuments to the region's Palestinian past has been  tantamount, in  the  long  run, to  their elimination. Abandoned and unprotected, these  relicts  have been subject  to destruction once they  are viewed as  negative externalities to  local  development  (Dumper 1994:55-60). Furthermore,  since  state authorities  and  most Jewish  citizens regard Palestinian  cultural relicts as  'abandoned  property,'  these  relicts  are,  in effect,  state  property  (Golan 1992; Dumper 1994:30-35). The  physical  existence  of  such property thus depends ultimately on the good will of government authorities who are generally  ignorant  of or  disinterested  in the  history and significance of such cultural items. Indeed, removing the Palestinian structures  that  might serve as  potential cultural  signifiers  serves the political  goals  of  diminishing  the  Palestinian past and  weakening Palestinian claims  to  the land. In cases where certain cultural relicts have been preserved for tourist  purposes,  e.g., the mountain  village  of  Sataf  (Jerusalem sub-district),  the official historical records usually indicate an existence that extends back to biblical times.  In these ways,  the Palestinian Arab cultural contributions to the village site have been trivialized  as  Jewish  history has  been  foregrounded.  In a kind of reverse palimpsest, the ancient layers beneath the Palestinian site have been highlighted.

## The Remaining Holy

## Places

The influence of holy places and sacred sites on  the  life  of  the  peasants  is  probably  the single-best  example  of  the  extent  to  which landscape  is  encoded  by  society  (Berdoulay 1989:131). It  is  important  to  distinguish  be-

Figure 12. Palestinian villages depopulated in 1948: Distribution of remaining public buildings and cultural relics as observed in 1987-1 990.

<!-- image -->

tween holy places which reflect religious affiliation and those shaped by the beliefs and customs of the local population. Beliefs are reflected  in the  religious  affiliations  of the  inhabitants of a particular village (Moslems, Christians, or both)  and in landscape structures such as  mosques, churches, and cemeteries in the built-up area  of each village.  Customs are reflected  in the numerous sacred sites associated  with  saints.  The  term rnakarnat (singular rnakarn or standing-place) is often used to designate  these  places.  The rnakarn is  usually  a white stone building capped by a small dome. Makarnat have various degrees of importance depending on the beliefs connected with them (Conder 1879:266-268).

Having examined the relations of sacred sites to human habitations,  Canaan  contended that '[slacred  shrines  are innumerable  in Palestine. Nearly everywhere-in villages,  on the mountains,  in valleys,  in the fields-do we meet with them. There is hardly a village,  however small it may be, which does not honour at least one local saint. .  .  .  As every village possesses lands which stretch for miles beyond the settlement itself,  every  shrine  situated  in  such  land  belongs to that village,  and is also  honoured primarily by its inhabitants' (1 927:2-3). Canaan's (1  927) observation strengthens the conception of the  village  as  thus  a  locus  for  an  array  of meaningful places,  a package that attaches the peasant to the village  and its landscape.

The scope of de-Arabization would be even more striking  if  it  encompassed  Israel's  treatment of non-Jewish holy places in the Palestinian cities depopulated during the years  19481950 (Safad,  Tiberias,  Baysan,  Beersheba,  and al-Majdal)  as  well  as  in  the  five  mixed  ArabJewish cities  (Jaffa, Lydda,  al-Ramla,  Haifa, and Acre). These contained a broad and rich array of  Christian  and  Muslim  holy  places. Here, however, I focus only on the holy places in the 41  8  depopulated  Palestinian  villages. Village de-Arabization assumed a variety of manifestations  depending  on  the  nature  of the  place. Figure 13  maps  the  surviving  Muslim  and Christian  holy  places  in the  depopulated  villages. The symbols on the map represent the type of holy  place,  not their  actual  numbers. No  regional  pattern  is  discernible  for  the  68 villages  where such sites remain;  more important,  however,  is the current physical status of these  places.

Field research revealed that the

Israelis adopted  three  general  principles  for  dealing with  holy  places.  First,  monasteries  and  convents generally  have survived and continue to function as  they did before 1948. The authorities did not touch this type of church property in  the  countryside,  apparently  out  of respect for  the Western  Christian world and the Vatican.  Monasteries  are  directly connected  with the  outside  Christian  world and  not with the Arab citizens of Palestine.  Some of the monks and nuns living there barely speak Arabic. Second, shrines and  sheik's tombs (rnakarnat) were largely untouched,  but no state effort has been  made to  preserve  them.  The  shrine  of al-Nabi Yusha' in the village  of the same name (Safad sub-district)  is a huge abandoned  structure.  The  shrine  is  closed  off with wire  fencing-not for  protection but to  prevent access t o   the  site.  These  shrines  may  have  been spared  by bulldozer operators  at the time village houses were being destroyed  because of the  widespread  belief  that  such  shrines  have the mystical power to punish those who desecrate them. Nevertheless, their destruction was left to the forces  of nature.

Third,  and hardest hit, are the churches and mosques  which  have been totally  neglected, abandoned,  and  unprotected.  The  church  in al-Bassa (Acre sub-district), for example,  is in a deplorable state of dereliction and decay.  This church is  now collapsing on one side  and its walls  are  cracking.  Similarly,  the  walls  of  the mosque in 'Amqa (Acre sub-district) are cracked in many places, and some stones have fallen  from  the  walls.  In  Yibna  (al-Ramla  subdistrict), the  upper  half  of  the  minaret  has collapsed. In other villages, mosques and churches have,  in effect,  been desecrated  by changes  in their original function.  The mosque and two churches  in  Ma'lul  village  (Nazareth sub-district),  though still standing,  are used intermittently  as  cow sheds  by the  residents  of Kibbutz Kefar ha-Horesh. Similarly, the mosques  of  Hittin  (Tiberias  sub-district)  and Kawfakha (Gaza sub-district)  have served as  a storehouse  for  animal fodder  and sometimes as a stable. The mosque of al-Manshiyya (Acre sub-district)  is  used  as  a  private  home  for  a Jewish family.  In the villages of 'Ayn Hawd and Qisarya,  mosques were converted into restaurants where alcohol is served,  a practice  perceived by Muslims as profoundly offensive and sacrilegious.  Mosques and churches in former Arab towns have been subjected to similar vio-

Figure  13. Palestinian villages  depopulated  in  1948:  Distribution of remaining holy  places  a s   observed  in 1987-1 990.

<!-- image -->

lation.  The  town of Safad,  mentioned earlier, also experienced  desecration of  its  former places  of worship,  Christian  and  Moslem.  Its Friday  Mosque  has  been  used  for  the  past three decades as a spacious general exhibition hall by the Safad Artists'  Association. Engraved Koranic  inscriptions  attest  to  its  former  function. The massive and much older Red Mosque i s  o w ned by the municipality and used on occasion  for  staging  rock  and  folk  concerts. A former church in the heart of the former Arab Christian  quarter  was  converted  in the 1960s t o  private galleries and apartments for two  Jewish artists,  its belltower looking down anomalously  o n  the  lanes  of the  Artists'  Quarter.  Directly  opposite  the  churchtower  lies  a  large complex  that  was  formerly  a  monastery  and now  houses  a  municipally-run  art  museum. Stone-engraved  crosses still  adorn  its  inner courtyard. The main Moslem hillside cemetery, located just  below the principal access  road at the  northern  edge  of town,  is  in a  shambles, its numerous stone tombstones  in disarray and overgrown by brush. It is puzzling to note the persistence  of  such  practices  within  Israel's sovereign territory, when at the same time any desecration of a Jewish  synagogue or cemetery in  Europe  brings forth  immediate  accusations of  wilful  anti-Semitism, and  when  Arab  holy sites  and  cemeteries  are  nominally  protected by Israeli state  law.

## Concluding Remarks

'When the Portuguese colonized,  they built churches; when  the  British  colonized,  they built trading  stations;  when  the  French  colonize, they build schools'  (Gordon 1962:7). It is my thesis that when the Israelis colonized Palestine,  they  destroyed  most of the Palestinian landscapes that they found and deconstructed their  cultural  topographies.  As  this  paper  has attempted  to  show, the  events  of  the 1948 Israeli-Palestinian  war served as  catalytic  agents for  the  transformation  of  Palestine's cultural landscape.  This was  a 'total'  war,  one marked by unlimited violence and by the depopulation of Palestinian  places.

The spatial obliteration  of village  landscapes was  an  integral  component  of  Israeli  military strategy during the 1948 war,  and one that persisted  into the  post-war  period. For the Palestinians,  the  ruins  of the villages  represent the remains of a lost cultural topography. Yet these very  ruins may 'provide  the incentive for restoration,  and for  a  return to origins'  (Jackson 1980:102); their survival  constitutes  material evidence  refuting  Israel's  claim  that  the Palestinians  are  not part  of  Palestine  (Peters 1984; Abu-Lughod 1988; Finkelstein 1988), that  past Palestinian  identity  has  been obliterated  from the 'Judaicized'  landscape and cleansed of its Palestinian markers.

This paper  has  reconsidered  the  way in which the state  of  Israel was  created  and  superimposed on the landscape in Palestine, supplanting  in  course  the  Palestinian  landscape. Israel's  current cultural landscape, I suggest,  is one that  has been established by the obliteration  of  another  via  de-signification.  The  predominant Israeli interpretations of the war and the making of the modern Israeli cultural landscape  are,  of course,  quite different.  Generations  of  children  at  Israeli  state  schools  have been taught a one-sided  story  in the name of the Israeli 'civic  religion,'  one that has engendered  negative  attitudes  toward  non-Jewish cultural places,  a kind of cultural xenophobia. These attitudes toward Palestinian localities (whose residents are officially defined as  'enemies') blinds most Israelis to the value of these places for their former inhabitants. Israelis thus tend to view the Palestinian  cultural landscape that endures  in depopulated villages  and cities in terms of its present utility rather than its past function.

Authenticating Palestine's  geographical  record  may  help  to  redress  this  situation.  The data  presented  here-a portion  of which  has been classified-afford insights on the historical geography of a  landscape's de-signification. Having adapted an  ideological and geographical paradigm that has been shaped by the discursive regime of Israeli nationalism,  Israeli geographers understandably  have been hard put to provide a complete and unbiased picture of the empirical realities  of the Palestinian cultural landscape  and  its  transformation  since 1948. However well-intentioned,  members of a society  that  carried  out  (or  benefited  from)  the dispossession of the Palestinians are unlikely to inventory  the  Palestinian cultural  relicts  that survive or to chronicle the violence of dispossession or the historical events  surrounding  it. Doubtless the same objections could be raised about committed Palestinian  researchers  were it  not  for  the  massive  archival  and  photo-

graphic  evidence  that  they  have  helped  adduce. In any  event,  the time seems  ripe for a more open and less ideological era in scholarship  on the  geographical  palimpsest of Palestinellsrael.  The alternative  reading o f i t s   landscape  realities presented  here  is  perhaps  a small step on that way.

## Acknowledgments

This is an expanded version of a paper read at the 27th  International  Geographical  Congress  held  in Washington,  D.C., U.S.A.  (August 9-14, 1992) and the subsequent week at the 8th International  Conference  of Historical Geographers  held  in Vancouver, Canada (August 16-23,  1992). I would like to thank the Institute for  Palestine Studies  (Washington, D.C.) for  permitting me to use some of the empirical data and documents held in the Institute.  For critical advice  and  editorial  assistance, I am  grateful to  Kim England,  Bill Templer, Walter  Lehn,  and Joe Leydon; thanks  also  to  three  anonymous  reviewers  of  the Annals. Errors remaining are solely the responsibility of the author.

## Notes

- 1 . It should be noted,  however,  that within internal IsraeWZionist discourse,  there have been alternative  perspectives on  Zionist  ideological attitudes t o   the Arab question (Laqueur 1972; Teveth 1985; Corny 1987;  Shapira 1992). Corny,  for  example, points to the existence among Jews of four views of  the  local Arab  population at  the  beginning  of the present century: integrative,  separatist,  liberal, and the constructive  socialist.  The recognition of the national rights of Arabs  in Palestine was  torn between two extreme standpoints-one  recognizing the equal rights  of the two peoples to Palestine,  the  other  insisting on the  exclusiveness  of Jewish rights (Corny 1987:77). An instructive historical overview  of changing attitudes toward the Arab population in the prestate (Yishuv) period of Jewish settlement is Shapira (1992). She points up the  numerous ambiguities  and  inconsistencies in left-Labor  socialist  Zionism  attitudes  toward  the Arab-Palestinian population and the Zionist enterprise of colonization;  she  also explores the binational  single-state  solution  advocated  by  radical proponents in the intellectual circle of Brit Shatom (covenant of Peace)  active in the 1920s and 1930s. They sought to establish a 'model society' without using  coercion, and they consistently championed Jewish-Arab  rapprochement (Shapira 1992:164 ff.).
2. Pa'il's article  was  published  in  the  Hebrew-language Israeli journal Ma'rakhot. He uses the  Hebrew  word 'tihur' (cleansing or  purification  in English) in various  places  in the  text.  This  word could refer  to the  cleansing of civilian population or of only the hostile elements within this popula-
- tion.  He means the former  on page 13 when he describes  the  operation  of  Yiftach  unit in northeastern  Galilee  as  one  of  'cleansing  the  whole Arab  area  [located]  north of [lake]  kinneret  and Rosh  Pinna  and  gaining  control  of  it'  and  also 'cleansing the  Hula Valley  of most of its Arab inhabitants'  (Pa'il 1972:13).
3. In an attempt to circumvent  the  presence of the British  Army, the Palestinian  leader, Haj  Amin Husseini (who  was expelled by the British Administration  to  Egypt  in  1937) and  the  Arab  League hastily formed and trained irregular  forces of volunteers from various Arab countries. These forces, infelicitously termed  the  Arab  Liberation  Army (ALA), numbered 3,830  armed persons, of whom at least 1,000 were Palestinians, under the control of  an  Arab  League  Military  Committee  based  in Damascus.  The  effect  of the  ALA  on the  civilian population was  generally  demoralizing. The ALA volunteers,  searching  for  food  and  lodging,  imposed  themselves  on  local  Palestinian  villagers. Moreover, this force entered Palestine only gradually,  over  a period  of four  months (Khalidi 1971; Nazzal 1978).
4.  Israeli leaders and  historians  in the  1960s talked about the 'massive Arab offensive' of armies sent to  Palestine on May 15,  1948. This  was  later  refuted  by  many  scholars, including  Israelis.  The Arab  forces  sent  to  Palestine by the  Arab  states were  far  outnumbered  by the Jewish forces  already  in Palestine. Their  total strength,  according to Khalidi, was less than 15,000 soldiers (1971  :867).  This figure  should  be compared with the  estimates of  Benny  Morris.  Although  Morris estimated  Arab  armies'  forces  at  25-30,000 soldiers,  doubling Khalidi's numbers, he pointed out that in mid-May 1948, 'the Haganah fielded some 35,000 armed  troops  .  .  .  in July,  the  IDF  had 65,000  men under arms and by December,  close to  90,000 men  under  arms-at each  stage  significantly outnumbering the combined strength of the Arab armies ranged against them in Palestine' (1990:15). The size of the Arab armies dispatched to Palestine is reflective of the Arab governments' attitudes  toward  the  Israeli-Palestinian conflict  at that time. They  were generally unprepared to enter the war,  and insisted  instead on a political solution  to  the  conflict.  They  also  repeatedly  demanded the delay of the departure of the British Army from Palestine until  a political solution to the problems had been found.
5.  From  1987 to 1991,  the  author  was  involved  in the Washington,  D.C.-based Institute for Palestine Studies  (IPS) research  project  on  the  Palestinian villages  occupied  and  depopulated  by  Israel  in 1948-1 949. In addition to my role as  project consultant assigned to compile a definitive list of depopulated  villages, I twice-conducted  field  research  in over  one-third  of the  418  village  sites. On the first visit, I identified the  precise location of the  villages  and prepared a detailed report on current  land  uses  and  statuses  of  the  remaining physical structures. During the second visit,  I  was accompanied by a professional  photographer who photographed  the sites from various vantage points  and  angles.  Anywhere  from  five  to thirty

photographs were taken of each site visited. The remaining two-thirds  of the  depopulated  villages were  similarly  surveyed  and  photographed by  a research team from Bir Zeit University. A list of the 418  villages  with  information on the  level of destruction is available by request to the author or to the  Institute  for  Palestine Studies,  3501  M Street N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20007,  U.S.A.

## References

- Abcarius,  M. F . 1946.  Palestine Through the Fog of Propaganda. London: Hutchinson and Co.
- Abu-Lughod,  I. 1988.  Territorially-Based Nationalism and the Politics of Negation.  In Blaming the Victims, Spurious  Scholarship  and  the  Palestinian Question, ed. E. W. Said  and C. Hitchens, pp. 193-206.  London: Verso.
- Agnew, J. A,, and  Duncan, J. S. , eds.  1989.  The Power of Place. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
- Aron, R.  1954.  The  Century of Total  War.  Boston: Beacon Press.
- Baker, A. R.  H.  1992.  Introduction: On Ideology and Landscape. In ldeology and Landscape in Historical Perspective, ed. A.  R.  H. Baker and G. Biger, pp.  1-14. Cambridge:  Cambridge  University Press.
- Baker,  A.  R.  H.,  and Biger, C., eds., 1992.  ldeology and Landscape in Historical Perspective.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Bell-Fialkoff, A.  1993.  A Brief History of Ethnic Cleansing. Foreign Affairs 72:llO-121.
- Ben-Artzi,  Y. 1992.  The  Historiography of the  War of Independence. Cathedra 65 (September):159-167.  (In Hebrew).
- Berdoulay, V . 1989.  Place,  Meaning,  and Discourse in French Language Geography. In The Power of Place, ed. J. A. Agnew  and J. S. Duncan, pp. 124-139.  Boston: Unwin Hyman.
- Brewer, S. P . 1948a.  Palestine Police Cite Arab Atrocity.  The New York  Times February 8:46.
- . 194813. Jews Kill  15 Arabs  in  Galilee  Village. The New York Times March 4:17.
- Canaan,  T.  1927.  Mohammedan Saints and Sanctuaries in Palestine. London: Luzac &amp; Co.
- Childers,  E.  D.  1971.  The Other Exodus. In From Haven To Conquest,  ed.  w. Khalidi,  pp. 795-806. Beirut: The Institute for  Palestine Studies.
- Conder,  C. R. 1879.  Tent Work  in Palestine,  vol.  II. London: Richard Bently &amp;  Son.
- Cosgrove, D.  1990.  Spectacle  and  Society:  Landscape as Theatre in Pre- and Post-modern Cities. In  Vision,  Culture and Landscape:  Working Papers from  the Berkeley Symposium on Cultural Landscape,  ed.  P .   Groth,  pp. 221  -239.  Berkeley: Department of Landscape Architecture,  University of California,  Berkeley.
- Cosgrove,  D.,  and Daniels, S.,  eds.  1988.  The lcon-

- ,

- ography of Landscape: Essays on Symbolic Representation,  Design  and Use of Past  Environments. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- and - . 1989.  Fieldwork as Theatre:  A Week's  Performance in the Venice Region. journal of Geography in Higher Education 13:169182.
- Cosgrove,  D.,  and Jackson, P .   1987.  New Directions in Cultural Geography. Area 19:95-101.
- Cox, C.,  and Eibner, J. 1993.  Ethnic Cleansing in Progress:  War in Nagorno Karabakh. Zurich: Institute for  Religious Minorities in the Islamic World.
- Dumper, M. 1994.  lslam and  Israel,  Muslim Religious Endowments and the /ewish State. Washington, D.C.:  The Institute for  Palestine Studies.
- Duncan, J., and  Duncan,  N.  1988.  (Re)reading the Landscape. Environment and Planning  D :  Society and Space 6:117-I  26.
- Duncan, J., and Ley, D.  eds., 1993a.  Place/Culture/Representation.  London: Routledge.
- Edmonds,  M.  1972.  Civil War,  Internal War,  and Intrasocietal Conflict. In Civil War in the Twentieth Century,  ed.  R.  Higham,  pp. 11-26. Lexington: University of Kentucky Press.
- Falah, G. 1989.  The Forgotten Palestinians, Arab AnNaqab 7906-7986. Tayiba,  Israel: Arab  Heritage Centre. (In Arabic)
- . 1991.  The  Invisible  Aspect  of  Palestine  Human  Geography  as  Reflected in  Israeli Official Sources. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the West Lakes Division of the Association  of American  Geographers held in Duluth,  Minnesota,  October 10-1 2.

- .

1993.  A/-jalil wa-mukhattatat a/-tahwid &lt;Galilee  and ludaization  Plans&gt;.  Beirut:  Institute  for Palestine Studies. (In Arabic)
2. Finkelstein,  N. G. 1988.  Disinformation and the Palestine  Question:  The  Not-So-Strange  Case  of Joan Peters's From Time Immemorial. In Blaming the  Victims,  Spurious Scholarship and the Palestinian  Question,  ed. E.  W. Said and C. Hitchens, pp. 33-69.  London: Verso.
- . 1991.  Myths,  Old and  New. journal o f   Palestine Studies 21  (1  ):66-89.
4. Gilmour, D.  1980.  Dispossessed: The Ordeal of the Palestinians. London: Sphere Books Limited.
5. Glazer,  S. 1980.  The  Palestinian  Exodus  in  1948. Journal of Palestine Studies 9(4):96-118.
6. Golan,  A.  1992.  The  Transfer  of  Abandoned  Rural Arab  Lands to Jews during Israel's  War of Independence. Cathedra 63  (April):l22-154.  (In Hebrew)
7. Goodrich-Freer,  A.  1924.  Arabs  in  Tent and Town. London: Seely,  Service and Co.
8. Gordon,  D. C.  1962.  North Africa's  French Legacy 7954-7962. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
9. Corny, Y. 1987.  Zionism and The Arabs 7882-1948: A Study of Ideology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

- Government of Palestine.  1940.  A  Gazetteer  of the Names which Appear in the Small-Scale Maps of Palestine  and  Trans-lordan. Jerusalem:  Government Printing Press.
- . 1946. Palestinian  Village  Statistics 1945. Jerusalem: Government of Palestine.

Graham-Brown, S.  1980.  Palestinians and Their Society 1880-1946. London: Quartet  Books.

Gregory,  D., and  Ley, D.  1988.  Culture's  Geographies-Editorial. Environment and  Planning  D: Society and Space 6:115-116.

- Gyorgy,  A.  1943.  The Geopolitics of War: Total War and Geostrategy.  The Journal of Politics 5:347362.
- Hewitt,  K.  1983.  Place  Annihilation:  Area  Bombing and the  Fate of Urban Places. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 73:257-284.
- . 1987.  The Social Space of Terror:  Towards  a Civil  Interpretation  of  Total  War.  Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 5:445-474.

Hitchens,  C.  1988.  Broadcasts.  In  Blaming the  Victims, Spurious  Scholarship  and  the  Palestinian Question, ed. E. W.  Said and  C. Hitchens, pp. 73-83. London: Verso.

- Jackson, j. B.  1980.  The  Necessity  For  Ruins.  Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
- Khalidi,  W.  1959.  W h y  Did the  Palestinians  Leave? Middle East Forum 35(7):21-24, 35.

- . 1961.  Plan Dalet-The Zionist  Master Plan for the  Conquest  of  Palestine.  Middle East  Forum 37(9):22-28.

- . , ed.  1971.  From Heven To  Conquest.  Beirut: The Institute for  Palestine Studies.

- .

1984. Before Their Diaspora:  A Photographic History of the Palestinians, 1876-1948. Washington,  D.C.:  The Institute for  Palestine Studies.

- . 1992a. Palestine  Reborn.  London:  I.B.  Tauris and Co.
- . , ed.  1992b.  All That Remains,  The Palestinian Villages  Occupied and Depopulated b y  Israel in 1948. Washington, D.C.: Institute  for  Palestine Studies.
- Laqueur,  W.  1972.  A  History of Zionism.  New York: Holt,  Rinehart and Winston.
- Leary,  L. G.  1911.  The Real  Palestine of To-Day. New York: McBride,  Nast &amp; Company.
- Ley, D.,  and  Duncan J. 1993.  Epilogue.  In  Place/ Culture/Representation, ed. J. Duncan and D. Ley,  pp. 329-334. London: Routledge.
- Ley,  D . ,   and Olds,  K.  1988.  Landscape as  Spectacle: World's Fairs  and  the  Culture  of  Heroic  Consumption.  Environment and Planning D :   Society and Space 6:191-212.
- Liddell-Hart,  B. H.  1967.  The Revolution in Warfare. New Haven: Yale University Press.
- Lorch,  N.  1968.  Israel's  War of Independence. Hartford,  Connecticut:  Harmore House,  Inc.
- Masalha, N.  1992a.  Expulsion of  the Palestinians. Washington,  D.C.:  Institute for  Palestine Studies.

- .

- 1992b. Tard al-Filastiniyyin: mafhum a/ &lt;transfer&gt; fi a/-fikr wa-a/-takhtit a/-Suhyuniyyayn, 1882-1948 (The  Concept of &lt;Transferring&gt; the  Palestinian  Arabs  in Zionist Thinking, Planning  and Action, 1882-1948). Beirut:  Institute for  Palestine Studies.  (In Arabic)

Meron, T. 1993.  The Case for  War  Crimes Trials  in Yugoslavia.  Foreign Affairs 72(3):122-I  35.

Morris,  B.  1986a.  The Causes and Character  of the Arab Exodus from Palestine: The  Israel Defense Forces Intelligence Branch Analysis of June 1948. Middle Eastern Studies  22:s-19.

- .

1986b.  Yosef  Weitz  and  the  Transfer  Committees, 1948-49. Middle Eastern Studies 22:522-561.

- . 1987. The  Birth  of  the  Palestine  Refugee Problem, 1947-1949. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

- .

1990. 1948 And After, lsraeland  the Palestinians.  Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Nazzal,  N.  1978.  The Palestinian Exodus from Galilee, 1948. Beirut:  Institute for  Palestine  Studies.

Neil, J. 1913.  Everyday Life  in the  Holy Land.  London: Cassell and Company Limited.

Norton, W.  1989.  Explorations in the Understanding of Landscape: A Cultural Geography. New York: Greenwood Press.

- Oren, A.  1983.  The Campaigns for  the Galilee during War  of  Independence. In  Lands of Galilee, ed. A.  Shmueli,  A.  Soffer,  and N. Kliot,  pp. 819851.  Haifa:  University  of Haifa. (In Hebrew)
- Pa'il,  M. 1972.  Achieving Territorial Continuity in  the War  of Independence. Ma'rakhot  225:9-17. (In Hebrew).
- Palumbo, M. 1987.  The Palestinian Catastrophe. London: Quartet  Books.
- Pappe', 1 . 1992.  The Making  of  the  Arab-Israeli Conflict 1947-51. London:  I.B.  Tauris &amp; Co. Ltd.
- Peters, J. 1984.  From Time Immemorial:  The Origins of the Arab-/ewish  Conflict over Palestine.  New York:  Harper and Row.
- Pfaff, W.  1993.  Invitation  To War. Foreign  Affairs 72(3):97-109.
- Ramchandani,  R.  R.  1976.  Uganda Asians:  The End of an Enterprise.  Bombay:  United Asia  Publications.

Reichman,  S.  1990.  Partition  and  Transfer:  Crystallization of the Settlement Map of Israel Following the  War  of  Independence,  1948-1950.  In  The Land that Became Israel: Studies in Historical  Geography,  ed.  R.  Kark,  pp. 320-330.  New Haven: Yale University Press.

- Reynier,  D. j. 1950.  A Jerusalem un drapeau flottait sur la ligne d e  feu.  Neuch,%tel:  Editions de la Baconniere.
- Sayigh, R. 1979.  Palestinians: From Peasants to Revolutionaries.  London:  Zed Press.
- Schechla, J. 1993.  ideological  Roots  of  Population Transfer.  Third World Quarterly  14:239-275.

- Schieder,  T . , ed.  1960.  Documents on the Expulsion of the German Population from Czechoslovakia. Bonn,  Germany:  Federal  Ministry for  Expellees, Refugees and War Victims.

- . ,

- ed.  n.d.  Documents on the Expulsion of the Germans from  Eastern-Central-Europe. Bonn: Federal Ministry for Expellees, Refugees and War Victims.
- Shapira,  A.  1992.  Land and Power:  The  Zionist Resort to force 1881-1948. New York: Oxford University  Press.
- Shaw,  M. 1987.  The  Rise  and  Fall of the  MilitaryDemocratic  State:  Britain 1940-85.  In  The Sociology of War and Peace,  ed.  C.  Creighton and M.  Shaw, pp. 143-158. Houndmills, U.K.: Macmillan Press.
- Stock, B.  1993.  Reading,  Community  and  a  Sense of  Place.  In Place/Culture/Representation, ed. J. Duncan  and  D.  Ley,  pp.  314-328. London: Routledge.
- Szaz,  Z. M.  1960.  Germany's  Eastern Frontiers. Chicago: Henry Regnery.
- Ternon,  Y. 1981.  The Armenians,  History of  a Cenocide. Delmar, New York:  Caravans Books.
- Teveth,  S.  1985.  Ben-Gurion and the Palestinian Arabs. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Twaddle, M. 1975.  Expulsion  of a  Minority, Essays on Ugandan Asians.  London:  University of London.
- Walker, J. C. 1980.  Armenia, The  Survivaf  of a  Nation.  New York:  St.  Martin's  Press.
- Weigley,  R.  F . 1973.  The  American  Way  of War:  A History o f   United  States Military  Strategy and  Policy. New York:  Macmillan.

Submitted 11/93; Revised 3/95,  6/95; Accepted 8/95.

Falah,  Ghazi. 1996. The 1948 Israeli-Palestinian  War and its Aftermath:  The Transformation  and De-Signification of Palestine's Cultural Landscape. Annafs of the Association of American Geographers 86(2):256-285. Abstract.

Violence against  persons and places may result in profound and radical transformations  in the cultural landscape. In Palestine, political processes during war and its aftermath resulted in radical changes  in culturescape.  While the 1948 plight of some three-quarters  of a million Palestinian refugees  has  been the subject  of considerable  analysis  and  controversy,  far  less attention has been paid to the physical destruction of the spatial world they inhabited. Using recently released classified  material on the 1948 Israeli-Palestinian  War,  this paper  seeks to interpret the war and its aftermath from the Palestinian civilian perspective.  Particular attention is given to the enforced uprooting o f the Palestinians and the obliteration  of their  rural villages.  Empirical findings based on visits  to  all  Palestinian  villages  (418)  depopulated  during that  war  corroborate  the  radical transformation  of the  Arab  cultural  landscape  and its  concomitant  de-signification.  The  paper postulates six different categories of state intervention in the Arab cultural landscape; these range from obliteration (hardly any physical remains are discernable) to the selective survival of Arab houses currently  occupied by Jewish families.  This  paper  delineates  what is essentially a 'forgotten landscape' concealed under the palimpsest of the countryside of modern Israel/Palestine. Key Words: cultural  landscape  transformation, depopulated  villages, de-signification, ethnic cleansing,  field  research, Jewish forces,  Israel-Palestine,  the 1948 war,  Safad sub-district.

Correspondence: Department of Geography,  University of Wales,  Lampeter,  Lampeter,  Dyfed, SA48 7ED,  United Kingdom.