<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## The Weight of Small Cities: Development and the Rural-Urban Nexus in Jinghong, Southwest China

Harvey Neo &amp; C. P. Pow

To cite this article: Harvey Neo &amp; C. P. Pow (2015) The Weight of Small Cities: Development and the Rural-Urban Nexus in Jinghong, Southwest China, The Professional Geographer, 67:4, 555-563, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2015.1053880

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2015.1053880

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 24 Jul 2015.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 24

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

Full Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rtpg20

<!-- image -->

## The Weight of Small Cities: Development and the Rural-Urban Nexus in Jinghong, Southwest China

Harvey Neo and C. P. Pow

National University of Singapore

Research on small cities has begun to attract the attention of scholars who argue that contemporary urban scholarship, in its preoccupation with the largest and most advanced world-class cities, have largely ignored small to medium-sized cities. In China, although much attention has been paid to economically advanced urban centers, there actually has been a steady stream of work on small cities. This article pro fi les how a comparatively smaller city in western China attempts to market itself by selectively placing itself within various social -spatial and political -economic realities. Through Jinghong, we illustrate how local of fi cials and planners attempt to center the city as a gateway to Southeast Asia. By activating, often discursively, multiscalar transborder strategies, local of fi cials in Jinghong not only mobilize ethnic imaginaries, but they also adopt forms of entrepreneurial tactics to promote growth. Developmental strategies of Jinghong not only vacillate between (and draw on) both rural and urban resources; they are furthermore expected to alleviate rural poverty. Through highlighting the agency of small cities like Jinghong in China, this article speaks to the broader developmentalist critique of third- and fourth-world cities as an unfortunate footnote in global urban restructuring, often depicted as places of uniform marginalization and structural irrelevance. Indeed, by focusing on the geography of small cities and giving due attention to their size and proximity to rural spaces, case studies like Jinghong might yet point empathetically to different ways and imperatives of ' being urban ' where the weight that they carry can also be duly recognized. Key Words: China, development, rural resources, rural -urban nexus, small cities.

小 型城 市 的 研 究 ， 开 始 吸 引 学 者 们 的 关 注 ， 这 些 学 者 主 张 ， 当 代 的 城 市 研 究 ， 全 神 贯 注 于 最 大 型 、 最 先 进 的 世 界 级 城 市 ， 因 而 大 幅 忽 略 中 小 型城 市 。 在 中 国 ， 即 便 大多 数 的 关 注 皆 聚 焦 经 济 上 领 先 的 城 市 中 心 ， 但 实 际 上 ， 仍 有 持 续 的 研 究 工 作 关 注 小 型城 市 。 本 文 概 述 中 国 西 部 一个 相 对 而 言 较 小 型 的 城 市 ， 如 何 透 过 选 择 性 地 将 自 身 置 放 在 多 重 的 社 会 -空 间 及 政 治 -经 济 现 实 中 ， 以 进 行 自 我 行 销 。 我 们 透 过 景 洪 的 案 例 ， 描 绘 地 方 官 员 及 规 划 师 如 何企 图 凸 显 该 城 市 作 为 取 道 东 南 亚 的 门 户 。 景 洪 的 地 方 官 员 ， 透 过 激 活 经 常 是 论 述 上 的 多 重 尺 度 跨 境 策 略 ， 不仅 动 员 族 裔 想 像 ， 亦 同 时 採 纳 创 业 策 略 的 形式 来 促 进 成 长 。 景 洪 的 发 展 策 略 ， 不仅 在 农 村 与 城 市 资 源 之 间 摇摆 （ 并 同 时 运 用 两 造 资 源 ） ； 这 些 策 略 同 时 被 进 一 步 期 待 能 够 减 轻 农 村 贫 穷 。 本 文 透 过 凸 显 诸 如 中 国 的 景 洪 等 小 型城 市 的 能 动 性 ， 与 更 广 泛 的 发 展 主义 批 判 进 行 对 话 ， 该 批 判 将 第 三 、 第 四 世 界 城 市 视 为 全 球 城 市 再 结 构 下 的 不 幸 注 脚 ， 并 经 常 将 其 描 绘 为 始 终 如 一 的 边 缘 化 、 且 无 关 乎 结 构 之 地 。 透 过 聚 焦 小 型城 市 的 地 理 ， 并 正 视 它 们 的 大 小 及 其 与 农 村 空 间 的 邻 近 性 ， 诸 如 景 洪 之 案 例 研 究 ， 的 确 有 可 能 具 同 理 心 地 说 明 作 为 城 市 灯 的 不 同 方 式 与 动 机 ， 其 中 它 们 所承 载 的 重量 ， 也 可 同 时 被 公允 地 承 认 。 关 键 词 : 中 国 ， 发 展 ， 农 村 资 源 ， 农 村 -城 市 轴 线 ， 小 城 市 。

La investigaci  on relacionada con ciudades peque ~ nas ha empezado a atraer la atenci  on de estudiosos que lamentan que la especialidad urbana contempor  anea, con su preocupaci  on por las m  as grandes y pujantes ciudades globales, en gran medida ha ignorado las ciudades peque ~ nas y medianas. Si bien allí se le ha concedido considerable atenci  on a los centros urbanos econ  omicamente avanzados, en China realmente se nota una corriente sostenida de trabajos sobre ciudades peque ~ nas. Este artículo traza el per fi l sobre la manera como una ciudad comparativamente peque ~ na de la China occidental intenta vender su imagen coloc  andose selectivamente dentro de varias realidades socio -espaciales y político -econ  omicas. Con el caso de Jinghong ilustramos el modo como funcionarios locales y pani fi cadores intentan centrar la ciudad como puerta de entrada al sudeste de Asia. Al activar estrategias multiescalares transfronterizas, a menudo de manera discursiva, los funcionarios locales de Jinghong no solo movilizan imaginarios  etnicos, sino que tambi  en adoptan formas de t  acticas empresariales destinadas a promover el crecimiento. Las estrategias de desarrollo de Jinghong no solo vacilan (y tambi  en se basan) entre los recursos rurales y los urbanos; a  un m  as, se espera de ellos que alivien la pobreza rural. Al destacar la agencia que ejercen en China ciudades peque ~ nas como Jinghong, este artículo le habla a la m  as amplia crítica desarrollista de ciudades del tercero y cuarto mundos, como desafortunada nota de pie de p  agina en la reestructuraci  on de lo urbano global, ciudades a menudo retratadas como lugares de marginalidad uniforme e irrelevancia estructural. En verdad, enfoc  andose sobre la geografía de las ciudades peque ~ nas y brind  andoles debida atenci  on a su tama ~ no y proximidad a los espacios rurales, estudios de caso como el de Jinghong bien podrían apuntar emp  aticamente a diferentes maneras e imperativos de lo que signi fi ca ' ser urbano ' , donde el peso que ellos lleven pueda tambi  en ser debidamente reconocido. Palabras clave: China, desarrollo, recursos rurales, nexo rural -urbano, ciudades peque ~ nas.

C hina has undergone tremendous development since its economic liberalization in the 1980s. Although the phenomenal growth of its coastal cities has been well documented, comparatively less attention has been paid to western China. Even less consideration has been given to smaller cities in the western region that are often perceived as lagging behind, despite the massive Western Development

Strategy initiated by the central government since the early 1990s, which aims to spur the economic development of these erstwhile ' backward ' regions. The general assessment of this strategy is that although it has brought unprecedented growth to the region, the disparity between western and coastal regions has persisted (Grewal and Ahmed 2011). Two main reasons are suggested to explain this. First, massive capital injections by the central government into the region cannot continue inde fi nitely. Second, the region faces environmental limitations such as insuf fi cient water and arable land resources (Tian 2004).

Nonetheless, contextualizing such a clarion call for growth into a more local scale analysis shows that although there are both discursive and material spaces for places in western China to embark on their own economic campaigns, the nature of such a market economy can be signi fi cantly different from one Chinese city to another. This is notwithstanding the constant intercity discursive referencing and purported learning by less developed cities in relation to their more successful counterparts. In this regard, this article aims to pro fi le how a comparatively smaller city in western China attempts to market itself by selectively placing itself within various social-spatial and political -economic realities. Through Jinghong, we illustrate how local government of fi cials and planners attempt to center the city as a gateway to the Southeast Asia region. By activating, often discursively, multiscalar transborder strategies, local of fi cials in Jinghong not only mobilize ethnic imaginaries, but they also adopt forms of entrepreneurial tactics and urban imaginaries to promote growth. We highlight two challenges, situated in two different spatial scales, in the ' catch-up ' processes of Jinghong. First, although the developmental aspiration is modeled after the more successful coastal cities, Jinghong ' s opening up is necessarily rooted in regionalist impulses (in contrast to the global reach of top-tier Chinese cities). We argue that this poses particular challenges to Jinghong ' s urban imaginaries and aspirations and its relationship to the broader market. Second, and relatedly, we argue that the developmental strategies of Jinghong vacillate between (and draw on) both rural and urban resources; they are furthermore expected to address rural developmental problems.

It should be stated at the outset that we are not suggesting Jinghong ' s case is exceptional. Rather, we aim to contribute to the much neglected scholarship on small cities like Jinghong and demonstrate their relevance to the production of urban knowledge and theories. In other words, we ask what small cities can tell us about the broader urban developmental processes. In recent years, research on small cities has begun to attract the attention of scholars who argue that contemporary urban scholarship in its preoccupation with the largest and most advanced world-class cities have largely ignored small to medium-sized cities; the latter of which actually constitute the greater part of the urban world. Bell and Jayne (2009, 683), in particular, have called on scholars to ' think big about small cities ' by engaging with studies on small cities that ' enable important interventions into a diverse range of debates within urban theory, including how small cities are integrated into global fl ows of capital, culture and people ' (Jayne et al. 2010, 1411). Importantly, research must also pursue an understanding of the ways in which ' smallness is bound up with particular ways of acting, self-images, structures of feeling, senses of place, aspirations ' (Bell and Jayne 2009, 690; see McManus and Connor [2013], for a cognate discussion on the agency of rural communities). There is hence a need to give due emphasis to understanding the urban experiences of small cities in their own terms and eschew the metrocentric tendency of judging them with established theories and a priori standards that are derived from large global cities and metropolis (Bunnell and Maringanti 2010). Our research follows up on these exhortations.

In China, although much attention has been paid to economically advanced mega urban centers such as Beijing, Shanghai, and Shenzhen, there actually has been a steady stream of work on small cities and towns (see, e.g., Deng 2000; Shi 2000; Feng 2001; S. J. Xu and Zhang 2004). Indeed, as early as 1986, Fei emphasized the importance of studying small cities and township development in China so as to solve the country ' s ' big problem ' on population management and rural developmental issues.

By 2010, 75.1 percent of urban residents lived in midsized cities ( Report on the development of small and medium-sized cities in China 2012). Although it is beyond the scope of this article to provide a systematic study on small cities in China, S. J. Xu and Zhang (2004) highlighted four phases in their development. These are 1949 to 1954 (the initial resurgence of small cities and towns following the establishment of the People ' s Republic of China), 1953 to 1956 (decline of small cities due to policy shifts from central government as well as negative impacts from the Great Leap Forward movement, which decimated the economic foundation of small cities), 1967 to 1978 (further stagnation of small cities and towns due to ' ten-year unrest ' during the Cultural Revolution), and post1978 (resurgence of small cities and towns due to economic reforms).

It can be argued that the multitiered governance structure in China privileges the central and, to some extent, provincial government decision over regional, county, and local townships, with important policies being determined by higher authorities, but the decentralization of the Chinese urban system over the past decades has meant that greater autonomy has now been granted to local government (including small cities and towns). As Li and An (2010) illustrated in their study of four small towns in Shanxi Province, small towns can acquire resources and have used migration from their hinterlands to bolster their local economic growth. We argue that the case study of Jinghong, nestled in a vast rural economy, shows the immense challenges faced by

small to medium-sized cities in China, which often have the added responsibility (or at least an implicit expectation) of ensuring the economic development of their immediate rural hinterlands.

This article draws from fi eldwork conducted in the summers of 2007 -2008 and 2011 -2012. Individual interviews were conducted with of fi cials from the Economic Planning Department and the Agricultural Development Department in Jinghong. Informal discussions were also conducted with local business owners and tourism workers. The nature of our interaction was broad and focused on their personal views, as well as the views of the agencies they represent, on how to develop Jinghong and the challenges ahead. This article is largely interested in the development of Jinghong since the early 2000s. Following this introduction, we highlight how the concept of urban entrepreneurialism is relevant to China and Jinghong. Next, we discuss aspects of Jinghong ' s rural -urban nexus and developmental tensions as well as its strategic positioning within the larger Southeast Asian region. We conclude with a sympathetic assessment of the plights of small cities like Jinghong.

## Marginal Cities as Target for Entrepreneurial Policies and Development Intervention

The fi xation on coastal and successful cities not only ignores the socioeconomic complexity of other Chinese cities, but it also unhelpfully promotes urban imaginaries of some cities as always lagging behind and playing catch-up or imitating other more successful coastal cities (Gaubatz 2008). Such ' loser cities ' (Rosseau 2009) are often portrayed negatively as stragglers in the dominant global urban hierarchy and in dire need of external investment and stimulus because their endogenous growth is limited. Consequently, they are often portrayed as objects for developmentalist intervention (Escobar 1998). This view, however, obfuscates the agency and responsibility of some of these places as the driver for rural poverty alleviation themselves.

Nonetheless, in an attempt to catch up, many marginal cities do embark on urban restructuring schemes that parallel the dictates of Western urban entrepreneurialism (Logan and Molotch 1987; Jonas and Wilson 1999; Short and Kim 1999; Jessop and Sum 2000). It has been widely argued that globalization and urban restructuring of cities have resulted in the formation of a new entrepreneurialism where city of fi cials now focus on the speculative deployment of local resources to attract private investments and stimulate local economic regeneration in cities (Leitner and Garner 1993). In the context of China, Wu (2002) characterized urban entrepreneurialism as being fundamentally a state project, although we argue that it would be more useful to unravel the various scales of state involvement and their speci fi c responsibilities.

In China, even as local governments are increasingly granted more autonomy, they also have to diversify their revenue sources and provide their own funds to build urban infrastructure projects. This is not to say that the local state is relegated to a mere ' business partner ' alongside nonstate actors, as it still wields enormous power and continues to play an important role in providing strategic guidance (see Oi 1995; G. C. S. Lin 2002). Yet, Yeh and Wu (1999) critically pointed out that some local of fi cials advocate progrowth strategies for both economic growth and promoting their own career advancement. As a result, rampant imitation, redundant construction, and speculation in Chinese cities are not uncommon. Hence, although there certainly has been heightened intercity competition in China, one must not be too hasty to homogenize the developmental experiences of Chinese cities, big or small (J. Xu and Yeh 2005). It is fair to say that there exists signi fi cant space for Chinese cities to chart their particular developmental paths, outside of the predominant ' western models ' (or, indeed, any perceived directives from the central government), even as such paths engender the broad logics of progrowth, public -private partnerships and foreign direct investments (Zhang and Peck 2014).

In the case of Jinghong, local entrepreneurial strategies entail the mobilizing of a new urban imaginary that associates itself with successful urban counterparts such as Shenzhen. Such interurban referencing not only works to legitimize the entrepreneurial discourses of local planners, but it also helps to reimage Jinghong ' s purportedly backward status by latching onto an already known symbol of success. As Ong (2011, 17) pointed out, ' the practice of citing a ' more successful city '-itself an unstable category -seems to stir urban aspirations and sentiments of inter-city rivalry as well as standing as a legitimation for particular enterprises at home. ' Weare not suggesting that Jinghong will become a replica of a ' model ' Chinese city, nor that it strives to be so. Rather, we show how a small city such as Jinghong is discursively caught up in urban aspirational models by embarking on various entrepreneurial strategies, even as it attempts to valorize the particular resources afforded by its sociospatial circumstance.

There are, indeed, interesting divergences between Jinghong and larger cities like Chongqing in the west and other coastal cities in the east. For example, there is a more obvious focus on rural resources to help it develop and a concomitant concern toward rural poverty alleviation. The latter point is often cited in our conversations with our respondents, even as there is no evidence that the central or provincial governments quantify their performance in this regard.

Overall, this article uses rural development and urban economic frames to show how Jinghong ' s entrepreneurial pulses are not geared solely toward intercity competition but are also meant for alleviating rural poverty. Jinghong ' s strategy to boost the city ' s competitiveness mobilizes the rural economy, drawing it materially into urban space (Woods 2011). Dyadic conceptions of urban -rural relationships are

misleading, as they ignore the spatial interdependencies and responsibilities between the city and countryside (Champion and Hugo 2004). In particular, focusing on the rural -urban nexus provides a useful lens for understanding the diverse engines of economic and social transformation in marginal cities such as Jinghong, where the rural hinterland is not just a place from which resources are unilaterally drawn to enrich the urban center; it is also a place where the latter needs to give back to. As a Jinghong of fi cial opined plainly, ' We have a responsibility to the [marginalized] minorities [in the rural areas], it is a weight which we have to carry ' (X. Chen, personal interview, 10 June 2011).

Conceptually, Jinghong demonstrates how the seemingly dissimilar goals of extraction from rural resources and poverty alleviation are drawn into a discourse of urban entrepreneurialism, interurban referencing (both within China and in the Indo-China region), and rural -urban interdependency. In so doing, it points to the need for framing the development of small cities beyond urban economic terms but to include rural developmental ones, too.

## Jinghong, Xishuangbanna in Context

Yunnan is an ethnically diverse province bordered by Laos, Vietnam, and Myanmar. One third of its 42 million people are ethnic minorities and up to 41 percent of the population live below or near the poverty line (Lu 2012). Jinghong is the capital of the Xishuangbanna Dai Autonomous Prefecture in Southwest Yunnan (Banna for short; see Figure 1) and has a population of over half a million (Jinghong City Statistics Of fi ce 2011). 1 As the prefectural capital, Jinghong is the urban center of Banna, where all government agencies are located, and it is the main, if not only, dispenser of developmental strategies and projects to the rural areas.

Developing the region has always been a political focus at the highest level of governance in China due to the persistent impoverishment of minority groups (Zhang 2012). Relatedly, the geopolitical stability of the western and border regions is a particular concern as well, as a result of the transborder ethnic ties that minorities in western China have with those in Vietnam, Laos, and Myanmar. Banna has, for example, been a buffer zone between China and mainland Southeast Asia since the fi fteenth century. In that sense, the central government has always been wary of minority groups establishing deep ethnic ties across borders. Yet, in an age of market economy, city of fi cials in Jinghong have tried to valorize ethnic uniqueness and appeal to a transborder ethnic solidarity in their efforts to build an entrepreneurial city, as elaborated later. In the next two sections, we illustrate the developmental tensions that arose from the speci fi c cultural politics, history, and location of Jinghong.

## Tourism, Regionalization, and the Spatial Representations of Jinghong

Banna was established as a Dai Autonomous Prefecture in 1953. Notwithstanding the particularities of Jinghong ' s sociopolitical, historical, and environmental contexts, the drivers behind its catch-up processes are resolutely developmentalist, market-oriented, and modernist. The launch of a regional development policy in the 1990s encapsulates such a market discourse perfectly. In 1999, the Central Government of fi cially embarked on an ambitious plan to bring the marginalized western provinces to par with other relatively more prosperous places in eastern and coastal China.

The Great Western Development ( xibudakaifa ) policy is meant to be a ' a long term project . . . focusing on improving infrastructure, providing incentives for investment, protecting the natural environment, forging economic adjustment, nurturing human capital and sectors with a comparative advantage and aiding the poor ' (Lai 2002, 458). Under this broad directive, a range of social -economic policies (both macro and micro) have been implemented in numerous regions in the west. For Banna, since the 1990s, a large-scale regional development project was initiated, centering on the Lancang River and Mekong River and Jinghong in Banna. Such policies aim to enroll marginalized communities into the market economy and capitalize on their unique sets of skills and identities.

Implicit in the discourse of the Great Western Development is the nod toward the coastal cities. For example, the coastal city of Shenzhen was mentioned several times by respondents as a city that Jinghong can look up to. Interestingly, among the many cities in the western region, Jinghong is not the only one that aspires to be the Shenzhen of the west, but Kashgar in Xinjiang Province is, thus far, the only western city that has been of fi cially anointed as ' Shenzhen of the west ' by the Central Government (Ministry of Commerce, China 2011). As mentioned earlier, there are clear and self-acknowledged differences between the place identities of Shenzhen and Jinghong, not least being Shenzhen ' s positionality as the hinterland or proxy for Hong Kong that directly links it to the global market (Luo and Shen 2012), whereas Jinghong ' s opening up is con fi ned to the broader mainland Southeast Asia region. Analytically, then, the juxtaposing of Jinghong and Shenzhen is at best rhetorical and the experience of Shenzhen ' s economic growth bears few direct lessons to the development of Jinghong. Indeed, even at a broad discursive level, the distinct challenges in some of the developmental initiatives Jinghong of fi cials have undertaken, particularly in the tourism sector, are tangential to Shenzhen ' s context.

Following years of consistent growth, tourism receipts in 2013 hit a record high of US$2.74 billion in Xishuangbanna, of which 80 percent was generated by Jinghong ( ' Major tourism conglomerates ' 2014). Local government of fi cials and entrepreneurs see the

Figure 1 Location map of Jinghong.

<!-- image -->

' exoticism ' of Banna as ' a resource to be exploited for further developing tourism in an area ' (Hansen 1999, 397). Indeed, tourism has also been heralded as a way to boost the urban economy and alleviate rural poverty. Such a strategy no doubt attempts to leverage the cultural diversity of the region and Jinghong city authorities have explicitly valorized such ties to appeal to tourists (e.g., the Dais in Banna share deep cultural af fi nities with the Thai people in Thailand).

Speci fi cally, in just one of several examples of the construction of ethnic showcase villages, the Jinuo people (one of the smallest minority groups in China) have been subjected to an experiment to ' sell ' their culture. The particular village in question, the Baka village, morphed into a demonstration village for tourists to appreciate Jinuo culture in 2001. Among other things, a Jinuo museum was built within the village and the young people in the village were encouraged to perform traditional song-and-dance rituals and demonstrate their traditional craftmaking. Unfortunately, this initiative was a failure. For one, the tourist numbers were never high enough. Coupled with the distinct lack of interest on the part of the villagers, the venture collapsed by 2005 (Zheng, Luo, and Xiao 2007). As one of the tourism and development of fi cials from Jinghong explained:

The way I see it, ultimately that was something very alien to them even though we tried to convince them that the money will be good if they persevered. Sometimes, I think that they do not understand that you cannot expect to have immediate results for business ventures like this. But they lost interest very quickly, which makes getting tourists there even more dif fi cult. (Q. Li, personal interview, 9 June 2011)

This example illustrates the interdependency of the rural and urban in Jinghong. More problematically, though, another of fi cial, despite consistent growth in the tourism sector, highlighted a broader, fundamental drawback of the image of Jinghong itself:

Banna is known to be attractive and different from other tourist spots in China. We are the regional center of the minority cultures in Southeast Asia, in the Golden Triangle. This advantage is now lost and in fact has become a liability when the Chinese people are rich enough to go to Vietnam or Chiangmai or Bangkok for their holiday. [Saying] Jinghong is the center of Dai culture cannot attract tourists anymore, it has no selling point. (Y. Wu, personal interview, 9 June 2011)

As can be seen from this quote, marketing Jinghong as a gateway to Southeast Asia can have less than desired outcomes for its tourist industry. It also illustrates the dif fi culties in adopting entrepreneurial strategies to ' develop ' rurality and alleviate poverty. Equally important is the fact that the city of Jinghong itself has a limited draw for tourism. Hence, there is a selfacknowledged need to discover, develop, and maintain ways of enthralling tourists; yet at the same time these initiatives must be experientially unique. In this respect, in the past ten years, to increase the tourism potential of Jinghong, the biggest Theravada Buddhism temple in mainland Southeast Asia was constructed. The Mengli Temple was built in 2008 with an investment of 350 million yuan and the total builtup area of the temple complex is 24,000 m 2 .

An of fi cial explained that the temple will help concretize the image of Southeast Asia in Jinghong as Theravada Buddhism is the most popular religion in Southeast Asia, especially in countries like Thailand, Laos, Myanmar, and Cambodia. As he elaborated further, ' We need to stand out from the region and show the outside world that we are connected to our neighbors but in some ways different and better ' (Q. Li, personal interview, 9 June 2011). Therein is one developmental dilemma of Jinghong, which is especially pertinent for the tourism industry: the ability to walk the tightrope between valorizing its regional cultural identity vis- a-vis other parts of China while concomitantly maintaining a more superior and attractive image than its neighboring countries. As it is, the vast majority of tourists to Jinghong are still domestic, with international tourists constituting less than 5 percent of tourist arrivals in 2010 (Jinghong City Statistics Of fi ce 2011).

## The Rural-Urban Nexus in Entrepreneurial Jinghong

Beyond the regional imagings of Jinghong and Banna that are geared toward tourism, other efforts to make the city entrepreneurial have also been met with challenges. The main problem is that, notwithstanding the recent waves of market-oriented development plans, Banna for the most part is essentially still an agrarian society. According to the latest population census in 2011, 59.43 percent of Jinghong ' s population is considered rural. Hence, as mentioned earlier, Jinghong city ' s strategy for catching up cannot help but involve in important and intimate ways rural places and rural economies. Yet, how does a city attempt to adopt a coherent rural -urban interface to pro fi t from its rural base?

Jinghong ' s overall development master plan is arguably couched in the grand narratives of progress, development, and modernity. The tourism sector described earlier is one important way in which Jinghong capitalizes on the rural economy, with the agricultural sector being the other route. Either way, this incorporation of the rural economy is folded into an entrepreneurial discourse. Furthermore, as with tourism development, it needs to function as a rural poverty alleviation strategy concomitantly. For example, city of fi cials we spoke to took pains to explain that Jinghong needs to revamp its ' backward ' image by adopting modern urban practices and capitalizing on its indigenous resources. Such narratives are typically deemed to require decisive changes in the purposes, organization, and delivery of economic strategies that are focused on the local, urban, or regional levels and infused with some kind of entrepreneurial spirit.

The Banna agrarian economy is historically based on cash-cropping with tea, rubber, and sugarcane being the most popular crops. Poverty alleviation measures in the region have hence been focused on encouraging the minorities to cultivate particular crops. Nonetheless, the limits of such crops in alleviating poverty have long been recognized, not least because market prices for them can fl uctuate dramatically. Chapman (1991), in his study of Yunnan rubber plantations, very early on questioned the long-term bene fi ts of rubber to small family farms that have to compete increasingly with bigger and often state-run enterprises. Concomitantly, limited labor availability and minimal technological investments have seen smallholding crop production stagnating in Yunnan (Li 2006), throwing doubt on the effectiveness of this strategy ' s ability to alleviate rural poverty.

The agricultural department authorities that we spoke to are fully cognizant of the potential pitfalls of

plantation agriculture, even as agriculture continues to be a target for their developmental, modernizing plans, with one third of the provincial economy dependent on agriculture (Jinghong City Statistics Of fi ce 2011). What is different is their fairly recent interest in niche agriculture and their attempts to entrepreneurially package these products to maximum advantage. As one agricultural of fi cial explained:

Our strengths are our fresh air and unpolluted land. We cannot go the way of our neighbors. It won ' t work if we start to plant rice in a large commercial scale. We cannot compete with Thailand. We are targeting specialized food and agriculture and tourism. The development strategy is actually very simple, differentiate and showcase our strengths! (S. Zhuang, personal interview, 4 July 2012)

In late 2006, the Jinghong Agricultural Department introduced an indigenous pig-rearing program to the Jinuo people. Recognizing the potential to turn an erstwhile subsistence activity into an entrepreneurial one, the Agricultural Department encouraged villagers to rear the small ear pig for sale. The Agricultural Department was con fi dent of the success of this latest market-oriented plan for several reasons. First, it believed that rearing small ear pigs will not demand too many household resources from the villagers, whose main economic activity hitherto has been tea and rubber plantation. Second, it believed that there is an untapped market in this indigenous breed of pig. Last but not least, because of the proximity of the Jinuo mountains to the city itself, it envisaged that transportation of the pigs would not be too much of a burden (see Neo and Chen [2009] for a more detailed discussion of this initiative).

Clearly, the market ethos is palpable in this endeavor, even as its original goal was poverty alleviation. Hence, in the rural outskirts of the city, formerly small-scale subsistence farmers have also adopted an entrepreneurial outlook. In an interview, a pig farmer expressed how his desire to expand his pig-rearing operations might not materialize: ' Here in the mountains, I cannot hope to have a big farm, it is impossible. We need to be on the plains to do that ' (C. Kai, personal interview, 27 May 2008). Along the same lines, an agricultural of fi cial elaborated:

The market is there and it is big. We must push more out to urban consumers. . . . That is why we have also set up a specialized butchery in Jinghong city itself. You must have a shop in the city that only sells this meat, to let consumers know that they are buying a very unique product. (W. Hong, personal interview, 28 May 2008)

Indeed, the fi rst such specialized butchery is located, interestingly, on one of the main shopping streets in the city. The presence of such a shop is a visual testament of the links the urban center has with the rural. Inside the shop are posters that describe in great detail the small ear pig, its physiology, and the environment in which it is bred. A recurring motif is the stress on the pigs ' indigeneity to the Banna region. Since this scheme was introduced in 2007, it has seen encouraging success. To date, more than 2,000 rural families are enrolled in the scheme, earning about 4,000 to 5,000 yuan a year. The annual production of the pig meat is 1,680 tonnes and there are now four specialized butcheries throughout Yunnan Province (Pan 2009).

Another more organically developed urban attraction is the cluster of tea shops (specializing in the indigenous Pu-er tea) located in close proximity to the hotel district in Jinghong. The ' tea district ' materially connects the urban to the rural economy and functions as an urban tourism site as well. Although the shops in the district are ostensibly tea traders, they welcome tourists. Each of the shops contains are a wealth of information on the Pu-er tradition in the region and introductions to the various tea plantations and factories in the rural areas of Banna. When queried about this cluster of shops, an of fi cial explained:

That was not really planned. The tea merchants wanted to be near the Jinglan Hotel [a high-end hotel] as many businessmen stay there. So it is convenient for them to talk business. It quite quickly became an area where tourists can visit, too, not just businessmen. (X. Chen, personal interview, 3 July 2012)

The specialized butchery and the tea district are visible testaments of Jinghong extending beyond its own spatial limits to draw on (rural) products and images that will enable it to rise above the competition. Hence, urban-based entrepreneurial strategy to sell the city cannot be divorced from its economic realities (in this case, its dominant rural economy), its broader social -cultural circumstance, and its political responsibility to help its hinterland. The preceding anecdotal examples suggest that the development path of Jinghong is guided, in the broadest sense, on the principle of capitalizing on its rural resources (e.g., tourism, organic livestock, and tea) and a desire to alleviate rural poverty (more explicitly seen in the tourism and organic livestock sectors). Nonetheless, although poverty alleviation is a perennial developmental goal of the Chinese government, across various administrative scales, there is little to suggest that the provincial or central government has explicitly prescribed how Jinghong should grow.

## Conclusion

We depart from the typical urban scholarship that tends to focus on large successful coastal cities in China to consider the nature and role of small

urbanity. We show how Jinghong ' s development is bound up with various urban entrepreneurial developmental objectives, including urban reimaging and interreferencing, but also serves as important node that mediates urban and rural economy, as well as promotes rural growth.

Weargue that even as city of fi cials employ the rhetoric of urban entrepreneurialism, what they are actually doing is more contextual. Although it can be criticized that the broad strategies adopted by the local urban of fi cials to jumpstart Jinghong and Banna ' s economy have been done in a somewhat piecemeal fashion, a closer analysis has shown that they have tried to leverage the unique strengths of the locale, rather than copy wholesale from other successful Chinese cities. In the case of Jinghong, urban entrepreneurialism is driven with a strong spatial logic that combines urban boosterism with rural poverty alleviation objectives, sensibilities, and responsibilities.

Through highlighting the agency of small cities like Jinghong in remote China, this article also speaks to the broader developmentalist critique of third- and fourth-world cities as an unfortunate footnote in global urban restructuring and often depicted as places of uniform marginalization and structural irrelevance (Shatkin 1998). Indeed, by focusing on the geography of small cities and giving due attention to their size and proximity to rural spaces, case studies like that of Jinghong might yet point empathetically to different ways and imperatives of ' being urban ' where the weight that they carry can also be duly recognized. &amp;

## Acknowledgments

To protect the privacy of the interviewees, pseudonyms have been used throughout the article.

## Note

1 According to the central government ' s classi fi cation, the largest cities should have a population of more than 2 million and a small city is one with a population of 200,000 or less. A city like Jinghong with a reported population of 500,000, based on its most recent census, would be considered large (Jinghong City Statistics Of fi ce 2011). The central government ' s classi fi cation, however, refers to nonrural residents and excludes the populations of counties that are under the jurisdiction of the city (Dan and Zhong 2011, 39). For Jinghong, the fi gure of 500,000 includes population under its jurisdiction (spread over ten other towns and more than eighty villages). The actual urban population of Jinghong is about 162,000 (Jinghong City Statistics Of fi ce 2011). Chan (2007) commented on the inconsistencies in the de fi nitions of different forms of cities in China as well as their relevant statistics.

## Literature Cited

- Bell, D., and M. Jayne. 2009. Small cities? Towards a research agenda. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 33 (3): 683 -99.
- Bunnell, T., and A. Maringanti. 2010. Practising urban and regional research beyond metrocentricity. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 34:415 -20.
- Champion, A. G., and G. Hugo. 2004. New forms of urbanization: Beyond the rural -urban dichotomy . Farnham, UK: Ashgate.
- Chan, K. M. 2007. Misconceptions and complexities in the study of China ' s cities: De fi nitions, statistics, and implications. Eurasian Geography and Economics 48 (4): 383 -412.
- Chapman, E. C. 1991. The expansion of rubber in Southern Yunnan, China. The Geographical Journal 157:36 -44.
- Dan, Q. Q., and S. Y. Zhong. 2011. An evaluation of the scienti fi c development of China ' s cities. In Annual report on urban development in China , ed. J. H. Pan and H. K. Wei, 38 -81. Bejing: Social Sciences Academic Press.
- Deng, W. 2000. Problems in small town development. Urban Planning Forum 132 (1): 67 -70.
- Escobar, A. 1998. Encountering development . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Fei, X. T. 1986. Small towns in China: Functions, problems and prospects . Beijing: New World Press.
- Feng, J. 2001. Review on the research of small cities and towns development in China since the 1980s. Urban Planning Forum 133 (3): 28 -33.
- Gaubatz, P. 2008. Commercial redevelopment, globalization and regional inequality in urban China: Xining ' s Wangfujing? Eurasian Geography and Economics 49 (2): 1 -20.
- Grewal, B. S., and A. D. Ahmed. 2011. Is China ' s western region development strategy on tracks? An assessment. Journal of Contemporary China 29 (69): 161 -81.
- Hansen, M. 1999. Lessons in being Chinese: Minority education and ethnic identity in southwest China . Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
- Jayne, M., C. Gibson, G. Waitt, and D. Bell. 2010. The cultural economy of small cities. Geography Compass 4 (9): 1407 -17.
- Jessop, B., and N. Sum. 2000. An entrepreneurial city in action: Emerging strategies for (inter)- urban competition in Hong Kong. Urban Studies 37:2287 -2313.
- Jinghong City Statistics Of fi ce. 2011. 6th population census of Jinghong City. http://ww.jhs.gov.cn/home/ bn\_53280105301/newshow.aspx?id D 35968 (last accessed 28 May 2014).
- Jonas, A. E. G., and D. Wilson, eds. 1999. The urban growth machine: Critical perspectives two decades later . New York: State University of New York Press.
- Lai, H. H. 2002. China ' s Western Development Program. Modern China 28:432 -66.
- Leitner, H., and M. Garner. 1993. The limits of local initiatives: A reassessment of urban entrepreneurialism for urban development. Urban Geography 14:57 -77.
- Li, B., and X. An. 2010. Migrants as a source of revenue in small towns in China. Environment and Urbanization 22 (1): 51 -66.
- Li, L. 2006. An exploration of the fostering of market economy in the poor mountainous regions of Yunnan Province. Journal of Lincang Education College 15:45 -48.
- Lin, G. C. S. 2002. Changing discourses in China geography: A narrative evaluation. Environment and Planning A 34:1809 -31.

- Logan, J. R., and H. L. Molotch. 1987. Urban fortunes: The political economy of place . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Lu, H. Y. 2012. Yunnan Province ' s poverty alleviation model: A reconsideration. Xixiangzhanxian 38:143 -44.
- Luo, X., and J. Shen. 2012. The making of new regionalism in the cross boundary metropolis of Hong KongShenzhen, China. Habitat International 36:126 -35.
- Major tourism conglomerates fl ock to Xishuangbanna, domestic investors account for 80%. 2014. Fenghuang Finance , 27 May. http:// fi nance.ifeng.com/a/20140527/ 12414660\_0.shtml (last accessed 1 June 2014).
- McManus, P., and L. H. Connor. 2013. What ' s mine is mine (d): Contestations over the marginalization of rural life in the Upper Hunter, NSW. Rural Society 22 (2): 166 -83.
- Ministry of Commerce, China. 2011. Pakistan -China Business Forum held on 60th friendship anniversary. http://english.mofcom.gov.cn/aarticle/counselorsreport/ asiareport/201107/20110707630746.html (last accessed 28 May 2014).
- Neo, H., and L. H. Chen. 2009. Household income diversi fi cation and the production of local meat: The prospect of small scale pig farming in Southern Yunnan, China. Area 41:300 -309.
- Oi, J. C. 1995. The role of the local state in China ' s transitional economy. The China Quarterly 144:1132 -49.
- Ong, A. 2011. Introduction: Worlding cities, or the art of being global. In Worlding Cities: Asian experiments and the art of being global , ed. A. Roy and A. Ong, 1 -27. Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell.
- Pan, Y. 2009. Jinghong markets small ear pig, makes inroads into domestic market. Yunnan Web . http://yn.yunnan.cn/ bn/html/2009-10/28/content\_957582.htm (last accessed 10 December 2012).
- Report on the development of small and medium-sized cities in China. 2012. Beijing: Social Sciences Academic Press.
- Roberts, S., and R. Schein. 1993. The entrepreneurial city: Fabricating urban development in Syracuse, New York. The Professional Geographer 45:21 -33.
- Rosseau, M. 2009. Re-imaging the city centre for the middle classes: Regeneration, gentri fi cation and symbolic policies in ' loser cities. ' International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 33:770 -88.
- Shatkin, G. 1998. ' Fourth world ' cities in the global economy: The case of Phnom Penh, Cambodia. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 22 (3): 378 -93.
- Shi, Y. S. 2000. Issues on small town development. Urban Planning Forum 125 (1): 30 -32.
- Short, J. R., and Y. H. Kim. 1999. Globalization and the city . Reading, MA: Addison Wesley Longman.
- Tian, Q. 2004. China develops its west: Motivation, strategy and prospect. Journal of Contemporary China 13 (41): 611 -36.
- Woods, M. 2011. The local politics of the global countryside: Boosterism, aspirational ruralism and the contested reconstitution of Queenstown, New Zealand. Geojournal 76:365 -81.
- Wu, F. L. 2002. Towards a more market-oriented economy. Urban Studies 39:1071 -93.
- Xu, J., and A. G. O. Yeh. 2005. City repositioning and competitiveness building in regional development: New development strategies in Guangzhou, China. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 29:283 -308.
- Xu, S. J., and X. K. Zhang. 2004. Review on the research of small cities and towns in China since the 1990s. Urban Planning Forum 151 (3): 79 -83.
- Yeh, A. G. O., and F. Wu. 1999. The transformation of urban planning system in midst of economic reform in PRC. Progress in Planning 51:167 -252.
- Zhang, J. 2012. An investigation into the development of the highlands of Xishuangbanna. The Journal of Yunnan Provincial Committee School of the CPC 13:124 -26.
- Zhang, J., and J. Peck. 2014. Variegated capitalism, Chinese-style: Regional models, multi-scalar constructions. Regional Studies . Advance online publication. doi: 10.1080/00343404.2013.85651410. 1080/00343404.2013.856514
- Zheng, H., M. J. Luo, and Y. X. Xiao. 2007. Lessons from Baka hamlet. Ethnic Today 12:16 -19.

HARVEY NEO is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography at The National University of Singapore, 117570 Singapore. E-mail: geoneoh@nus.edu.sg. His research interests include animal geographies, nature and society issues (focusing on the production and consumption of food), and green urbanism.

- C. P. POW is an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography at The National University of Singapore, 117570 Singapore. E-mail: geopowcp@nus.edu.sg. He researches the critical geographies of the urban built environment, urban environmentalism, and urban cultural politics.