<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## The Rise and Fall of a Timber Baron: Political Forests and Unruly Coalitions in the Carpathian Mountains of Romania

Monica Vasile

To cite this article: Monica Vasile (2020): The Rise and Fall of a Timber Baron: Political Forests and Unruly Coalitions in the Carpathian Mountains of Romania, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2020.1723399

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2020.1723399

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 20 Mar 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## The Rise and Fall of a Timber Baron: Political Forests and Unruly Coalitions in the Carpathian Mountains of Romania

Monica Vasile

Rachel Carson Center for Society and Environment, LMU Munich

Concerns over deforestation are growing along with the climate crisis. This is particularly unsettling in relation to the rise of populist authoritarian regimes. In this article I reveal the connections between forests, neoliberalism, authoritarianism, and cronyism, through an in-depth ethnographic study of the Romanian Carpathian forests after the fall of socialism in 1989. The study examines the intricate entanglements between forest extraction, party politics, and informal territorial governance that emerged over the last thirty years. It argues that unruly coalitions shaped forest history. It focuses on the central figure of the timber baron, who ran businesses in connection with state office politics and maintained provincial authoritarian control over resources by tapping into paternalist dependencies of rural mountain dwellers. The article uses the analytic tools of political ecology and the conceptual framework developed by studies on resource frontiers and political forests combined with the anthropology of postsocialism. I draw on field research from 2004 to 2016, in which I collected data through systematic fieldwork, interviews, and surveys, complemented with official reports and media coverage. The article uses a narrative ethnographic writing approach. Key Words: authoritarianism, Eastern Europe, extractivism, forests, Romania, rural politics.

随 着 气 候 危 机 日 益 严 峻 , 人们也 日 益 关 注 森 林 砍 伐 的 问 题 。 民 粹 独 裁 政 治 理 念 的 甚 嚣 尘 上 , 让 局 势 更 加 令人 感 到 不 安 。 本 文 围 绕 1989 年 在 罗 马 尼 亚 （ 社 会 主义 已 陨 落 ） 的 喀 尔 巴 阡 森 林 进 行 的 一 次 深 入 人 种 志 研 究 , 揭 示 了 森 林 、 新 自 由 主义 、 威 权 主义 和 裙 带 关 系 之 间 的 联 系 。 本 文 还 探 讨 了 过 去 三 十 年 中 的 森 林 采 伐 、 政 党 政 治 和 非 正 式 领 土 治 理 之 间错 综 复 杂 的 关 系 。 作 者 认 为 , 林 业 的 发 展 一 直 都 是 一个 没 有 或 缺 少 规 则 的 ' 结 盟 体 ' 。 这 个 联 盟的 核 心 就 是 大 型 木材 企 业 , 他们 的 业 务 与 国 家 政 治 存 在 密 切 关 系 , 通 过 对 山 区 农 村 居 民 的 家 长 式 统 治 , 维 持 着 对 地 方 资 源 的 独 裁 控 制 。 本 文 不仅 使 用 了 政 治 生 态 学 的 分 析 工 具 , 还 采 用 了 资 源 边 界 和 政 治 森 林 研 究 与 后 社 会 主义人 类 学 相 结 合 发 展 而 来 的 概 念 框 架 。 作 者 还 借 鉴 了 2004 年 至 2016 年 进 行 的 实 地 研 究 , 该 研 究 通 过 了 系 统 的 实 地 调 查 、 访 谈 和 调 查 收 集 数 据 , 同 时 辅 以 官 方 报 道 和 媒 体 报 道 进 行 研 究 。 本 文 使 用 了 叙 事 民 族 志 的 写 作 方 法 。 关 键 词 : 独 裁 主义 , 东 欧 , 榨 取 注 意 , 森 林 , 罗 马 尼 亚 , 农 村 政 治 。

Las preocupaciones sobre la deforestaci  on crecen a la par con la crisis clim  atica. Esto es particularmente inquietante en relaci  on con el incremento en los casos de reg  ı menes populistas autoritarios. En este art  ı culo revelo las conexiones que existen entre bosques, neoliberalismo, autoritarismo y clientelismo, por medio de un estudio etnogr  afico a profundidad de los bosques de los C  arpatos rumanos despu  es de la ca  ı da del socialismo en 1989. En el estudio se examinan los intrincados enredos que se tejieron entre la extracci  on forestal, las pol  ı ticas de partido y la gobernanza territorial informal que emergi  o durante los pasados treinta a ~ nos. Se sostiene que la historia forestal fue configurada por coaliciones revoltosas. El estudio est  a centrado en la figura central del bar  on de la madera, quien llev  o adelante sus negociados en conexi  on con la oficina pol  ı tica del estado y mantuvo un control provincial autoritario sobre los recursos aprovechando las dependencias paternalistas de los pobladores rurales de las monta ~ nas. El art  ı culo usa las herramientas anal  ı ticas de l ecolog  ı a pol  ı tica y el marco conceptual desarrollado a trav  es de estudios de las fronteras de recursos y las pol  ı ticas forestales, combinados con la antropolog  ı a del postsocialismo. Me baso en investigaci  on de campo de 2004 a 2016, durante la cual recog  ı datos por medio de trabajo de campo sistem  atico, entrevistas y estudio sistem  atico, complementados con la revisi  on de informes oficiales y de la cobertura de los medios. El estudio usa un enfoque de escritura narrativo -etnogr  afico. Palabras clave: autoritarismo, bosques, Europa Oriental, extractivismo, pol  ı tica rural, Rumania.

T imber baron Agurid  a was a tall, solid man. His puffy face was mild, with watery blue eyes, half covered by double lids. When I interviewed him in 2007 at his office in the town hall, I felt a benevolent but unsympathetic stance toward me. He scrutinized me briefly. He understood I was doing my job, and he was going to do his, answering my questions with well-rehearsed discourse. This inscrutable man locked in a political armor was an experienced politician, an example of ' sly boots ' or ' smeared with all the ointments, ' as a Romanian saying goes. Four years later, in March 2011, Agurid  a died in a mysterious car crash. After a night out at a local restaurant, driving home at dawn, the baron lost control of the wheel, tumbling down a precipice into the Putna River valley. It was thought he suffered heart failure during driving. He was sixty years old, overweight and diabetic, and it was known that his health was in bad condition. Later investigations, however, revealed another cause of death: alcohol. Yet, at the time of his funeral, nobody knew that he was driving drunk, and he was buried with full military honors, a privilege usually granted only to statesmen. The funeral displayed with pomp the power of the late baron Agurid  a and the majesty of his political camarilla. Mounted on the trailer platform of a large timber truck, the open casket was surrounded by hundreds of carnations, chrysanthemums, and a few armed soldiers in camouflage gear with assault rifles draped around their bodies. His mournful wife, his son and daughters-inlaw -kneeling -kept their hands on the coffin. The soldiers presented military honors, and nine priests in golden gowns officiated the funeral mass. A crowd of 3,000 people attended the funeral, mostly villagers from Tulnici. Among them were many politicians: the prime minister, the leader of the SocialDemocratic Party of which the baron was part, and Dragnea, who was to become eight years later ' Romania ' s most powerful man sent to prison for corruption, ' as a headline of The New York Times read in 2019 (Gillet and Santora 2019). Countylevel politicians also attended, including the county governor, himself called a baron and nicknamed The Little Dictator, and the prefect. Dressed in kneelength black coats, with the rim of white shirt collars showing at the neck, the row of aligned political leaders clasped their hands in front of their bodies like footballers listening to the national anthem with thousands of eyes and cameras on them. With sorrowful and downcast eyes, they put on a strong display of solidarity with the dead man.

Agurid  a had been the elected mayor of the municipality of Tulnici for ten years, a constituency of the Social-Democratic Party. Tulnici is a fairly large and prosperous rural commune in the historic county of Vrancea in the southeastern Carpathians of Romania (Figure 1). The community owns the largest forest commons in the country, counting 14,000 hectares. Arable land is scarce and barely enough for small vegetable plots. The majority of the active male population works at the local forestry companies, and a few women work in the small tourism industry. It is the last community placed on the Putna River valley; the next village to the west is in Transylvania, an hour and a half away on a bumpy country road across the mountains.

In the last thirty years, Tulnici became the theater for one of the most unsettling forest conflicts in the country. Agurid  a was the mayor of Tulnici during the timber boom years between 2000 and 2011. Holding political and financial power, he was one of the two timber barons in the forest fiefdom of Vrancea. Together with his son, he ran a timber business large enough to swallow half of the timber annually harvested on the forest commons.

At the funeral, the deputy mayor read a speech that summarized in a few rushed lines the good reputation of the baron: ' A generous soul, a righteous man, disciplined, vertical, with an uncommon strength, which I thought to be unbreakable. Already at an early age, he showed good leadership skills; as a business manager he was serious and hard-working. ' Other speeches detailed how he held the reins of the community and made his subjects feel secure. He gave money to older people, offered leftovers from his sawmills, paid for the rehabilitation of schools and kindergartens, and fought for the community to regain the forest commons. For the latter, villagers compared him to the legendary king Stephen the Great, who donated the forested mountains to the people from Vrancea in the sixteenth century. Yet, among the funeral crowd some voices muttered that people from Tulnici drink foul water due to Agurid  a ' s failures with infrastructure projects and that his dictatorial politics turned commoners into beggars waiting for charity, while their forest rights were being abused. The Little Dictator, the almighty patron of the county, also gave a tear-jerking speech. He spoke of his invaluable friendship with the late Agurid  a. Like a patronizing

Figure 1. Map of Tulnici in the Carpathian Mountains.

<!-- image -->

godfather at the death of the father, he reassured the dismayed community that he would take care of them; he promised to keep channeling state funds and thus renewed his vows to a large electoral base. Squeezing his baby face into grimaces of grief, and picking his fingers, he spoke with long silences between each word, as if held back by interior sobs: ' Farewell, dear friend, I am so sorry, but this is life. '

' Security forces launch raids linked to deforestation in the Carpathian Mountains, home to some of Europe ' s last virgin forest, ' read a subheadline from The Guardian in 2018 (Nelsen 2018). The Romanian Carpathian Mountains harbor some of the largest areas of old-growth temperate forest remaining in Europe, biodiverse forests of beechwood, spruce, and fir. Forests cover 6.9 million hectares, 1 27 percent of Romania ' s territory. As the subheadline suggested, though, these forests became sites of environmental looting and violent conflicts in recent years. Agurid  a ' s rise and fall provides a glimpse into the surge of such processes. Although underresearched to date, the Romanian Carpathians are a key vantage point for understanding current governance of resources in Europe and, more broadly, the global networks of forest extraction and wealth accumulation.

After the fall of socialism in 1989, a timber rush began, fueled by the opening of markets, increased exports, shifts in forest ownership, and collapsing regulations (Ioras and Abrudan 2006; Munteanu et al. 2016). For the first time in the 150-year history of Carpathian commercial logging, local entrepreneurs held the reins of forest extraction. State officials, as well as forestry professionals, became the new entrepreneurs. They abused their state-derived powers for personal accumulation, which reached previously unimagined scales. Such processes were facilitated by postsocialist land restitution and decentralization. Half the forests have been privatized by three consecutive restitution laws (in 1991, 2000, and 2005) into community forests with collective deeds -obs , ti and composesorate -and individually owned forests. The previously mammoth institution of the state forest service became decentralized, and part of it was privatized; one third of the 450 forestry districts ( ocoale silvice ) across the country became private firms that offered professional services under state supervision. 2 The management of forests and the control of logging were divided across a number of private and public entities, ripening conditions for conflict.

The Vrancea Mountains in general and Tulnici in particular offer a rich case study where these dramatic transformations can be examined. Here the state retreated as the owner and manager of forests. In 2000, 68,000 hectares of forest were returned to communities through the new laws of restitution. From 2004, private forestry districts were established to manage these forests. If the state withdrew from forestry management, however, why was a timber baron mayor buried with the military pomp usually reserved for a worthy statesman? Why did the prime minister exert himself to travel deep into the countryside? Was it just to win the grieving hearts of 3,000 voters? The answers to these questions are the key to understanding the trajectory of Romanian forests after the fall of socialism and the intricate entanglements between forest extraction, party politics, and emergent forms of informal territorial governance.

Even as the central state retreated in its monolithic form as forest owner, governor, and manager, state officials were still part of the top unruly coalitions that profited from the forests -made up of foresters, mayors, businessmen, judges, policemen, administration officers, and party politicians. Unruly coalitions is a term coined by Verdery (1996) to designate ' loose clusterings of elites neither institutionalized nor otherwise formally recognized, who cooperate to pursue or control resources ' (193). The clusters, referred to as mafias by locals, journalists, and scholars (e.g., Humphrey 1991; Verdery 1996), were unruly because they were fragile, unstable, and often violent, vulnerable to political and economic power struggles, riddled with vanities, ambiguities, and conflicts.

Drawing on political ecology as an analytical framework, I argue that the unruly coalitions shaped forest history by creating informal territories controlled by timber barons and filled with forms of slow and fast violence, in which extraction and politics intertwined. I explore these transformations through an in-depth ethnographic study. Between 2003 and 2016, I conducted fieldwork in the region of Vrancea, in successive visits ranging from one week to two months, amounting to more than 300 recorded interviews and a database of 342 surveys. In this article, I focus on the village of Tulnici, where I conducted interviews in 2004, 2007, and 2016, including a total of forty interviews and thirty-seven household surveys. My analysis also draws extensively on video recordings, official reports, media reports, and newspaper articles about

Tulnici from regional and national presses 3 that were published between 2011 and 2019.

Contemporary forest frontiers are not only biological realities but also political ones, generated by interwoven ecological processes, governance practices, and relations of power (Vandergeest and Peluso 2015). Twenty-first-century forests are characterized by increased polymorphism, fragmentation, and contestation enabled by a withdrawal of the state (Marijnen and Verweijen 2018; Lukas and Peluso 2019). The undoing of control is common in the initial phases of new forest frontiers (Rasmussen and Lund 2018; Watts 2018). This allows for emergent forms of governmentality to take hold through new relations of access, labor, and property, creating informal and incomplete hegemonies (Peluso 2018). These processes were visible in Romania, a resource frontier for expanding capitalism after the fall of socialism. Political forests emerged as fiefdoms (Vasile 2019), boisterous territories of intensive logging that operated outside the formal channels (e.g., exceeding official forest management plans, using labor without contracts, cutting trees without permits). This informality fermented alongside a privatization of power and the emergence of multiple, divided, parceled sovereignties (Verdery 1996; Humphrey 2002). The unruly coalitions morphed previous socialist ways into novel forms of governance characterized by cronyism and neo-patrimonialism (Eisenstadt 1973; Hutchcroft 1991; Dauvergne 1997). What emerged at a larger scale from the coalescence of such practices was a shadow state, where state officials exercised control through market channels, successfully marrying capitalist business with patronage politics (Reno 1998). Local commoners took part in these processes as rightsholders, as laborers, as voters, as fathers, and as daughters. In Vrancea, extraction was mobilized in populist politics as a means to earn livelihoods, and rural communities framed logging as a way of life (Kojola 2019), enabling the abuse of community forests by locally elected leaders.

The unruly coalitions often revolved around the central figure of the timber baron. Agurid  a was one such figure, a postsocialist hybrid frontiersman. He drew on resources from both state and private operations, weaving one into the other. He was at once state official, former socialist party cadre, and a brand new capitalist businessman. The figure of the timber baron blurred the boundaries between ' law and theft,

governance and violence, use and destruction, legitimate and illegitimate, embodying resource frontier dynamics ' (Tsing 2005, 27). Agurid  a and the unruly coalitions entangled bureaucracy with market, state with private, and micro with macro, creating loops in which the rule of law held little sway (Wedel 2011). Agurid  a was buried with all the political pomp reserved for a reputed statesman because he supported the financial and electoral interests of the upper political echelons with timber capital. He helped create a local timber economy by riding the frontier boom, but he was not alone in navigating the gray waters of informality; he benefited from political protection. The timber barons captured the powers that had been formally handed over to communities and transformed the countryside into extractive territories of political influence, into landscapes of precariousness and slow violence, as environmental degradation creeps up and shrinks possibilities for local livelihoods (Nixon 2013).

Hardly typical for Romania, relationships between shadow elite groups and states are increasingly prominent around the world, flouting once-sacrosanct boundaries between state and private, with enormous implications for politics, economies, environments, and societies (Wedel 2011). Furthermore, the current moment of global extractivism merges the economics of neoliberal capitalism with the politics of populist authoritarianism (Kenney-Lazar 2019; McCarthy 2019), often supported by disenfranchised rural populations (Scoones et al. 2018; Mamonova 2019).

## Genealogies of the Romanian Carpathian Forests: The Last One Hundred Years in Brief

Thirty years ago, timber economies boomed in the Carpathians. The geographies of postsocialist logging grew uneven. In some areas, small-scale timbermen thrived (e.g., in the Apuseni Mountains; see Vasile 2015a), whereas in others new businessmen took hold of the available labor force and developed medium-sized timber firms, as was the case in Vrancea. Increased forest disturbance occurred especially after the year 2000 (Griffiths et al. 2014; Munteanu et al. 2014; Munteanu et al. 2016), with the conjuncture of forest restitution, the growth of local entrepreneurs, and the arrival of transnational processing companies. The boom wound down beginning in 2015. The unfolding of Romania ' s recent forest history bears similarities with other areas in Eastern Europe where problems include forest rushes riddled with struggles for access and rents, intensified corruption, forest degradation (Staddon 2001; J. Stahl 2010; Petrova 2014), and increased disturbances (Kuemmerle et al. 2007).

The postsocialist timber boom was not the first in the history of these territories, however. Around 1850, large-scale commercial forestry emerged for the first time in the Carpathians, driven not by domestic elites but by foreign capitalist entrepreneurs seeking to expand the European forest frontier into new territory. In Vrancea, the forest rush arrived during the late nineteenth century with catastrophic consequences. In a few decades, the Vrancea Mountains became the most degraded landscape of Romania, ' Saharan desertlike ' (Belinsky 1922, 68). Approximately six foreign enterprises extracted timber there through concessions from rightsholding local communities. Because the terrain was unsuitable for timber flotation, the companies built narrow-gauge steam railways and cable hoists. They carried timber westward across the mountains into Transylvania and eastward to sawmills and to the harbor of Galat ¸i (Turnock 1990; Iliescu 2012). Local elites became rich from intermediating the forest concessions and the sale of commoners ' rights. Those commoners, driven by poverty, sometimes sold their forest rights for a pack of cigarettes, signing contracts that they were unable to read (as described by H. H. Stahl 1939, 1998). The timber barons of the time were the capitalist business owners, some of them holding actual baron titles (e.g., Baron Groedel, one of the wealthiest members of the prewar Jewish aristocracy in the late Austro-Hungarian Empire). Local elites were mere middlemen, called ' axe handles, ' 4 suggesting that elites betrayed their fellow villagers and wrought their extortion, just like wooden handles wronged the forests they were made of. In 1925, peasants from Tulnici complained to the county prefect about the company called Union; they lamented destructive cutting, exceeding the terms of the contract, appalling deals between the company and local notables, the swindling of payments by the latter, and threats of lawsuits (Iliescu 2002). Locals did not work for the companies. Workers from Transylvania were brought in and camped in forestry enclaves. Most people from Tulnici lived as shepherds, petty timber cutters, and merchants, bartering timber for food in the regional markets (H. H. Stahl 1998). After 1925, the

companies were forced to downsize by unfavorable circumstances: the war, the Great Depression, restrictive forestry policies, resistance from commoners, and propeasant politicians. The massive extractions and the abuse of peasants ' rights are remembered today with bitterness, however, and some people narrate a familiar tale: the return of the predatory axe handles.

During socialism, a massive ecological restoration took place in Vrancea to stabilize the grounds (Bogdan 2012). Foresters also planted productive forests and, where appropriate, allowed further cuttings. Forests were nationalized, sometimes against resistance from locals (Dobrincu 2010). In the country, cutting continued apace to pay off war reparations to the Soviet Union in wood, which resulted in a decline in woodland areas during the 1960s (Turnock and Lawrence 2007; Nita et al. 2018) and a decrease in old forests (Knorn et al. 2013; Munteanu et al. 2016). Socialism in the Vrancea Mountains brought back the forest that was later to be cut down again by the postsocialist timber elites.

Today the Vrancea Mountains look forested, hosting bears, wolves, boar, and other beasts, whose tracks could be seen stamped everywhere in the dirt. They are not very high mountains, going up only to 1,700 m in altitude, but have steep and rugged slopes. The lower areas are beech forests, mixed with hornbeam and alder and at higher altitudes with resinous spruce and silver fir. In the accessible areas, stumps can be seen everywhere, along with tractor tracks, piles of logs, and patches of clear-felling. Loggers have a hard time because Vrancea is unruly. Its young, erratic, unstable landform is an epicenter for earthquakes, and its active tectonic plates cause landslides (Muica 1993). The Vrancea Mountains are divided into three river basins, coinciding with three associations of communities with commons, obs , ti , which in turn overlap with three forestry districts, similar but with subtly distinct socioenvironmental assemblages. Timber businesses currently concentrate in two areas, Tulnici and Nereju. The Tulnici entrepreneurs, of which Agurid  a held the largest business, controlled about 25,000 hectares of forest.

## The Life and Death of a Timber Baron Becoming the Father

When socialism fell, Agurid  a was thirty-three years old and the president of the local agricultural production cooperative. The cooperative owned hundreds of sheep that needed to be fed, but the grazing land in the cooperative was restituted to former owners, and nobody worked anymore to take care of the sheep. They became a problem. A committee, led by Agurid  a, was in charge of liquidating the assets of the cooperative, including the sheep. The cooperative became a joint-stock company in 1991 with several shareholders. Agurid  a sold the sheep at local fairs, and the accounting for the proceeds remained unclear; locals say that a part of the money was divided among the shareholders, but most of it went to Agurid  a, who bought out the others and developed a forestry company. The sheep turned into capital. Agurid  a transformed the unwanted ruins of a defunct regime into a developing business. He capitalized on patriarchal behavior learned during socialism and became a godfatherly political capitalist, an entrepratchick , a term highlighting the fusion between new businessmen and socialist cadres (Verdery 1996) or a green baron (Swain 2013). His capital encountered an available labor force: considerable numbers of qualified men laid off by the collapsing state forest industry. His story was common across the whole former socialist bloc (see Lampland 2003; Swain 2013). The power turnover between the socialist and the postsocialist regimes was in fact ' a continuity of former cadres who seemed to break more or less free of Marxist ideological shackles ' (Sampson 2002, 298).

In 2000, Agurid  a won the mayor ' s office as an independent candidate and was then recruited by the Social-Democratic Party. At the time, the party was consolidating its power in the area through a promising young leader who had already became president of the county council five years before (in 1995), later to be called the Little Dictator and the head of the Vrancea mafia. In the 1990s, he made a fortune from land deals through a private company in which he was a shareholder, together with other prominent members of the Social-Democratic Party. He ascended to high administrative positions, including vice president and president of the county council and remained there for more than twenty years. He was known for commanding appalling submission from his vassals: factory directors, commune mayors, state institutions charged with forestry, and the judiciary. He controlled 70 percent of the mayors in the county of Vrancea (the social-democrats), who were said to be unable to move a finger without his approval. He was also known to antagonize

journalists and, in time, also allies with his violent and noxious behavior.

Land and forest restitution were a treasure trove for Agurid  a (and other barons) to consolidate power and a patronage base (Verdery 2002). Starting in 1991, and then more substantially in 2000, property reforms returned land and forests to former owners, and the process of rights formalization was in the hands of local commissions led by mayors. Through the very acts of registration and authorizing land claims, the mayors gained tremendous authority (Sikor and Lund 2009). Agurid  a enhanced his networks by granting title deeds for holiday houses in Leps , a village (under Tulnici jurisdiction), a former forestry camp now famous as a tourist destination.

Mayor Agurid  a also contributed to the restitution of the Tulnici mountain commons, the country ' s largest commons, in which as a forestry businessman he had a vested interest. Most of the forests in the Vrancea Mountains (68,000 hectares) were restituted since 2000 in ownership to thirty communities to be governed as commons ( obs , ti ). 5 On average, a commons in Vrancea included 2,500 hectares of forest and 250 hectares of pasture for 970 commoners, according to my 2016 survey. By comparison, the Tulnici commons were much larger. Here, a community of 2,800 commoners owned approximately 14,000 hectares of mountain. In this property regime, the villages held the collective property title and governed through an elected council and the communal assembly. Overall, Vrancea is the area in the Carpathians where commons most prominently have a communitarian and equalitarian orientation; the rights to commons are granted on residence in the village. The commoners are aware of their rights and manifest emotional attachment to the forests (Vasile 2007, 2015b; Mateescu 2009). It is also the area, however, where the political fight for control over commons is most intense. In Vrancea, the bureaucratic process of validating restitution documents was less cumbersome than in other places. In Tulnici, however, a large portion of the commons (nearly 6,000 hectares) was only won after six years of litigation with neighboring Transylvanian communities. Agurid  a led the lawsuit on behalf of Tulnici ' s community and won praise and local legitimacy for this achievement. Everybody thought he should have been the president of the commons, but he could not hold the positions of mayor and obs , te president simultaneously. Nevertheless, it was said that he pulled all the strings.

Forests of the Tulnici commons were commercially logged and the proceeds from logging concessions were distributed to local rightsholders and invested in community improvements. In practice, such distributions were subject to heated disputes. The allowed annual cutting quota for the obs , te Tulnici was 40,000 cubic meters. This seemed sizable, yet it fell short of the local capacity for production. Only Agurid  a ' s company could have handled that quantity of resinous wood, because he had a capacity of production of 30,000 cubic meters, 6 the equivalent of 1,500 truckloads or four trucks full of logs processed every day of the year. At least another twenty smaller timber companies existed in Tulnici alone, however. The local companies ' capacity for logging and processing surpassed the supply of forests, creating ripe conditions for competition and abuses. A hunger for wood lurked in Vrancea at the time of my fieldwork, which intensified over time. In theory, the obs , te council set minimum prices for stumpage and organized auctions for the timber concessions. Cutting was supervised by the local forestry district, ocol silvic , 7 a territorial structure of forestry professionals that managed and guarded delimited areas of forest. These structures were once branches of the national state forest service, an outdated apparatus considered as powerful as a ' second army ' in mountain areas (Dorondel 2016). The local forestry district was privatized in 2004 and became a company of forestry professionals, working in accordance with state laws. Their practice was based on management plans that, in theory, ensured a sustained yield of timber and a healthy regrowth of the forest; in practice, these plans were selectively followed. Local voices and the media reported that the Tulnici forestry district followed more the orders of the logging companies and less the norms of good forestry. They suggested that Agurid  a ' s company first took the lion ' s share of the Tulnici commons concessions, the best stands at low prices already arranged before the bidding, lowering the community revenues. After negotiations, the other Tulnici companies got smaller shares. As locals suggested and legal investigations were to prove later, illegal logging was rampant. Entangled in a mafia-like structure, the brokerage of Agurid  a linked the forestry district and the obs , te to the political upperworld.

## A Good Baron?

Acting as a father figure, Agurid  a provided a sense of stability in the area. He reassured the villagers with paternalist leanings, who praised his generosity and admired him as a strong leader.

I first met Agurid  a on a crisp sunny morning in December 2004, four years after he had been elected mayor. He had organized a meeting of the obs , te of H  aulis , ca village and tried to convince the commoners to lease him a piece of land for developing a ski business. The meeting was in a small room of the village school, packed with men dressed in dark, moth-eaten jackets and their best Sunday shirts, seated like students behind old wooden desks. Agurid  a and a few other local officials presided from the front. The room was cold. Villagers wore old Soviet army -style black fur hats with flaps tied on top of their heads. Agurid  a wore a similar hat, but his was of a high-ranking diplomat style made of speckled gray lamb fur, a model preferred by former socialist President Ceaus , escu. When he started to speak, some of the villagers hailed him in awe: ' Mister Agurida, tell us, you are our father. We listen to you. ' He spoke steadily with restrain, unfolding his vision for tourism-based rural development. Then it was the commoners ' turn to speak. A man stood up from behind his school desk and took off his fur hat, clasping it humbly with both hands in front of his body, exposing his sweaty, bald head. ' We will not benefit much from this deal, ' he said, stuttering. ' We cede the rights to our land for peanuts. Then the rich entrepreneurs from Tulnici will profit from it, erecting villas, restaurants, and squeezing out fortunes from tourists, ' he continued with more grit. He then invoked notorious historical examples from the area when other communities lost their commons from apparently harmless deals -' The fools! '-hinting at parallels between Agurid  a and former ' axe handle ' elites: ' We don ' t want history repeating. ' The others applauded. A few folks sprang from the desks in an uproar of protest toward the presidium. A vote was summoned, but nobody voted either for or against the deal. They all sat motionless, unsure how to proceed. That day, Agurid  a left the village of H  aulis , ca empty-handed. I understood then that Agurid  a was respected and treated as a ruler of the area, sometimes with obvious but, for me, somewhat disturbing public deference. This did not mean that people were silent and unwitting subjects. They appreciated a strong fatherly leader but thought for themselves, wary of the shifting boundaries between autonomy and dependence.

Most working people in Tulnici could not afford to openly resist Agurid  a, however; they depended on the jobs he offered as well as on his patronage of the whole local industry. Like in other parts of Vrancea, resistance was limited by fear of retaliation (Vasile 2019). There were no statistics counting how many people worked for the local timber companies in Tulnici, and even the number of companies and sawmills was uncertain, because some were unregistered. It was certain, though, that the area was buzzing with forestry activity. I estimated that at least 50 percent of the active male population (about 400 people) worked in forest-related jobs, either in the forest or at the sawmills in the role of drivers, lumberjacks, haulers, tractor drivers, millers, overseers, or forestry engineers. Part of this work was done without contracts by a vulnerable population, but the illicitness of practice meant more labor relief. An old forester summed up the social side of informality for me: ' If everything were legal, there would be less wood around, and if all work was on contracts, businesses could not afford so many laborers ' (interview 2007). In maintaining these practices, Agurid  a had a crucial role. He brokered important relationships between the community and the external worlds of markets, institutions, and national politics. He maintained an appearance of peace among the competing thuggish businessmen of Tulnici.

Most locals, even if uninvolved in forestry, approved of local forestry practices and held an economic-productivist view of forests: a resource to be harvested and reproduced through human labor. In 2007, O, a schoolteacher, remembered that when he was a child the foothills and the mountains were bare, eroded by previous extractions. Trees came back on these slopes, however. O, now in his sixties, had worked together with his parents in massive reforestation campaigns in the 1960s and the 1970s. He also harvested trees with oxen and debarked beech for pulp production. These labor experiences allowed him to claim that he now ' knows the secrets of the forest. ' He believed, as confident forestry specialists from Tulnici told him, that natural regeneration of forests is strong now in Vrancea and that forests should be cut, because if too old, trees get diseased. He admired Agurid  a for sponsoring the school, helping people, and distributing leftovers from the mills to people in need of firewood.

Regarding the illegal logging accusations, he believed that they were ill meant and that mistakes were normal: ' When you work a lot, you make some mistakes. '

Yet many Tulnici villagers criticized the baron, his camarilla, and the forestry practices, some expressing fury. At the peak of Agurid  a ' s rule in 2007, 65 percent of my interviewees told me that they did not trust the municipality and the mayor. Their grievances touched on social justice issues. T., a former forester now living on a state pension, described a disturbingly increasing social differentiation: ' The problem is that he [Agurid  a] is a billionaire and the rest of us barely make ends meet from hand to mouth. He has three large sawmills here and everything that leaves the forest arrives in his yard ' (interview 2007) Yet, T. thought that Agurid  a was a better man in comparison with other mafiosi from the region, because he was respectful and benevolent, and certainly not a thug. T. approved of Agurid  a ' s charities but contended that they might not signify genuine altruism but rather business as usual: ' His charity didn ' t come straight out of his piggy bank. Giving out leftovers from the mill means disposing of waste, and for sponsoring the school he might get a tax break. ' T. ' s critique was also directed toward environmental carelessness and its imminent social consequences. He had noticed climate changes: ' Nature does not give rain anymore and as of late winds were blowing to kill. Forests do not regenerate anymore. They should be replanted, helped out. ' He explained further that foresters did not care for reforestations as they used to during socialism. Now they cared only for ' chop-chop-chop. ' T. was unhappy that the obs , te sells timber to local businessmen at low prices instead of at higher prices that would increase community revenues. The community not only lost money in the short run but lost perspective for the future through the plunder. Because he foresaw an impending timber famine, T. was concerned that his own sons would not be able to make a living in the village and would be forced to emigrate, suggesting the scenario of slow violence: the erosion of life-sustaining conditions fueling conflicts and depopulation (Nixon 2013).

## The Crash

For the commoners, Agurid  a might have embodied the unflinching patriarch, but respected though he might have been in the eyes of his peers - businessmen and politicians -for them he was a fading patriarch.

A medical report on Agurid  a ' s death revealed that he was drunk on the night of the crash. The report was released in the midst of new elections in Tulnici, and it disparaged the image of Agurid  a the timber baron. The media speculated that the socialdemocrats triggered the release of the report as ' electoral ammunition, ' a postmortem exclusion of the baron from the party, as the Little Dictator realized that Agurid  a and his camarilla were actually unfaithful. Why discredit the dead man, though?

First, what happened before the car crash? The story starts with a political conflict. Agurid  a, together with the Little Dictator and a few other prominent mayors from Vrancea, were for many years in opposition to the governing party. This rivalry translated into high costs for Agurid  a: threats to his businesses and scarcity of governmental funds channeled toward his community. The liberal democrats attempted to break the fief of the social democrats in Tulnici; the power of the Little Dictator to fend off such attempts was limited. Agurid  a ' s political loyalty faltered. ' He was not such a political shark, ' one of his friends told me in 2016. ' He was not up in arms about the Little Dictator, and when he went to the county council he was not received with flowers, but left waiting and begging for state funds to be channeled toward Tulnici. ' Agurid  a ' s business was sanctioned a few times, and the security of his illicit operations was shaky. The night of the crash, a few forest inspectors who were sent by the Ministry of Environment to check the forestry activity in Tulnici were invited to a party organized by the local timber entrepreneurs and the young president of the commons, Agurid  a ' s prot  eg  e, Alin. The party was long; the drinking was heavy. People said that, despite being a diabetic, Agurid  a liked to drink. The Little Dictator suggested otherwise, however. He insinuated in a declaration for the press that Alin and his other allies, the timber entrepreneurs (whom he called ' interlopers ' ), were to blame. Instead of preventing their boss and friend from drinking and driving, he suggested, they encouraged him. He hinted at backstabbing: ' What kind of friends are these? '

Second, what was at stake politically? Why did the Little Dictator want to throw dirt on Agurid  a ' s friends and prot  eg  es by releasing the report (which could have been kept secret, available only for the members of the

family) and insinuating the backstabbing, only weeks after the display of such sumptuous solidarity at the funeral? Because Alin, a young charismatic president of the commons, was about to run for mayor. Despite him being a member of the Social-Democratic Party, he had a change of heart, deserted the party, and was now running for the opposition, for the liberal democrats. Agurid  a ' s son openly endorsed this move, which suggested that Agurid  a himself was about to betray the party, because he was fed up with the patronage of the Little Dictator and with the political sanctions of the governing party. Old and ill, Agurid  a intended to renounce the mayor seat, but he wanted Alin to follow in his footsteps. Alin had charisma and the support of a powerful dead ' father ' and of the community. The Little Dictator was therefore about to lose an electoral base. Alin was a stylish man and former high school literature teacher. He resembled the late Agurid  a; he had the same solid stature and same patriarchal composure. Alin lost the mayoral election against Valentin, another timber businessman from Tulnici who ran initially as an independent; after winning, he shook hands with the Little Dictator (a tactic copied from Agurid  a). Yet, Alin still had the obs , te presidency. Serious political battles followed this episode.

## And Everything Fell Apart

## The Life and Death of a Timber Truck

In 2019, the eyes of Romanian people lit up in anger at the sight of trucks loaded with saw logs. Today, the trucks stand as a symbol of illegal logging, corrupted forestry, and domestic capitalist greed as well as ecological destruction. Agurid  a ' s death coincided with the rise of the environmentalist discourse in Romania and with the beginning of the end of the timber boom. The story of one particular truck from Tulnici reveals much about the murky and dangerous zone of local timber industries in the Carpathians connected to world economies and national politics, hinting at fraud and rural warlordism.

Trucks replaced forestry trains and timber rafts as favorite means of transportation during socialism, especially after 1970 when heavy-duty Kamaz trucks were imported from Russia and Romania started to produce trucks in a new factory in Roman. After the end of socialism, these battered old trucks changed hands from state forestry enterprises to private businessmen, and they became market devices that enabled the emergence of local timber capitalisms. The Tulnici truck in question was one such device. It was bought secondhand by the obs , te to meet the requirements of a profitable deal. At the time of my fieldwork in 2007, there was a buzz in Tulnici about the interest of the most powerful timber corporation in Romania, Holzindustrie Schweighofer, to buy thin roundwood (20 cm diameter). The wood was to be processed and exported to Japan. The harvesting of young trees was controversial from a sustainable yield point of view, and so was the entire activity of Schweighofer a few years later. The company started business in Romania in 2003 with a promising trajectory, but it suffered severe blows by 2015. An investigation by the Environmental Investigation Agency exposed illegal timber supply sourced from local logging companies, leading to severe charges for the corporation. Back in 2007, when it was thriving, Schweighofer auctioned 10,000 cubic meters per year at Tulnici, and according to the contract, transportation to the sawmill was done by the obs , te . Until then, the obs , te used to contract transports with the company of one of the most notorious mobsters of Tulnici, Valeric, who had allegedly cheated the obs , te several times by retaining some of their transported timber. This embezzlement was tolerated on several occasions because as part of the Tulnici camarilla Valeric was a feared businessman. This was not Valeric ' s only crime. In 2016 he was sentenced to years in jail for setting up an organized crime gang with multiple phantom firms. In the wake of the big Schweighofer deal in 2007, though, the obs , te decided to end this unprofitable business and buy its own secondhand truck worth e 50,000.

It was on this same truck that Agurid  a laid dead among funerary flowers. Soon after the funeral, the truck died, too. In 2012, it burned in an alleged arson that happened just before the new elections for the mayor ' s office. A few scenarios were put forward as to who was the instigator of this ' terrorist attack. ' The first scenario pointed to ' political pyromaniacs. ' Stirring up trouble and throwing mud on candidates made Alin ' s countercandidate, who owned the parking lot where the arson happened, look like a bad administrator, guilty of damaging community property. Yet an alleged economic stake was also on the table: Valeric wanted to get his business clients back. The arson damaged all of the existing large trucks in the community except for his.

## Warlords and the End of the Boom

After the smokescreens of peace kept up during the collapse of Agurid  a in March 2011, the Tulnici timber industry surged as a domestic organized crime network, a timber mafia. As the 2010s advanced, changes were afoot for timber barons across the country. Institutional-bureaucratic forest regulations shifted every few years, bringing a daunting overregulation (Scriban et al. 2017; Dr  agoi and Toza 2019; Popa, Nit ¸  a, and H  al  alis , an 2019). Reassessments of laws and control institutions brought on unprecedented criminalization of forest wrongdoers. Rampant accusations of corruption and illegal logging tarnished the previously well-respected profession of forestry (Lawrence and Szabo 2005; Vasile 2009, 2019; Nichiforel and Schanz 2011; Bouriaud and Marzano 2016; Dorondel 2016; Palaghianu and Nichiforel 2016). The courts flooded with long-lasting lawsuits made the forests into objects of (il)legality. In 2011, the popular TV show The Grand Deforestation irreversibly stirred the waters in Romania by broadcasting weekly investigations of illegal logging. The hegemonic public discourse pointed to stumpscapes, sawdust, and red-spotted remote-sensing maps to show evidence of a forest emergency. The momentum against illegal logging peaked in 2015 with a release of a National Forest Inventory (n.d.) report, which mentioned that 8 million cubic meters of wood ' disappear annually from the forest. '

Local timber businessmen felt the pressure from increasing limitations triggered by competition, regulations, more demanding political patrons, shrinking markets (following the world financial crisis), and an impending timber shortage. Factionalism bubbled up in Tulnici. Unprecedented trials exposed illicit timber deals. Court records piled up evidence for corruption, abuse of power, fake timber marking methods, forged documents, illegal logging, and tax evasion. A war had started between the faction of Alin, who ruled the obs , te institution that was controlled by the Liberal Democratic Party, and the faction of the forestry district that was controlled by the Social-Democratic Party patronized by the Little Dictator. Both factions survived from cutting the same forest.

One of the first Grand Deforestation episodes focused on Tulnici. The director of the national park in the area -which overlapped with 30 percent of the forests of obs , te Tulnici -spoke out about illegal logging, the ecological effects of carved forestry roads, and damage to riverbeds caused by hauling logs. Uprooted trees and stumps covered in thick branches stood as proof. Costel, the director of the forestry district who was targeted by the accusations, responded that he only approved salvage cutting; most of it was damage caused by wildlife. Indeed, he blamed bears for scratching and debarking trees or stags for rubbing their horns against tree bark. Although the Vrancea Mountains were known to host large numbers of bears and stags, it seemed improbable that they caused damage to 30,000 cubic meters of wood. Yet such ridiculous statements were typical for Costel. He was the opposite character of Agurid  a and Alin. When I met him in 2007, he occupied both the position of obs , te president and head of the forestry district. With a frowny face and a cheeky smile, he had a daring personality and was a passionate poker player. He oozed up-front insolence that infuriated many people in Tulnici. This was in stark contrast to the patriarchal and composed politeness of Alin and the late baron Agurid  a. Apparently, though, during his two obs , te and ocol mandates between 2006 and 2010, he increased the revenues for the community obs , te. He doubled the quotas of wood received by the commoners by allowing other timber companies besides Agurid  a ' s to auction and win concessions and raised the concession prices (Nichiforel et al. 2015). Nonetheless, in 2012, after months of fighting, stalled forestry activity, and bureaucratic drudgery, the obs , te terminated the former district ruled by Costel and formed another forestry district. Costel was left without a job and with dozens of trials.

The war was fought on all fronts. The commons grazing areas were involved, too, not only the forests. Grazing areas had caused discord in Tulnici for centuries, when the shepherds from the neighboring region of Transylvania and Vrancea fought over the use of the alpine borderlands. In postsocialism, the grazing areas once again became a cause of distress and the subject of allegations of public money fraud. In 2011, the state launched an investigation into the spending of European Union subsidies for 3,000 hectares of pasture belonging to obs , te Tulnici, then administered by the forestry district coordinated by Costel. This subsidy scheme was meant to maintain traditional pastoral practice all over Europe by encouraging local communities to stock the pasture and clean it from brush by manual means and to

build shelters, water troughs, and access ways for the animals. Empirical evidence, however, pointed to the fact that in several areas across the Carpathians the pastoralists themselves received little if any money and the pasture improvements were done superficially with fictitious service contracts and spending on dubious equipment. Meanwhile, allegedly large sums of subsidy money were laundered. In Tulnici, the state brought a lawsuit against the obs , te council and the forestry district, and both Alin and Costel (together with seventeen other people) were charged for unlawful spending of public funds, corruption, and forgeries, with a prejudice reaching nearly e 600,000. The lawsuit has gone back and forth for eight years with fifty hearings. When least expected, a final court sentence acquitted all of the prosecuted men except for Costel, who was found guilty and sentenced to three years of prison on probation.

In the hazy morass of the political crossfire between the commons and the forestry district, many crimes were probably concealed, but many crimes were also proven. The fiscal authority found forged documents covering 30,000 cubic meters of timber extracted from the Tulnici commons. Two years after this, they found another accounting irregularity -a ' hole ' in the obs , te budget of e 60,000 -and blocked their accounts. One more year passed and the obs , te was found to have far exceeded the decennial allowed quota of the logging management plan, and their entire forestry activity was suspended for one year, with fines amounting to nearly e 13,000. The largest obs , te in the country was approaching bankruptcy. As grounds of contested evidence (Mateescu 2017), forests were shaped by evidence-making and evidence-erasing mechanisms: cianure-covered stumpscapes, as harvesters poured acid on stumps to make them look old, and holes in the forest litter where stumps were uprooted. As the 2010s advanced, illegal logging was increasingly vilified, which in turn increased the necessity for paperwork. Piles of records, plans, maps, permits, bills, requests, and licenses made the graphic incarnations of such forests. In the realm of a crony bureaucratic state, the paper forests were for the most part unfulfilled targets or mere forgeries, as some of the Tulnici lawsuits have revealed.

Public reports on Romanian forestry supported the allegations that illegal logging was rampant (among which official reports by the Romanian Court of

Accounts, and numerous reports by environmental nongovernmental organizations), advancing figures on the order of millions of cubic meters of timber ' disappeared from the forest. ' A few voices attempted to put these figures into a larger forestry perspective that dampened the alarmist edge and suggested that the harvested rates were sustainable and that the word deforestation is wrongly used. 8 They accused environmental nongovernmental organizations of unfounded scaremongering and suggested that Romanian forest policy, which defines legality, is restrictive and outdated, allowing for harvesting quotas that are too small, especially in comparison to other European forestry policies. In fact, they thought the forests could ' give more ' (e.g., Schulze et al. 2014). According to this narrative, despite the logging, the forested surface of the country is increasing, with forests encroaching on former grazing areas abandoned by a shrinking rural populace (e.g., National Forest Inventory n.d.). Also, voices representing the forestry industry signaled that the vilifying discourse indiscriminately lashed out at legitimate foresters and businesses, strangling and tarnishing the entire field of forestry. Not dismissing the intensity of illegal logging, these alternative interpretations shifted the discussion to the larger scale. There seemed to be no authoritative knowledge on what was happening to the forest. Rather, multiple knowledges, or narratives, were coproduced and disputed by different experts, activists, and practitioners, pertaining to different regimes of truth and morality (Blavascunas 2013; Forsyth 2019).

By 2016, an overdose of regulation led to stalling harvesting operations everywhere in the country, which in turn led to a firewood crisis and a price increase. This made Romanian timber uncompetitive on the international market, contributing to the decline of the forestry industry, with social consequences. It reduced labor opportunities in mountain areas and increased violence. As the timber industry slowly went under all over the Carpathians, in Tulnici, too, the timber businesses downsized significantly. By the end of 2016, Agurid  a ' s son closed down the company.

## Conclusion

In this article I shined a light on the reckless politics of the shadow state and offered a glimpse into

the dark heart of Romania ' s political forests. This revealed a fight for control over forests and voters, fought within clusters of local elites -mayors, foresters, entrepreneurs -who were to varying degrees corrupt, composed, cheeky, vulnerable, violent, and charitable. Profiting from a dispersion of power catalyzed by the new frontier boom, these unruly coalitions consolidated authority over discrete forested territories that in popular parlance bear the name of fiefs through control over local industries, labor, resources, and governmental funds. At different scales, and in subtly different forms, forest fiefs took hold in almost all areas of the Romanian Carpathians with rich high forests. Alongside, illegal logging grew, promising profits and short-lived labor relief. In some areas, like Vrancea, midsized lumber companies emerged from the postsocialist frontier boom and facilitated the growth of social differentiation. Initially lured by windfall profits created by a free market, the new timber entrepreneurs experienced a gradual return of structures (institutions, laws, norms). Once unleashed, the new structures grew into strangling overregulation. The power of these structures, however, did not lie in their ability to constrain and immediately halt illegal logging but in their ability to threaten -more akin to racketeering than governing. Particularly potent was the threat of prosecution. Institutions and laws became weapons in the hands of the unruly coalitions who controlled them. The barons, the mayors, and the foresters all paid tribute to the autocratic political party leaders to gain their favor and protection, reinforcing the shadow state.

Threats, detention, arson, and suicides became part of everyday realities of Vrancea ' s political forests. Amidst growing conflict, the presence of baron Agurid  a gave many people comfort. For a large number of people in Tulnici, he impersonated a generous, careful leader and a conciliator. The locals who were left in a precarious position by the collapse of the socialist centralized economy supported him and his coalition, seeking labor relief and social security through paternalist relations. In the long run, though, the political conjuncture that he helped advance was an attack on the commons, shaping mafiogenic ecologies of disaster (Armiero et al. 2019). This festering forest politics enabled a form of slow violence, impoverishing communities and diminishing their survival base (Nixon 2013). It also enabled a fast, immediate violence, pervasive in the language and actions of the unruly coalitions, which escalated as legal threats drew nearer. By bridging state and private, market and administration, local and national, Agurid  a and his peers created a nexus of practice in which the rule of law had little significance.

Compared to industry captains of the U.S. frontier, Agurid  a hardly qualifies as a timber baron. The term was widely used, however, throughout Romania to signify the political power such characters had. A comparison was made to feudal barons of previous ages, recognized by kings, ruling fiefs, controlling discrete territories in which they were sovereign, exploiting serf labor, and outside the reach of the state. Agurid  a had the recognition and admiration of many of his subjects. As a player among the top unruly coalitions, however, he was vulnerable, entangled in merciless power struggles, which exposed him to competitive mobsters, sly allies, and dictatorial party bosses. After ten years of being a mayor, Agurid  a ' s strength faltered and his business became shaky, as protective political connections rotted away. Unruly coalitions were unstable. He was disappointed with the party leaders he had served for so many years and was about to betray them but passed away before making that move. Ironically, the leaders he was about to betray mounted a conspicuous ritual for his funeral, using his death to legitimize themselves in front of the community in an attempt to maintain control of the fief. Soon after the funeral, as Agurid  a ' s intended betrayal became evident through the incarnation of his follower Alin, the party politicians revealed the disgraceful cause of his death -driving drunk -to besmirch his memory, for the same political cause: keeping the forest fief.

The forest fief was shattered by the battle that followed Agurid  a ' s death, though. The largest forest commons in the country approached bankruptcy. The local industry, the labor opportunities, the forest, and the social fabric of the community fell to pieces. A few members of the unruly coalitions went to jail, some do community work on probation, and others escaped altogether. The younger commoners who were able emigrated to find work elsewhere. The locals who remain are picking up the pieces as they can, driven by the faith that things can be different, gradually replacing slow violence with slow hope (Mauch 2019).

## Acknowledgments

In the first part of the research (2004 -2008), I was at the University of Bucharest during my PhD years in the Department of Sociology. Thanks are due to fieldwork companions Horia Terpe, David Diaconu, George Iord  achescu, Monica Popa, and Liviu M  antescu, who participated in some of the field visits and helped with interviewing. I am grateful to Anita Carrasco, George Iord  achescu, S , tefan Voicu, Marco Armiero, Judith Carney, Meredith McKittrick, Florin Prun  a, Samantha Walton, Rory Hill, and Marin Coudreau for reading the first draft and offering suggestions. I thank Anna Pilz, Kelly Donati, and Arryn Snowball for careful editing of the final draft and their warm support.

## Funding

For the final part of the fieldwork in 2016, I acknowledge the funding from the Romanian National Authority for Scientific Research and Innovation (PN-II-RU-TE-2014-4-2865), hosted by the Romanian Academy. During the writing process, I benefited from a fellowship from the Rachel Carson Center for Environment and Society, Munich.

## ORCID

Monica Vasile http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9528-9027

## Notes

1. This is according to results of the National Forest Inventory (n.d.), consulted November 25, 2018 (see http://roifn.ro/site/rezultate-ifn-2/).
2. This is according to a governmental report (Ministerul Apelor si P  adurilor 2017).
3. The media outlets analysis included Monitorul de Vrancea, Ziarul de Vrancea, Vrancea24, Vrancea Media, Ziarul de Ias , i, Rom ^ ania Liber  a, and Adev  arul (Boicu 2011).
4. The idiom axe handles was used at the beginning of the twentieth century (Giurescu 1980). It came from a poem by Grigore Alexandrescu (1810 -1885), ' The Axe and the Forest ' ( ' Toporul si P  adurea ' ).
5. More information on commons restitution and formalization can be found in Vasile (2018).
6. [This is according to a local media source (see https:// vranceamedia.ro/exclusiv-fiul-fostului-primar-din-tulniciproduce-30-000-de-metri-cubi-de-busteni-pe-an/).](https://vranceamedia.ro/exclusiv-fiul-fostului-primar-din-tulnici-produce-30-000-de-metri-cubi-de-busteni-pe-an/)
7. The term ocol silvic in Romanian means a forest service institution. Ocol silvic is associated with a territorial delimitation of an area for the purpose of
8. forest management. The term ocol is literally an archaism used for naming a fenced enclosure, a paddock for domestic animals.
8. For example, among such voices were forestry scientists Palaghianu and Nichiforel (2016) and a former forestry official, Sorin Sf ^ ı rlogea (2019), on his blog.

## References

- Armiero, M., F. Gravagno, G. Pappalardo, and A. D. Ferrara. 2019. The nature of mafia: An environmental history of the Simeto River Basin, Sicily. Environment and History. Advance online publication. 10.3197/096734019X15463432086793.
- Belinsky, G. D. 1922. P  adurile Mos , nenes , ti Din Vrancea [Community forests of Vrancea]. Revista P  adurilor 34 (2):68 -81.
- Blavascunas, E. 2013. Signals in the forest: Cultural boundaries of science in Bia ł owie \_ za, Poland. In New natures: Joining environmental history with science and technology studies , ed. D. Jørgensen, F. A. Jørgensen, and S. B. Pritchard, 118 -34. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
- Bogdan, N. 2012. Vrancea Arhaica. Istoric. Cauzele Distrugerii Ecosistemului Forestier. Lucrari Intreprinse Pentru Redresarea Lui [Archaic Vrancea. Evolution. The causes for the destruction of the forest ecosystem. Works undertaken for its restoration]. Bucuresti, Romania: Progresul Silvic.
- Boicu, A. M. 2011. Exclusiv: Fiul fostului primar din Tulnici ' produce ' 30.000 de metri cubi de bus ¸teni pe an [Exclusive: The son of the ex mayor of Tulnici ' produces ' 30,000 cubic meters of logs per year]. Vrancea Media (21.05.2011). Accessed September 17, 2019. https://vranceamedia.ro/exclusiv-fiul-fostului-primar-din-tulnici-produce-30-000-de-metri-cubide-busteni-pe-an/
- Bouriaud, L., and M. Marzano. 2016. Conservation, extraction and corruption: Is sustainable forest management possible in Romania? In Natural resource extraction and indigenous livelihoods: Development challenges in an era of globalization , ed. E. Gilberthorpe and G. Hilson, 221 -39. London and New York: Routledge.
- Dauvergne, P. 1997. Shadows in the forest: Japan and the politics of timber in Southeast Asia. Politics, science, and the environment . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Dobrincu, D. 2010. Rezistent ¸a Armat  a Anticomunist  a Din Vrancea. Organizat ¸ia ' Vlad T ¸epes ¸ II ' (1949 -1950) [The anticommunist armed resistance in Vrancea: The ' Vlad Tepes II Organization ' (1949 -1950)]. Colloquium Politicum 1 (1):103 -45.
- Dorondel, S. 2016. Disrupted landscapes: State, peasants and the politics of land in postsocialist Romania . The environment in history . New York: Berghahn.
- Dr  agoi, M., and V. Toza. 2019. Did forestland restitution facilitate institutional amnesia? Some evidence from Romanian forest policy. Land 8 (6):99. doi: 10.3390/ land8060099.
- Eisenstadt, S. N. 1973. Traditional patrimonialism and modern neopatrimonialism. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

- Forsyth, T. 2019. Who shapes the politics of expertise? Co-production and authoritative knowledge in Thailand ' s political forests. Antipode . Advance online publication. doi: 10.1111/anti.12545.
- Gillet, K., and M. Santora. 2019. Romania ' s most powerful man sent to prison for corruption. The New York Times , May 27. Accessed February 20, 2020. https:// www.nytimes.com/2019/05/27/world/europe/liviu-dragnea-romania-corruption.html.
- Giurescu, C. C. 1980. A history of the Romanian forest . Bucures , ti, Romania: Editura Academiei Rom ^ ane.
- Griffiths, P., T. Kuemmerle, M. Baumann, V. C. Radeloff, I. V. Abrudan, J. Lieskovsky, C. Munteanu, K. Ostapowicz, and P. Hostert. 2014. Forest disturbances, forest recovery, and changes in forest types across the Carpathian ecoregion from 1985 to 2010 based on Landsat image composites. Remote Sensing of Environment 151 (August):72 -88. doi: 10.1016/j.rse. 2013.04.022.
- Humphrey, C. 1991. ' Icebergs, ' barter, and the mafia in provincial Russia. Anthropology Today 7 (2):8 -13. doi: 10.2307/3033166.
- Humphrey, C. 2002. The unmaking of Soviet life: Everyday economies after socialism. Culture and society after socialism . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Hutchcroft, P. D. 1991. Oligarchs and cronies in the Philippine state: The politics of patrimonial plunder. World Politics 43 (3):414 -50. doi: 10.2307/2010401.
- Iliescu, I. 2002. Aspecte Ale Activitatii Societatilor Forestiere Straine in Vechea Vrance [Aspects of the activity of foreign forestry societies of Old Vrancea]. Cronica Vrancei 3:269 -85.
- Iliescu, I. 2012. Cai Ferate Forestiere in Stravechea Tara a Vrancei (Prima Jumatate a Secolului 20) [Forestry railroads in the old country of Vrancea. First half of the 20th century]. Marturii Documentare. Cronica Vrancei 13:288 -309.
- Ioras, F., and I. V. Abrudan. 2006. The Romanian forestry sector: Privatisation facts. International Forestry Review 8 (3):361 -67. doi: 10.1505/ifor.8.3.361.
- Kenney-Lazar, M. 2019. Neoliberalizing authoritarian environmental governance in (post)socialist Laos. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 109 (2):338 -48. doi: 10.1080/24694452.2018.1537842.
- Knorn, J., T. Kuemmerle, V. C. Radeloff, W. S. Keeton, V. Gancz, I.-A. Biris ¸, M. Svoboda, P. Griffiths, A. Hagatis, and P. Hostert. 2013. Continued loss of temperate old-growth forests in the Romanian Carpathians despite an increasing protected area network. Environmental Conservation 40 (2):182 -93. doi: 10.1017/S0376892912000355.
- Kojola, E. 2019. Bringing back the mines and a way of life: Populism and the politics of extraction. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 109 (2):371 -81. doi: 10.1080/24694452.2018.1506695.
- Kuemmerle, T., P. Hostert, V. C. Radeloff, K. Perzanowski, and I. Kruhlov. 2007. Post-socialist forest disturbance in the Carpathian border region of Poland, Slovakia, and Ukraine. Ecological Applications 17 (5):1279 -95. doi: 10.1890/06-1661.1.
- Lampland, M. 2003. The advantages of being collectivized: Cooperative farm managers in the postsocialist
- economy. In Postsocialism , ed. C. Hann, 43 -68. London and New York: Routledge.
- Lawrence, A., and A. Szabo. 2005. Ethics and culture in the forestry profession: Emergent changes in Romania. Silva Carelica 49:303 -14.
- Lukas, M. C., and N. L. Peluso. 2019. Transforming the classic political forest: Contentious territories in Java. Antipode . Advance online publication. doi: 10.1111/ anti.12563.
- Mamonova, N. 2019. Understanding the silent majority in authoritarian populism: What can we learn from popular support for Putin in rural Russia? The Journal of Peasant Studies 46 (3):561 -85. doi: 10.1080/ 03066150.2018.1561439.
- Marijnen, E., and J. Verweijen. 2018. Pluralising political forests: Unpacking ' the state ' by tracing Virunga ' s charcoal chain. Antipode . Advance online publication. doi: 10.1111/anti.12492
- Mateescu, O. 2009. Evidence in the museum: Subjects, objects and memories in Vrancea. Sociologie Rom ^ aneasc  a 7 (3):51 -71.
- Mateescu, O. 2017. Serial anachronism: Re-assembling Romanian forest commons . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
- Mauch, C. 2019. Slow hope: Rethinking ecologies of crisis and fear. RCC Perspectives . doi: 10.5282/rcc/8556.
- McCarthy, J. 2019. Authoritarianism, populism, and the environment: Comparative experiences, insights, and perspectives. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 109 (2):301 -13. doi: 10.1080/24694452. 2018.1554393.
- Ministerul Apelor si P  adurilor. 2017. Raport privind starea p  adurilor Rom ^ aniei ^ ı n anul 2017 [Report on the state of the Romanian forests in 2017], 82 pp. Accessed September 18, 2019. http://apepaduri.gov.ro/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/Starea-p%C4%83durilor-%C3% AEn-anul-2017.pdf
- Muica, E. C. 1993. Prospects for Vrancea: A traditional mountain community in Romania. GeoJournal 29 (1):69 -82. doi: 10.1007/BF00806869.
- Munteanu, C., T. Kuemmerle, M. Boltiziar, V. Butsic, U. Gimmi, L. Halada, D. Kaim, et al. 2014. Forest and agricultural land change in the Carpathian region -A meta-analysis of long-term patterns and drivers of change. Land Use Policy 38 (May):685 -97. doi: 10. 1016/j.landusepol.2014.01.012.
- Munteanu, C., M. D. Nita, I. V. Abrudan, and V. C. Radeloff. 2016. Historical forest management in Romania is imposing strong legacies on contemporary forests and their management. Forest Ecology and Management 361 (February):179 -93. doi: 10.1016/j. foreco.2015.11.023.
- National Forest Inventory. n.d. Accessed July 20, 2019. http://roifn.ro/site/en/
- Nelsen, A. 2018. Romania breaks up alleged e 25m illegal logging ring. The Guardian , May 31. https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/may/31/romania-breaksup-alleged-25m-illegal-logging-ring.
- Nichiforel, L., L. Bouriaud, M. Dragoi, S. Dorondel, L. Mantesc, and H. Terpe. 2015. Forest land ownership change in Romania. COST Action FP1201 FACESMAP Country Report, EFI Central-East and

- South-East European Regional Office, Vienna. Accessed June 1, 2019. http://facesmap.boku.ac.at/ library/FP1201\_Country%20Report\_ROMANIA.pdf.
- Nichiforel, L., and H. Schanz. 2011. Property rights distribution and entrepreneurial rent-seeking in Romanian forestry: A perspective of private forest owners. European Journal of Forest Research 130 (3):369 -81. doi: 10.1007/s10342-009-0337-8.
- Nita, M. D., C. Munteanu, G. Gutman, I. V. Abrudan, and V. C. Radeloff. 2018. Widespread forest cutting in the aftermath of World War II captured by broadscale historical corona spy satellite photography. Remote Sensing of Environment 204 (January):322 -32. doi: 10.1016/j.rse.2017.10.021.
- Nixon, R. 2013. Slow violence and the environmentalism of the poor. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Palaghianu, C., and L. Nichiforel. 2016. Intre Perceptii Si Precepte in Dialogul Despre Padurile Romaniei [Between perceptions and norms in the dialogue about Romanian forests]. Bucovina Forestiera 16 (1):3 -8. doi: 10.4316/bf.2016.001.
- Peluso, N. L. 2018. Entangled territories in small-scale gold mining frontiers: Labor practices, property, and secrets in Indonesian gold country. World Development 101 (January):400 -416. doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2016. 11.003.
- Petrova, S. 2014. Contesting forest neoliberalization: Recombinant geographies of ' illegal ' logging in the Balkans. Geoforum 55 (August):13 -21. doi: 10.1016/j. geoforum.2014.04.008.
- Popa, B., M. D. Nit ¸  a, and A. F. H  al  alis , an. 2019. Intentions to engage in forest law enforcement in Romania: An application of the theory of planned behavior. Forest Policy and Economics 100 (March):33 -43. doi: 10.1016/j.forpol.2018.11.005.
- Rasmussen, M. B., and C. Lund. 2018. Reconfiguring frontier spaces: The territorialization of resource control. World Development 101 (January):388 -99. doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.01.018.
- Reno, W. 1998. Warlord politics and African states . Boulder, CO: Rienner.
- Sampson, S. 2002. Beyond transition: Rethinking elite configurations in the Balkans. In Postsocialism: Ideals, ideologies and practices in Eurasia , ed. C. M. Hann, 297 -316. London and New York: Routledge.
- Schulze, E. D., L. Bouriaud, H. Bussler, M. Gossner, H. Walentowski, D. Hessenm € oller, O. Bouriaud, and K. v. Gadow. 2014. Opinion paper: Forest management and biodiversity. Web Ecology 14 (1):3 -10. doi: 10.5194/we-14-3-2014.
- Scoones, I., M. Edelman, S. M. Borras, R. Hall, W. Wolford, and B. White. 2018. Emancipatory rural politics: Confronting authoritarian populism. The Journal of Peasant Studies 45 (1):1 -20. doi: 10.1080/ 03066150.2017.1339693.
- Scriban, R. E., L. Nichiforel, L. G. Bouriaud, I. Barnoaiea, V. C. Cosofret, and C. O. Barbu. 2017. Governance of the forest restitution process in Romania: An application of the DPSIR model. Forest Policy and Economics 99 (2):59 -67. doi: 10.1016/j.forpol.2017.10.018.
- Sf ^ ı rlogea, S. 2019. C ^ at lemn dau p  adurile Rom ^ aniei [How much wood do Romanian forests give].
- sorin.sfirlogea.com (5.01.2019) Accessed September 29, 2019. https://sorin.sfirlogea.com/2019/01/05/catlemn-dau-padurile-romaniei/
- Sikor, T., and C. Lund. 2009. Access and property: A question of power and authority. Development and Change 40 (1):1 -22. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7660.2009.01503.x.
- Staddon, C. 2001. Restructuring the Bulgarian woodprocessing sector: Linkages between resource exploitation, capital accumulation, and redevelopment in a postcommunist locality. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 33 (4):607 -28. doi: 10.1068/ a3395.
- Stahl, H. H. 1939. Nerej, Un Village d ' une R  egion Archa ï que: Monographie Sociologique [Nerej, a village from an archaic region: Sociological monograph]. Bucharest: Institut de Sciences Sociales de Roumanie.
- Stahl, H. H. 1998. Contribut ¸ii La Studiul Satelor Dev  almas , e Rom ^ anes , ti [Contributions to the study of Romanian communal villages]. (2nd ed.). Bucharest: Cartea Rom ^ aneasc  a.
- Stahl, J. 2010. The rents of illegal logging: The mechanisms behind the rush on forest resources in southeast Albania. Conservation and Society 8 (2):140 -50. doi: 10.4103/0972-4923.68916.
- Swain, N. 2013. Green barons, force-of-circumstance entrepreneurs, impotent mayors: Rural change in the early years of post-socialist capitalist democracy . Budapest: Central European University Press.
- Tsing, A. L. 2005. Friction: An ethnography of global connection . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Turnock, D. 1990. Transport for Romania ' s Carpathian forests: Improved accessibility through technological change. GeoJournal 22 (4):409 -28. doi: 10.1007/ BF00174762.
- Turnock, D., and A. Lawrence. 2007. Romania ' s forests under transition: Changing priorities in management, conservation and ownership. Geogaphica Timisiensis 16 (1 -2):5 -28.
- Vandergeest, P., and N. L. Peluso. 2015. Political forests. In The international handbook of political ecology , ed. R. Bryant, 162 -76. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
- Vasile, M. 2007. Sense of property, deprivation and memory in the case of Obs , tea Vr ^ ancean  a. Sociologie Romaneasca 5 (2):114 -29.
- Vasile, M. 2009. Corruption in Romanian forestry: Morality and local practice in the context of privatization. Romanian Journal of Sociology 20 (1 -2):105 -20.
- Vasile, M. 2015a. ' Being one ' s own master ' : Reciprocity and technology among Transylvanian forest dwellers. In Oikos and market: Explorations in self-sufficiency after socialism , ed. S. Gudeman and C. Hann, 162 -88. New York: Berghahn.
- Vasile, M. 2015b. The role of memory and identity in the Obs ¸tea forest commons of Romania. In Patterns of commoning , ed. D. Bollier and S. Helfrich, 65 -71. Amherst, MA: The Commons Strategies Group.
- Vasile, M. 2018. Formalizing commons, registering rights: The making of the forest and pasture commons in the Romanian Carpathians from the 19th century to

post-socialism. International Journal of the Commons 12 (1):170 -201. 10.18352/ijc.805.

- Vasile, M. 2019. Fiefdom forests and authoritarianism: Timber barons and the limits of resistance in the Carpathian Mountains. Geoforum 106 (11):155 -66.
- Verdery, K. 1996. What was socialism, and what comes next? Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Verdery, K. 2002. Seeing like a mayor: Or, how local officials obstructed Romanian land restitution. Ethnography 3 (1):5 -33. 10.1177/14661380222231054.
- Watts, M. J. 2018. Frontiers: Authority, precarity, and insurgency at the edge of the state. World Development 101 (January):477 -88. doi: 10.1016/j. worlddev.2017.03.024.
- Wedel, J. R. 2011. Shadow elite: How the world ' s new power brokers undermine democracy, government, and the free market . New York: Basic Books.

MONICA VASILE is a fellow at the Rachel Carson Center for Environment and Society at LudwigMaximilians University, Munich, Leopoldstr. 11a D80802 Germany. E-mail: monica.vasile01@gmail.com. She is an environmental anthropologist and her research focuses on forests and commons in the Carpathian region in Eastern Europe, human -animal relations, and rewilding, in particular European bison reintroduction.