## Developing the Commons: The Contradictions of Growth in Exurban Montana ∗

## Paul Robbins and Stephen Martin

University of Arizona

## Susan Gilbertz

Montana State University-Billings

Property development in exurban areas has the capacity to undermine the amenity values that undergird that development. Predicated on that contradiction, this research seeks to explain the emergence of local, informal, planning-based regulations in the traditionally antiregulatory context of rural Montana. Adopting both the insights of institutional common property theory and those of critical materialist analysis of economic growth, the work reconciles accounts of development as inherently ecologically self-destructive with those stressing creative development and adoption of rules for collective self-governance. Using a detailed case analysis of a Montana county undergoing rapid growth, it examines what drives localized land use regulation, what controls are enacted, and whether such controls are resisted or facilitated by development capital. Findings suggest that informal regulations seek to control externalities of development on valuable amenity commons and that they are adopted with the acceptance, if not encouragement, of the development community. These fragile instruments are vulnerable to opposition, however, highlighting problems of more general relevance: Growth depends on a deregulated development regime, which produces externalities that undermine the valorization of property. Localized regulatory planning regimes are therefore both a solution to contradictions inherent in growth and a potential source of future planning problems. Key Words: exurban, New West, planning, political economy.

远郊区的物业发展有破坏巩固城市发展的市容价值的能力。以这一矛盾为前提，本研究试图 解释在蒙大拿州农村传统的反监管的背景下出现的地方的，非正式的，以规划为基础的法 规。采用机构的共同财产理论和经济增长的关键唯物主义分析，该研究调和把发展视为固有 的生态的自我毁灭，和那些强调创造性发展并采纳集体自治的规则的观点。使用正在快速增 长的蒙大拿县的一个详细的案例分析，探讨是什么推动局部地区土地利用调控，什么样的控 制被制定，以及这种控制是否被发展资金抵制或推动。研究结果表明，非正规的规章旨在控 制发展对于宝贵的市容风景的外部性影响，这些规章被发展社区接受采纳，如果不是鼓励的 话。然而，这些脆弱的工具容易受到反对，突出更普遍意义的问题：增长取决于一个放松管 制的发展机制，这一机制产生破坏财产价值的外部性。本地化的监管规划制度因此既是内在 矛盾的解决方案，也是未来规划问题的一个潜在来源。关键词：城市远郊，新西部，规划， 政治经济。

El desarrollo inmobiliario en ´ areas periurbanas tiene la capacidad de empeorar el valor utilitario que subyace al mercado inmobiliario. Basado en dicha contradicci´ on, esta investigaci´ on busca explicar el surgimiento de reglamentaciones locales e informales basadas en la planificaci´ on en el contexto tradicionalmente antiregulatorio de Montana rural. Adoptando ambas perspectivas tanto de la teor´ ıa institucional de la propiedad com´ un como aquellas de an´ alisis cr´ ıtico materialista del crecimiento econ´ omico, el trabajo concilia las versiones del

∗ This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0617953. The authors would like to thank David McGinnis, Sheila McGinnis, and David Bennett for their ongoing work with the team. A draft of this article was helpfully evaluated by many colleagues at the 15th Annual Conference on Critical Geography, held in Athens, Ohio, in 2008. Special thanks go to the hard-working and largely unsung planners and planning boards of Montana.

The Professional Geographer, 64(3) 2012, pages 317-331 C © Copyright 2012 by Association of American Geographers. Initial submission, January 2009; revised submission, June 2010; final acceptance, October 2010. Published by Taylor &amp; Francis Group, LLC.

desarrollo como inherente y ecol´ ogicamente autodestructivo, con las que destacan el desarrollo creativo y la adopci´ on de un reglamento para el auto-gobierno colectivo. Mediante un an´ alisis de un caso detallado de un condado de Montana en r´ apido crecimiento, se examina que impulsa la regulaci´ on del uso del suelo localizado, qu´ e controles est´ an en vigor, y si dichos controles son resistidos o facilitados por el desarrollo del capital. Los resultados sugieren que las reglamentaciones informales tratan de controlar las externalidades del desarrollo en importantes amenidades comunes y que se adoptan con la aceptaci´ on, si no con el fomento, del desarrollo de la comunidad. Estas fr´ agiles formas son vulnerables a la oposici´ on, no obstante, resaltando problemas de relevancia m´ as general: El crecimiento depende de un desregulado r´ egimen de desarrollo, lo que produce factores externos que empeoran la valorizaci´ on de la propiedad. Por consiguiente los reg´ ımenes de planificaci ´ on reglamentaria ubicados son al mismo tiempo una soluci´ on a las contradicciones inherentes en el crecimiento y una posible fuente de problemas de planificaci´ on en el futuro. Palabras claves: periurbano, New West, planificaci´ on, econom´ ıa pol´ ıtica.

I t has been observed that economic growth in the Western United States is predicated on, and sometimes exacerbates, contradictions: outcomes of activity that are paradoxically inconsistent with intended goals. Urban people moving to the countryside to enjoy its amenities, including open views, free-ranging cattle, and forests, are often confronted with undesirable characteristics of productive rural living, like isolation, the smell of livestock, and timber harvesting (Walker and Fortmann 2003). So, too, the arrival of new migrants increases the density of local population and traffic, which migrants fled the city to avoid in the first place (Travis et al. 2005).

Such outcomes, and the potential conflicts they engender, are part of a larger class of problems that stem from the management of externalities from economic activity. In this regard, it has long been recognized that common pool resources, from fisheries (Gordon 1954) to electronic bandwidth (Werbach 2004), are vulnerable to 'prisoner's dilemmas' that can lead to competitive overuse and that, as Hardin (1968, 1244) phrased it, 'freedom in a commons brings ruin to all.' Problems of exurban development should come as no surprise, therefore, and have led some observers to advocate fewer planning controls and more marketoriented approaches and individuated property rights for resolving conflict, congestion, or unwanted land uses (O'Toole 2007).

It is simultaneously well documented, however, that common property resource management institutions often successfully control such problems by creating conditions for collective action, cooperation, and sustainable use (Berkes et al. 1989; Bromley 1992; Berkes 1996; Ostrom 2002, 2005). In experiments (Janssen et al. 2010) as well as empirically observed communities (Dietz, Ostrom, and Stern 2003), cooperative solutions have been shown to emerge without individuation of property rights or the imposition of markets.

Indeed, political ecology and common property resource research confirm that it is precisely the dismantling of such institutions, in pursuit of more individuated property rights and market-based reform inspired by Hardin and others, that has historically led to a decline in the sustainability of resource use (Jodha 1987; McCay and Acheson 1987; Shanmugaratnam 1996; Robbins 1998; St. Martin 2001; Agrawal 2003; Mansfield 2004). Market integration has been extended to fisheries, wildlife, water, and other goods, with overuse and conflict often being the result, rather than the cause, of this transformation (Heynen and Robbins 2005). This has led to a tacit assertion that common property resource management and the extension of markets are potentially incompatible (Heynen et al. 2007).

And yet the problem of externalities, shared resources, and collective action is endemic to market development and capitalist enterprise as well. As framed by O'Connor (1996), the 'second contradiction' of capitalism arises precisely because the externalities of economic growth undermine the environmental conditions on which the economy depends. Avoiding the resulting crises depends precisely on the collective action of firms or their external regulation. In other words, the question of common property management is not exclusively one of 'traditional' or 'antiquated' collective economies giving way to modern, individuated ones (as noted by Agrawal 2002); instead, it is also fundamental to-although often overlooked within-free, open, and competitive markets.

Nowhere are such tensions more clear than in sites of growth and development in the Western United States. Here, there is a long legal and ideological tradition of limited

regulation, free transaction, and exclusive private property rights. At the same time, these are places where the provision of environmental services and amenities that fuel growth, ranging from mountain views to fishable streams, are contradictorily threatened by precisely the growth they compel. Here, traditional, formal, top-down regulation has long been spurned by producers, developers, and investors. This does not mean, however, that informal, collectively organized modes of self-regulation of common goods might not be proliferating.

Previous research on the West has effectively examined struggles over environment, state regulation, public land use, and private property rights (Krannich and Smith 1998; McCarthy and Guthman 1998; McCarthy 2001, 2002; Sayre 2002). A focus on formal, statutory methods of regulation and private-public property, however, does not tell the entire story of the control of development. Are contradictions of growth managed through other forms of institutions in the U.S. West, especially where existing conditions make formal regulation impossible? What new institutions form when traditional avenues for growth control are closed?

This article assesses how and whether growth is contained and by whom. Through an analysis of the planning process in Park County, Montana, a region that experienced explosive development between 1991 and 2007, we ask:

1. Are growth controls implemented in an otherwise antiregulatory environment?
2. Towhat degree are such controls resisted or facilitated by development capital?
3. Are such informal regulatory regimes sustainable in the face of ongoing growth?

Our findings suggest that informal growth controls are indeed increasingly directed at controlling the externalities of development on amenity 'commons' (e.g., viewsheds). We observe that these informal institutions utilize 'soft' provisions in the local county planning process. These represent a method of regulation adopted with the acceptance, if not approval, of the development community, which seeks to maintain revenue streams from growth. We further find that these fragile instruments mightbevulnerable to legal challenges and cen- tralized political opposition, making them of unknown long-term value for managing rapid growth.

These results suggest the contradictions that lie at the heart of New West growth regimes: Growth depends on a deregulated development regime, which produces externalities that potentially undermine the valorization of property. Localized, informal regulatory planning regimes are a solution to such contradictions of growth, but they are also a potential source of future growth planning problems. The contradictions of growth, under current conditions, by implication cannot be solved by institutional innovation but only deferred.

## Institutions and Political Economy

A century of research on institutions and economics has come to emphasize the ongoing possibility of collective self-regulation (Commons 1934). Beginning from the acknowledgment that where the extraction or use of a resource can externally impact its availability or value for another user, research has outlined both the tremendous challenges in controlling externalities and the diversity of creative arrangements that do so (Ostrom 2005).

The challenges emerge first from designing a system of rules that can direct use sustainably. Where ecological systems are complex (e.g., in a fishery), simply organizing and setting appropriate limits presents difficulties. On top of this, however, come the far more daunting problems of encouraging users to control their practices within those limits and enforcing these arrangements where formal police powers might not exist and users must govern one another. The so-called prisoner's dilemma, where cooperation benefits all but the incentive to 'free ride' is high, causes observers to predict cooperation to be the exception rather than the rule (see Poundstone 1992 for a history of the concept).

Not unique to the problems facing New England fishers (Schlager and Ostrom 1992; Acheson 1998), South Indian irrigators (Wade 1988), Japanese forest product users (McKean 1992), or Swiss herders (Netting 1981), these problems also confronted employers, firms, investors, and real estate developers operating in the condition and logics of modern

markets (Vandermeer 1996). As early as the first volume of Capital, Karl Marx observed that even when irrational economic arrangements (i.e., stock swindles and pyramid schemes) lead toward inevitable collective economic disaster, individual investors inevitably participate up to the very last moment, hoping that the crash 'may fall on the head of his neighbor' (Marx 1990, 381). Firms and investors, no matter how well meaning, have little choice in the matter, because 'under free competition, the immanent laws of capitalist production confront the individual capitalist as a coercive force external to him' (381). As a result, companies, firms, and investors inevitably draw down the supply of natural capital (i.e., the health of workers and the soil), even where it might be in their enlightened self-interest not to do so. Such behaviors are predicted to lead to economic and ecological crisis (Foster 2000).

Yet, commonpropertyresourceresearch also describes countless cases where the behaviors of market actors are constrained through institutions born of collective choice, as where irrigator organizations form to curb competitive timing of water extraction (Emel and Roberts 1995). Historically, moreover, market economies have thrived amidst a simultaneous diversity of property arrangements, as where private agricultural lands coexisted with collectively managed forests in Europe, India, and elsewhere (Dietz et al. 2002). Why would innovative institutional outcomes not occur between competitive firms in modern markets?

## The Problem of Planning in the 'New West'

Such questions are especially pressing in the Western United States, where some forms of regulation might be truncated as others flourish. Here, population migration poses serious challenges to existing institutions and the rapid arrival of new types of migrants, often desiring amenity housing and lifestyles in largely rural and historically agrarian areas, creates a concomitant explosion of real estate development activities where few were present before (Johnson and Beale 1994; Beale and Fuguitt 1995; Shumway and Davis 1996; Nelson 1997; Cromartie and Wardwell 1999; Beyers and Nelson 2000; Vias and Carruthers 2005). Balancing growth with the maintenance of traditional production systems and the visually open landscapes associated with them occupies the attention of older residents, newcomers, and the planning communities that must adjudicate multiple interests, aesthetics, land and water demands, and economic priorities (Sheridan 2001; Walker and Fortmann 2003; Brehm, Eisenhauer, and Krannich 2004; Ghose 2004; Gosnell and Travis 2005; Haggerty and Travis 2006; Gosnell, Haggerty, and Byorth 2007). Rising land values and ranchland sales in the region have led to a range of new owners but often also to land use patterns and density that many view as economically and ecologically undesirable (Knight, Wallace, and Riebsame 1995; Rasker and Hackman 1996; Rasker and Hansen 2000; Hansen and Brown 2005).

Such development can be predicted to depress the values on which growth depends. Much of the value of new growth lies precisely in the ecosystem services of amenity landscapes, including open areas (Pejchar et al. 2007) and views (Poudyal et al. 2010). Where such benefits are 'subtractable'-that is, vulnerable to competitive use-growth therefore threatens its own underpinnings. Each new minimansion constructed in a pristine ranching valley reduces the potential value of the next one built, as the landscape fills in, the viewshed is reduced, and access to streams and forests is increasingly blocked.

This represents a classic common pool problem, at least from the point of view of developers who depend on such amenity values. Addressing these challenges through existing institutions remains difficult in the region, however, because historic land use laws present few restrictions on sales, use, or development of property, due to a combination of agrarian production, tax, and debt systems and an ideology of private property rights, individualism, and 'freedom' (Robbins et al. 2009).

The case of Montana is illustrative. There, up to 1993, any subdivision of a property over 20 acres (a vast majority) required no state oversight, planning directives, or legal permissions. Most existing county planning regulations only set limits on the powers of county planning boards, not on buyers and sellers. Zoning regulations, although common in other parts of the country, are exceedingly rare. As of this writing, only one of Montana's fifty-six counties, Cascade County, has county-wide zoning. 1

Although 'growth policies' have been adopted in most counties, they are widely unpopular and have no regulatory power. As one local respondent reported to us succinctly, '[Montana] has a huge history of, especially the agricultural community, not liking land use regulations very much.' The question, then, remains: Are new or informal common property regulations cultivated by property-seeking firms and actors in places like Park County, where formal regulation is historically weak and politically difficult?

## Study Area and Methods

To address this question, we examined the planning process in Park County, located in southwestern Montana (Figure 1A), a site chosen specifically because it is emblematic of fast-growing areas demonstrating resistance to regulatory control. The difficulties planners face in adopting growth restrictions in Park County are exemplified by the failed effort to adopt a county-wide growth policy. In late 2004, the county convened a meeting to adopt a nonbinding growth policy, as mandated by state law. Here, the overflowing crowd forced the event to be moved to the county fairgrounds (Tschida 2008), where a chaotic twelve-hour event unfolded, in front of a screaming and yelling crowd (Nolt 2008). Vociferously opposing the entirely nonbinding plan as an assault on property rights, the crowd eventually brought the proceedings to a halt, and the commissioners ultimately gave up. 'They had a total revolt on their hands,' a former county planner told us. 'It was just a complete disaster.' Traditional

Figure 1 Study area showing principal towns, transportation routes, rivers, and proximity to Yellowstone National Park. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Table 1 Park County and Montana, selected demographic variables 1980 and 2000

|                                                       | Park County   | Park County   | Park County   | Montana    | Montana    |
|-------------------------------------------------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|------------|------------|
|                                                       | 1980          | 2000          | Changes       | 1980       | 2000       |
| Total Population                                      | 12 , 660      | 15 , 694      | 23 . 97%      | 786 , 690  | 902 , 195  |
| Rural population                                      | 5 , 666       | 7 , 372       | 30 . 11%      | 370 , 431  | 414 , 317  |
| Share of population employed in extractive industries | 10.2%         | 7.3%          | - 28 . 43%    | 13.2%      | 7.9%       |
| Per capita income                                     | $18 , 871     | $22 , 019     | 16 . 68%      | $18 , 819  | $26 , 850  |
| Number of housing units                               | 5 , 966       | 8 , 247       | 38 . 23%      | 328 , 465  | 412 , 633  |
| Mean values of owner-occupied housing units           | $109 , 746    | $180 , 194    | 64 . 19%      | $122 , 957 | $151 , 641 |

Note : All monetary values converted to 2007 dollars. Extractive industries are agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining.

top-down regulation, or even planning, is apparently unfeasible here.

The study focused on exurban parts of the county swept up in such controversies, excluding areas within the city limits of Livingston, the county seat. Historically, land in Park County consisted of ranching and farming properties, with most residents either actively engaged in agricultural industries or servicing the large farming community. Since 1980, the county population has increased by 24 percent, and the number of housing units has increased by 30 percent, with the majority of population growth occurring outside the county seat (Table 1). At the same time, values of owner-occupied housing units have exploded, increasing nearly three times faster than statewide values. Despite the rural character of development, the study area has seen a significant decline in the importance of agriculture, with new residents who are mainly retirees, second home buyers, and others looking to capitalize on land prices that are inexpensive compared to elsewhere in the United States.

During the study period, much of the demand for new properties was satisfied through the subdivision of existing properties. Since 1991, the Park County planning office recorded 290 applications for new subdivisions, with the greatest rates occurring principally between 1993 and 2001 (Figure 2).

Field research was conducted during the spring and summer of 2007 and consisted of archival research reviewing all county subdivision cases over the study period and semistructured interviews with Park County planners and members of the county planning board. First, to quantify annual development activity, counts of subdivision applications were compiled from county records and classified according to year of application. Second, membership on the county planning board was reconstructed over the study period, using meeting minutes, interviews, and county records, and board members were classified according to their primary profession (i.e., ranchers, developers, etc.).

The first objective of interviews was to establish a timeline tracking the amount and rate of growth and development. Informants were asked to characterize the pace and spatial distribution of development. Second, we wished to understand the subdivision and development process as navigated by individual developers. Informants were asked to outline the specific steps that a prospective developer would follow to receive approval of a subdivision application, the pace of the review process, and opportunities for public comment. Participants

Figure 2 Change in mean number and standard deviation of approval conditions (left y axis) and cumulative number of subdivision applications (right y axis), 1991-2006. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

were asked to detail the county and state departments involved in subdivision review and the jurisdictional relationships between those institutions. In particular, participants were asked about the relationships and responsibilities of county planning boards, the county planning office, and county commissioners. Finally, we wished to understand formal and informal methods available to the county to control growth and development. Informants were asked to detail the roles of subdivision regulations, conditional approval requirements applied to applications, zoning regulations, and growth plans.

During the initial course of the interviews with planning board members, 'approval conditions' emerged as the principal vehicle for the regulation of growth. As a result, a count of all approval conditions was compiled for all subdivision applications in the county archives. The approval conditions were grouped by year of application and the mean, standard deviation, and coefficient of variation of these counts was calculated for each year. Mean number of approval conditions were calculated for three time periods, 1991 to 1995, 1996 to 2000, and 2001 to 2005. Two-sample t tests were used to test whether there was a significant increase in the number of approval conditions applied to applications over the three time periods. A systematic sample of subdivision applications was compiled by selecting every third application and their approval conditions were qualitatively characterized according to purpose.

## Findings

Our findings suggest that (1) there has been an expansion in approval conditions at the expense of other, more formalized, governance institutions and that these ad hoc approvals have become increasingly standardized; (2) the expansion of approval conditions is largely directed at regulating common property and environmental externalities; and (3) the expansion of approval conditions further coincides with the increasing activity, presence, and representation of development interests on planning boards. These, we conclude, represent a tacit and highly informal form of common property resource management, propelled by the externalities associated with growth.

Expansion of Standard Approval Conditions

High rates of growth in Park County coincide with an increasing number of approval conditions negotiated between planning institutions and developers. Originally designed as a casual instrument to assure that subdivision sites meet basic health and safety standards, these conditions are applied by planning boards after the initial submission of the subdivision application and include a set of requirements that must be met by the applicant prior to final approval of the proposed subdivision. In theory, approval conditions are application specific and contingent on the geography of the proposed subdivision. They are therefore not codified in official policies and are less visible to the public than statutory regulations. Nevertheless, they have emerged as the dominant mechanism through which growth is controlled.

Figure 2A shows the mean number of approval conditions applied to subdivision applications between 1991 and 2005. Over the course of the study period, the number of conditions per application in Park County increased dramatically from 4.3 in 1991 to a peak of 38.8 in 2003. A series of two-sample Student's t tests was conducted to determine whether changes in the mean number of approval conditions were statistically significant over time. The study period was divided into three time periods, 1991 to 1995, 1996 to 2000, and 2001 to 2005, divisions merely representing a near-even trifurcation of the overall study period. The results are presented in Table 2 and indicate that the number of approval conditions applied in Park County increased consistently and significantly throughout the study period.

Study data suggest that the rise in approval conditions is a response to the intensity of development in the county. Figure 2 compares

Table 2 Difference in mean number of approval conditions between Group 1 (1991-1995), Group 2 (1996-2000), and Group 3 (2001-2005)

| T -score of difference   | T -score of difference   | T -score of difference   |
|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
| Group 2 - Group 1        | Group 3 - Group 2        | Group 3 - Group 1        |
| 7.65 ∗                   | 12 . 50 ∗                | 8 . 31 ∗                 |

intensity of development with the mean number and standard deviation of approval conditions applied in each year. The mean number of approval conditions is plotted on the primary y axis of the figure, with the blue shaded region indicating the standard deviation. The intensity of development is represented by the cumulative number of subdivisions in the county and is plotted in red on the secondary y axis of the charts. Figure 2 shows that the mean number of approval conditions rises in concert with the cumulative number of subdivisions, with a dramatic increase in number of approval conditions in 2001, after several years of consistently high growth.

In addition to the increase in overall number of approval conditions, there is a parallel increase in the number of what can be termed standard conditions : conditions applied uniformly to all subdivision applications. As described previously, approval conditions are intended to address site-specific factors in need of mitigation before final approval of an application can take place. Differences in geography and in situ features between sites lead to variation in the number of conditions as the presence or absence of particular features triggers appropriate approval conditions. The degree to which approval conditions vary between applications, therefore, is an indication of the individual, site-specific characteristics of the properties. A qualitative analysis of approval conditions, however, indicated that a large set of approval conditions are applied to all subdivision applications and are not tied to site- or application-specific features.

This finding is supported by an analysis of the standard deviation of the number of approval conditions. If approval conditions are triggered by geographical features not present at all sites, the variation in number of applied conditions should increase with the total number of conditions. Consequently, the standard deviation provides a rough measure of the average number of conditions that are attributable to site-specific factors.

Figure 2A shows that the variation in number of approval conditions has remained relatively stable in Park County despite an overall increase in their number. This suggests that the growth in approval conditions is driven by a set of approval conditions applied to all subdivision applications regardless of setting or circum-

Table 3 Approval conditions in Park County, 1992 and 2005

| Type                                    |   1992 |   2005 |
|-----------------------------------------|--------|--------|
| Existing practices, wildlife and nature |      1 |      9 |
| Limitations on use                      |      3 |     10 |
| Developer construction responsibilities |      7 |     17 |
| Fees, easements, regulations            |      7 |     11 |
| Resident responsibilities               |      5 |      8 |

stance. 2 These standard conditions represent an extraregulatory method of growth control, rendered largely invisible through its informal and putatively specific application.

## Approval Conditions as Regulation of the Commons

The quantitative increase in the number of approval conditions is paralleled by a qualitative change in the type of approval conditions applied (Table 3). In 1992, approval conditions were primarily oriented around developer responsibilities and fees, easements, and general subdivision regulations. These conditions addressed site-specific requirements, such as road improvements, recognition of existing right-ofways, or the payment of fees necessary for the processing of applications and functioning of the approval process.

In 2005, these types of conditions were still present. There was a small relative increase in conditions related to fees and other county regulations and a larger increase in conditions related to requirements placed on developers as part of a general transfer of responsibility from the state to the individual developer. Developer construction responsibilities have expanded and include road construction and maintenance, as well as fire-code provisions for available water.

The largest relative increases between 1991 and 2005, however, occurred in approval conditions that seek to preserve the character of property and a sense of place. Conditions aimed at protecting wildlife, nature, and traditional land uses include clauses to be placed in homeowner covenants stating the wildlife might be present near homes and acknowledging practices such as agriculture and hunting as part of the cultural fabric of Montana. Similar are a set of conditions limiting use of property:

'dark skies' (regulating property lighting), limitations on numbers and types of pets, lists of permissible types of landscaping, and other restrictions aimed at preserving amenities desired by residents and the property rights of neighbors.

Approval conditions imposing new responsibilities on residents also increased between 1992 and 2005, although to a lesser degree. These conditions often involve shifting responsibilities traditionally borne by county government to individual property owners but more commonly require residents to actively engage in activities designed to maintain property values. These conditions often require the establishment of homeowners' associations to assume responsibility for maintaining subdivision roads, removal of invasive or noxious vegetation by residents, and for residents to maintain attractive lawns.

These uses of approval conditions are terrifically ad hoc, with little precedent for their employment in this way. As such, they represent newly formed and informally agreed-on uses of the planning process for growth control. As one Montana planning board member explained, 'We're in a situation here where we as a planning board and commissioners want to do more but we really can't. So we have to try to invent things.'

## Approval Conditions Coincide with Developer Planning Activity

Finally, we observed shifts in the occupations of serving planning board members during the study period (Figure 3A). Surprisingly, the most dramatic rise in number of approval conditions was accompanied by an increase in the number of individuals on the planning board with backgrounds in real estate. Between 2001 and 2007, the number of these members grew to make up nearly one half of the planning board. Interviews with planning board members confirmed the change in membership:

By the time I moved on to the county board there weren't developers on there. There were people who were pro-development but they weren't really in the business of development. These developers [would] come and present their subdivisions to us, and next thing you know, they're on the board, too!

The presence of real estate interests on the board has not resulted in a decrease in approval conditions but has coincided with their expansion. Because these controls are increasingly concerned with mitigating the externalizing effects of development, this final finding suggests that participation in, and indeed support for, growth control is strong within an interest group whose activities (development) prompt the need for control in the first place.

## Discussion

What does the promulgation of approval conditions in Park County, and the complex informal systems that have grown to arrange them, represent? First, it is clear that, as these historically ad hoc regulatory mechanisms become more standardized, they represent real (albeit fragile) rules governing growth. Rather than merely being site-specific and idiosyncratic mitigations of particular parcel developments, they have become a set of commonly applied limits and demands on developers, which they can expect when applying for permission to build, subdivide, and market land. As such, they are institutions, rules (indeed, codified norms) governing the behavior of firms and investors in a place where formal regulation is scarce.

Second, these institutions have been arranged not through imposition of traditional state authority but instead through collective choice arrangements, albeit ones not designed for that purpose. Planning boards in Montana are specifically restricted in terms of their authority and ability to impose rules. And yet, precisely over a period when developers are increasingly participating in planning board activities, such local regulations have expanded. This organization of the board to become a collective choice mechanism, therefore, has essentially been an organic process. Planning boards have become regulatory bodies; they were not created to perform in this role. As such, they reflect precisely the sort of self-governing collective choice arrangements understood in common property theory to be prerequisite to robust institutional formation. So, too, they are self-regulatory bodies, insofar as participants are active land users, buyers, and sellers, rather than outside regulatory agents (Ostrom 1992).

Figure 3 Change in planning board composition by occupation, 1991-2007. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Third, insofar as these rules and collective choice arrangements have occurred with the consent and participation of developers, who directly face the consequences of growth in the form of potentially declining amenity values, they can be seen as an articulation of capital's need, however hesitant, to regulate itself. The specific foci of these rules are precisely those with the highest stakes for future growth, including the maintenance of night skies, viewsheds, and rural character.

This arrangement produces a set of conditions that are amenable to long-term capital investment. By avoiding formal regulation, the rules that result come from within the development community itself. With no higher order restrictions, the system creates a flat legal terrain on which highly discretionary rules can be constructed. Case-by-case decision making is maintained, to a degree, and with it, the flexible authority of developers. At the same time, manyof the self-imposed rules are standardized and come to apply to all competing firms entering the regional development market, lowering the opportunity to free ride.

The very things that make this arrangement attractive, however, make it frail and fraught with opportunities for failure on its own terms. First, a regulatory mechanism that is, in legal form, ad hoc and site specific, is vulnerable to legal challenge. Some approval conditions are dubious even on their faces. One commonly applied approval condition, for example, states that the developer 'shall voluntarily' make a donation to local schools. One board member interviewed stated the suspicion that the application of standard approval conditions might not have the force of law:

I think we're coming up against a crisis here where we're eventually gonna get a developer whosays, 'I don't really care what it says in those regulations' in the county books. 'I'm going to do it this way, and you really can't stop me.' . . . If a developer comes in and says, 'I don't really care about your site-specific requirement number 7 here, I'm going to take you to court on it here,' we'd probably lose.

Morepressingly, it appears to be the case that the acceleration of controls of this kind tends to follow, rather than precede or anticipate, increasing growth, density, and loss of amenity values. As one planner explained to us, 'It's a case of closing the barn door after the horses have fled. I think in Park County those horses are long gone.' Thus, reliance on developers to reign in growth, rather than adopting more traditional routes to land use control, might result in a process that does too little, too late to protect the amenities valued by new and longterm residents. As one former planner told us, 'I don't think you can do it. I think [planning] is impossible.' This raises fundamental questions about whether these emerging planning mechanisms can be constituted in time to control the loss of amenity value in the landscape and, if, even so, they can be sustained in the future.

Certainly, rapidly rising property values in Park County can be seen as evidence of success. For the time being, valorization of property values-the desired outcome for developers organizing this form of selfregulation-has been maintained by the emergence of these institutions.

Conflicts surrounding the pace of development and disappearing amenities, however, continue to pit pro- and antidevelopment residents and planning board members against each other and create a highly charged, often litigious atmosphere. One current planning board memberdescribedcurrent debates surrounding proposed developments as 'they get an attorney, and the other groups get an attorney . . . we could have half-a-dozen attorneys at [planning board meetings] at one time.' Whether these conflicts represent an actual threat to continued development is uncertain, but developers are clearly attempting to forestall this possibility through these informal regulatory institutions.

This also raises questions about prospects for what has been called community-based natural resource management (Walker and

Hurley 2004), collaborative natural resource management (Conley and Moote 2003), grassroots ecosystem management (Weber 2003), collaborative conservation (Brick, Snow, and Wetering 2001), or local governance (Kemmis 2001), which have been touted as possible solutions to resource conflicts in the U.S. West. Critics of this approach have argued that grassroots ecosystem management can lead to rising control of special interest groups and accelerated environmental degradation. More critically, some research has called into question the assumption that prolocal governance advocates often make: Locals tend to be disenfranchised, poor, and marginal, which is certainly not always the case. This study reinforces the findings of Walker and Hurley (2004), therefore, that local political and financial capital can often come to dominate local decision making more effectively than external or central authorities. The case of Park County stresses a skepticism of any predispositions toward localism in Western U.S. decision making. As McCarthy (2002, 1298) observed, such cases remind us that 'local agendas are not inherently more legitimate than state or environmental agendas, and that centralized state resource management is not always a bad thing, for social or ecological goals.' This is congruent with a trend of critical examination of localized 'neoliberal' governance more generally, which seeks to reveal its linkage to an often narrow set of economic interests (Heynen et al. 2007).

## Conclusions: Solving or Deferring the Contradictions of Growth?

The further development of the commodity does not abolish these contradictions, but rather provides the form within which they have room to move. This is, in general, the way in which real contradictions are resolved. (Marx 1990, 198)

We have demonstrated here that there has been an increase in self-regulatory activity in Park County, Montana, which is driven by the needs of developers to maintain the very aesthetic and environmental conditions that are compromised in their pursuit of surplus. The resulting system of rules and decision making must be said to resemble common property

resource management systems familiar from other contexts and economies.

We have not argued here that the institutional system that has emerged is in any way a desirable one in terms of ecology or democracy. Rules that protect viewsheds do not necessarily protect stream or forest function. Rules that are created without popular vote cannot be said to represent the interests of the community at large, only communities of developers.

Nor have we argued that the overall shift toward very modest regulation in places like Park County is solely the product of developer activity and interests. Such changes have clearly not occurred in a vacuum. Decades of environmental lobbying and slow cultural change are underway in the region as new constituencies bring environmental and amenity consumption demands to the regulatory process. But as the chaotic and failed effort to adopt nonbinding growth controls in Park County demonstrates, it has only been in the realm of the developerdominated planning process that restrictions have made headway.

We have instead argued that the internal contradictions of economic development, which necessarily feed on the conditions that sustain growth, constantly demand resolution and that investors and profit-seeking firms are no less likely to pursue collective solutions to their problems than other sorts of political ecological actors. We suggest, therefore, an extension of political ecological research toward processes that have historically received little attention: capitalists constructing common property institutions and not merely dismantling them. Such investigation is all the more imperative in times when the technological and informational capacity of private firms outstrips dramatically that of traditional state institutions. Consider, for example, the impossibility of federal authorities taking over the management of the recent massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, where only those who have caused a catastrophic problem appear to have the necessary technical capacity to control its effects.

Such explorations necessarily connect with ongoing investigations of neoliberal marketization of resources, the dismantling of state regulatory capacity, and the simultaneous proliferation of new institutions, organizations, and forms of management (Robertson 2006).

The extension of informally negotiated approval conditions placed on subdivision applications is only one such deployment of a new formofregulation where state-centered restrictions on private property rights have been historically limited but also where such innovations offer new opportunities for capital.

Such investigation must necessarily proceed, however, by acknowledging the dialectical problem long acknowledged at the heart of institutional and common property analysis; namely, that the interests of the collective are not always the same as that of the individual, whether that is a firm or an subsistence producer. We would conclude, therefore, by suggesting that the outcome observed in Park County is one that reflects a more general prior problem. Given that the need of capital to manage growth is actually a result of the success of its enterprise, regulatory mechanisms are propelled in the first instance by a contradiction, sometimes signaled by crisis in the economy. Solutions that grow from the seed of this contradiction typically embody characteristics that propel further contradictions. As Harvey (1982) observed, 'the resolution of each [contradiction] merely provokes the formation of new contradictions or their translation on to some fresh terrain. The argument can spin onwards and outwards in this way to encompass every aspect of [capitalism]' (xxxii).

Although it is too soon to know for certain, judging from efforts to deal with growth in Park County, we suspect that the contradictions created by development cannot be solved through a developer-led mode of selfregulation; they can only be deferred. The implications of this for how competitive firms work to design rules to regulate themselves and for commonsense public concern over open spaces and sustainable development are several. They emphasize the continued relevance of a wider range of policy tools, even in places historically hostile to regulation. Addressing, rather than deferring, the contradictions of growth might otherwise remain an elusive goal. /squaresolid

## Notes

1 Urban zoning does exist in most larger towns. Additionally, citizens can petition to create subcounty zoning districts, although these are rare.

- 2 The notably high standard deviation in 2003 coincides with the highest historic number of conditions, suggesting one or two outlier properties with high numbers of locally specific conditions.

## Literature Cited

- Acheson, J. M. 1998. Lobster trap limits: A solution to a communal action problem. Human Organization 57 (1): 43-52.
- Agrawal, A. 2002. Common resources and institutional sustainability. In The drama of the commons , ed. E. Ostrom, T. Dietz, N. Dolsak, P. C. Stern, S. Stonich, and E. U. Weber, 41-86. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
- ---. 2003. Sustainable governance of commonpool resources: Context, methods, and politics. Annual Review of Anthropology 32:243-62.
- Beale, C. L., and G. V. Fuguitt. 1995. Recent nonmetropolitan migration trends in the West. Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics 20 (2): 392-93.
- Berkes, F. 1996. Social systems, ecological systems, and property rights. In Rights to nature: Ecological, economic, cultural, and political principles of institutions for the environment , ed. S. S. Hanna, C. Folke, and K.-G. Maler, 87-110. Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Berkes, F., D. Feeny, B. J. McCay, and J. M. Acheson. 1989. The benefits of the commons. Nature 340:91-93.
- Beyers, W. B., and P. B. Nelson. 2000. Contemporary development forces in the nonmetropolitan west: New insights from rapidly growing communities. Journal of Rural Studies 16 (4): 459-74.
- Brehm, J. M., B. W. Eisenhauer, and R. S. Krannich. 2004. Dimensions of community attachment and their relationship to well-being in the amenity-rich rural west. Rural Sociology 69 (3): 405-29.
- Brick, P. D., D. Snow, and S. V. D. Wetering. 2001. Across the great divide: Explorations in collaborative conservation and the American West . Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Bromley, D. 1992. Making the commons work: Theory, practice, and policy . San Francisco: Institute for Contemporary Studies.
- Commons, J. R. 1934. Institutional economics . New York: Macmillan.
- Conley, A., and M. A. Moote. 2003 Evaluating collaborative natural resource management. Society and Natural Resources 16 (3): 317-86.
- Cromartie, J. B., and J. M. Wardwell. 1999. Migrants settling far and wide in the rural West. Rural Development Perspectives 14 (2): 2-8.
- Dietz, T., N. Dolsak, E. Ostrom, and P. Stern. 2002. The drama of the commons. In The drama of the commons , ed. E. Ostrom, T. Dietz, N. Dolsak, P. C.
- Stern, S. Stonich, and E. U. Weber, 3-35. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
- Dietz, T., E. Ostrom, and P. C. Stern. 2003. The struggle to govern the commons. Science 302 (5652): 1907-12.
- Emel, J., and R. Roberts. 1995. Institutional form and its effects on environmental change: The case of groundwater in the southern High Plains. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 85 (4): 664-83.
- Foster, J. B. 2000. Marx's ecology: Materialism and nature . New York: Monthly Review Press.
- Ghose, R. 2004. Big Sky or big sprawl? Rural gentrification and the changing cultural landscape of Missoula, Montana. Urban Geography 25:528-49.
- Gordon, H. S. 1954. The economic theory of a common property resource: The fishery. Journal of Political Economy 62:124-42.
- Gosnell, H., J. H. Haggerty, and P. A. Byorth. 2007. Ranchland ownership change and new approaches to water resource management in southwestern Montana. Journal of the American Water Resources Association 43 (4): 990-1003.
- Gosnell, H., and W. R. Travis. 2005. Ranchland ownership dynamics in the Rocky Mountain West. Rangeland Ecology &amp; Management 58 (2): 191-98.
- Haggerty, J. H., and W. R. Travis. 2006. Out of administrative control: Absentee owners, resident elk and the shifting nature of wildlife management in southwestern Montana. Geoforum 37 (5): 816-30.
- Hansen, A. J., and D. G. Brown. 2005. Land-use change in rural America: Rates, drivers, and consequences. Ecological Applications 15 (6): 1849-50.
- Hardin, G. 1968. The tragedy of the commons. Science 162:1243-48.
- Harvey, D. 1982. The limits to capital . Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
- Heynen, N., J. McCarthy, W. S. Prudham, and P. Robbins, eds. 2007. Neoliberal environments: False promises and unnatural consequences . London and New York: Routledge.
- Heynen, N., and P. Robbins. 2005. The neoliberalization of nature: Governance, privatization, enclosure and valuation. Capitalism Nature Socialism 16 (1): 5-8.
- Janssen, M. A., R. Holahan, A. Lee, and E. Ostrom. 2010. Lab experiments for the study of socialecological systems. Science 328 (5978): 613-17.
- Jodha, N. S. 1987. A case study of the degradation of common property resources in India. In Land degradation and society , ed. P. Blaikie and H. Brookfield, 186-205. London and New York: Routledge.
- Johnson, K. M., and C. L. Beale. 1994. The recent revival of widespread population growth in nonmetropolitan areas of the United States. Rural Sociology 59 (4): 655-67.
- Kemmis, D. 2001. This sovereign land: A new vision for governing the West . Washington, DC: Island Press.

- Knight, R. L., G. N. Wallace, and W. E. Riebsame. 1995. Ranching the view-Subdivisions versus agriculture. Conservation Biology 9 (2): 459-61.
- Krannich, R. S., and M. D. Smith. 1998. Local perceptions of public lands natural resource management in the rural West: Toward improved understanding of the 'revolt in the West.' Society &amp; Natural Resources 11 (7): 677-95.
- Mansfield, B. 2004. Neoliberalism in the oceans: 'Rationalization,' property rights, and the commons question. Geoforum 35:313-26.
- Marx, K. 1990. Capital: A critique of political economy. Vol. I. New York: Penguin.
- McCarthy, J. 2001. Environmental enclosures and the state of nature in the American West. In Violent environments , ed. M. Watts and N. Peluso, 117-45. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- ---.2002. First World political ecology: Lessons from the wise use movement. Environment and Planning A 34 (7): 1281-1302.
- McCarthy, J., and J. Guthman. 1998. Nature and capital in the American West. Antipode 30:6772.
- McCay, B. J., and J. M. Acheson, eds. 1987. The question of the commons: The culture and ecology of communal resources . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- McKean, M. A. 1992. Management of traditional common lands (Iriachi) in Japan. In Making the commons work , ed. D. W. Bromley, 63-98. San Francisco: Institute for Contemporary Studies.
- Nelson, P. B. 1997. Migration, sources of income, and community change in the nonmetropolitan Northwest. The Professional Geographer 49 (4): 418-30.
- Netting, R. M. 1981. Balancing on an Alp: Ecological change and continuity in a Swiss mountain community . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Nolt, D. 2008. Will Park County be paradise lost or found? A county near Yellowstone falls apart over planning. NewWest 2007. http://www. newwest.net/index.php/main/article/a county near yellowstone falls apart over planning/ (last accessed 7 November 2008).
- O'Connor, J. 1996. The second contradiction of capitalism. In The greening of Marxism , ed. T. Benton, 197-221. New York: Guilford.
- Ostrom,E.1992. Crafting institutions for self-governing irrigation systems . San Francisco: Institute for contemporary Studies.
- ---ed.2002. The drama of the commons . Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
- ---. 2005. Understanding institutional diversity . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- O'Toole, R. 2007. The best-laid plans: How government planning harms your quality of life, your pocketbook, and your future . Washington, DC: CATO Institute.
- Pejchar, L., P. M. Morgan, M. R. Caldwell, C. Palmer, and G. C. Daily. 2007. Evaluating the po-
- tential for conservation development: Biophysical, economic, and institutional perspectives. Conservation Biology 21 (1): 69-78.
- Poudyal, N. C., D. G. Hodges, J. Fenderson, and W. Tarkington. 2010. Realizing the economic value of a forested landscape in a viewshed. Southern Journal of Applied Forestry 34 (2): 72-78.
- Poundstone, W. 1992. Prisoner's dilemma . New York: Anchor.
- Rasker, R., and A. Hackman. 1996. Economic development and the conservation of large carnivores. Conservation Biology 10 (4): 991-1002.
- Rasker, R., and A. J. Hansen. 2000. Natural amenities and population growth in the greater Yellowstone region. Human Ecology Review 7:30-40.
- Robbins, P. 1998. Authority and environment: Institutional landscapes in Rajasthan, India. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 88 (3): 410-35.
- Robbins, P., K. Meehan, H. Gosnell, and S. Gilbertz. 2009. Writing the new West: A critical review. Rural Sociology 74 (3): 356-82.
- Robertson, M. M. 2006. The nature that capital can see: Science, state, and market in the commodification of ecosystem services. Environment and Planning D: Society &amp; Space 24 (3): 367-87.
- Sayre, N. F. 2002. Ranching, endangered species, and urbanization in the Southwest: Species of capital . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- Schlager, E., and E. Ostrom. 1992. Property rights regimes and natural resources: A conceptual analysis. Land Economics 68 (3): 249-62.
- Shanmugaratnam, N. 1996. Nationalization, privatization and the dilemmas of common property management in Western Rajasthan. Journal of Development Studies 33 (2): 163-87.
- Sheridan, T. E. 2001. Cows, condos, and the contested commons: The political ecology of ranching on the Arizona-Sonora borderlands. Human Organization 60 (2): 141-52.
- Shumway, J. M., and J. A. Davis. 1996. Nonmetropolitan population change in the mountain West: 1910-1995. Rural Sociology 61 (3): 513-29.
- St. Martin, K. 2001. Making space for community resource management in fisheries. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 91 (1): 122-42.
- Travis, W. R., D. M. Theobald, G. Mixon, and T. Dickinson. 2005. Western futures: A look into the patterns of land use and future development in the American West . Boulder: Center of the American West, University of Colorado, Boulder.
- Tschida, R. 2008 Park County wrestles with growth policy. Bozeman Daily Chronicle . http:// bozemandailychronicle.com/articles/2004/12/17/ news/03parkcountygrowth.txt (last accessed 7 November 2008).
- Vandermeer, J. 1996. Tragedy of the commons: The meaning of the metaphor. Science &amp; Society 60 (3): 290-306.

- Vias, A. C., and J. I. Carruthers. 2005. Regional development and land use change in the Rocky Mountain West, 1982-1997. Growth and Change 36 (2): 244-72.
- Wade, R. 1988. Village republics: Economic conditions for collective action in South India . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Walker, P., and L. Fortmann. 2003. Whose landscape? A political ecology of the 'exurban' Sierra. Cultural Geographies 10:496-91.
- Walker, P. A., and P. T. Hurley. 2004. Collaboration derailed: The politics of 'community-based' resource management in Nevada County. Society &amp;Natural Resources 17 (8): 735-51.
- Weber, E. 2003. Bringing society back in: Grassroots ecosystem management, accountability, and sustainable communities . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Werbach, K. 2004. Supercommons: Toward a unified theory of wireless communication. Texas Law Review 82 (4): 863-973.

PAUL ROBBINS is Professor and Director at the School of Geography and Development at the Uni- versity of Arizona, Harvill Building, 437A, Tucson, AZ 85721. E-mail: robbins@email.arizona.edu. His research focuses on the relationships between human individuals and communities, environmental actors, and the institutions that connect them.

STEPHEN MARTIN is a PhD candidate in the School of Geography and Development at the University of Arizona, Harvill Building, 437A, Tucson, AZ 85721. E-mail: scmartin@email.arizona.edu. His research focuses on sustainable community design and the social outcomes of environmentally focused development.

SUSAN GILBERTZ is Assistant Professor in Environmental Studies at Montana State University, Environmental Studies Program, Billings, MT 59101. E-mail: sgilbertz@msubillings.edu. Her research focuses on environmental management and history, and the role of community knowledge, culture, and participation in environmental decision making and remediation.

Copyright of Professional Geographer is the property of Taylor &amp; Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.