## Hybrid Cultures of Postdevelopment: The Struggle for Popular Hegemony in Rural Nicaragua

Julie Cupples, * Kevin Glynn, w and Irving Larios z

*Department of Geography, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand w School of Culture, Literature and Society, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand z Instituto de Investigacio ´n y Gestio ´n Social, Managua, Nicaragua

This article contributes to contemporary debates around ''postdevelopment'' by examining the new social alliances that are reimagining, rearticulating, and refashioning development discourses and practices in Northern Leo ´n, an impoverished region on Nicaragua's Pacific coastal strip. We examine the strategies and tactics whereby Northern Leo ´n's citizens, local leaders, and nongovernmental organizations have reworked the region's cultural, political, and economic terrains in ways that negotiate and contest Northern Leo ´n's marginalization by the Nicaraguan central government, and that challenge and reshape global spaces and imaginaries constituted through the disciplinary and regulatory discourses of international financial institutions and predatory multinational capital. We draw particularly on Gramscian perspectives and other contemporary theoretical engagements with neoliberalism, globalization, and postdevelopment in order to present the case of Northern Leo ´n as an opportunity to think through the possibilities for forms of grassroots globalism that mobilize strategies of discursive activism, disarticulation/rearticulation, and ''place-projection'' in ways that destabilize and disrupt the linear temporalities and spatial fixities of mainstream development thought and practice. Key Words: globalization, Gramsci, neoliberalism, Nicaragua, postdevelopment.

A mong the key features of the Latin American political landscape since the debt crisis of the 1980s have been ''the disappearance of spaces for political negotiation'' (Garcı ´ a Canclini 2001, 147) and a reduced capacity for ''government, communities and markets to articulate and enforce consistent rules of the game'' (Barrett, Lee, and McPeak 2005, 194). Indeed, contemporary global development geographies appear to be predicated on pervasive, undemocratic, and disempowering forms of governance that escape direct and elected political spheres (Laurie et al. 1999; Escobar 2001; Peet 2003). Consequently, marginalized people in Latin America and other parts of the global South are deprived of access to conventional forms of citizenship, political representation, and decision making and are thus unable to have a voice in decisions that affect their everyday lives. It seems that under contemporary conditions of global governance there are few possibilities for ordinary people ''to intervene at a level where major decisions are made'' (Diokno-Pascual 2002, 2). The rollback of the state under neoliberalism and the disciplinary power exercised by a ''tier of unaccountable international governance institutions'' (Power 2003, 150; Peet 2003), in particular the IMF , the World Bank, and the WTO, means that many of the conventional political channels and spaces in which politics were contested have closed down. This closing down of participatory political spaces and the persistence of what Garcı ´ a Canclini (2001, 25) calls ''selective globalization,'' which deprives millions of people of access to work, health, education, and decent housing, is accompanied by an overwhelming sense that the global development project, particularly in its modernist and modernizing forms, has been a dismal failure (Esteva 1987; Escobar 1995). In this context, postdevelopment theorists such as Arturo Escobar, Jan Nederveen Pieterse, and Gustavo Esteva have provided cogent critiques of the epistemological legacies of the invention of development after the Second World War, in particular its Westernizing assumptions of progress and modernity and its discursive production of the very subjects it claims merely to represent.

This article explores a radical form of democratic place-based politics that has been initiated in an impoverished region on Nicaragua's Pacific coastal strip. In the municipalities of Northern Leo ´n, a unique political alliance between locally elected mayors of different political persuasions, a national and an international nongovernmental organization (NGO), civil society organizations, and large swaths of the local citizenry, was created to contest the region's marginalization from national and global development planning. The political resistance activated through this alliance resulted in the signing of the historic Achuapa agreements. We focus in

particular on the strategies of rearticulation that have been deployed by local people to rework the latest global development discourses around ''participation'' and ''poverty reduction'' in order to find a way out of poverty for Northern Leo ´n and bring about development based on local potentials. Local actors are therefore engaged in grassroots globalization and discursive activism (Routledge 2003), as the region's organic intellectuals have begun to rearticulate the parameters of global development discourses and to forge new forms of translocal solidarity. The formation of a collective will among heterogeneous oppositional forces has created social conditions that are ripe for the emergence of new expressions of what Gramsci (1985) has termed the ''national-popular.''

There is no doubt that the debt crisis of the 1980s unleashed a decisive and harmful spatial restructuring of governance and political power, which has exacerbated global inequalities and produced more intense forms of poverty and suffering in the global South. These outcomes have generated increasing resistance to neoliberal imperatives. Anglophonic scholarly writing on the socalled resistance to globalization has, however, tended either to overlook the ways in which such activities are grounded in cultures of everyday life (Davies 2006) and in the particularities of place (Escobar 2001; Power 2003), or to concentrate on large-scale protests in the first world such as those in Seattle or Davos (for examples, see Routledge 2003). The tendency to ignore what Escobar (2001) has termed ''place-based practices'' in the third world has resulted, according to Power (2003, 151), in a denial of people's roles as agents of development and in a failure to accord third world regions ''autonomous space'' in the debates on globalization and modernity. Power writes that it is almost as if the question of agency has no relevance because capitalism is presented as inexorable, inevitable, and overwhelming (p. 151). In light of such depictions, we wonder, with Aitken (2006, 80), what it might mean to ''make capital visible as something decentered and as something made, and potentially remade, in the diverse and sometimes incoherent space of everyday life.''

According to Escobar (1995), the discourse of development since the Second World War engenders particular kinds of subjectivities whereby third world people come to see themselves as underdeveloped and requiring development. We do, however, need more spatially sensitive understandings of how marginalized people negotiate, engage with, and resist such discourses and interact, as Routledge (2003) says, with the knowledge produced by international financial institutions (IFIs), and thus are able to contribute to the remaking of global development geographies (Power 2003). As Escobar (2001, 155) has indicated, ''local groups, far from being passive receivers of transnational conditions, actively shape the process of constructing identities, social relations and economic practices.'' Similarly, Walker et al. (2007) have recently argued, based on their work conducted with indigenous people in Oaxaca in Mexico, that knowledgeable and engaged citizens can challenge and redeploy dominant understandings of development in ways that engender and mobilize empowering new political identities. At stake here is the key question of popular imaginaries in an age of globalization; Appadurai (2000, 6) has effectively captured the ''split character'' of popular global imaginaries:

On the one hand, it is in and through the imagination that modern citizens are disciplined and controlled-by states, markets, and other powerful interests. But is it is also the faculty through which collective patterns of dissent and new designs for collective life emerge. As the imagination as a social force itself works across national lines to produce locality as a spatial fact and as a sensibility, we see the beginnings of social forms without either the predatory mobility of unregulated capital or the predatory stability of many states.

Following Friedman (1997, 276), Escobar (2001) states that the point is to find out how people ''practice the local in the global'' and construct local places as they participate in translocal networks. It is clear therefore that even in the present phase of globalization there is space for a more effective politics of imaginative engagement that includes state and nonstate actors and is embedded in the particularities of place.

In our view, one way to open these questions to a detailed analysis is through the adoption of a Gramscian perspective. Gramsci's contributions to theory were, as Hall (1996a, 411) notes, of a ''complexifying'' nature. 1 Indeed, Gramsci anticipated many of the theoretical developments associated with poststructuralism by refusing the seductions of economic reductionism and rejecting orthodox notions of unitary ideological formations and subjectivities. From a Gramscian perspective, culture is a site of necessarily ongoing struggles that yield no final, once-and-for-all victories and that cannot be reduced to economic determinations (Hall 1996a). Gramsci therefore stressed the processes of discursive contestation whereby particular ideological formations secure both specific regions of social life and dimensions of everyday activity to their sensemaking modalities and are disrupted or displaced by alternative and competing discourses.

From a Gramscian perspective, then, social agents can never be finally captured as the fixed subjects of this or that discursive formation, since sociodiscursive dynamics can no more be finalized than the passage of time or history can be frozen. Like culture itself, subjectivities are therefore riddled with contradictions and constituted as sites of contestation between, for example, dominant and emergent discourses. One such core contradiction that Gramsci noted was that between the ''common sense'' of a class or other social formation and its ''good sense.'' ''Common sense'' is a richly sedimented, variegated, ''fragmentary'' and ever-shifting ideological construction that can be consolidated through the discursive labor of '''traditional' intellectuals'' and thus turned to secure popular subjectivities for the economic and political projects of dominant social formations; nevertheless such projects are constantly threatened and undermined by the ''good sense'' of a people: that basic awareness of what the people are up against, that ability to grasp, however dimly and rudimentarily, the forces of exploitation and disempowerment that continually colonize the lifeworlds of a people (Hall 1996a, 431-33). For Gramsci, this ''good sense'' can never be finally extinguished, not least because the material conditions of everyday life carry constant reminders of the sensemaking inadequacy of the power-bearing discourses that so insistently seek to colonize popular lifeworlds and to constitute modes of subjectivity and of ''common sense'' that serve the interests of the dominant. As Jessop and Sum put it, the hegemonic ''formation of a 'popular collective will' can never be complete because there are always excluded or marginalized forces'' that constitute ''a permanent reservoir of resistance and a permanent potential for the development of counter-hegemony on different scales and sites'' (2006, 173). Such excluded or marginalized forces exist even at the level of the individual self, where the complex, contradictory, and ''composite'' structure of the social formation's ''discursive terrain'' is mirrored; as Hall (1996a, 433) notes, Gramsci ''altogether refuses any idea of a . . . unified ideological subject'' and ''recognizes the 'plurality' of selves or identities of which the so-called subject of thought and ideas is composed.''

For Gramsci, the existence of multiple contradictions within contemporary societies places great weight on the processes of leadership and on the formation of alliances across social differences. The cultural leadership of ''traditional'' intellectuals, who are aligned with the discourses of officialdom and the established order of things, is crucial to the formation of alliances that can, for a time, constitute a hegemonic bloc. The instabilities inherent within any hegemonic formation, however, leave all such developments prey to the activities of organic intellectuals : cultural leaders aligned with historically emergent forces who become adept at the crucial techniques of discursive articulation, disarticulation, and rearticulation (Hall 1996a). Thus, even as hegemonic blocs exert a kind of ideological leadership that penetrates into the deepest recesses of popular consciousness through the ''common sense'' they consolidate, they are at the same time inherently unstable and continuously undermined by discursive appeals to the ''good sense'' of the people. Organic intellectuals can speak to this ''good sense'' in ways that disarticulate and rearticulate the connections between hegemonic discourses and the material conditions of existence to which they give sense, thus engendering the amplification or enlargement of a popular ''good sense'' and the emergence of new discursive formations and thus of corresponding political subjectivities. Organic intellectuals therefore play a key role in the practices of intervention that can affect shifts in the balance of forces within a social formation and promote the emergence of conjunctural moments and spaces.

And yet, although the cultural leadership of organic intellectuals is crucial to the practices of articulation central to the formation and reformation of hegemonic discourses, such leadership is also fully dependent on the ideological terrain it has inherited, for no leader could willfully replace the existing formations of discourse and subjectivity within any society by simply imposing a new set of sensemaking configurations (Hall 1996a, 434). Consequently, for Gramsci, traditional Marxist notions of the revolutionary ''war of maneouvre'' should give way to the much more protracted and multifrontal ''war of position,'' which must take place across a number of sites that play important discursive-ideological roles within civil society (Hall 1996a, 426-7). A war of position would thus entail, among other things, the exertion of leadership in discursive struggles for the rearticulation of sensemaking practices and hence for the progressive hegemonization of popular consciousness. Though the term is widely misunderstood, ''hegemony'' is therefore not a mere synonym for ''domination.'' Rather, it entails the exercise of leadership in the formation of discourses, subjectivities, and sociopolitical blocs within contexts of ongoing contestation, unending struggles over meaning, and ever-shifting balances of forces (Condit 1994). The global profusion of neoliberal discourses and practicesindeed, of neoliberal thinking -is not of course about economic power alone; it is a form of cultural hegemony that is bound up with myriad economic motivations and consequences. Furthermore, as Hall (1996b, 468) writes,

cultural hegemony is never about pure victory or pure domination . . . it is never a zero-sum cultural game; it is always about shifting the balance of power in the relations of culture; it is always about changing the dispositions and the configurations of cultural power, not getting out of it. . . . Cultural strategies that can make a difference, that's what I'm interested in.

This article emerges from an ongoing research collaboration between the academy (University of Canterbury researchers) and a Nicaraguan NGO, INGES ( Instituto de Investigaciones y Gestio ´n Social [Institute for Research and Social Action]), that aims to document the intersections between rural development, environmental degradation, and neoliberalism. Much of the material is drawn from the advocacy experiences of INGES (also see Aguirre 2005), supplemented by in-depth fieldwork in the region in 2003 and 2004. The fieldwork consists primarily of interviews with the organized citizens of Northern Leo ´n, the vast majority of whom are low-income subsistence farmers, and of participation in regional meetings, assemblies, and workshops.

## Postdevelopment

The strategies of rearticulation that are under way in Northern Leo ´n should be understood in terms of postdevelopment . Postdevelopment is not like antidevelopment and it is clear that the people of Northern Leo ´n are not ready to abandon development as an option. But they do want to change its terms of reference and the spaces and places in which it becomes effective (or destructive); they question the right of the modernizers to administer and deliver development to the third world rather than the other way around. In place of development as governance from above, where debt relief and poverty reduction are seen to flow linearly through multilateral institutions to the national government and then the regions, Northern Leo ´n is fashioning a more hybrid and collaborative form of global governance through which the targets of development and poverty reduction are ''theorising back'' (Slater 1993) and thus undoing the spatial and cultural fixities constructed by the IMF, the World Bank, and the Nicaraguan central government. This refashioning of development involves contesting the notion that there is a universal model of development to be followed and insisting on recognition of the geopolitical and cultural specificities that define the spaces within which development occurs. One salutary consequence currently under way is a shift from ''projects'' to processes and thus a movement away from the insidious ''project culture'' that has been a feature of

Nicaraguan development for many years. This project culture has generated NGO funding regimes that have tended to demobilize citizen action (Marcuello and Marcuello 2002). Furthermore, civil society organizations no longer operate only on the margins of state and political party activities in a way that not long ago wastefully duplicated efforts and allowed the government to evade some of its key responsibilities to citizens.

In Northern Leo ´n, the ''project culture'' is being supplanted through the emergence of a new hybrid postdevelopment culture centered around permanent strategies of negotiation. Garcı ´ a Canclini (2001,146) writes that negotiation should not be seen as ''a process external to the constitution of'' social agents, ''to which they might resort on occasion for political convenience.'' Rather, ''it is a mode of existence, something intrinsic to the groups that take part in the social drama. Negotiation is located within collective subjectivity, in the most unconscious culture of politics and daily life.'' The reworking of governance arrangements brought about through Nicaragua's emergent postdevelopment culture has significant implications for the politics of scale. Bulkeley (2005, 879) notes that because the scales of governance are often seen as bounded, there is inadequate awareness of the possibility that global governance ''might emanate from the 'bottom-up.''' This conceptual blind spot leaves ''no analytical space for . . . governance arrangements which are hybrid, involving a mix of state and non-state actors, or multi-scalar, including actors drawn from different levels of governance simultaneously.'' We are thus left with ''little insight into how different forms of hierarchical and network governance interact and intersect to produce particular governance forms'' (Bulkeley 2005, 881).

In Northern Leo ´n there is a clear consensus that a beneficial reconfiguration of development processes must involve the state and must furthermore preclude the fixation of the political roles of both governments and civil society organizations through any permanent delimitation of their functions. When people challenge the notion that state and civil society must function as separate entities, spaces emerge for the creation of new forms of subjectivity and identity that disrupt and contest the territoriality of political systems (Slater 1997, 264) along with the common sense of mainstream approaches to development. In Nicaragua, we are witnessing the emergence of new understandings of the role of the peripheral neoliberal state as the central government is called to account through the activities of what we will call the new development alliances and the birth of a vital postdevelopment culture. This emergent culture underlines the importance of Larner's (2006, 205)

allusion to ''the possibility that there are different configurations of neoliberalism, and that close inspection of particular neoliberal political projects is more likely to reveal a complex and hybrid political imaginary, rather than the straightforward implementation of a unified and coherent philosophy.''

## Local Impacts of Structural Adjustment

Structural adjustment was implemented in Nicaragua after the electoral defeat of the Sandinistas in 1990 and more than ten years of armed conflict that left the people exhausted and traumatized by war and the economy devastated. The struggle against the Somoza dictatorship in the 1970s and the Contra war in the 1980s has left a legacy of hatred and animosity between the two main political blocs: (i) the anti-Sandinista PLC ( Partido Liberal Constitucionalista [Liberal Constitutionalist Party]), in power from 1996 to 2006 and part of the UNO ( Unio ´n Nacional Opositora [National Opposition Union]) coalition government from 1990-1996, and (ii) the Sandinistas, who constituted the revolutionary government from 1979 to 1990 and the main opposition party from 1990 to 2006. Structural adjustment policies have taken their toll on the lives of low-income Nicaraguans, who have had to develop multiple survival strategies in response to rising levels of poverty and unemployment (Green 1995; Babb 2001; Cupples 2005).

Northern Leo ´n (see Figure 1) has a population of 87,307 and is made up of four municipalities: El Sauce, Achuapa, El Jı ´ caral, and Santa Rosa del Pen ˜on (Larios and Morales 2003). This area faces a high level of natural resource depletion, particularly of soil and water, which limits agricultural productivity. It is particularly prone to climatic extremes that lead to low precipitation, drought, and flooding, and it was badly affected by Hurricane Mitchell in 1998. Slash and burn practices on slopes that are less suited to agriculture exacerbate the problem and create landslides, soil degradation, and increased erosion. Although there is some small-scale cattle ranching, most farmers are engaged in subsistence agriculture involving basic grains, some of which may be traded locally when there are surpluses. Since the implementation of structural adjustment policies in the 1990s, agriculture in this region has suffered severe decapitalization. Small farmers' ability to produce is seriously undermined by the lack of bank credit as well as by the insecurity surrounding land ownership. 2 Consequently, many farmers are forced to sell land or tractors to larger landowners. More than half of the population is unemployed or underemployed and dependent on seasonal agricultural work that does not provide sufficient income to cover basic needs. Social

Figure 1. The municipalities of Northern Leo ´n.

<!-- image -->

services in healthcare, sanitation, education, housing, and electricity are poor and communications and transport infrastructures are inadequate. Emergency patients often die because of a lack of ambulances or other transport to transfer them to hospital in Leo ´n. Outmigration to the capital, Managua, and neighboring countries is high. Women often migrate to Costa Rica in search of manual labor or work in domestic service, leaving children in the care of grandmothers or older siblings. As the local president of the Union of Agricultural Cooperatives, Julio Bucardo Membren ˜o, told us, we pool our efforts to work our farms at the very least to provide food for our families. We fail to produce enough to sell in addition because we don't have the ability to make the economic outlay. We feel that every day there is more pressure upon us, each day life is more difficult, it is becoming more and more impossible to work our farms. We

have fought against poverty but up until now we've done it alone, and we can't find a way to put our farms to work productively. And then suddenly our children are having to emigrate, some to Costa Rica, some to El Salvador. I've got two daughters working as domestic servants in Costa Rica and a son working in road construction in El Salvador, they're working like slaves really.

[authors' translation]

This situation has led to a high degree of aid dependency. Although NGOs in the region have provided some selective forms of aid and poverty alleviation, these have tended to be short-term and of a welfarist nature. The region has thus suffered from quite significant political neglect and a high degree of isolation between the municipalities and centers of decision making. Consequently, municipal councils often do not receive moneys to which they are entitled from the central government. The municipal council of Achuapa, which does not even have a phone line much less an Internet connection, was closed for part of 2002 as it simply had no funds with which to pay its employees (Peralta 2002a).

Amid such severe political, economic, and environmental challenges, this area also displays high levels of community organization. The development of civil society was promoted by the Danish NGO IBIS at the end of the 1980s before the electoral defeat of the Sandinistas. Despite (or perhaps because of) the fact that Northern Leo ´n was a Sandinista stronghold in the 1980s, it was also an area largely neglected by the central Sandinista government. This situation led, in the months before the Sandinistas' electoral defeat, to an agreement between the Sandinista government and IBIS for Danish investment in reforestation and capacitybuilding processes and the creation of strong community organizations each with a male and female representative who worked voluntarily to promote community interests. As a consequence, there is now a high level of popular awareness of issues and debates surrounding neoliberalism, gender, finance, cooperativism, and organic agriculture. The national NGO, INGES, began to work in the region in 1995, setting up development projects in agriculture, livestock production, and solar energy. In 2001, it turned its attention to advocacy work and initiated a highly innovative process that culminated in the signing of the Achuapa agreements in 2002.

## Nicaragua's New Development Alliances and the Achuapa Agreements

In 2001, Nicaragua was admitted into the World Bank's and IMF's Heavily Indebted Poor Countries

(HIPC) initiative. The HIPC has been promoted by these institutions as a mechanism to secure a lasting exit from unsustainable debt burdens for the world's poorest countries. Participating countries are required to produce a country-specific Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) developed in consultation with civil society, demonstrate progress in its implementation, and then recycle 60 percent of their debt service savings into poverty reduction programs (Cupples 2004). Hailed by some as a new era in IFI policies, activist groups such as the Jubilee coalition have questioned the appropriateness of coupling debt relief with poverty reduction and suggested that the new emphasis on poverty reduction amounts to little more than a rebranding of harmful structural adjustment policies (Hanlon 1998; Power 2003). Nevertheless, although it is doubtful that the World Bank ever intended for the PRSP to be genuinely participatory (Bradshaw and Linneker 2003), the promotion of more democratic forms of global governance can, under the right local political and socioeconomic conditions, unleash imaginative new ways of responding to poverty and thus help to promote the reterritorialization of economic life and the formation of new social and political geographies. Just as globalization brings about new forms of territorial differentiation such as new trading blocs and market fusions, regional agents engage as well at smaller scales in processes of economic, political, and cultural reimagination and border redefinition (Larios and Morales 2003).

A series of events surrounding the PRSP process in Nicaragua catalyzed one such reterritorialization of governance in Northern Leo ´n by fostering the emergence of a new type of mobilization. A key feature of the backdrop for this reterritorialization was the 2001 international slump in coffee prices, which severely affected the coffee growing region of Matagalpa in the Central Northern highlands. These effects led to an outcry by Matagalpan campesinos (small and subsistence farmers). The Minister of Agriculture, Jose ´ Augusto Navarro, tried to deflect this outcry by directing the attention of the media to Northern Leo ´n, where the situation was much worse-despite the fact that little coffee was produced there. Municipal councils in Northern Leo ´n cannily seized this opportunity to influence the government's take on poverty reduction; INGES played a key advocacy role in the process.

In February 2001, with the encouragement and facilitation of both INGES and IBIS, the mayors of the municipalities of Northern Leo ´n came together to reflect on the high levels of poverty afflicting the region. This meant putting intensely rancorous partisan interests aside in order to find political solutions to the problems

facing their communities. 3 In effect, this amounted to a reformation of political identities through processes of disarticulation and rearticulation. Hall explains that to ''articulate'' means to join together different elements that have no necessary connection to one another, and simultaneously to give expression to a set of meanings or identities that arise from this conjuncture of elements. He explains:

An articulation is thus the form of the connection that can make a unity of two different elements, under certain conditions. . . . So the so-called ''unity'' of a discourse is really the articulation of different, distinct elements which can be rearticulated in different ways because they have no necessary ''belongingness.'' The ''unity'' which matters is a linkage between that articulated discourse and the social forces with which it can, under certain historical conditions, but need not necessarily, be connected.

(Grossberg 1996, 141)

The disarticulation of (disabling) partisan rivalries thus led to a rearticulation of regional identifications and discourses that launched the emergence of a powerful new set of expressive political practices.

INGES's aim was to create a development plan for the region that included both the local authorities and organized members of the population. In order to enhance the participatory dimensions of the process, INGES facilitated two key developments: the establishment of a series of large public gatherings in which the nature of development in the region was discussed, and the creation of a network of local civil society organizations to better coordinate and integrate collective actions. The public gatherings included the municipal mayors, local community leaders, the leaders of the two NGOs, and a number of academics who were invited to participate. From the reflections that took place at these gatherings, it was recognized that the communities were rich in human capital but lacking in both financial and natural resources, and that there would be no possibility of local development without the participation and cooperation of the central government.

Despite the high levels of poverty in the region, when the national government put together its analysis of poverty in the country as part of its PRSP , it designated Northern Leo ´n as having only ''medium'' poverty. Although the PRSP was supposed to be based on consultation with civil society, the national government did not engage any of the civil society movements in Northern Leo ´n. This failure reveals what Power (2003, 170) calls the ''spatiality of power and discourse in development,'' which determines who gets to have a voice in particular discursive spaces. As one community leader put it, '' the consultative model that had been established . . . excluded the poor from expressing opinions about poverty and ways of combating it . We wanted to change the national process'' (Cranshaw 2003, 13; emphasis in the original). T oward this end and to protest the erroneous classification of their region as suffering from only ''medium'' poverty, civil society and municipal organizations drew up their own version of the PRSP , which they affectionately called the PRSP cito , ''our little PRSP'' (Cornally, Crowley, and O'Neill 2004, 18). It was hoped that the PRSP cito would help catalyze the articulation of a popular and progressive development discourse around the impacts of IFI-imposed structural adjustment policies and neoliberal agendas more broadly. The formation of a popular democratic development discourse could potentially counteract key disempowering impacts of the official PRSP apparatus noted by Possing (2003, v):

The participatory role assigned to representatives of ''the poor'' in the PRSP framework is based on conceptions of poor populations as basically victimized, as people in need of aid and development assistance. . . . These representational devices are particularly adept in silencing any sense of connection between their plight as losers in the wider political economy of access to capital, property and power and their expressed lacks, wants and vulnerabilities.

Auspiciously, the presentation of the PRSP cito to the government drew national media attention (Cranshaw 2003). Fearful of an uprising led by local government leaders, the national government thus agreed to negotiate. In a meeting held in Achuapa between a number of deputy ministers, government bureaucrats, and the locally elected mayors, a set of agreements was reached. The decision to hold the meeting in Achuapa rather than the capital, Managua, was a strategic move designed to highlight the difficulties of the region, including its inadequate communication with the rest of the world, its lack of electricity, and its poor, pockmarked, unpaved roads. Representatives from the central government would thus be forced to undergo encounters with consequences of impoverishment that were mostly alien to their own everyday experiential lifeworlds. For example, these government representatives had to endure a long, bone-jarring journey along badly eroded dirt roads for some five hours in order to reach the meeting site.

The Achuapa agreements between the Association of Municipalities of Northern Leo ´n (AMULEON: Asociacio ´n de Municipios de Leo ´n Norte ), INGES, and the central government were signed on 18 October 2002. They essentially contain a series of short- and long-term

programs, all aimed at strengthening local production and overcoming the social and political marginalization of the region. The agreements are comprised of two main sections: one each on the productive and the social sectors. In the section on production, the government agrees to a reforestation program, financial support for small farmers, upgrading and repair to roads and bridges, and the legalization of property held as a consequence of Sandinista land redistribution schemes. In the social section, the government agrees to help improve the community's nutritional levels by increasing the provision of communal kitchens, implementing a glass of milk program for primary school children, and providing support for community vegetable gardens. They also agree to provide no-fee dental care for children; teachers, school materials, and Saturday schooling; scholarships for secondary school children; support for disabled people, victims of domestic violence, and children at risk; medicines for health centers; fuel for transporting emergency patients to hospital; and resources for garbage collection and sanitation. They further agree to provide for the destruction of mosquito breeding grounds (important sources of disease in the region), to speed up the approval of budgets for municipal investment, and to prevent delays in transferring funds from the central government to the municipalities. These agreements are the first of their kind in the nation and through them, Northern Leo ´n became the first Nicaraguan region to create its own development plan. During negotiations, there were hundreds of civil society leaders outside in the streets; their presence exerted significant pressure on the government ministers, who were thus confronted not only by the region's mayors but also by a strong, wellorganized, and politically mobilized population.

INGES's work has revolved around strengthening local state and civil society organizations and increasing these organizations' capacities for networking and promoting the voices of the region at national and international levels. Since the Achuapa agreements were signed, the spaces of political engagement for groups of impoverished and marginalized people have continued to proliferate throughout the region. Indeed, the process of creating an intermunicipal alliance that began in Northern Leo ´n with the formation of AMULEON has since spread to the neighboring municipalities of Northern Chinandega. The mayors of Chinandega (also with INGES's advocacy) have created their own organization, AMUNORCHI ( Asociacio ´n de Municipios del Norte de Chinandega [Association of Municipalities of Northern Chinandega]). AMULEON and AMUNORCHI are now working closely together and both organizations are represented at the national level within

NGO umbrella groups Civil Coalition ( Coordinadora Civil: CC) and South-North Advocacy Group ( Grupo de Incidencia Sur-Norte , or GISN); as a result, AMULEON and AMUNORCHI are better able to make representations to the Northern donor community. INGES has also improved the coordination of the civil society organizations by creating a local umbrella group, the Network of Actors for Local Development ( Red de Actores por el Desarrollo Local: RADEL). RADEL is made up of forty civil society organizations and now has a presence throughout all of the municipalities of Northern Leo ´n, including the most isolated parts of the region. It is currently seeking permanent membership of the CC and of regional state bodies such as the Council for Departmental Development of Leo ´n ( Consejo de Desarrollo Departamental de Leo ´n: CONDELEON). INGES has also worked to breathe new life into the Municipal Development Councils ( Comite ´s de Desarrollo Municipal: CDM), entities that were created by the government but had not thus far been politically effective; the CDMs now interact productively with a number of thematic civil society networks such as the Network of Women against Violence ( Red de Mujeres contra la Violencia ), the Group of Men against Violence ( Grupo de Hombres contra la Violencia ), the Federation of NGOs ( Federacio ´n de ONGs , or FONG), the Communal Movement ( Movimiento Comunal ), and the Union of Farmworkers and Ranchers ( Unio ´n Nacional de Agricultores y Ganaderos , or UNAG). Through the overall leadership efforts of INGES, including facilitating the creation of AMULEON and AMUNORCHI, both Northern Leo ´n and Northern Chinandega have gained representation at consultative group meetings between the Nicaraguan central government and the bilateral donor community of the developed world. This achievement in itself constitutes a significant reworking of Nicaragua's development geographies by disrupting established arrangements that previously excluded regional voices and perspectives from consultative processes involving highlevel national officials and international donors. Consequently, local representatives from the impoverished Northern Leo ´n and Chinandega regions were able to participate in the formulation of Nicaragua's 2005 letter of intent with the IMF and thus to ensure that funds released through the HIPC are channeled to the country's most vulnerable sectors and incorporated transparently into the national budget.

Nicaragua's new development alliances have devised a strategy that involves four main approaches: pressure, negotiation, agreement, and social mobilization. Thus, rather than simply opposing the latest economic model, they engage with it through negotiation and in the

process develop practical strategies for addressing rural poverty; however, they combine negotiation and agreement with constant social pressure that transforms into more directly confrontational political action whenever the government fails to keep its promises. Negotiation is of course a key term for describing ideological engagement in the Gramscian conceptual vocabulary. Gledhill (1988, 67-68) notes that ''the term 'negotiation' implies the holding together of opposite sides in an ongoing process of give-and-take,'' where meaning ''arises out of a struggle . . . between competing frames of reference, motivation and experience.'' As the mayor of Santa Rosa, Barney Pulido, stated at a roadblock held at the start of the planting season to protest the government's failure to provide promised agricultural assistance and to include investments pledged to Northern Leo ´n in the national budget, ''we are going to continue the struggle until President Bolan ˜os and his cabinet keep their word. They promised new roads and finance for agricultural production and we are still waiting for these things'' (Flores Vergara 2004, authors' translation). Mobilizations of this kind have also been successful in addressing the abuses committed by privatized utilities. The Spanish company Unio ´n Fenosa, which took over the provision of electricity in Nicaragua during the 1990s, has repeatedly charged people for electricity that was never provided. A mobilization in Achuapa to protest charges by Unio ´n Fenosa for nonexistent street lighting forced the government to provide this service. During a recent national anti-corruption campaign conducted by the Civil Coalition, Northern Leo ´n was the most active region in collecting signatures. In the process, public awareness rose to such heights that when (now former) president Arnoldo Alema ´n (who was later sentenced to home detention on corruption charges) came to campaign in Malpaisillo, the new development alliances held a large protest march that made national headlines. Local political leaders now feel empowered to take a stand when the state fails to fulfill its responsibilities to provide services such as healthcare and education.

The new development alliances have thus brought about a significant degree of government compliance with the Achuapa agreements. Bilateral and multilateral funds have found their way into the region and produced material improvements. There is visible evidence of new investment in education and roading infrastructure, and in the provision of better housing and of fuel for the transportation of emergency patients to hospital; as well, there are moves to improve sanitation and garbage collection. Nevertheless, forging alternatives to neoliberalism and attempting to reverse the current spatialities of power is of course extremely difficult, and significant challenges lie ahead. The articulation of such processes is politically, economically, and culturally complex and the poor communications infrastructure continues to make local coordination of activities very difficult. Moreover, despite the significant forces brought to bear on the central government by the impoverished Northern regions through the Achuapa agreements, the core principles of these agreements were nonetheless omitted from the PRSP by Nicaraguan officials. Consequently, there still exists a significant level of mistrust on both sides.

Ongoing difficulties notwithstanding, Northern Leo ´n is undoubtedly experiencing a cultural transformation that, by grounding global processes in local materialities, is producing new political subjectivities and hybridities of space, place, and scale. These are radical processes that provide important insights regarding the political potential of postdevelopment interventions. The forging of shared interests between heterogeneous social and political groups and the performance of advocacy work by INGES constitute cultural and ideological struggles for the reformation of the region's collective will and for the emergence of a new progressive hegemony. The organic intellectuals of the new development alliances are effectively appealing to the good sense of the region's people in order to extensively rearticulate both Liberal and Sandinista commonsense notions concerning the parameters of poverty, economic expansion, neoliberalism, and globalization. As well, their appeals to this materially grounded popular good sense is reconfiguring the common sense regarding seemingly intractable and politically disabling antagonisms and animosities between Sandinistas and Liberals and thus is giving rise to a new, unified sense of effective regional identity and political common cause.

## Hegemony and the National-Popular

Although Gramsci's writings were produced before the postwar development orthodoxy was invented and long before the post-debt-crisis neoliberal regime of truth came into force, his theories of hegemony and the national-popular constitute a valuable explanatory framework for the analysis of the postdevelopment activities carried out by marginalized people in the global South as a means to negotiate and/or contest the disciplinary power exercised by the IFIs. In particular, a Gramscian approach can accommodate the levels of nuance and complexity necessary for understanding the dynamics of recent political processes in Northern Leo ´n, which require us to grapple with issues such as why people who are harmed by neoliberalism vote for Nicaragua's Liberal

Party and how significant political differences and animosities can be overcome in order to produce a subnational development plan that depends centrally on the articulation and mobilization of a politically active regional identity.

A core problem facing progressives throughout much of Latin America today, twenty years after the debt crisis, is to invent ''ways of challenging and questioning the [neoliberal] political and economic 'common-sense' which manages to generate inequality without bringing the more widespread growth that is supposed to go with it'' (Allen, Massey, and Cochrane 1998, 127). A Gramscian perspective would insist that this problem be confronted in ways that are cognizant of the geographical and historical specificities that constitute capitalism, labor processes, and value differently in different places and times. This insistence on the importance of such specificities, over and against the classical Marxist prioritization of the homogenizing force or the universal laws of capital, is the key to Gramsci's development of a nonreductive mode of analysis. As Hall argues, a Gramscian approach tends to reject the theorization of capitalism at a high level of generality on the grounds that such generalization ''has encouraged us to neglect the ways in which the law of value, operating on a global as opposed to a merely domestic scale, operates through and because of the culturally specific character of labour power'' (Hall 1996a, 436; emphasis in the original). In a word then, the Gramscian approach challenges ''capitalocentrism-or the assumption that capitalism is a singular and singularly ubiquitous formation,'' and provides instead a set of conceptual tools oriented toward recognizing ''the multiplicity, not only of capitalisms but also of economic practices and formations'' (Grossberg 2006, 21; see also Gibson-Graham 1996).

In the latest phase of global governance, the discursive reframing of neoliberalism by IFIs in terms of ''poverty reduction'' strategies may be seen as part of an attempt to maintain the increasingly contested neoliberal hegemony by incorporating (and thus domesticating and controlling) alternative or oppositional perspectives. But it must be borne in mind that such processes of incorporation require hegemonic formations to change ''in order to remain hegemonic,'' and as they change to create new spaces for the potential emergence of forces and imaginaries that point toward ''an authentically different social order'' (Gitlin 1994, 531-32). For the social forces that lose out under neoliberalism, the subordinate majority in Latin America ''who barely survive'' (Yu ´dice 2001, xiii) do not conveniently ''disappear from the terrain of struggle; nor is struggle in such circumstances suspended'' (Hall 1996a, 422-33). The perma- nent instability of hegemony means that the World Bank and the IMF , despite their global financial and political clout, must work hard to maintain control, just as the counterhegemonic movements that wish to undermine the power of the IFIs in order to create a better life for the multitudes must fight on a multiplicity of fronts to forge a new popular hegemony. Gramsci saw the national-popular as a key site of democratic struggle involving complex sets of relations between the state and civil society, wherein culture features centrally as the ''historically-shaped terrain on which all 'new' philosophical and theoretical currents work and with which they must come to terms'' (Hall 1996a, 434, 439).

Gramsci's proposition that the classical revolutionary model of an all-out assault waged along a singular battle front (the ''war of manoeuvre'' for control of the state) must give way to the much more protracted, tactical, and multidimensional ''war of position'' staged across many cultural sites within civil society (Hall 1996a, 427-28) has a particular kind of ironical force in the context of Nicaragua, which in the 1970s and 1980s successfully overthrew a brutal and corrupt dictatorship, and in the context of neoliberal globalization, where governance often seems largely directed by Washington rather than Managua. As a consequence of its past revolutionary struggles, there is a widespread sense of exhaustion from the traumas and legacies of war in Nicaragua, and the traditional left there is widely seen as discredited and in disarray (see Cupples and Larios 2005). Indeed, political vibrancy in Nicaragua today emerges not from traditional political parties but from an organized civil society and new social movements. It is through such sources that relations between Nicaragua and Washington have become sites of hegemonic negotiation and struggle, in much the same way as do those between Northern Leo ´n and Managua; moreover, such hegemonic processes are today mediated through the supranational emergence of a Latin American counter-center that pulses around the progressive movements emblematized by populist figures such as Venezuela's Hugo Cha ´vez and Bolivia's Evo Morales.

Former mayor of El Sauce and current INGES coordinator for Northern Leo ´n, Alfonso Narva ´ez, states that since the Achuapa agreements have become a development plan, there is much greater public awareness of national and international policies concerning the role of IFIs, the Nicaraguan National Budget and fiscal policy, the Central American-Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA), and the proposed Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA). He understands this as a kind of awakening ( despertar ) among the people of Northern Leo ´n, who have gained a high degree of what

he refers to as economic literacy and are able to actively participate in the development of their municipality, factors that serve to construct, expand, reconfigure, and rearticulate concepts and practices of citizenship. This rearticulated citizenship can therefore be linked to that which was on display in Mar del Plata, Argentina, in November 2005, where Latin American leaders soundly defeated the Bush Administration's efforts to create a ''Free Trade Area of the Americas,'' which Cha ´vez, in his address to a 25,000-strong rally of cheering and energized anti-Bush and anti-FTAA protestors gathered there, characterized as ''an old project of the imperial eagle that from the beginning has wanted to sink its claws'' into the region (Rohter and Bumiller 2005).

Recent events in Northern Leo ´n have thus created conditions that are conducive to the emergence of a new historical bloc in Nicaragua (as has been developing in other parts of Latin America). The Achuapa agreements serve as a reference point for the proliferation of cultural and political struggle. This has led to the formation of a layer of organic intellectuals engaged in processes of ''ideological diffusion'' (Gramsci 1985, 382, quoted in Landy 2002, 167). The new roles adopted by members of AMULEON and RADEL are particularly innovative in this regard, overcoming the geographical constraints of the region, touching everyday practical consciousness through face-to-face interactions, and aligning themselves with an emerging political awareness. These new cultural, political, and institutional arrangements are particularly significant in the context of multinational capitalism. They provide an important means of addressing the conditions under which commodities are produced and sold or in which children fail to go to school, thus constituting emergent forms of citizenship for social and political actors. The enrollment of once largely ineffective and inactive state bodies such as the CDMs into new development alliances and ''global network practices'' (Amin 2002, 395) has given these bodies a new lease on life, led them to reinterpret their roles, increased their interactions with other state and nonstate actors, and encouraged them to insert themselves into global politics in new ways. The emergent forms of citizenship to which such bodies are articulated, engage with and are thoroughly shaped by globalizing and transnational processes and discourses, but are crucially grounded in a local sense of belonging and of loyalty to region and community. As Escobar (2001, 165-66) has suggested, ''it is important to learn to see place-based cultural, ecological, and economic practices as important sources of alternative visions and strategies for reconstructing local and regional worlds, no matter how produced by 'the global' they might also be.'' In these new development processes, Northern Leo ´n is reimagined through both its intraand extra-regional connections and articulations, which leads us to reject the ''notion that 'social relations' are contained at particular scales'' (Bulkeley 2005, 884) and to instead understand postdevelopment dynamics as multiscalar (Jessop and Sum 2006). This allows us to avoid the tendency evident in some critical circles to see the macrolevel of social structures as merely reproduced at the microlevel of everyday life. We instead see the culture and micropolitics of everyday life as sites for both social reproduction and for ''glimpses of the possible within the present-of potential for something beyond it'' (Davies 2006, 224, 235).

Indeed, in many ways the culture of everyday life in Northern Leo ´n often comes to resemble de Certeau's (1984) analysis of popular culture as a set of persistent tactics turned toward the creation of spaces of reimagination and agency within the places that are constructed by colonizing and controlling forces of one sort or another. Our interest here, however, concerns the organization and leadership roles undertaken by civil society groups within this tactical culture, and thus differentiates our focus from de Certeau's emphasis on the peripatetic activities of individuated cultural consumers. For example, RADEL activists promote progressive popular economic literacies in Northern Leo ´n communities through the proliferation of networks of community meetings devoted to wide-ranging discussions of how to reimagine and enact development as an endogenous rather than an externally-imposed process, and what this might entail in terms of harnessing the region's existing economic strengths and artisanal skills. These processes sometimes take theatrical forms, as in the case of a play that toured the region and thematized issues around neoliberalism and globalization; it was widely attended within the communities of Northern Leo ´n and followed by open-ended discussion sessions among audience members. Other issues explored through such community networks have included the exploitation of the region by economic ''middlemen''; the transformation of subsistence into cash-crop farming; domestic violence and the relations between economic and gender inequality; and the use of media such as radio, Internet, and TV to do regional outreach on economic and political issues and to reunite families that have been dispersed through the deterritorializing impacts of neoliberal globalization. Consequently, there is emerging in Northern Leo ´n a new critical public sphere. It is now commonplace to hear people with little formal education speak very articulately about development strategies, neoliberalism, and globalization. Similarly, there are large

networks of men against violence throughout the region, where not long ago there was virtually no public discussion of domestic violence.

Within this emergent critical public sphere of Northern Leo ´n then, a variety of cultural activities have been successfully articulated to a range of political priorities. Through music, theater, and media, cultural expressivity is continually reconfigured to meet the new political demands of the contemporary period. Even older forms such as the revolutionary tradition of political theater, along with poetry, music, and dance, display a new vitality as they take on the discourses and challenges of global neoliberalism. Alfredo Rivera Lara, a music teacher of the Casa de Cultura in El Sauce, works to turn deprived children from the barrios into talented musicians in a run-down building donated by the municipal council. He explained to us his vision for the articulation of culture and politics in the current conjuncture:

Between 1990 and 2000, our main objective has been to keep Nicaraguan culture alive and enable people to confront the abuses of power, and all the things that were happening. . . . Since then we have become highly critical of the problematic situation in which the population is living, and have tried to find ways to enable people to demand their rights, and to do what they need to do to achieve a new degree of development. That is why we established a base, this cultural center ( casa de cultura ) which we use as a reference point. We are hanging out in this dump-because it is a dump-but we like it because it is a cultural reference; it is a symbolic space to which all of our family members can come and watch what we do. We worked to give it this sense of culture and here we have established ourselves. We like it because we are doing a job which is very valuable.

[authors' translation]

## The Projection of Place into Space

While many development scholars have worked to critique, reject, and deconstruct the latest development buzzwords such as participation and poverty reduction (see Stirrat 1996; Cooke and Kothari 2001), the people of Northern Leo ´n have embarked upon important strategies of rearticulation. Rather than merely opposing or protesting the latest phase of global governance and the exclusions it generates, they have chosen to engage with it and provide alternative, locally grounded readings of the meanings of poverty reduction and participation. They insist that it is local knowledges and local experiences rather than the latest mandates from Washington that should guide and inform development planning (see

Mosse 2001). They are thus producing a geographically and historically specific (in place of a universalizing) perspective on global processes that takes local potentialities and vulnerabilities as its starting point. This amounts to a kind of ''upscaling'' of local struggles (Routledge 2003, 334), where ordinary people are engaging with processes that affect their everyday lives but from which they have hitherto been excluded.

If we reverse now the polarities of de Certeau's (1984) use of the terms space and place , these processes in Northern Leo ´n can be seen to constitute a ''place project'' (Escobar 2001, 163), whereby a place is projected into a global space that is constituted and dominated by powerful interests; such projections of place into the transnational discursive and regulatory spaces of IFIs and capital might then catalyze reworkings of existing power relations by facilitating reappropriations of powerful discourses and cultural forms in ways that enlarge the scope for local agency (Dirlik 2001, 40; Escobar 2001). This is finally a localizing political strategy that aims to deflect the disciplinary power of global entities. Dirlik (2001, 40, and quoted in Escobar 2001, 164) thus argues that local cultures can defend themselves against normalization through globalizing dynamics only if places ''project themselves into the spaces that are presently the domains of capital and modernity.'' That Northern Leon has produced its own regional development plan and secured representation on its own behalf in hearings before the IMF and the GISN is illustrative of such place-project(ion)s, which belong to a new way of doing politics in the Latin American context. ''The production of space through processes and narratives of capital and development, for instance, is quite different from the space struggled for by [traditional] social movements'' (Escobar 2001, 165). Seen in this light, poverty reduction works as a ''framing horizon'' (Garcı ´ a Canclini 2001, 3), and exploiting its discursive ambiguities facilitates participation in national and global processes. We have then a form of discursive activism that promotes the formation of new place-imaginaries and thus enables the restoration of some degree of ''symmetry between the local and the global'' (Escobar 2001, 163; Dirlik 2001).

In the context of Northern Leo ´n, institutionality has thus become open to the mobilization of popular power. This differentiates the activities of Nicaragua's new development alliances from more familiar, extra-institutional forms of political struggle enacted by many of the contemporary movements against corporate neoliberalism (see Eschle 2005). For instance, when the representatives of Northern Leon forced bureaucrats from the central government to endure for several hours a long

and physically uncomfortable ride along the region's inadequate roadway infrastructure, their actions involved at once an element of protest and of constructive engagement that showcased at the most localized site imaginable-that of the body and its physical experience of space and place, the disruption of its ordinary senses of proprioception, and so forth-the specific needs and deprivations of the region. ''The concrete and specific ways in which poverty becomes a material reality for billions of people around the world'' are tragically ''overlooked in so many neoliberal scriptings of international development'' (Power 2003, 171). Such grounded understandings of poverty are precisely what the new development alliances of Northern Leo ´n have put onto Nicaragua's national political agenda through the Achuapa agreements and their other activities. They have thus drawn attention to the consequences of inadequate access to medical supplies, treatment facilities, housing, and proper sanitation, but also to the consequences of neglecting the productive capacities and support needs of small farmers and community vegetable gardens, and to the repercussions of failing to create sufficient academic opportunities for young students.

Northern Leo ´n has traditionally been seen by the central government as unproductive and lacking in economic potential. Through their collective practices, the people of Northern Leo ´n have vigorously debated both the historical causes and consequences of poverty. They have also rearticulated and thus broadened the concept of poverty to include not just low monetary income but also the effects of land degradation, disasters, pesticide use, failed harvests, poor roads, domestic violence, deficient self-esteem, as well as inadequate access to healthcare, education, bank credit, technical agricultural assistance, information about market prices for agricultural products, and formal political spheres and processes. Indeed, the people of Northern Leo ´n have resignified their regions as ''impoverished'' rather than ''poor,'' themselves as producers and social actors rather than development beneficiaries, and their development focus as entrepreneurial. 4 These identity assertions and rearticulations constitute a form of place rescripting that is reshaping Northern Leo ´n's prospects. Hence the poor in Northern Leo ´n have gained new forms of government support for the region and ended their exclusion from central economic planning (Aguirre 2005). As Abel Reyes, the former mayor of Achuapa, put it, now ''our voices are listened to and we get to make representations to the central government. We can see how we have had an influence on the National Council of Economic and Social Planning'' (Peralta 2002b, authors' translation). The people of the region are creating new spaces for political engagement through which ordinary people can participate in the contestation and transformation of meanings that shape everyday materialities in negative and damaging ways.

## Conclusion: The Good Sense of Popular Postdevelopment Practices

The establishment of a neoliberal common sense generates spatial constraints that struggle to contain, confine, and control the social imaginaries that can operate within particular social formations, and thus to circumscribe the agency of both state and nonstate actors. But a Gramscian perspective draws attention to the permanently unsettled relations of negotiation and contestation between a social formation's ''common sense'' and the ''good sense'' of a people that can never be finally extinguished. INGES, the mayors of Northern Leo ´n, and civil society leaders have begun to consolidate and amplify a good sense that works to undermine the neoliberal and welfarist common sense that had established some degree of political effectiveness throughout the region prior to the Achuapa agreements. As diverse forms of political organization and cultural expression proliferate, so too does the region's good sense regarding development, poverty reduction, and political alliance formation. It is this good sense that facilitates the mobilization of alternative and more empowered political identities capable of exerting influence over the nature of development in the region. It is this good sense, which we might see as a popular form of postdevelopment thinking, that is slowly producing a more malleable understanding of a development that is to be forged in the spaces and places of everyday life rather than being executed according to the designs of Washington-based World Bank officials. It is this regional, materially, spatially and historically conditioned good sense that is driving the new development alliances to hold the state accountable for the provision of essential and ongoing social services, even in the face of a powerful neoliberal common sense that has generated dependence on shortterm NGO projects in those areas where the state has failed to appear.

The projection of place into (global) space can similarly exert a destabilizing force against the certitudes, rigidities, and fixities that neoliberal common sense strives to engender. Recent experiences in Northern Leo ´n have demonstrated how the reworking of discourses and narratives that construct the spaces, places, and subjects of development, can promote the emergence of new citizen-subjectivities and a critical public

sphere that bring tangible improvements to people's sense of self and in their wider lives-even within a highly negative conjuncture marked by extreme political polarization, widespread corruption, and intensive poverty exacerbated by imposed structural adjustment policies. The new development alliances of Northern Leo ´n have enlarged spaces for political innovation and for development practice grounded in local economic potentialities and tailored to local social and cultural conditions. Their activities have captured national media attention and pressured the neoliberal central government to respond to Northern Leo ´n's social service needs. These new alliances are thus effectively challenging their region's historical subordination within the national economy and policy-making process, and are as well disrupting the linear temporalities and spatial fixities of mainstream development thought and practice.

## Acknowledgments

The field work for this research was funded in part by a University of Canterbury research grant (U6540). The authors wish to thank the people of Northern Leo ´n for including us in their political struggles and the Annals editor and three reviewers for their helpful and constructive comments, as well as Marney Brosnan for cartography.

## Notes

1. The ensuing account of Gramsci's theoretical formulations is heavily indebted to Hall (1996a).
2. There is much confusion surrounding property and land ownership in Nicaragua (Cupples 1992). Beneficiaries of the agrarian reform process in the 1980s often failed to receive titles with their land. As a result, many became vulnerable after the Sandinista electoral defeat, when former landowners returned from exile and attempted to reclaim land. In Northern Leo ´n, only 38.5 percent of farmers possess legal titles to the lands they farm (Government of Nicaragua and AMULEON-AMUNORCHI 2003).
3. Prior to this process, the municipalities of Achuapa, El Sauce, Santa Rosa del Pen ˜on, and El Jı ´ caral had come together to form AMULEON ( Asociacio ´n de Municipios de Leo ´n Norte [Association of Municipalities of Northern Leo ´n]). One other municipality, Malpaisillo-Larreynaga (which is not formally part of Northern Leo ´n but shares borders with the other municipalities), also joined the process in 2001. Given that the municipalities of Northern Leon had a combined total of two Sandinista and two Liberal mayors, MalpaisilloLarreynaga was initially excluded from this process as the Liberal mayors argued that its inclusion would have destroyed the balance of political power.
4. In Northern Leo ´n, the conceptual distinction between producer and entrepreneur is beginning to blur. As Aguirre (2005) indicates, producers have tended to be locally un-
5. derstood as farmers who produce merely to survive and do not care whether they make a profit or not.

## References

- Aguirre, E. 2005. Los acuerdos de Achuapa: Una experiencia de concertacio ´n local/nacional [The Achuapa agreements: A local/national pacting experience]. Managua: INGES.
- Aitken, R. 2006. Performativity, popular finance and security in the global political economy. In International political economy and poststructural politics , ed. M. de Goede, 77-96. Houndmills, U.K.: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Allen, J., D. Massey, and A. Cochrane. 1998. Rethinking the region . London: Routledge.
- Amin, A. 2002. Spatialities of globalisation. Environment and Planning A 34:385-99.
- Appadurai, A. 2000. Grassroots globalization and the research imagination. Public Culture 12 (1): 19.
- Babb, F. 2001. After revolution: Mapping gender and cultural politics in neoliberal Nicaragua . Austin: University of T exas Press.
- Barrett, C. B., D. R. Lee, and J. G. McPeak. 2005. Institutional arrangements for rural poverty reduction and resource conservation. World Development 33 (2): 193-97.
- Bradshaw, S., and B. Linneker. 2003. Civil society responses to poverty reduction strategies in Nicaragua. Progress in Development Studies 3 (2): 147-58.
- Bulkeley, H. 2005. Reconfiguring environmental governance: Towards a politics of scales and networks. Political Geography 24:875-902.
- Condit, C. M. 1994. Hegemony in a mass-mediated society: Concordance about reproductive technologies. Critical Studies in Mass Communication 11 (3): 205-30.
- Cooke, B., and U. Kothari, eds. 2001. Participation: The new tyranny . London: Zed Books.
- Cornally, J., T. Crowley, and S. O'Neill. 2004. The impact of poverty reduction strategies on the rural sector in Honduras and Nicaragua . Study carried out by Tro ´caire for the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). Available at www.trocaire.org/policyandadvocacy/debt/Impact\_ of\_PRS\_in\_Honduras\_Nicaragua.pdf (last accessed 22 May 2006).
- Cranshaw, M. I. 2003. Entonces sı ´ hay avances: El PRSPcito de Leo ´n Norte: Una experiencia de incidencia de IBIS en Nicaragua [So we are making progress: The Northern Leo ´n ''PRSPcito'': An advocacy experience from IBIS in Nicaragua]. Guatemala: Arte Color y T exto.
- Cupples, J. 1992. Ownership and privatisation in post-revolutionary Nicaragua. Bulletin of Latin American Research 11 (3): 295-306.
- FFF . 2004. HIPC. In The Routledge encyclopedia of international development , ed. T . Forsyth, 314. London: Routledge. FFF . 2005. Love and money in an age of neoliberalism: Gender, work and single motherhood in post-revolutionary Nicaragua. Environment and Planning A 37 (2): 305-22.
- Cupples, J., and I. Larios. 2005. Gender, elections, terrorism: The geopolitical enframing of the 2001 Nicaraguan elections. Political Geography 24 (3): 317-39.
- Davies, M. 2006. Everyday life in the global political economy. In International political economy and poststructural politics , ed. M. de Goede, 219-37. Houndmills, U.K.: Palgrave Macmillan.

- de Certeau, M. 1984. The practice of everyday life , trans. S. Rendall. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Diokno-Pascual, M. T. 2002. Development and advocacy. In Development and advocacy , ed. D. Eade, 1-6. Oxford, U.K.: Oxfam.
- Dirlik, A. 2001. Place-based imagination: Globalism and the politics of place. In Places and politics in an age of globalization , ed. R. Prazniak and A. Dirlik, 15-51. Lanham, MD: Rowman &amp; Littlefield.
- Eschle, C. 2005. Constructing ''the anti-globalisation movement.'' In Critical theories, international relations and ''the anti-globalisation movement,'' ed. C. Eschle and B. Maiguascha, 17-35. London: Routledge.
- Escobar, A. 1995. Encountering development: The making and unmaking of the third world . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- FFF . 2001. Culture sits in places: Reflections on globalism and subaltern strategies of localization. Political Geography 20:139-74.
- Esteva, G. 1987. Regenerating people's space. Alternatives 12 (1): 125-52.
- Flores Vergara, M. 2004. Tranques en Occidente [Roadblocks in the West]. El Nuevo Diario 5 May. Available at www. elnuevodiario.com.ni (last accessed 1 September 2006).
- Friedman, J. 1997. Simplifying complexity. In Siting culture , ed. K. F . Olwig and K Hastings, 268-91. London: Routledge.
- Garcı ´ a Canclini, N. 2001. Consumers and citizens: Globalization and multicultural conflicts , trans. G. Yu ´dice. Minneapolis: Minnesota University Press.
- Gibson-Graham, J. K. 1996. The end of capitalism (as we knew it): A feminist critique of political economy . Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
- Gitlin, T . 1994. Prime time ideology: The hegemonic process in television entertainment. In Television: The critical view , 5th ed., ed. H. Newcomb, 516-36. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Gledhill, C. 1988. Pleasurable negotiations. In Female spectators: Looking at film and television , ed. E. D. Pribram, 64-89. London: Verso.
- Government of Nicaragua and AMULEON-AMUNORCHI. 2003. Plan estrate ´gico de desarrollo regional rural de la zona seca (PEDRR) [Strategic regional rural development plan for the dry zone]. Alcaldı ´ as de AMULEON, AMUNORCHI and MAGFOR.
- Gramsci, A. 1985. Selections from the cultural writings , ed. D. Forgacs. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Green, D. 1995. Silent revolution: The rise of market economics in Latin America . London: Latin America Bureau.
- Grossberg, L. 1996. On postmodernism and articulation: An interview with Stuart Hall. In Stuart Hall: Critical dialogues in cultural studies , ed. D. Morley and K. Chen, 131-50. London: Routledge.
- FFF . 2006. Does cultural studies have futures? Should it? (Or what's the matter with New York?): Cultural studies, contexts and conjunctures. Cultural Studies 20 (1): 1-32.
- Hall, S. 1996a. Gramsci's relevance for the study of race and ethnicity. In Stuart Hall: Critical dialogues in cultural studies , ed. D. Morley and K. Chen, 411-40. London: Routledge. FFF
- . 1996b. What is this ''black'' in black popular culture? In Stuart Hall: Critical dialogues in cultural studies , ed. D. Morley and K. Chen, 465-75. London: Routledge.
- Hanlon, J. 1998. HIPC heresies and the flat earth response . London: Jubilee 2000 Coalition.
- Jessop, B., and N. Sum. 2006. T owards a cultural international political economy: Poststructuralism and the Italian school. In International political economy and poststructural politics , ed. M. de Goede, 157-76. Houndmills, U.K.: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Landy, M. 2002. Antonio Gramsci. In Postmodernism: The key figures , ed. H. Bertens and J. Natoli, 162-67. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
- Larios, I., and A. Morales. 2003. El desarrollo local concertado: Una vı ´ a para el cambio en Nicaragua [Pacting for local development: A route to change in Nicaragua]. Managua: INGES and IBIS Dinamarca.
- Larner, W . 2006. Neoliberalism: Policy, ideology, governmentality. In International political economy and poststructural politics , ed. M. de Goede, 199-218. Houndmills, U.K.: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Laurie, N., C. Dwyer, S. Holloway, and F . Smith. 1999. Geographies of new femininities . Essex, U.K.: Longman.
- Marcuello, C., and C. Marcuello. 2002. Northern words, southern readings. In Development and advocacy , ed. D. Eade, 149-59. Oxford, U.K.: Oxfam.
- Mosse, D. 2001. People's knowledge, participation and patronage: Operations and representations in rural development. In Participation: The new tyranny , ed. B. Cooke and U. Kothari, 16-35. London: Zed Books.
- Peet, D. 2003. Unholy trinity: The IMF , World Bank, and the WTO . London: Zed Books.
- Peralta, M. 2002a. Cierran por falta de recursos [Closed because of lack of funds]. La Prensa , 21 September. Available at www-ni.laprensa.com.ni (last accessed 1 September 2006).
- FFF . 2002b. Municipios de Leo ´n con visio ´n empresarial para resolver pobreza [Municipalities of Leo ´n with an entrepreneurial vision to resolve poverty]. La Prensa , 1 April. Available at www-ni.laprensa.com.ni (last accessed 1 September 2006).
- Possing, S. 2003. Between grassroots and governments. Civil society experiences with the PRSPs: A study of local civil society response to the PRSPs. Danish Institute for International Working paper 20. Available at www.globalpolicy. org/ngos/int/bwi/2003/09grass.pdf (last accessed 23 May 2006).
- Power, M. 2003. Rethinking development geographies . London: Routledge.
- Rohter, L., and E. Bumiller. 2005. Hemisphere meeting ends without trade consensus. New York Times , 6 November. Available at www.nytimes.com (last accessed 26 August 2006).
- Routledge, P . 2003. Convergence space: Process geographies of grassroots globalisation networks. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 28 (3): 333-49.
- Slater, D. 1993. The geopolitical imagination and the enframing of development theory. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 18 (4): 419-37.
- FFF . 1997. Spatial politics/social movements: Questions of (b)orders and resistance in global times. In Geographies of resistance , ed. S. Pile and M. Keith, 258-76. London: Routledge.
- Stirrat, R. 1996. The new orthodoxy and old truths: Participation, empowerment and other buzzwords. In Assessing participation: A debate from South Asia , ed. S. Bastian and N. Bastian, 67-92. Delhi: Konark.

Walker, D., J .P . Jones III, S. M. Roberts, and O. R. Froehling. 2007. When participation meets empowerment: The WWF and the politics of invitation in the Chimalapas, Mexico. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 97: 423-44.

Yu ´dice, G. 2001. Translator's introduction: From hybridity to policy: For a purposeful cultural studies. In G. Garcı ´ a Canclini, Consumers and citizens: Globalization and multicultural conflicts , ix-xxxviii. Minneapolis: Minnesota University Press.

Correspondence: Department of Geography, University of Canterbury, Private Bag 4800, Christchurch, New Zealand, e-mail: julie.cupples@ canterbury.ac.nz (Cupples); School of Culture, Literature and Society, University of Canterbury, Private Bag 4800, Christchurch, New Zealand, e-mail: kevin.glynn@canterbury.ac.nz (Glynn); Instituto de Investigaciones y Gestio ´n Social, Las Palmas, de los sema ´foros de Montoya 3 cuadras abajo, 80 vrs al lago, Managua, Nicaragua, e-mail: inges@cablenet.com.ni (Larios).