## THEIR SPACE: SECURITY AND SERVICE WORKERS IN A BRAZILIAN GATED COMMUNITY"

## JACQUELYN CHASE

ABSTRACT.  This study examines the role of service workers in creating a secure landscape in a zone of gated communities near Belo Horizonte, Brazil. Most research on gated communities emphasizes their  segregation  and formal security apparatuses. In fact, gated  communities interact with surrounding rural settlements because they draw their service employees from them. Security emerges from informal relationships of trust that property owners establish with service workers. Gardeners, especially, enable homeowners to project their property investment to others through landscaping. Equally of importance, a manicured garden conveys the message that a home is receiving daily attention-and is secure-even if the owner is not present. The study probes this interdependence  from the point of view of gardeners in the context of  one gated  community in an area  south of  Belo Horizonte and the attempts by members of its homeowners association to minimize the sense of fear they associate with the Brazilian  city. Keywords: Brazil, gardens, gated communities, securitx  service workers.

g f t e r   decades of moving up into urban towers, the Brazilian elite is now moving --out to gated subdivisions on metropolitan fringes. In these compounds the wealthy can  relax  without fear  as  armed guards  circulate  on motorcycles  and high-tech firms provide surveillance. As elsewhere in the world, developers intensely market to prospective buyers the sense of security the gates provide  (Davis 1992; Luymes 1997; Andrade 2006). The gated communities  offer a bucolic  counterpoint to urban life, and often function as vacation or weekend  destinations.  The design and isolation  of these  subdivisions  allow  families to forego the protective walls that encircle each of their urban homes, and they can display their gardens and homes to the street. They can jog, take walks, and be neighborly, much as they might in the Brazilian interior or, as many say, as they imagine life in U.S. suburbs.

But during the week, when the owners are in the city, the citizens of these gated subdivisions  are the hundreds of people  who maintain the grounds and clean the homes. Gated communities regulate the circulation of workers with a system that requires renewal of badges and proof of good conduct. But are  these  workers  a  challenge  to  security, or  essential  to  it?  How  do  their freedom and circulation fit into the high-tech image  and strategic design that most of the gated communities wish to project? How does their relationship w i t h homeowners square  with the image  that most critics  have drawn of the gated subdivision as a space of social  segregation and insulation?

* I  am  grateful to  the  Department of  Geography and  Planning at California State University-Chico,  which provided me with a semester-long sabbatical to complete my research in  Brazil. I also would like to thank my Brazilian friends and colleagues, especially Rachel, Ralfo,  Roseni, and  Cid, and  Heloisa Soares de Moura Costa, for their interest and kind support. To  the people who told  me  their stories, and to the members of the gated community who provided me with data, ideas, and a  place to stay: muito obrigada. Two anonymous reviewers and the editor of  this journal  made insightful suggestions. All shortcomings  in  this  article my responsibility.

%J DR. CHASE  is an associate professor  of  geography and planning at California State UniversityChico, Chico, California 95929-0425.

Security comes not only from design and surveillance of space or from the screening of workers by homeowners associations but also from practices that give domestic workers  intimate  access to homes. These informal practices are largely unregulated by homeowners associations but intensely negotiated by owners and domestic workers. The growing spatial distance between  the rich  and poor that most literature on gated communities emphasizes would presuppose heightened mistrust, yet  one of the most enduring qualities of Brazilian society has been  a complex infusion of servility and intimacy in relationships  between the rich and poor (Lauderdale Graham 1988; Scheper-Hughes 1992).  Such intimacy is found in other countries,' but it is pervasive in the middle and upper classes in Brazil and can obscure the social polarization on which it rests. In this article I show that the social polarization inherent in these relationships  is reconfigured  and negotiated in ways that are specific to these spaces.

The prestige that comes from hiring  urban-based  professional  landscapers, and the regulation  of domestic workers  in gated  communities  by homeowners associations, potentially contradict  gardeners'  perceptions of their own  responsibilities,  prestige,  and power. The displacement  of  traditional  domestic work by new forms of regulation  and by professionalization  will not do away with  this work or destroy the intimacy that pervades it. If segregation-symbolized  by gates and walls-epitomizes social polarization, this does not mean that social polarization would disappear in the absence of spatial segregation-symbolized by circulation, intimacy, and proximity. However, the broader  spatial context in which domestic work takes place does affect the ability of gardeners and other domestic workers to negotiate their  terms of employment, making daily life more livable, and the future more predictable.

The Brazilian  elite  continues  to  depend on  domestic  workers  despite  the increasing modernity of domestic life-including the use of the newest generation of  home appliances-and the incipient professionalization  of services  that were once  entirely  the domain of personal service  work such as child  care and food  preparation. Although urban professionals  have reduced  their daily  dependence  on  live-in  nannies and other domestic  workers,  their  need for  gardeners  and  part-time domestic  workers wil l grow as a  result of their property  ownership  in gated communities.2  The relationship  between employer and  worker includes  the  private  worlds  ofworkers in  villages  and settlements  outside  the gates and thus adds a regional dimension to the security and daily life of the gated compounds.

A gated community south of Belo Horizonte, capital of the state of Minas Gerais, provides  examples  of  this intimacy  not only  in and  around private  homes but also  in the surrounding settlements that property owners in gated subdivisions  draw on for their workers. (Because  of  the personal information contained in a small  sample  ofworkers, and because  of  commentaries  on the area's security,  I do  not name  the  gated community in this article.)  Networks  of kinship  among  workers have coalesced  in villages  and  groups of residences  outside  the  gates  of this  elite  development,  where  almost  no one  is a stranger. The homeowners in the gated communities benefit from this stability,  as  the supporting

relationships reduce the risk that 'bad elements'  will enter the gates.  Some  homeowners inside the gates  build solidarity  with those outside through practices that include visits, exchanges  between households, payment ofbus fares,  purchase of homes, and, most of all,  creation of a domestic space by the workers who spend much of their lives in intimacy with their employers. This mutuality is particularly strong in gated communities with controlled access  and where the livelihoods  of people  in the surrounding neighborhoods are almost wholly dependent on these gated comrnunitie~.~

New development,  infrastructure, and transportation  in the region  will bring growth and higher land prices, challenging the continuity of places that have adapted to change by  reinforcing  tradition. Authorities  have already approved  plans  for the development of 800 lots near  the condominio (gated community) that is the subject of this study. Speculators may have exaggerated the demand for land outside the condominio in this remote valley, but their actions have set the stage for future growth that will include the dislocation of working-class and farming families. Eighty percent of the 3,000 lots in this area are vacant  (IBRAM  2003). In sum, the equilibrium between gated communities and the communities outside the gates that serve their  needs is fragile; but for the time being this relationship  has made gated  communities viable and valuable.

## BRAZIL'S  GATED COMMUNITIES: WHAT  Do WE KNOW ABOUT THEM?

For some, the answer to the question is 'enough.' Indeed, scrutiny of this mode of development in Brazil, most of which  has shown gated communities  to be elitist enclaves that  reinforce class segregation, has been  i n t e n ~ e . ~ The tropes of elitism and segregation closely parallel analyses from case studies in the United States and Europe,  which typically  explain gated communities from the perspective of urban decay, white flight, immigration, and industrial collapse in world cities such as Los Angeles, New York, and London  (Davis 1992). The gated  compound of  late-twentiethcentury America expresses the exhaustion of urban sprawl that now replicates the syndrome of  decay as the  poor themselves  flee the inner city. According to one developer  from Orange County, California, planned communities  provide spatial enclosure and definition-along with  security-that are missing  from the urban fabric  (Luymes 1997, 191).

Studies of  gated  communities outside  the  United  States  or Europe  have  increased, confirming  the globalization  of  this phenomenon  (Leisch 2002; Wu  and Webber 2004; Janoschka and Borsdorf 2006; Mycoo 2006; kvarez-Rivadulla2007). The most cited  study on Brazilian  'fortified  enclaves' is that of  Teresa Caldeira (2003), who researched high-rise compounds on the suburban fringe of the city of Silo Paulo in the 1990s. In that period  ,550  Paulo was emblematic of the rush to leave the traditional downtown area, where elites had inhabited apartment buildings and single-family homes for generations after having displaced the  poor to the periphery. Outside the old core but still within  the city limits a new kind  of high-rise, equipped with protective walls and security systems, rose up. These enclaves included not only a reconfigured living space of multiple high-rise buildings

but spaces for recreation-pools, courts, and jogging paths-and shopping as well. Developers  advertised  them as more 'tranquil' versions of the urban high-rise, although, ironically, they chose peripheral areas that favelas already occupied. An additional  advantage for developers was that, in most municipalities, urban  planning was  poorly  equipped  to deal with  sprawl, so developers could  act without restraint.

Caldeira  writes  that, by  1990, a horizontal version  of  the gated  community started to appear around Brazil's largest cities. The Alphaville complexes  (about twenty of them across Brazil, including  one in the  Belo  Horizonte  metropolitan region) are an example of this kind of elite build-out. Alphaville markets its developments as new towns, with commercial and social infrastructure such as schools, parks, restaurants, and shopping centers, and emphasizes meticulously landscaped open spaces for residents.  Homes are ostentatious and modern. Other variations of the horizontal  gated community include several in Belo Horizonte that promise homeowners a retreat to more 'natural' environments with little urban  infrastructure.  These  could be  classified as 'recreational' gated  communities, where residents normally do not live year-round. The community in which I conducted my research fits this profile, with no school, only one nondenominational  church, limited public transportation,  and one tiny, overpriced market. Only about 20 percent of homeowners  live there full-time.

Even if vertical enclaves  succeed in separating the public lives of rich and poor, they are never geographically  far from a favela (Caldeira  2003).  Although realtors  boast about the grand vistas from the towers,  the views are often of squatter settlements. Horizontal gated communities take advantage  of the rural environment  to promote a way of life that is close to nature and far from people. On the urban hinterland the poor are part of a remnant local population (not  feared by the rich) that has not been augmented by poor migrants (feared by the rich). Maria Jose  Alvarez-Rivadulla finds that gated dwellers  in Montevideo, Uruguay, make a similar distinction between  'safe'1ocal  poor populations and the 'unsafe' urban poor (2007). This strategy  of building away from the dangerous urban poor-rests  on  the fictions,  which developers  encourage,  that the urban hinterland is a  kind of timeless, unpopulated landscape. The illusion of wealth and self-sufficiency makes is easier  for planners to ignore workers'  housing and transportation needs (Costa 2oo6a, 112; Laschefski 2006). Advertisements for gated Communities emphasize a return to family  life, as if these communities were simply a compilation of self-sufficient nuclear households. But the escape to the urban hinterland, where residents hope to enjoy  life in 'American-style''  homes without protective  walls, has not allowed  the wealthy to abandon their deep dependence on domestic workers. On  the contrary, these  workers have become even more essential  to this new life project of the rich.

## THE I \_\_ SECOND -. GOLD  RUSH OF THE EIXO  SUL

The Eixo Sul (South Axis) of Belo Horizonte comprises two of this metropolitan region's'ihirty-four  municipalities:  Brumadinho and Nova  Lima. (Figure i).With a  combined population of 108,000,  these municipalities are home to a mere frac-

tion  of  the  metropolitan  region's 4.8  million  people. Yet  they are a  frontier of urban growth that has increased dramatically since 1990 (Laschefski 2006; Magalhaes, Linhares, and Melo Monte-M6r 2006, 412). Because of the vast wealth that has flowed into the Eixo Sul with  the growth  of elite subdivisions, people  have come to see the area as exclusively rich. Recent work by faculty and students at the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais show that the process is far more complex (Costa 2006b).

The extremely hilly Eixo Sul is part of a larger zone of gold and iron-ore mining in central  Minas  Gerais. Both  Nova  Lima and Brumadinho have dozens of active and abandoned open-face mines. Over the last 150 years or so, various national and international mining companies have occupied and controlled most of this region (Pereira, Mungai, and Rodrigues 2005). The hegemony of large mining corporations has  deterred  illegal occupations  of land because these  companies possess the security apparatus to stop them, and their holdings are well recognized and demarcated by fences, signs, and other infrastructure  (Costa 2oo6a; Bhering and Melo Monte-Mor 2006). Many of these companies are now developing their land as gated communities and commercial areas in a process they call 'the second gold  rush.'  By  owning, mining, and controlling access to much  of the area for more than a century, these companies in effect controlled the advance of the urban frontier  into the Eixo Sul (Costa 2006a).

Nova  Lima and Brumadinho  have seen rapid  growth of gated communities since the 1970s.  B y   2000 Nova Lima had a total of thirty gated communities,  and Brumadinho  had eleven  (Bhering and Melo Monte-Mor  2006, 302-303).  One agglomeration  of these  gated  communities  is along the northwestern border of Nova Lima near the old municipal seat. Another axis of growth is along the Highway ~ ~ 0 4 0 , which links Belo Horizonte and Rio de Janeiro (Figure 2).

Although the Eixo Sul is famous for its gated communities, the urban fabric of this area is actually heterogeneous  (Mendonqa and Perpktuo 2006; Bhering and Melo Monte-M6r 2006). This area has seen the simultaneous expansion of rich and poor populations  through  migration,  suggesting that building beyond  the urban  fringe provides  the middle and upper classes only with temporary shelter from this inevitable encounter. The most  notable example of low-income settlement is that of Jardim Canada, in Nova Lima along ~ ~ 0 4 0 near the borders of the municipalities of Belo Horizonte and Brumadinho. Mining companies developed this neighborhood  in the early 195os, predicting its eventual connection with  the southern fringes of Belo Horizonte. Despite this connectivity with Belo Horizonte, it has emerged as a service center and source of workers for the gated communities along ~ ~ 0 4 0 (Figures 2 and 3).

Despite the reach of urbanization, the region retains rural hamlets, farms, and ranches. The remnants of farms and agricultural production, and evidence of the eighteenth-century  colonial presence, add to the charm and complexity  of the landscape (Pereira, Mungai, and Rodrigues 2005). In the gated community I studied, property owners drew workers from nearby hamlets that were once entirely

supported by ranching and farming. Though fragmented, this landscape still provides  large  quantities  of fresh vegetables  and dairy products to Belo Horizonte and supports subsistence agriculture (Figure 4). It is also prone to real  estate speculation  (Figure 5 ) .

FIG. 1-Metropolitan Belo Horizonte, Brazil, and its component municipalities. The gray area on the main map is the Eixo Sul. (Cartography by Chris Lewis, California State University-Chico,  with assistance from Jupira Gomes de Mendonca)

<!-- image -->

The gardener  is  one of many kinds of workers  whose presence is essential to providing property owners with the life they desire. The gated community in which I worked is one  of a new generation of 'green'  subdivisions in which the homeowners association debates sustainable development (Figure 6). A core group of environmentalist  property owners,  enabled by local and state legislation  on deforestation, embraced this goal. In the Eixo Sul, concern with the integrity of the Atlantic Forest  and with  the water  supply for the entire metropolitan  area, which  origi-

FIG.  2-Gated communities along ~ ~ 0 4 0 , in the municipalities  ofBelo Horizonte, Brumadinho, and Nova Lima in Minas Gerais State, BraziLSource: Modified from Costa 2006b, 253. (Cartography by Guy King, California State University-Chico)

<!-- image -->

FIG.  3-Jardim  Canada, along ~ ~ 0 4 0 , is a low-income settlement in Nova Lima close to the southern boundary  of  Belo Horizonte. Residents of  this neighborhood  serve the commercial needs of gated communities by offering goods and services near the highway. Proximity to Retiro das Pedras and Alphaville have created a labor market for domestic and construction workers from Jardim Canada. (Photograph by the author, October 2005)

<!-- image -->

nates  in  this  watershed,  is  integrated  into current metropolitan  zoning (Costa 2006a). Ironically,  as environmental awareness  grows in  this  region  because  of sprawl, developers use 'ecology' as a selling point for new subdivisions.

Landscaping  provides  not only the signature of wealth-a lush lawn  and a sparkling pool-but a  way  for property owners to express their  appreciation for ecology by  preserving  or planting  native  species.  Gardeners  have  been  increasingly drawn into the discourse  and practice  of environmentalism  in their  daily lives, which  in turn has  increased  the perception  of  gardeners  as quasi-professional workers in the community.  Gardeners' access to homes, their  relationships with their employers, and their tendency to stay for long periods in one job were reasons I  chose this category to probe class relationships  and security within  the gated  community.

The data for this article came from several secondary and primary sources. I consulted many unpublished and published works from the Eixo Sul interdisciplinary project  of  the Universidade  Federal de Minas Gerais. That project, the  first phase which  is now complete, has resulted  in the publication  of Novas Perqerias Metroplitanas, edited  by  Heloisa  Soares de Moura  Costa  (2006b).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Advertisements  by developers of  residential  and commercial property, as well as  landscaping and architecture  magazines  were  sources of information on the 'aesthetic of security' (Caldeira 2003). They also helped me understand the directions that elite real estate investment is taking and how this affects culture and the local economy. Some findings are the  result  of  my own  field observations  in the region,  particularly one gated  community where I  spent two weeks interviewing gardeners, residents,  and members of the homeowners ass~ciation.~

I conducted fourteen in-depth, semistructured interviews with gardeners. The first  part  of  each  interview  focused  on individual  and household  demographics, migration history, salary, education, and residential  information. The second part presented each participant with questions that invited reflections on security, aesthetics, sense of the future, and the interviewees' relationships with their employ-

FIG. 4 (facing page, top)-Rural Brumadinho, Brazil, is peppered with  remnant farms and ranches, but new homes, like the one in the background ofthis  photograph, are springing up. (Photograph by the author, November 2005)

FIG.  5 (jiacacingpage, bottom)-Land developers' signs are abundant at crossroads in rural Brumadinho, Brazil. (Photograph by the author, October 2005)

FIG. 6 (this page, top)-About 40 percent of the lots in this rural gated community in Minas Gerais State, Brazil, are vacant. Regulations permit a built footprint of 50 percent on lots of up to 1,200 square meters and of 20 percent on lots of 5,000 square meters or more. These conditions create a panorama that almost conceals the community in this photograph. (Photograph by the author, November 2005)

ers and with  their  peers.  I  selected  participants  through  'snowball' sampling6 Despite my connection with a property owner-a friend who provided me with a place to stay and with  initial contacts-I do not believe that the gardeners with whom I spoke were hesitant to describe their lives or give their opinions in a rich and detailed way.  I  have withheld  the interviewees' names and other  identifying characteristics in  order to protect their  anonymity.

## SECURITY AND THE BUILT  ENVIRONMENT

The birth of the semirural community for weekend enjoyment predates the obsession with security that is now built into the design and technology of gated communities. In the earliest stage, these communities were not, in fact, for permanent residents but were a kind of country club where people could spend the day barbecuing, swimming, and playing sports (Costa 2oo6a; Pires 2006). Security was not explicitly promoted or protected. Instead of absolute distance from the city, it was distance from poor neighborhoods or favelas that provided a sense of security and environmental enjoyment.

The first low-density  residential  community appeared  on the metropolitan fringe of Belo Horizonte in 1959. Retiro das Pedras, on the border of  Brumadinho and Nova Lima, attracted middle-class residents with alternative life projects and a commitment to living there year-round. The moderately sized lots did not allow palatial  homes  and extensive landscaping  (Andrade 2006). Almost  twenty years later, a  new project  explicitly addressed  emerging concerns with  security and referred to targeted  buyers  as 'sophisticated' and 'urbane.' Luciana Teixeira de Andrade describes the campaign of this new project:

'Live Where Life Is Worth Living'  was the title of its pamphlet. Inside, it specified its public: 'This  house in the mountains has all the conveniences of civilization that  you, man of the twentieth century, cannot do without: electronic comfort, communications, services.  Add to this recipe for life  a perfect combination  of nature and  progress.' It concludes: 'This  paradise is only ten minutes from the center of Belo Horizonte.' (2006, 278)

The pamphlet's authors cite the lot size-i,ooo square meters-and security, even though there was no specific infrastructure in place at the time.

In both  Brumadinho and Nova Lima, security measures  such as automatic gates and patrols by armed guards came later. As in earlier weekend resorts, distance from urban  centers would,  for the time being, assure these new residents a modicum of safety.  However, in the 1990s new communities had security built into their architecture, layout, and services. As  Andrade explains, 'Among the benefits [of this new wave of gated  communities] is private security which  controls the entrance of nonresidents. It was at this time [in  the 1990~1 that the term 'condominio' emerged to distinguish these communities  with simple neighborhoods where people could enter and circulate freely. Cundominios are built with security gates, private security companies are hired, and residential  associations formed' (2006, 279).

Ironically, publicity  for contemporary communities aimed  at the  very rich makes little  mention of  security measures, which  are implicit  and pervasive. Instead, advertisers repeatedly refer to the ability of gated communities to provide a high  quality of  urban  life  and  represent that  life  with  pictures  of  outdoor living-jogging, biking, hiking, and shopping-and conviviality of the target population. In other words, the security is so good that one can forget it is there, and, once inside the compound, people can adopt a carefree lifestyle that includes enjoyment  of the outdoors.  In one luxury community the emphasis  is  on people's ability to commune with  nature without walls; indeed, the land company created a reserve of more than 200 hectares of riparian  forest where paths allow people to circulate. This project  is  close to the city, and promotes itself as an 'ecovillage':

Its  developers, concerned with offering an innovative product, distinguishes the [ community] from older condominios and from Alphaville. As for older condominios, it promises to create a full-time  living experience, not a dormitory city. . . and unlike Alphaville,  it will not build walls  inside or  out ofthe project. 'There  will be total closure of the project, not with walls, which are  of an aggressive  appearance  and interfere with the landscape, but with. .  . screens and living fences. There will be an internal closedcircuit television system, and communication,  with constant  monitoring with cameras in strategic locations throughout the project.' ( h d r a d e   2006,282, quoting from the magazine Encontro Especial, May 2004,io)

Despite their emphasis on nature, these communities have sophisticated security equipment and infrastructure. Whether they use 2.5-meter-high  walls or more discreet forms of surveillance, the gated experience allows internal circulation to feel natural and unimpeded. As one critic said to me, 'the communities are designed for people to exist in a  bubble of conviviality.'  Even so, he continued, only a minority participate in community festivities or politics. Every residence has its own self-sufficient leisure space, which usually includes barbecue area, pool, sauna, vast grassy areas, and landscaping  to ensure privacy.  As 1 will show,  although most homes in the condominios have avoided security walls and aggressive  individual security systems,  their owners are extraordinarily reliant on trusted employees who provide security through their knowledge of the social  environment in the Community.

## THE  HIGH  PROFILE OF Low TECHNOLOGY: GARDENERS, LANDSCAPES, AND SECURITY

High walls are not allowed in the community in which I worked and in a neighboring community, except when  needed  for retention  of hillsides. The homeowners association  also  bans barbed wire.  Instead,  they encourage  green  fencing with bougainvilleas  or hedges, split-log fences, and low walls. For years following the founding of the community, the homeowners association allowed no fences at all. The absence of security walls was a key marker of what people often refer to as an 'American' neighborhood style and part of a consensus to avoid the appearance of a landscape of fear. People pay in money, convenience, and time to tighten  the security on the perimeters.  Once homeowners  swipe their  identification  cards at

FIG.  7-Yards in  the gated  communities of rural  Minas Gerais State, Brazil, have low walls, native trees, and well-groomed lawns. (Photograph by the author, November 2005)

<!-- image -->

the gate  (their  pictures  come  up on screens in  the security booth, where  armed guards monitor traffic), they can  forget  the security apparatus. In reality, 'my' condominio, which covers approximately 15 square kilometers,  is susceptible to determined trespassers. The unguarded  perimeter is marked only by barbed wire, and many lots along the edge of the community are vacant. Because of this vulnerability, the  homeowners  association  harshly punishes workers who use shortcuts through the fence and provides armed guards who ride motorcycles through the condominio day and night.

The desire of the population  to 'live without fear'' has led to an arrangement that  many researchers  say is inspired  by the U.S. suburb.8  This plays out in  the imagination  of architects  and urban designers as a combination of  the outdoor mall  and neighborhoods  with  single-family  homes without protective  walls and surrounded by lawns and gardens. With  fears  muted by  the collective security apparatus, an 'American' style of house open to the street and in 'commune with nature,' as one longtime resident idealized this style, has replaced the architecture of fear dominant in large cities (Figure 7).

In condominios like the one I  came to know, covenants prohibit  the use  of internal protective walls as well as individual security systems. Most homeowners look after their patrimony by hiring part-time gardeners, caretakers, and domes-

tic  workers.  The employees  not only clean  and garden  but also give a  sense of human presence  to their  homes that  sometimes  go uninhabited  by their  owners for months.  Like old newspapers  left on a front porch, a poorly groomed garden tells the world that no one is home.

The groomed garden, with low shrubs, plenty ofgrass, a few  native trees, and abundant exotic plants such as pine, cypress, and eucalyptus is the aesthetic norm in most condominios, reinforcing the need for gardeners with new skills. Removal of forest  and its replacement by a manicured landscape is a core aesthetic value of gated communities today. As a result, most gated communities have little remaining forest except in reserves and on vacant lots. The condominio I studied is known as one of the most 'forested' developments of the region, whereas others, like Alphaville, are completely manicured. A renowned landscape architect wrote about the proper manipulation of the environment in gated communities: 'To dominate nature by the composition of gardens,  preserving older trees, constructing mirrored ponds and waterfalls,  treating the plant as a sculpture, and giving privileged space to native or tropical species are the tendencies  that guide contemporary  landscaping  in Brazil' (Encontro Decorapo 2003).

In another magazine devoted  to landscaping and gardens, the  resulting  aesthetic  is  referred  to as  'controlled  tropical'  (Lucchesi  2004). New projects  are departing from a clearance model in light of the new restrictions on deforestation and the value that elite residents  place on 'ecology.'  Whatever  styles evolve out of debates about a natural  'aesthetic,' the maintenance  of such  a controlled landscape is extremely labor intensive. According to a middle-class  resident and environmental activist in the region of the condominio, gardens have become the new signature of the rich who can now display their class and style behind the walls of these compounds. These are not the middle-class yards of suburbs that buzz with lawn mowers and weed whackers on any summer weekend in the United  States. They are more like perfectly groomed country clubs that ring with the laughter of card  games, barbecues, and poolside chatter, where gardeners  spring into action as soon as the club members leave.

In 2006, 235 gardeners or caretakers  were  working in the condo mini^.^ According to gardeners, few of them lived full time in the condominio.  One reason for the predominance of workers who do not live on the premises is that the standard lot  measures 1,000 square meters, providing  little room for a second dwelling. Moreover, homeowners generally do not consider their  lots large enough  to demand full-time  caretakers.  The one caretaker  I  interviewed lived on an enormous, multiparcel  property  on which  the owners rarely set  foot  and which was large enough to have orchards, produce  manioc, and raise some livestock. Sending gardeners  home on weekends  also gives homeowners  privacy when  they are visiting with  their families. Condominio regulations encourage  a no-work policy on weekends and holidays, when they prohibit construction work and the circulation  of trucks.

Most of the gardeners I interviewed were married men in their thirties or forties  and had  an  elementary  school education. The majority of them worked  for

more than one owner, receiving one-half to two minimum wages per  house per month (the equivalent of u.s.$75-$300),  depending on the size of the yard  and demands of the job. In only four cases were the men I interviewed the sole earners in their households.  Many wives were employed in the condominios as domestic workers, usually paid for services rendered. Like most low-income families in Brazil, survival strategies included pooling multiple forms of income within the household. In addition, only one of the gardeners I interviewed lived in a household that paid  rent. It  is  not  uncommon  for them to share a large lot or farm with  other relatives, forming a family network where they share child care, fruit and vegetable production, animal husbandry, and other economic activities. All of  the gardeners I  interviewed  lived in  the adjacent  'valley' communities, close to the lower gates of the condominio, and therefore spent little on transportation.''

All but two gardeners had an herb or vegetable garden at home. One of the two lived  in  an  apartment, and the other had  been  in  his  home only one year  and planned  to plant  a garden  and fruit trees.  None of those who had  gardens sold their  produce.  Eleven of the fourteen  had been  raised in what they considered a rural area, and several men mentioned that they believed their work as gardeners was a natural extension of farming. In contrast, homeowners and the homeowners association insisted that gardeners receive special training in landscaping and ecology. One homeowner joked  that he had to break his gardeners' bad  habits that included wanting to 'cut down everything with a machete.'

Employees support each others'  job searches and job security, and they vouch for relatives or friends who arrive in the area seeking employment. According to one gardener, arriving at the gate of a condominio in search of work is pointless. Without the endorsement of a trusted employee or property owner, such an individual would not even be allowed to enter the condominio to begin making these contacts.

How does a population of  much poorer  people, living outside the gates and under surveillance by the community's security apparatus, provide a sense of trust among property owners? All  employees are reregistered  every six months when the condominio requires them to obtain criminal clearance from the police department. Informal mechanisms of an internal labor market weave workers, houses, and families together  into a  network that helps deter crime. Gardeners pass on information  about work and 'good' and 'bad' employers.  Relatives help each other obtain jobs.  This solidarity  is a necessary  ingredient  of  security  in the condominios, to which  only those with  personal  recommendations  gain access. One gardener noted that some workers take jobs from others, suggesting a balance between ambition and solidarity. The first gardener I  interviewed  had  found his position  when  his brother-in-law's work schedule became overbooked.

Because many homeowners come only on weekends, the gardeners and caretakers in effect are in control of most of the space of the condominio for most of the time, and they use this authority to make many decisions on their own. They share tools and fill in for each other when someone cannot finish a job or when someone

cannot go to work. Casual job sharing is common when a person needs help completing  a task,  and gardeners settle how much this help  is  worth among themselves. A woman  gardener was having  trouble  finishing a  task  of  raking after  a storm had blown  down twigs and branches,  so she subcontracted the job to a friend for about the  equivalent  of u.s.$5.00.

The wages and part-time nature of work suggests that the gardeners are underemployed, but, unlike  most agricultural employment, their work is  not seasonal. Although workers mentioned  their low wages, several also compared work in the condominio favorably to life on a farm. They remembered hunger  and a lack of cash for entertainment.  One younger  man had  other ambitions, but not in  agriculture. He hoped to get a job as a truck driver for one of the local mining companies because they paid more than did the condominio property  owner.

The economic  security  that came  to most gardeners  through owning  their  own homes, the proximity of kin, and the availability  of land for small  gardens  and livestock  offset the urge to move away  in search  of better work. They  also  assessed  their own inability  to  find employment elsewhere, citing their age, lack of education, or limited knowledge of nonagricultural work. The unhappiest gardener was a man in his forties  who lived on  his employer's  land. He believed he had missed the opportunity  to own land in the region, and his lack of autonomy  disturbed him, although he appreciated the income security and self-provisioning that the condominio provided. He proudly displayed his knowledge of more than twenty kinds of plants he grew on his employer's  property but was humiliated that the job title on his federal  work card was'domestic  worker.'Not  surprisingly, he wanted his two children to go to college, and he dreamed that his son would become a doctor.

Gardeners usually work part-time  from Monday until noon on Saturday, picking up the pace of work on Thursdays in preparation for the weekend. Their jobs include raking, mowing lawns, planting and trimming plants, cleaning pools, and poisoning insect  pests. Gardeners  play the  role  of  manager, too, in  that  they  are the contact point for plumbers,  contractors, and other service workers the homeowner might need.  Gardeners have free access not only to the yards but often to the houses where they work, and they are frequently asked to open a l l doors and windows for ventilation.  They are also allowed to use the kitchen  for heating up meals, as well as the bathroom. When I asked,  one worker if he felt at ecse working in  another person's home, he  said, emphatically, 'We're the, boss  there!' Another remarked: 'They leave eve@.i,ng in  our; hands. They tru&lt;t us.' . ,   -

Despite  obvious differences  in power  and income, the  relationship betyeen gardeners and homeowners is'one of mutual dependence. Work in the condominio is virtually the only employment for people in nearby communities.  Homeowners are absent much of the time and need to trust that their employees are doing their work without oversight. This service includes the freedop by owners to leave their houses unoccupied  for weeks or months at a stretch:  As  one gardener  said, 'We securitf. ?hey  give us jqbs, a\_nd  we give them security to leave their houses alone for days.' Clearly, the Tobs and the labor market are as much defined

by personal relations as by the supply and demand of workers. The flow of information through  gossip is essential to the well-being not only of the gardeners but also of the owners who, I was told, would get a 'buzz in their ears' if someone was not doing his job.  Despite the  gaps between  visits by  owners,  the gardeners are frequently in touch with them by cell phone.

Talk is vital to the informal security that owners want, but gossip is also undesirable and can cost a person his or her job. What is implied in this view of gossip is  that  it  is  bad  when  a  person  complains too openly about his  employer but necessary  to keep information flowing.  Solidarity is  tested  by competition over jobs, however. Some individuals use gossip to spread doubt about the quality and reliability of workers so that they can take their place. A gardener with ten years of experience described this process to me:

Someone  comes  around asking for how much you earn,  how big the place is, what you have to do. 'Oh, I make two minimum wages for so and so.' Then that person goes to the boss and says, 'I'll  work for less, and anyway,  he's not doing his job correctly.' Then the boss gives you a 'vacation,' and the next thing you know you don't have a job anymore.

This gardener said that this happened  to him once, but he is not afraid anymore because he trusts his employer and they are on congenial terms.

The rules  of the condominio mediate the relationships  between  homeowner and worker. Once a homeowner decides that he or she wants to hire a worker, the worker  must be  registered  at the  condominio with  two  documents: his  government identification  card and his criminal  record  clearance.  Once an employee is 'cleared,' he or she receives a badge with  a photograph  that is kept  at the guard house and that must be worn the entire time the employee is within the gates and returned at the end of the day. The condominio has precedence over a homeowner if  it finds that a worker has violated the community's internal rules. In this case, a worker can be 'suspended'  from entering the condominio for six months or longer, which is the same as firing him from his job. For example, a worker was suspended for entering  the grounds with  an unlicensed  chainsaw, an implement that is  licensed by the municipality. Other layers of authority can be imposed on the behavior of workers inside the gates. One incident involved the municipal authorities, who took a work&lt;:  in for questioning because he was dumping green waste inside the condominio. Because ail workers, from interior decorators to construction workers,  must renew  their  permission  to enter the gates,  the workers have  frequent centact with  the administration.  All  of the  gardeners  with  whom I  spoke knew the rules about tree removal, for example.

If  measured by the behavior of homeowners, most gated communities do not interact much with their  gurrounding  worlds,  as noted  in  case studies elsewhere (Davis 1992; Blake@ and SnydcI 1997;  Luymes 1997; Low 2003; kvarez-Rivadulla 2007). Many c mners ciiculiitc little  outside the gates, whereas workers continually f l ' m i m amd ma. The two gates that serve very different populations

symbolize the distinct forms of circulation. The upper gate links the condominio to ~ ~ 0 4 0 and to Belo Horizonte by an excellent road. The only other settled areas between the condominio and the highway are other gated communities. The other gate, at the lower end of the condominio, links it to the world of the workers. This gate  serves mostly to admit workers, while the other gate  serves homeowners. Outside the lower gate, the dirt roads begin immediately. The limited offering of a few small markets and bars outside this gate suggest that they are for the locals. One owner told me that after five years he had never been to communities more than 11 kilometers away. A woman said she feared bandits and would only venture .out of  the lower  gate  if  accompanied by  other  people.  These examples do not prove the degree to which people in gated communities circulate outside the gates, but  they corroborate the physical appearance and observed traffic on the side of the condominio that opens up to the dusty world of modest houses, truck farms, animals, bars,  and foot traffic.

The two worlds do intersect in ways that some people intend specifically to build community between them. A few condominio homeowners are well known in  neighboring communities, and all of  the gardeners I interviewed told me that their  employers  had  visited them at home at least once. A group of permanent residents of the condominio are active in community affairs in neighboring settlements. For example, some women were remodeling the local Catholic chapel, and the market in the condominio sponsors a yearly food drive for needy families. The women who were helping the church had asked the condominio nursery to donate plants for landscaping. Traditional patronage lives on as well. One longtime resident of the condominio is known for his generosity with workers, providing roast pigs and other meals for birthday parties and weddings. These community relationships are absent among most weekend  residents, although weekend  people develop enduring ties with their employees. The gates, the badges, the guards, and the surveillance speak to the surrounding communities of their true relationship with the gated communities, ever, thcugh mcst ::rs-kers conclude that this is a fair trade-off for the jobs they offer.

## CLASS

## AND SPACE

As Andrade shows ZOO^), each generation of  gated-community  residents boasts of a new concept in living that makes a statement about itself in relation to the rest of society and to nature. Today's high-security gated communities are an assertion about the place of this region in the world order. Its conspicuous consumption in the form of mansions and sumptuous gardens, the new world-class infrastructure they extract from the government, and the new shopping centers are all designed to attract an entrepreneurial  class to this region.

The security systems and exclusivity are emblazoned on each advertisement for a new condominio, but security is humanized by the presence of hundredb 0% enipioyees  who play the traditional role of  trusted workers f a the upper chmi. Without  these foot soldiers of security, the\ homes and gardens &amp;the  rich cmi'd

easily fall victim to crime, despite the high technology, walls, and distance that the elite thinks  protects  it. As  one gardener  said, 'We're always here,  looking.' It is important for scholars who interrogate class through spatial relationships  to also look more closely at domestic workers, without whom the strategies of the rich to shield themselves from the poor would be in vain. Many scholars have described gated communities as just another chapter in the segregation of rich and poor. But take a closer look, and you will see that they can reveal new forms of interactionwith people and with places-that erase the boundaries that their walls represent.

## NOTES

- 1 . For a survey  of this relationship among global  domestic workers,  see Ehrenreich and Hochschild 2002.
2. Some services have grown as a result of the gated-community boom: ornamental plant suppliers, professional landscapers, decorators, dog trainers and walkers, and pool-maintenance workers are a few examples. According to the  list of service workers I consulted  for one community, the vast majority of jobs are in construction. Construction workers,  however,  have short-term  employment that does not lend itself to the kinds of relationships that I explore in this article.
3. For evidence of this mutuality in other Latin American cities, see Sabatini 2003.
4. The vocabulary used to describe this kind of settlement is ambiguous. The 'gated community' comes closest to 'condominio  fechado' (usually shortened to 'condonzinio'), But, as Costa points out (2006a), this is a misnomer when applied to most communities beyond the urban fringe. Brazilian law recognizes  them as urban islands-and urban land cannot be 'closed.'  This rule is usually ignored in the interest of land values and desire for security within the communities.
5. I conducted all of the interviews in Portuguese, and all of the translations in this article are  mine.
6. Snowball  sampling is a kind of opportunity sampling. The sample is developed interactively by way of recommendations to the researcher by research participants. This sampling method was appropriate, given that  my access to interviewees (and to the spaces in which  interviews took place) was contingent upon personal introductions.
7.  Renato Quintino, a local environmental activist, referred to this as the desire to 'live without fear' (2005).
8.  Others who write about  gated communities in developing countries have noticed. the same reference to an American way of life (Leisch 2002; Caldeira 2003; Myc\_oo, 2006).
9. These were indi!id.uals whose registration with the condominio office was to expire . . in 2006. --.
10. Unfortunately, employees.'  addresses were incomplete in the condominio database, but qualitative information and my sample of fourteen gardeners corroborated this. I . ...

## REFERENCES

- . J. 2007. Golden Ghettos; Gated Communities and Class Residential  Segregation .... ' .   . Uruguay. Environment an4,  Planning A 39  (I):  47-63.
006. 0s  Condominios Fcch'ados  eos*Notbs'Emprccndimentos  de Cultura e Lazer In Novas Perifetias  Metroplitanas: A Expansiio Metropolitana em Belo Horizonte: Dindmica e Especificidades no Eixo Sul, edited by H. S. M. Costa, 275-290. Belo Horizonte,'Brazil: C/Arte Editora.
- . L. Melo Monte-Mor. 2006. DinPmica do Crescimento das Cidades Brasileiras: Ricas. In Novas  Periferias Metroplitanas: A Expansdo Metropolitana  em Belo Horizonte: Dindmica e Especificidades no Eixo Sul, edited by H. S. M. Costa, 291-yi. Belo Horizonte, Brazil: C/Arte Editora.
- Blakely, E.  J.,  and M.  G.  Snyder. 1997. Fortress America:  Gated  Communities in  the  vnitgd.Stgtes. . . Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution  Press.

- Caldeira,  T.  P .   R.  2003. Cidade de Muros: Crime, SegregaGdo e Cidadania em Sdo Paulo. Siio Paulo: Universidade de SQo Paulo.
- Costa, H. S. M.  zoo6a.  Mercado Imobiliario, Estado e Natureza na Produqiio do Espaqo Metropolitano. In Novas  Periferias  Metroplitanas:  A Expansdo  Metropolitana  em Belo Horizonte:  Dindmica  e Especificidades  no Eixo  Sul, edited by  H. S. M.  Costa,  101-124.  Belo Horizonte, Brazil: C/Arte Editora.
- , ed.  2006b. Novas Periferias  Metroplitanas: A Expansdo Metropolitana  em Belo  Horizonte: Dindmica e Especificidades no Eixo Sul. Belo Horizonte, Brazil: C/Arte Editora.
- Davis, M.  1992.  Fortress  Los Angeles: The Militarization  of  Urban  Space. In Variations on a  Theme Park: The  New  American City and the End of Public Space, edited by M. Sorkin, 154-180.  New York: Noonday Press.
- Ehrenreich,  B.,  and A. R. Hochschild, eds.  2002. Global Woman: Nannies, Maids, and Sex Workers in the New Economy. New York Metropolitan  Books.
- Encontro Decoraqiio.  2003.  Desenhando o Cenario: Paisagismo. Encontro Decoratdo, June, 11.
- IBRAM [ Instituto Brasileiro  de  Mineraqiio] . 2003. Contribuiqdo do IBRAMpara o Zoneamento EcologicoEconBmico e o Planejamento Ambiental de Municipios lntegrantes da APA-Sul RMBH: Brurnadinho, vol. 1, Memorial Descritivo. Brasilia: IBRAM.
- Janoschka, M., and A. Borsdorf.  2006. Condominios Fechados and Barrios Privados: The Rise of Private Residential  Neighbourhoods in  Latin  America.  In Private  Cities: Global  and  Local  Perspectives, edited by G. Glasze, C. Webster, and K. Frantz, 92-108.  London: Routledge.
- Laschefski, K.  2006.  A Sustentabilidade Geogrifica de Condominios na Zona Metropolitana  de Belo Horizonte.  In Novas Periferias Metroplitanas:  A  Expansiio  Metropolitana em Belo  Horizonte: Dindmica e Especificidades no Eixo Sul, edited by H. S. M. Costa, 313-337. Belo Horizonte, Brazil: C/Arte Editora.
- Lauderdale Graham, S.  1988. House and Street: The Domestic World of Servants and Masters in Nineteenth Century Rio de Janeiro. New York Cambridge  University Press.
- Leisch, H.  2002. Gated Communities in Indonesia. Cities 19 (5): 341-350.
- Low, S.  2003. Behind  the Gates: Life, Security, and  the Pursuit of  Happiness in Fortress America. New York Routledge.
- Lucchesi, C. J. 2004.  Atendendo  Pedidos. Paisagismo  e Jardinagem, June, 42-46.
- Luymes, D.  1997.  The Fortification  of  Suburbia:  Investigating  the  Rise  of  Enclave Communities. Landscape  and  Urban Planning 39  (2-3): 187-203.
- Magalhses,  F.  N. C.,  L.  R.  F .   Linhares,  and  R.  L .   Melo  Monte-Mor. 2006.  Urbanizaqiio Extensiva e Desconcentraqiio  Espacial no Eixo Sul do Entorno Metropolitano de Belo Horizonte. In Novas Periferias Metroplitanas: A Expansdo Metropolitana em Belo Horizonte: Dindmica e EspeciFcidades no Eixo Sul, edited by H. S. M. Costa, 391-421. Belo Horizonte,  Brazil: C/Arte Editora.
- Mendonqa,  J.  G.  de, and  I.  H. 0.  Perpktuo.  2006. A Metropole  Belo-Horizontina em Expansiio: Periferizaqiio da  Riqueza  ou Polarizatiio  Social? In Novas Periferias Metroplitanas: A Expansdo Metropolitana em Belo Horizonte: Dindmica e Especificidades no Eixo Sul, edited by H. S. M. Costa, 21-34. Belo Horizonte,  Brazil: C/Arte Editora.
- Mycoo,  M.  2006.  The Retreat ofupper  and Middle Classes  to Gated Communities in the Poststructural Adjustment  Era: The Case of Trinidad. Environment and PlanningA 38  (I): 131-148.
- Pereira, D.  B.,  M. F .   Mungai, and E. R. Rodrigues.  2005.  A  (Des)construqiio dos Lugares Rurais pela Criaqiio da  Paisagem da APA-PAZ Municipal  de Inhotim. Belo Horizonte,  Brazil: Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Instituto de Geocihcias. Unpublished manuscript.
- Pires,  C.  T. P . 2006.  Nova Lima: Um Enfoque sobre a Estrutura Fundaria e a Produgio de Loteamentos. In Novas  Periferias  Metroplitanas: A Expansdo Metropolitana  em Belo  Horizonte:  Dindmica  e Especificidades  no Eixo  Sul, edited  by  H. S.  M.  Costa, 365-388. Belo Horizonte, Brazil: ClArte Editora.
- Quintino, R.  2005.  Interview with the author. Belo Horizonte, Brazil, 1 1  November.
- Sabatini, F . 2003. The Social Spatial Segregation in the Cities of Latin America.  Washington, D.C.: InterAmerican Development Bank, Sustainable Development Department, Social Programs Division.
- Scheper-Hughes, N.  1992. Death without Weeping: The Violence of Everyday Life in Brazil. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Wu, F.,  and  K.  Webber.  2004.  The Rise of 'Foreign  Gated  Communities' in  Beijing: Between Economic Globalization and Local Institutions. Cities 21 (3): 203-213.