## Seeds of Civilization: Bronze Age Rural Economy and Ecology in the Southern Levant

Patricia L. Fall,* Lee Lines,** and Steven E. Falconer***

- *Department of Geography, Arizona State University
- **Department of Environmental Studies, Rollins College
- ***Department of Anthropology, Arizona State University

This paper considers the economic and environmental impacts of emerging regional commerce that accompanied the rise and collapse of early Near Eastern urbanism. W e integrate regional data on settlement and vegetation with detailed evidence of rural agriculture from two Bronze Age villages in the Jordan Valley. This approach is explicitly rural, in light of the largely rural character of Levantine civilization, and in response to more orthodox analytical perspectives focused on the first cities. Long-standing interest in the advent of agriculture now reveals that intensive localized depletion of woodland resources followed the aggregation of sedentary agrarian communities in the eighth through sixth millennia B.C., while the development of specialized pastoralism established one potential source of more extensive, subsequent defoliation. W e argue, however, that regional human impacts on Levantine vegetation were triggered only with the genesis of Bronze Age cities and urbanized economies in the third and second millennia B.C. Thereafter, these regional impacts molded an ever-shifting mosaic of anthropogenic and natural landscapes. Rank-size analysis illustrates the modestly integrated, largely rural nature of Bronze Age settlement in the southern Levant. In this context, T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat provide appropriate examples of the resilient agrarian villages that persisted through the dramatic collapse and rebirth of early Levantine cities. Excavated plant remains and animal bones show that their inhabitants responded to the developmentofBronzeAgeurbanismwithashifttowardincreased managementoftaxawithgreater market potential, tempered by some retention of local economic autonomy. Shifts to greater sheep husbandry and, most significantly, cultivation of orchard crops like olives, figs, and grapes, signal a second wave of economic innovation that fundamentally altered the agricultural strategies of village farmers and their exploitation of the surrounding countryside. Thus the mixed cultural and natural landscapes that have supported long-term agriculture in the Levant reflect a legacy of discontinuous changes in rural economy and ecology in response to the waxing and waning of urbanized society and regional mercantile exchange. Key Words: agricultural intensification, Bronze Age, environmental impacts, Near East, orchard cultivation, southern Levant, urbanism.

S outhwestern Asia is particularly noteworthy as a heartland of early urbanized civilization. From the ancient Near East comes much of our understanding of the rise of the first cities and state-level governments, monumental architecture, formal religious institutions, writing, and mathematics. Despite the fact that the vast majority (80-90 percent) of preindustrialized populations, in the Near East and elsewhere, led agrarian lifestyles and lived in rural communities (Mann 1986), only minimal attention has been directed to detailed studies of rural communities within the fabric of urbanized societies (Eickel- mann 1989:55; Schwartz and Falconer 1994:1; Butzer 1996). The traditional analytical orientation toward early urbanism is 'from the top down,' captured most bluntly by Oswald Spengler's generalization that 'world history is the history of city people' (1923:106). A common working assumption of this perspective holds that relatively homogeneous farming communities in the countryside compliantly supplied tax revenues, conscripted labor, and surplus foodstuffs for more dynamic and centrally important cities inhabited by merchants, craftsmen, bureaucrats, and urban elites (e.g., Redman 1978:215-16).

As a result of this urban bias, we are equipped currently with only a rudimentary comprehension of village economies and their fundamental roles in the coalescence or collapse of early civilizations (Schwartz and Falconer 1994). Many early civilizations, like those of the southern Levant (i.e., the region of modern Israel, Palestine, and Jordan), reveal greater long-term continuity in rural settlement and land use than in urban development (Falconer 1994). In such contexts marked by dramatically discontinuous urbanism, villages may provide our best evidence of longtermeconomicorganization.In fact, geographical research has a strong tradition focused on rural agrarian systems within larger political economies (Bassett 1988; Zimmerer 1991, 1993). Agricultural systems incorporating both subsistence farming and surplus-oriented production have been documented in a number of comparable settings, most notably in the New W orld tropics (Whitmore and T urner 1992; Denevan 1996). Thus rural investigations of early civilization provide an avenue of inquiry that is both particularly appropriate for the ancient southern Levant and more widely applicable to a variety of geographic research settings in both the past and present.

Our research revolves around the question of howfieldstudies of agrarian economy and ecology can illuminate the roles of rural communities in larger trajectories of urban growth and collapse. We ask more specifically how small farming villages in the southern Levant contributed and responded to the rise and fall of cities during the Bronze Age, this region's first major period of urbanism. We argue that our perspective 'from the bottom up' is especially well suited to the southern Levant amid its long legacy of sedentary agriculture, urban-rural dynamics, and their ecological consequences. The extent to which we offer new insights on rural economy and ecology may stem from this study's Levantine focus. The larger value of such investigations, however, also lies in their potential applicability to other regions or time periods.

Our alternative approach to the development of early civilizations begins with an overview of early agriculture, human settlement, and their ecological impacts on the ancient Near Eastern landscape. Rank-size analyses then contrast the central importance of dramatically large Mesopotamian cities that were intimately linked to their surrounding hinterlands, with the less integrated, more commonly rural settlement of the southern Levant. Our rank-size depictions also highlight the persistent foundation of villages that underlay the waxing and waning of early Levantine urbanism. Most important, we offer a unique comparison of rural agrarian behavior during the pervasive abandonment and sudden rejuvenation of this region's Bronze Age cities (ca. 2300-1500 B.C.).

Unlike prior studies of the ancient Near East, we draw from broad rank-size perspectives on early urbanism (Falconer and Savage 1995) to identify the hierarchical characteristics of Levantine settlement systems, thereby providing a regional backdrop for a case  study of Tell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat, two Bronze Age villages in the Jordan Valley. Ni'aj, occupied during the abandonment of cities throughout the southern Levant in Early Bronze IV , and Hayyat, inhabited during the subsequent development of Middle Bronze Age cities and urbanized society, provide data that span the dramatic rebirth of Levantine cities and permit an assessment of rural responses to the highly variable fortunes and influences of early city life.

Our central hypothesis derives from the traditional expectation that cities dictated urban-rural relations in most, if not all, early urbanized civilizations. Accordingly, traditional approaches expect that rural economy and ecology will reflect the oscillating influences of urban communities through time. If these expectations hold for early civilization in the southern Levant, we should generate several interrelated results: (1) rank-size patterns of  Bronze Age settlement should  be comparable to those for the other best-known cases of initial urbanism in the Near East (e.g., Mesopotamia) from which most traditional interpretations of this region's early urban societies have been drawn (e.g., Adams 1981); (2) evidence from T ell Abu en-Ni'aj, which was occupied during an interval of city abandonment, and Tell el-Hayyat, inhabited during the subsequent apex of early urbanism, should reveal fundamentally disjunct patterns of crop and herd management; (3) data from both villages spanning the collapse and redevelopment of Levantine urbanism should document increasing rural participation in regional economies and ecological impacts.

This exploration of Bronze Age rural life uses rank-size analysis to assess the first expectation of the null hypothesis presented above by describing the interregional settlement distinctions between the largely rural southern Levant and ancient Mesopotamia,  a  heartland of cities.  Rank-size

analysis subsequently reflects structural changes in Levantine coastal settlement between the urban nadir of the Early Bronze IV Period (ca. 2300-2000 B.C.) and its later apex in the Middle Bronze Age (ca. 2000-1500 B.C.)

Our investigation then focuses on plant and animal management as they are reflected in evidence excavated from T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and Tell el-Hayyat. Although previous discussions of T ell el-Hayyat have considered evidence of ritual behavior (Magness-Gardiner and Falconer 1994) and selected aspects of household subsistence (Falconer 1995), this paper marks the first detailed synthesis of rural economy and ecology at both communities, which were inhabited during a remarkable process of regional reurbanization.

Our analyses of regional settlement and rural economy do not readily conform to the expectations of our central hypothesis. The results that depart from these expectations, especially the larger implications of crop production (especially orchard cultivation; see Lines 1995) and animal management, allow us to contribute a more sophisticated appreciation of how small agrarian communities responded to the rise and collapse of early urbanized civilization in the southern Levant and elsewhere.

## Setting the Stage: Agrarian Settlement and Society in the Southern Levant

Near Eastern agrarian life developed on a landscape molded by a long legacy of human impact.

Much of its environmental degradation has been ascribed to the gradually increasing aggregation of town and city populations, and their correspondingly enhanced reliance on agriculture and pastoralism (Miller 1991). Repeated cycles of stability and perturbation, however, have led to the coevolution of productive agricultural systems and sustainable anthropogenic environments that have supported rural and urban societies for thousands of years (Butzer 1996). Near Eastern urbanism, notable for its early genesis and grand scale, is equally notorious for its repeated episodes of dramatic rise and collapse. When dissected in greater detail, the course of human impact accordingly has been neither continuous nor directional. Lengthy spans of stability for the Mediterranean  landscape were punctuated by shorter episodes of mismanagement, often followed by ecological recovery (Butzer 1996). The following chronological overview summarizes the long-term economic and political circumstances that fueled the advent, collapse, and rebirth of Bronze Age Levantine urbanism, which this study appraises from a rural vantage point.

Although the first cities in the Near East were not established until the late fourth and early third millennia B.C. (Postgate 1994:22-35), the first aggregated communities arose in the PrePottery Neolithic period shortly before 7000 B.C. (Rollefson et al. 1992) (T able 1). These early communities laid the foundation for the rise of social, political, and economic centers in the region. Aggregated communities, such as ' Ain Ghazal and Jericho (Figure 1), grew rapidly to large size with thousands of inhabitants, and then collapsed dramatically around 6000 B.C. (Rollefson et al. 1992).

Table 1. Archaeological Chronology for the Southern Levant, Incorporating the Settlement Sequence at Tell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat

| Cultural Period       | Approx. Duration (yrs. B.C.)   | Regional Settlement   | Settlement at Ni'aj and Hayyat   |
|-----------------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------|----------------------------------|
| Late Bronze           | 1500-1200                      | Urban recession       |                                  |
| Middle Bronze IIC     | 1650-1500                      | Height of urbanism    | Hayyat Phase 2                   |
| Middle Bronze IIB     | 1800-1650                      | Height of urbanism    | Hayyat Phase 3                   |
| Middle Bronze IIA     | 1900-1800                      | Cities redevelop      | Hayyat Phase 4                   |
| Middle Bronze IIA     | 2000-1900                      | Cities reappear       | Hayyat Phase 5                   |
| Early Bronze IV       | 2300-2000                      | Urban collapse        | Ni'aj Upper Phase                |
| Early Bronze II-III   | 2900-2300                      | First cities          |                                  |
| Early Bronze I        | 3200-2900                      | Village-level farming |                                  |
| Chalcolithic          | 4500-3200                      | Village-level farming |                                  |
| Pottery Neolithic     | 6000-4500                      | Village-level farming |                                  |
| Pre-Pottery Neolithic | 8000-6000                      | First farming towns   |                                  |

The inhabitants of these Neolithic communities implemented new economic strategies, especially the cultivation of cereals and legumes (van Zeist 1988), and the domestication of goats and sheep (Helmer 1989; Rodrigue 1992). As the population of Neolithic towns expanded and their croplands grew, seasonal and permanent herding camps were established in their ever more distant pasturage, setting the stage for specialized mobile pastoralism (Köhler-Rollefson 1992). Localized resource depletion due to harvesting of fuelwood and construction timbers, as well as repeated house plastering, generated resource demands for these early towns that rapidly could have exceeded the productive capacity of their immediate environments (Köhler-Rollefson 1988; Köhler-Rollefson and Rollefson 1990; Rollefson et al. 1992). Archaeological data from ' Ain Ghazal suggest that this Neolithic town, and perhaps many of its contemporaries, eventually were abandoned in the wake of interrelated environmental impacts that began with intense localized deforestation (Köhler-Rollefson and Rollefson 1990), and subsequently became amplified by extensive herding (Köhler-Rollefson 1992). Strikingly, aggregated towns did not reappear on the Near Eastern landscape for almost three millennia.

Following the abandonment of Pre-Pottery Neolithic aggregated towns, more modest villagelevel settlements characterized the southern Levant through the Pottery Neolithic, Chalcolithic, and Early Bronze I periods (ca. 6000-2900 B.C.) (Joffe 1993; Levy 1995). The subsequent development of urbanized society during the Early and Middle Bronze ages marked the florescence of civilization, associated with the Canaanites of the Old T estament. The success of Canaanite urban-

Figure 1. Prehistoric sites in the southern Levant. (a) Location of lake basins, which provide paleoecological records of past vegetation, and of prehistoric communities, which provide data on ancient agrarian economy. (b) Enlargement of inset details the locations of T ell el-Hayyat, T ell Abu en-Ni'aj, and other Bronze Age settlements in the Jordan Valley.

<!-- image -->

ism oscillated dramatically, however, through the third and second millennia B.C. (T able 1).

The initial urbanism of Early Bronze II-III (ca. 2900-2300 B.C.) paralleled the rise of the Egyptian state during Dynasties I-VI (Kantor 1992:17-21; Stager 1992:40-41). Shortly thereafter, Egypt entered the First Intermediate Period, during which centralized authority collapsed and regional economic ties were attenuated (Stager 1992:41). The southern Levant simultaneously experienced near-wholesale abandonment of towns and cities during  Early Bronze IV  (ca. 2300-2000 B.C.) (Dever 1995). In striking contrast to those in preceding and subsequent periods, Early Bronze IV settlements were small, often inhabited seasonally, and located at the arid margins of the southern Levant. The most influential explanatory model for Early Bronze IV society posits a largely pastoralized economy involving nonsedentary populations who moved seasonally between lowland winter camps around the desert fringes of the southern Levant and upland summer pasturage in the hills of Palestine and Transjordan (Dever 1995). But recent excavations of Early Bronze IV villages (e.g., Khirbet Iskander [Richard 1986] and T ell Umm Hammad [Helms 1986]) show that a significant sedentary rural population also persisted through the abandonment of Levantine towns and cities. T ell Abu en-Ni'aj, which was first inhabited at the beginning of the Early Bronze IV Period and abandoned at its end, provides our most substantial body of evidence for a year-round farming community during this interval most commonly interpreted in terms of nonsedentary pastoralized society.

Canaanite cities were rapidly  reestablished, and expanded in size and number during the subsequent Middle Bronze Age (Falconer 1994; Ilan 1995). The beginning of this urban heyday coincided with the reemergence of state-level authority and far-flung economic influence of Middle Kingdom Egypt. Middle Bronze IIA stands as a developmental prelude to the height of Canaanite urbanism in Middle Bronze II B and IIC. The Egyptian Execration T exts reflect the emergence of vaguely defined Levantine 'citystates' with a modicum of political authority during these periods (Posener 1971:541, 555). The hamlet of T ell el-Hayyat was founded at the beginning of Middle Bronze IIA and occupied continuously for approximately five hundred years until the end of Middle Bronze IIC, when it was abandoned. Farming villages like Hayyat typically populated the hinterlands around the Levant's towns and cities. Following political and military upheavals at the end of the Middle Bronze Age, Canaanite  cities declined  in number  and  size during the urban recession of the Late Bronze Age(Gonen 1984). Middle Bronze Age urbanism is particularly noteworthy because during Middle Bronze II B and C, the southern Levant's cities and regional population grew to levels unsurpassed until the Roman and Byzantine periods more than a millennium later (i.e., first century B.C.-seventh century A.D.; Broshi 1979).

Despite the severity of local forest-resource exploitation by Neolithic villagers, the Levantine hill country probably still featured large tracts of oak/pistachio woodland at the advent of Bronze Age cities in the third millennium B.C. (Gophna et al. 1986; Liphschitz et al. 1989). Roughly five thousand years after the Neolithic domestication of cereals and legumes, a second wave of agricultural innovation, featuring intensive orchard cultivation, became pronounced during the third and second millennia B.C. (Miller 1991). As a consequence, lowlands and river valleys, like the lands around Tell Abu en-Ni'aj and Tell elHayyat, became checkered with annual subsistence crops, while perennial fruit-bearing trees and vines encroached on the rockier slopes of neighboring uplands (Stager 1985). Despite the potential for localized Neolithic deforestation, palynological analysis of lake cores from the Sea of Galilee and the Dead Sea show that regional impacts on forests and woodlands emerged clearly only in the wake of Bronze Age urbanism (e.g., Baruch 1990). Thus the major impetus for the anthropogenic vegetation so characteristic of the Eastern Mediterranean stems from Bronze Age agricultural intensification-especially for the export of wine, olive oil, and dried fruit-to serve emerging urban markets, including Egypt and its trading partners (Stager 1985; Ben-T or 1986).

## Rank-Size Perspectives on Early Urbanism

The earliest Near Eastern cities depended, to varying extents, on agricultural surpluses provided by farmers and herders in the countryside. Agrarian populations, in turn, received the mixed blessings provided by ruling elites, religious institutions, professional bureaucrats, and mercantile specialists (Wirth 1938; Childe 1950; Redfield 1953; Weber 1958). Urban-rural relations tended to be hierarchical, such that more institutional

decisions and directives were issued from larger communities. Therefore, relative settlement sizes often reflect the nature of interactions between communities in ancient regional economic systems (e.g., Johnson 1977, 1980).

Rank-size analyses provide empirically-based descriptive portraits of settlement hierarchies that are most informative when settlement systems are compared between regions or over time within a single region. According to the 'ranksize rule,' the size of any nth-ranked place in a settlement system may be predicted by dividing the size of the largest place by n, such that the rank and population of these cities describe a log-normal distribution when plotted logarithmically (Zipf 1949). Applying the 'Principle of Least Effort,' Zipf attributed the rank-size rule to the interaction of the opposing economic forces of 'diversification' and 'unification' (1949:352). In this study, and in most other analyses of prehistoric data, these forces are undocumented and elude reliable quantification.  In  such circumstances, a special case of the rank-size equation commonly is applied, in which these forces are assumed to have been equal (see critical discussions in Moore 1959; Dziewonski 1972; Richardson 1973; Kowalewski 1982).

Log-normal distributions in accordance with the rank-size rule 'appear to be typical of larger countries with a long tradition of urbanism, which are politically and economically complex' (Berry 1961:582). Since  preindustrial settlement  systems rarely follow the predictions of the rank-size rule, however, their economic interpretation commonly derives from the manner and degree to which rank-size distributions depart from lognormal (e.g., Johnson 1977, 1980; Adams 1981; Paynter 1983; Falconer and Savage 1995). These departures are  molded by a variety of factors regarding community interactions within the system under analysis. These factors include the 'closure' of the settlement system (i.e., the degree to which interactions are bounded within a system) and the 'interdependence' or 'integration' of communities (i.e., the relative frequency of interaction between communities in a system) (Vapnarsky 1968; Johnson 1980).

Weapply rank-size analysis to assess the general structure of ancient settlement in lower Mesopotamia and the southern Levant, including the Jordan Valley, where T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and Tell el-Hayyat  are located.  We contrast these two regions because (1) they encompass the arenas of early Near Eastern urbanism that have been surveyed most comprehensively, and (2) reconstructions of early urbanism derived fromthegreaterNearEast(especiallyMesopotamia) heavily influence many interpretations of Bronze Age society in the southern Levant. The Mesopotamian settlement data analyzed here are drawn from the Warka and Nippur-Adab surveys directed by Robert Adams, which covered approximately 6250 km 2 in southern Iraq (Adams and Nissen 1972; Adams 1981). We focus on the sizes reported for sites occupied during the Early Dynastic I Period (ca. 2900-2600 B.C.), the first peak of urban development in lower Mesopotamia.

Levantine settlement data are gleaned from a variety of surveys in Israel and western Jordan that encompass an aggregate area of 15,000 km 2 (see Ibrahim et al. 1976, 1988; Broshi and Gophna 1986; Gophna and Portugali 1988). Likewise, we feature site sizes for the southern Levant's urban apex, Middle Bronze II B-C, as well as  evidence from the urban collapse of Early Bronze IV . Site locations, sizes, and periods of occupation were determined using pedestrian and vehicular reconnaissance methods (see discussion in Falconer and Savage 1995). For both regions we consider the entire inventory of sites reported for the periods of interest.

During the late fourth and early third millennia B.C., the world's first large fortified cities emerged on the plains of southern Mesopotamia as an apparent prototype for subsequent development of urbanism elsewhere in the Near East. Regional surveys directed by Adams (Figure 2) show that by the Early Dynastic I Period (ca. 2900-2600 B.C.), the city of ancient Uruk emerged as an anomalously large metropolis with a population of 'no less than 40,000 to 50,000 i n habitants' (Adams 1981:85) that was almost an order of magnitude larger than the region's second-ranked city (Figure 3).

Rank-size distributions featuring such a distinct 'primate city' (following Jefferson 1939; Morse 1962; Mehta 1964; Linsky 1965), associated with smaller settlements that adhere roughly to the rank-size rule, may be attributed to conditions of low system closure and high interdependence between communities (Vapnarsky 1968). Indeed, Uruk stood at the center of a far-flung network of economic and political interaction with neighboring regions (Algaze 1989). Uruk's primate size was achieved

through the rapid absorption of rural populations from its immediate hinterlands, reflecting thepronouncedintegrationofUrukwithanarray of supporting cities, towns, and villages in lower Mesopotamia(Adams1981:60-94).

Interestingly, the Levant's urban zenith stands in stark contrast to that of Mesopotamia. Canaanite cities, which very rarely exceeded a few thousand inhabitants (Falconer 1994), describe 'convex' rank-size distributions in which large settlements are smaller, and small settlements are larger, than predicted by the ranks i z e r u l e (Johnson 1977:497). Such distributions, which are increasingly difficult to observe in the modern world, tend to characterize underdeveloped regions with high closure and low interdependence (Vapnarsky 1968; Johnson 1980). Ancient Levantine settlement patterns repeatedly produce convex rank-size distributions, even during the urban

<!-- image -->

zenith of Middle Bronze II B-C, implying only modest regional interdependence through the Bronze Age (Falconer and Savage 1995) (Figure 3).

Some coastal settlement patterns provide more specific insights on the structure of Bronze Age urban and rural settlement. For example, the modest collection of small sedentary Early Bronze IV settlements along the Levantine coastal plain exhibits a vaguely convex rank-size distribution that implies a lack of interdependence among its local communities, which is not surprising for this period of urban collapse (Figure 4). Intriguingly, Middle Bronze Age data suggest the superimposition of a few cities and towns on a convex lower rank-size curve that closely resembles the distribution of Early Bronze IV villages. The similarities between these lower curves imply the persistence of rural settlement through the collapse and

Figure 2. Settlement survey regions. (a) The Warka and Nippur-Adab surveys in Lower Mesopotamia. (b) A variety of surveys in the southern Levant. See Adams (1981:figures 12, 13), Adams and Nissen (1972:maps 1A-4B), Ibrahim, et al. (1976, 1988); Broshi and Gophna (1986); Gophna and Portugali (1988); Falconer and Savage (1995).

<!-- image -->

Figure 3. Rank-size settlement distributions for major urban periods in Mesopotamia and the southern Levant. Data for the Early Dynastic I Period (ca. 2900-2600 B.C.) of Mesopotamia shows a primate rank-size distribution typical of 'hyper-urbanized' settlement systems, based on a sample of 98 surveyed sites. Data for the Levantine Middle Bronze II B-C Period (ca. 1800-1500 B.C.) produces a convex distribution of 219 site sizes, which is characteristic of a less integrated, more rural settlement system. Each represents the apex of early urban development in their respective region. Sources: data from Adams (1981:table 7) Ibrahim et al. (1976, 1988); Broshi and Gophna (1986); Gophna and Portugali (1988).

<!-- image -->

rejuvenation of Levantine urbanism (Falconer and Savage 1995). The coastal cities atop the Middle Bronze II B-C curve apparently developed in response to the external stimulus of Mediterranean maritime commerce (e.g., between Egypt and the cities of coastal Syria), which had disappeared during Early Bronze IV but recovered during the Middle Bronze Age (Gerstenblith 1983; Falconer 1994; Falconer and Savage 1995).

These rank-size analyses do not adhere to the first expectation of our general  working hypothesis.  Instead,  they effectively contrast the rapid growth of massive cities and primate settlement systems on the broad lower Mesopotamian Plain with the development of urbanism in the Southern Levant on a more tightly defined stage, a much smaller scale, and with less

Figure 4. Rank-size distributions for Bronze Age settlement on the Levantine coastal plain. Early Bronze IV is marked by urban collapse, while Middle Bronze II B-Csignals its subsequent redevelopment. The Middle Bronze II B-C curve includes 59 sites, which describe a primate distribution of cities and towns superimposed on a convex lower element of rural villages. This lower element is similar to the Early Bronze IV distribution comprised of 16 sites. Sources: data from Broshi and Gophna (1986); Gophna and Portugali (1988).

<!-- image -->

apparent integration between central and peripheral communities.

## Field Investigations in the Jordan Valley

The  rural basis for early civilization in the southern Levant is illustrated in a detailed case study of economy and ecology at the Bronze Age villages of T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat, located in the Jordan Valley, Jordan. These sites were chosen for investigation for two reasons. First, they span a dramatic transition from pervasively nonurbanized society to the rapid rebirth and florescence of Canaanite urbanism. T ell Abu en-Ni'aj was occupied ca. 2300-2000 B.C. during the pervasive abandonment of Levantine towns

and cities in the Early Bronze IV period. Subsequently, Tell el-Hayyat was inhabited ca. 2000-1500 B.C. during the heyday of Middle Bronze Age urbanism. Despite the pronounced waxing and waning of Canaanite cities, village life persisted across this transition, as exemplified at Ni'aj and Hayyat. Given their persistence in the face of urban collapse, villages like these provide the  most appropriate venues for inferring the long-term economic and ecological foundations for the development of Levantine civilization. Second, Ni'aj and Hayyat are located in prime agricultural land in which permanent agriculture and seasonal sheep and goat herding still flourish today. This criterion is crucial here since most Early Bronze IV settlements are located around the arid fringes of  the Levant where Middle Bronze II sites are virtually absent, and therefore unavailable for comparison.

Botharchaeological sites are located about 240 m below sea level in the ghor, the broad agricultural terrace above the active stream channel of the Jordan River (Figure 1). T ell el-Hayyat, a low mound (ca. 4 m high), rises from the Holocene alluvium of the ghor , which provides the most fertile soil in the Levant (Zohary 1982) and has been intensively cultivated throughout the history of the region. T ell Abu en-Ni'aj lies on Pleistocene lacustrine sediments at the terrace edge, overlooking the zor , the active floodplain of the Jordan River. The climate of the southern Levant is decidedly Mediterranean with mild, rainy winters and long, hot summers. Modern precipitation in the Jordan Valley averages 250 mm per year (Horowitz 1979: fig. 2.31), an amount sufficient for dry farming. A  mean annual  temperature greater than 20° C (Horowitz 1979:22) permits year-round horticulture.

Today, wheat fields generally are rain fed, while other fields and orchards in the vicinity of Hayyat and Ni'aj are irrigated from the East Ghor Canal, which diverts water from the Yarmouk River, a tributary of the Jordan River (20-30 km north of these sites). Although there is no direct evidence for local Bronze Age canals, irrigation water could have been obtained from the Jordan River (1-2 kmtothewest) or from a permanent spring at the foot of the ancient town of Pella, 7 km to the northeast (see Figure 1).

Three seasons of excavation at T ell el-Hayyat in 1982, 1983, and 1985 exposed 400 m 2 of the tell's surface (8 percent of the site's area), while excavations in 1985 at T ell Abu en-Ni'aj covered 200 m 2 (&lt; 1 percent of the site's area). The excavated portion of Hayyat is quite substantial by Near Eastern standards, whereas the exposure at Ni'aj reflects a single season of fieldwork and will be expanded in the future. Archaeological deposits at both sites were excavated in 5 × 5 m squares to permit careful documentation and recovery of refuse discarded by villagers, and its spatial patterning in households, alleyways, and work areas. This fragmentary material includes broken ceramics, stone tools, and the most informative vestiges of village ecology: plant fragments and animal bones. These otherwise mundane remnants provide very eloquent, direct indications of the commodities and foodstuffs produced and consumed routinely by Bronze Age villagers.

All sediments excavated at Hayyat and Ni'aj were sieved for animal bones and sampled for plant fragments. In open sites such as these, bone preservation is usually good, but floral remains are preserved very rarely unless they have been carbonized in antiquity. Thus sediment samples were collected nonrandomly from localities that clearly contained carbonized seeds and wood or showed evidence of burning (Fall 1983). Samples from Hayyat (n = 151) and Ni'aj (n = 30), drawn from earthen  floors, hearths, tabuns (cooking ovens), a kiln, storage pits, and trash deposits, were analyzed for plant remains.

Simple water flotation (Pearsall 1989) was used to extract more than 10,000 identifiable floral specimens, including seeds, fruits, and rachis segments, from 852 liters of sediment from Hayyat and 204 liters of sediment from Ni'aj (mean sample volume for both sites is 5.9 liters). Because sample volumes differed (ranging between 1 and 20 liters each), density ratios (i.e., number of fragments/kiloliter of sediment) were computed to standardize the floral data (after Miller 1988; Pearsall 1989). These values do not necessarily reflect the relative importance of each crop at any given time, but they are extremely valuable for inferring differences in plant use through time or between the two villages (Pearsall 1989; Miller

1988).

All excavated sediments were screened through 0.5 cm mesh screen, permitting the recovery of more than 36,000 animal bone fragments from every excavated context at both sites (Metzger 1984, 1985). Our faunal data are presented as numbers of identified specimens (NISP), which reflect the frequency of bones for each of several, primarily domesticated, animal taxa. Variable bone frequencies reflect changing animal management through the Bronze Age at

Hayyat and Ni'aj. Because the volumes of some excavated sediments are not available, bone densities are not presented here.

## Reconstructing Bronze Age Agriculture and Environment

Tell Abu en-Ni'aj embodies a village measuring 2.5 ha that revealed 2.5 m of cultural deposits with three major strata of mudbrick architecture, all dating to Early Bronze IV . T raditional Middle Eastern village population densities suggest that Ni'aj's population measured between 500 and 600 (see Kramer 1982). T ell el-Hayyat contains the stratified remains of a Middle Bronze Age hamlet measuring 0.5 ha, which housed no more than 150 inhabitants. It produced 6 strata of village architecture to a total depth of 4.5 m at the center of the mound (Falconer and MagnessGardiner 1989). Habitation at Hayyat began very late in Early Bronze IV and continued without interruption through the end of the Middle Bronze Age. Phases 5-2 provide robust data for village life through Middle Bronze II A, II B, and II C. At Ni'aj, the latest Early Bronze IV stratum contributes the most substantial data recovered thus far. In the following discussions, we combine excavated data from T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat that span five major strata and approximately five centuries through the Early Bronze IV-Middle Bronze II sequence (see T able 1).

Prevailing interpretations of Bronze Age society inspire fundamentally different expectations for the faunal and floral evidence from T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat. W e anticipated faunal data from Ni'aj to be dominated by sheep and especially goat, the mainstays of Early Bronze IV mobile herding. Floral remains would feature abundant annual crops, especially cereal grains

Table 2. Relative Animal Bone Frequencies from Tell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat

|                          | Bone Frequencies as Percentage   | Bone Frequencies as Percentage   |
|--------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| Species                  | Tell Abu en-Ni'aj (n =1056)      | Tell el-Hayyat (n =35,000)       |
| Sheep/goat ( Ovis aries/ |                                  |                                  |
| Capra hircus )           | 60                               | 63                               |
| Pig ( Sus scrofa )       | 28                               | 21                               |
| Cattle ( Bos taurus )    | 11                               | 11                               |
| Weed taxa                | 1                                | 5                                |

and legumes, suggesting the opportunistic seasonal agriculture that often accompanies pastoralism. On the other hand, we expected Tell el-Hayyat to reflect sedentary farming strategies incorporated within an increasingly urbanized regional economy (e.g., see Chernoff 1988). Among animal taxa, we expected increased deposition of sheep, important producers of marketable wool, and cattle, major sources of high-status meat, hides, and traction for pulling plows and carts. Floral evidence should document not only local food consumption, but a greater emphasis on cultivation of perennial orchard crops that could be rendered into transportable secondary products. In many significant respects, the agricultural data from both sites run contrary to our expectations and thereby open new insights on Bronze Age rural ecology.

## Animal Husbandry and Consumption

When summarized, the faunal assemblages from T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat show many more similarities than differences (T able 2). As with most agrarian communities in the Near East, the majority of bones represent sheep ( Ovis aries ) and goat ( Capra hircus ), which provide very similar bone frequencies between these two villages. The relative abundance of cattle ( Bos taurus ) bones is identical at each village, while the frequency of pig ( Sus scrofa ) is slightly higher at the presumed 'pastoral' settlement of Ni'aj.

The pig bone frequencies at both sites are unexpectedly high and significantly greater than those for other Near Eastern Bronze Age communities, which commonly produce frequencies around 10 percent (e.g., Wapnish and  Hesse 1988; Horwitz 1989). Low  pig  frequencies at other sites reflect their relatively high water needs and poor suitability for mobile pastoralism (Horwitz 1989). In  addition to the general faunal similarities between Ni'aj and Hayyat, high pigbone frequencies provide strong circumstantial evidence that both settlements were sedentary agrarian communities. The general agricultural orientation of both villages is underscored by the near absence of wild taxa, despite the availability of migratory birds along the Jordan V alley and fish in the nearby Jordan River.

Although the summary faunal evidence from these two villages is very similar, there are several significant trends through the Middle Bronze Age sequence at T ell el-Hayyat that document the

influences of developing urbanism. In most cases, sheep and goat bones cannot be distinguished, and must be analyzed collectively. However, for those cases in which sheep and goat can be segregated, the ratio of sheep to goat shows an increase through time (T able 3). Goat bones from Hayyat Phase 5 are slightly more numerous, but by Phase 3, sheep bones are almost three times more abundant (Falconer 1995). This trend implies increasingly market-oriented animal husbandry, since sheep carry more meat and produce more abundant secondary products (especially wool), which are suitable for transport and exchange (Sherratt  1981;  Davis  1984), whereas hardier goats are more indicative of mobile pastoralism.

In contrast, the other major animal taxa at T ell el-Hayyat reveal a diminishing potential for market-oriented  husbandry, as the relative  abundance of pig bones increases, while that of cattle decreases (Figure 5). Diminished use of cattle follows naturally  from the shift  toward sheep herding noted above. Although cattle may provide marketable goods and serve as important draft animals, they are grazers that compete more with sheep (which both graze and browse), than with goats (which prefer browsing) (Redding 1984).

Increased pig and diminished cattle husbandry reflect a growing emphasis on household-based subsistence at Hayyat (Falconer 1995). Pigs are poorly suited for regional exchange because they provide few secondary products and do not herd readily to distant pasturage or markets (Wapnish and Hesse 1988; Horwitz and T chernov 1989). Instead, pig husbandry tended to flourish when institutional controls were relaxed (Zeder 1990) and is highly diagnostic of sedentary household husbandry, since swine can subsist as domestic scavengers and may be managed effectively by individual families (Grigson 1982).

Table 3. Sheep:Goat Ratios at T ell el-Hayyat, Based on Number of Identifiable Specimens (NISP) Determined as Ovis or Capra a

|   Phase | Ratios   |   NISP |
|---------|----------|--------|
|       3 | 2.73:1   |    183 |
|       4 | 0.83:1   |    289 |
|       5 | 0.56:1   |    196 |

a Bone counts produce a chi-square statistic (X 2 =57.998, df = 2, p &lt; 0.001) that permits rejection of the null hypothesis that there is no difference between sheep and goat distribution at Hayyat by phase.

Thus the bone assemblages from T ell Abu enNi'aj and T ell el-Hayyat reflect mixed strategies of animal husbandry. High sheep and goat frequencies typify Bronze Age herd management, and escalating sheep:goat ratios suggest potentially increased regional exchange of animal goods by the inhabitants of Tell el-Hayyat, as might be anticipated to accompany Middle Bronze Age urbanization. These expected results are tempered, however, by pig-bone frequencies that are anomalously high at both sites and grow through time at Hayyat. These data suggest strongly that T ell Abu en-Ni'aj was a sedentary agrarian village, and that market participation by Hayyat was tempered by accentuated householdlevel animal management and consumption despite the regional development of Middle Bronze Age towns and cities.

## Plant Cultivation and Exchange

As with their faunal data, Ni'aj and Hayyat are characterized by remarkably similar botanical assemblages (T able 4). Agricultural crops at both villages are grouped into four main categories: cultivated cereals, orchard crops, cultivated legumes, and wild species (T able 5). Annual and perennial crops often require very different cultivation strategies. Cereals and legumes require the planting of mature seeds but may not entail intensive maintenance before producing a harvest of new seeds within several months. Thus the

## Faunal Remains, Tell el-Hayyat

Figure 5. Relative frequencies of bone-element deposition from domestic animals at T ell el-Hayyat, phases 5-3. Data provided by M. Metzger. Chi-square statistic (X 2 = 183.207, df = 4, p &lt; 0.001; NISP: Phase 5 = 2427, Phase 4 = 2802, Phase 3 = 1822), based on number of identified specimens (NISP), permits rejection of the null hypothesis that there is no difference in domestic animal-bone distribution by phase.

<!-- image -->

cultivation of annual crops permits discontinuous seasonal cultivation by mobile populations (Zohary and Hopf 1988; LaBianca 1990). In contrast, the cultivation of fruit trees requires more continuous  horticultural management and a shift from sexual (i.e., involving seeds) to vegetative reproduction (Liphschitz et al. 1991). Fruit trees represent a distinct long-term investment, since they do not bear fruit for three to eight years after planting and may not reach full productivity for ten to twenty years (Stager 1985; Hopkins 1985).

Cereal grains include einkorn ( Triticum monococcum ), emmer ( T. dicoccum ), bread wheat ( T. aestivum / T. compactum ), oat ( Avena sativa ), rye ( Secale cereale ), and barley in both hulled ( Hordeum vulgare ) and naked varieties ( H. vulgare var. nudum ) (Fall 1983; Lines 1995).  All of these cultivated cereals would have thrived as wintersown varieties in the Jordan Valley and could have been cultivated without irrigation. Hulled barley, the most common cultivated cereal at both villages, is four to seven times more abundant than the naked form. In traditional agricultural systems, hulled varieties of barley are preferred for animal fodder and brewing beer, while naked forms are favored as food (Zohary and Hopf 1988). The cultivated legumes found in these villages include lentil ( Lens culinaris ), pea ( Pisium sativum ), chickpea ( Cicer arietinum ), horsebean ( Vicia faba ), bitter vetch ( Vicia ervilia ), and grass pea ( Lathyrus sativus ) (Fall 1983; Lines 1995). Orchard crops feature olive ( Olea europea ), grape ( Vitis vinifera ), and fig ( Ficus carica ), while the only common uncultivated fruit was Prosopis , a source of animal fodder (Helbaek 1966). All of the weeds, wild grasses, and wild legumes recovered from Ni'aj and Hayyat are prevalent in agricultural fields or disturbed areas. Weeds from a variety of genera include Malva, Plantago, Rumex/Polygonum, Galium, Amaranthus, and Chenopodium, among others.

Althoughthe floral assemblages from Ni'aj and Hayyat are generally similar, there are several significant trends through time. Among cereal grains, density ratios show a predominance of barley cultivation at Ni'aj and during the early phases at Hayyat that gives way to similar wheat and barley densities during the latter half of the Middle Bronze Age (Figure 6). Both wheat and barley may be eaten as gruel or porridge or baked into bread. Barley flour traditionally has been viewed as an inferior source of bread for the poor (Zohary 1982), since wheat produces clearly superior baking flour, particularly when grown in rich soil, with a climate affording low rainfall and a hot, dry, sunny ripening period (Renfrew 1973). The relative mercantile value of these crops is reflected in the biblical verse: 'A quart of wheat for a denarius, and three quarts of barley for a denarius . . .' (Revelations 6:6). Although all varieties of wheat (einkorn, emmer, and bread wheat) are more common at Hayyat, the frequencyofbreadwheatinparticular jumpstoeight times its value at Ni'aj. The Jordan Valley provides precisely the agricultural characteristics favorable for wheat cultivation, making local bread wheat a potentially valuable commodity for local and, perhaps, regional trade.

The influence of regional exchange on rural agriculture is most apparent when considering evidence for fruit cultivation. Of the seven crop taxa-wheat, barley, grape, fig, pomegranate, olive, and date-with which the Old T estament says the Land of Israel was blessed, five are fruit trees (Deuteronomy 8:8;  Zohary  1982). Rendered fruit products provide relatively low bulk, highly storable and transportable commodities that are much better suited for regional exchange than more perishable, higher bulk annual grains and legumes.

Olive, arguably the most important fruit tree of the eastern Mediterranean, was valued primarily as a producer of oil for eating and cooking, ointments, and fuel for lamps (Zohary 1982). Olive oil, because it could be stored for long periods, was a valued trade commodity and a symbol of wealth throughout the Mediterranean Basin beginning in the Early Bronze Age (Zohary and Hopf 1988; Neef 1990).

The grape vine, a similarly versatile orchard taxon, produced fruits that could be eaten fresh, dried to make raisins, or pressed to render juice and wine (Zohary 1982).  Like  olive oil, wine could be sealed in pottery jars, stored and transported, making it suitable for regional exchange (Stager 1985). Although wild grapes were utilized

Table 4. Carbonized Seed Frequencies from T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat

|                    | Seed Frequencies as Percentage   | Seed Frequencies as Percentage   |
|--------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|
|                    | Tell Abu en-Ni'aj (n =2217)      | Tell el-Hayyat (n =8081)         |
| Cultivated cereals | 33                               | 30                               |
| Orchard crops      | 13                               | 17                               |
| Cultivated legumes | 3                                | 4                                |
| Weed taxa          | 51                               | 49                               |

Table 5. Floral Assemblages for T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat with Main Crop Categories and Major Crop T axa Presented as Density Ratios (# of Seeds/kl)

|                    |   Tell Abu en-Ni'aj (204 liters) |   Tell el-Hayyat (852 liters) |
|--------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Cultivated cereals |                             3598 |                          2888 |
| Wheat              |                              549 |                           898 |
| Barley             |                             1971 |                          1300 |
| Oat                |                              657 |                           273 |
| Rye                |                              422 |                           417 |
| Orchard crops      |                             1407 |                          1574 |
| Grape              |                              137 |                            31 |
| Olive              |                               25 |                           142 |
| Fig                |                             1245 |                          1401 |
| Cultivated legumes |                              319 |                           373 |
| Weed taxa          |                             5544 |                          4649 |

Figure 6. Density ratios of barley and wheat grains from T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat, phases 5-2. Summarized seed counts for barley and wheat produce a chi-square statistic (X 2 =63.23, df = 1, p &lt; 0.001) that permits rejection of the null hypothesis that there is no difference in barley and wheat distribution between the two villages.

<!-- image -->

earlier, the first  evidence of  cultivated grapes comes from  excavations at  Early  Bronze Age Lachish (Helbaek 1958), Arad (Hopf 1978), Numeira (McCreery 1980), and Jericho (Hopf 1983).

Cultivated figs, which are particularly rich in sugar, could be dried, stored, and eaten  year round. The earliest evidence for fig cultivation in the Levant dates to the Chalcolithic (Hopf 1983) and the Early Bronze Age (McCreery 1980). By the Early Bronze Age, olive, grape, and fig, which flourish collectively in Mediterranean environments, constituted the main horticultural products in areas throughout the Mediterranean basin

Figure 7. Density ratios of orchard crop remains from Tell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat. Summarized seed counts for fig, olive, and grape produce a chi-square statistic (X 2 =55.68, df = 2, p &lt; 0.001) that permits rejection of the null hypothesis that there is no difference in orchard crop distribution between the two villages.

<!-- image -->

that were dependent upon rain-fed agriculture (Zohary and Hopf 1988).

The densities of orchard crop remains at T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat show the same general pattern identified above for faunal and annual crop data: striking overall similarity, with some subtle but significant distinctions (Figure 7). Major fruit cultigens, all of which require long-term cultivation and maintenance, are well represented at both sites, reinforcing our interpretation of Ni'aj as a sedentary agrarian village, rather than a seasonal pastoral encampment.

Among the most informative floral distinctions, we note a shifting balance of grape and olive

Figure 8. Density ratios of grape and olive seeds from Tell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat, phases 5-2. Seed counts for grape and olive produce a chi-square statistic (X 2 =63.8, df = 4, p &lt; 0.01) that permits rejection of the null hypothesis that there is no difference between grape and olive deposition through the sequence at Ni'aj and Hayyat.

<!-- image -->

deposition, in which grape seeds are more commonatNi'aj, while olive becomes more abundant at Hayyat, particularly during phases 4 and 3 (Figure 8). Olive trees are perhaps the optimal cultigen for Mediterranean climates, since they thrive with warm, wet winters and hot, dry summers, particularly when planted on well-drained soils (Polunin and Huxley 1965; Renfrew 1973). Successful  olive  cultivation  requires extensive landholdings since each tree has an extensive root system that requires a spacing of approximately 10 m between trees (T urrill 1952). The apparent shift to greater olive cultivation at T ell el-Hayyat represents a serious increase in local agricultural investment. This shift extended well after the end of Early Bronze IV into phases 5 and 4 at Hayyat, suggesting it was also inspired by the mercantile opportunities afforded by developing urbanism.

Thesefloral data clearly reflect sedentary farming strategies at both T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat, with a growing emphasis on crops with greater market potential. The two major horticultural shifts, in which wheat became more dominant among cereals, and fruit cultivation shifted from grape to olive, are most accentuated within the Middle Bronze Age, rather than at the Early Bronze IV/Middle Bronze Age interface.

## Village Agriculture in Overview

This detailed profile of village agriculture in the Jordan Valley, as summarized in  T able 6, provides several fundamental, and sometimes unexpected, insights on Bronze Age rural economy and ecology in the midst of urban collapse and florescence. Many of our inferences stem from several basic continuities between T ell Abu enNi'aj and T ell el-Hayyat. For example, the striking similarities in animal management and orchard cultivation at both villages reflect a persistent element of rural sedentarism that may link the seemingly distinct societies of the 'pastoralized' Early Bronze IV period and the urban heyday of Middle Bronze II. Y et Ni'aj and Hayyat also provide their share of distinct contrasts that reflect rural responses to growing urbanism. Several clear trends of enhanced production of marketable commodities (especially olive oil, bread wheat, and sheep wool) suggest that the farmers of T ell el-Hayyat increasingly adapted their crop cultivation and animal management to meet the demands of emerging mercantile exchange and consumption in Middle Bronze Age towns and cities. An equally intriguing, and less expected, trend is marked by a parallel increase in more localized  plant  and  animal management (e.g., especially of pigs and possibly grapes), possibly as a hedge by this hamlet against the potential inroads of urban economic and political authorities.

In a study of peasant agriculture under Inca rule, Zimmerer (1993) also emphasizes the importance of household subsistence cultivation. Surplus-oriented production under the Inca state featured only a few major crops such as maize, potatoes, and coca; localized subsistence farming, however, supported a wide variety of cultivars (Lathrap 1973; Plowman 1984; Knapp 1991; Zimmerer 1993). Household gardens undoubtedly also played a similar role in maintaining native crop diversity in pre-Columbian Mesoamerica (Whitmore and T urner 1992).

At Tell el-Hayyat, the most pronounced changes in both faunal and  floral  data  occur between phases 4 and 3, and therefore suggest social and economic changes between the rebirth of town life in Middle Bronze II A and the culmination of urbanism in Middle Bronze II B and II C. In this manner, T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat illuminate the complex weave of village agriculture and intercommunity relations at the foundation of Bronze Age society  in  the southern Levant.

Table 6. Significant Results of Floral and Faunal Remains from T ell el-Hayyat and T ell Abu en-Ni'aj

| Results                                                                                                       | Significance                                                                               |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Substantial remains of cattle, pig, and perennial or- chard crops at Tell Abu en-Ni'aj                        | Persistence of sedentary farming in Early Bronze IV , despite the decline of urban centers |
| Increase in species that yield marketable commodities during the Middle Bronze II (e.g., olive, wheat, sheep) | Shift to market-oriented economy following the re- emergence of urban centers              |
| Decrease in olive, increase in grape and pig during late Middle Bronze II                                     | Enhanced economic autonomy; reduced potential for encroachment by political authorities    |
| Relative absence of wild floral and faunal remains from both villages (except agricultural weeds)             | Anthropogenic landscape                                                                    |

## Conclusion

Any appreciation of the roots of civilization in the Near East must not only identify the origins of social revolutions such as agriculture and urbanism, but comprehend their concomitant effects on the natural environment and the economic behaviors of rural villagers who comprised the vast majority of ancient populations. The communities of T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat provide  a rare, intimate portrait  of agrarian ecology on an increasingly anthropogenic landscape during the collapse and development of early towns and cities. Pre-Columbian state-level societies exerted comparably powerful influences on the rural environments of Mesoamerica (Denevan 1992; Whitmore and Turner 1992). Aztec and Maya demand for specialized orchard products such as cacao ( Theobroma cacao ) and avocado ( Persea americana ) created extensive agricultural landscapes throughout the region (Bergman 1969; T urner and Miksicek 1984; Whitmore and T urner 1992). Amid relatively long-term trajectories of agrarian and environmental change, rural communities often demonstrate remarkable resilience (e.g., Adams 1978), making them ideal vantage points for detailed reconstructions of the economy and ecology that lay at the root of early civilizations.

At Ni'aj and Hayyat, striking overall similarities in crop cultivation and animal management reflect the persistence of sedentary agriculture, despite the varying fortunes of urban centers, that has escaped serious attention previously. Ni'aj exemplifies the importance of sedentary communities and the persistence of orchard cultivation during the urban collapse and regional 'pastoralization' of Early Bronze IV , while Hayyat demonstrates several striking trends that accompany the rejuvenation of Middle Bronze Age cities. The farmers of Hayyat increasingly exploited far- reaching mercantile opportunities afforded by urban markets, as signaled by clear shifts to greater sheep husbandry and, most significantly, accentuated cultivation of marketable orchard crops like olives, figs, and grapes. They clearly also accentuated some aspects of economic autonomy, notably pig husbandry, which may be interpreted as a strategy to avoid excessive mercantile dependence.

On the eve of Spanish contact i n Mesoamerica, rural villages similarly integrated surplus-oriented tree cropping with diversified, household-level subsistence farming. Household orchard-gardens supported a wide variety of fruits, vegetables, condiments, fibers, and medicinal plants (Whitmore and T urner 1992). These diversified gardens provided a measure of householdlevel autonomy, facilitating the maintenance of traditional crop diversity. Nabhan (1987) suggests provocatively that the conservation of modern agricultural biodiversity may also depend on rural resistance to market forces and state-level political authority. Throughout the tropics, traditional diversified systems are being displaced by high-yield monocultures of cash crops such as coffee, bananas, and pineapple. The ability of rural peoples to resist this process in the face of emerging urban markets will have significant implications for the future of agrarian diversity.

While the assemblages of wild plant and animal taxa discussed above might suggest such extreme agricultural  dedication  that episodes of urban collapse would have a devastating impact on Bronze Age rural economy in the southern Levant, the evidence from Ni'aj and Hayyat attests to the resilience of these early rural communities. This resilience is based on shifts in agricultural intensification that variably exploited growing market opportunities or reduced the potential for institutional control. T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and T ell el-Hayyat exemplify the spec-

trum of agrarian strategies that provided the basis for village economy and ecology in emerging urbanized societies such as those of the southern Levant.

## Acknowledgments

Suggestions  and editorial comments by Karl W. Butzer and two anonymous reviewers greatly improved this manuscript. Excavations at T ell Abu en-Ni'aj and Tell el-Hayyat were conducted with the cooperation and assistance of the Department of Antiquities of Jordan and the American Center of Oriental Research, Amman.Thefieldcomponentofthisresearchhasbeen supported by grants to Steven Falconer and Bonnie Magness-Gardiner from the National Endowment for the  Humanities  (#RO-21027),  the National  Geographic Society (#2598-83 and #2984-84), and the Wenner-Gren Foundation  for Anthropological  Research  (#4382).  Analysis of the Hayyat  and Ni'aj collections is funded by grants to Steven Falconer and Patricia Fall from the National Endowment for the Humanities (#R0-22467-92) and by three Arizona State University Faculty Grants-in-Aid. W e offer special thanks to Mary Metzger for identification and analyses of the bone material from Hayyat and Ni'aj, to Bonnie Magness-Gardiner for insights into the cultural remains excavated from these two archaeological villages, and to Barbara T rapido for drafting the illustrations. Naomi Miller, Karen Adams, and Charles Miksicek aided in identifying the plant remains.

## References

- Adams, R. M. 1978. Strategies of Maximization, Stability, and Resilience in Mesopotamian Society, Settlement, and Agriculture. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 122:329-35.
- ---. 1981. Heartland of Cities. Surveys of Ancient Settlement and Land Use on the Central Floodplain of the Euphrates. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- --- and Nissen, H. 1972. The Uruk Countryside. The Natural Setting of Urban Societies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Algaze, G. 1989. The Uruk Expansion. Cross-cultural Exchange in Early Mesopotamian Civilization. Current Anthropology 30:571-608.
- Baruch, U. 1990. Palynological Evidence of Human Impact on the V egetation as Recorded in Late Holocene Lake Sediments in Israel. In Man's Role in the Shaping of the Eastern Mediterranean Landscape , ed. S. Bottema, G. Entjes-Nieborg, and W . van Zeist, pp. 283-93. Rotterdam: Balkema.
- Bassett, T . J. 1988. The Political Ecology of PeasantHerder Conflicts in the Northern Ivory Coast.
- Annals of the Association of American Geographers 78:453-72.
- Ben-T or , A. 1986. The T rade Relations of Palestine in the Early Bronze Age. Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 29:1-27.
- Bergmann, J. F . 1969. The Distribution of Cacao Cultivation in Pre-Columbian America. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 59:85-96.
- Berry, B. J. L. 1961. City Size Distributions and Economic Development. Economic Development and Culture Change 9:573-88.
- Broshi, M. 1979. The Population of W estern Palestine in the Roman-Byzantine Period. Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research 236:1-10.
- ---and Gophna, R. 1986. Middle Bronze Age II Palestine: Its Settlements and Population. Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research 261:73-90.
- Butzer, K. 1996. Ecology in the Long View: Settlement Histories, Agrosystemic Strategies, and Ecological Performance. Journal of Field Archaeology 23:141-50.
- Chernoff, M. C. 1988. The Archaeobotanical Material from T ell el Ifshar , Israel. Ph.D. dissertation, Brandeis University.
- Childe, V . G. 1950. The Urban Revolution. Town Planning Review 21:3-17.
- Davis, S. 1984. The Advent of Milk and W ool Production in W estern Iran. In Animals and Archaeology: 3. Early Herders and Their Flocks. British Archaeological Reports International Series 202, ed. J. Clutton-Brock and C. Grigson, pp. 265-78. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
- Denevan, W . M. 1992. The Pristine Myth: The Landscape of the Americas in 1492. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 82:369-85.
- ---. 1996. A Bluff Model of Riverine Settlement in Prehistoric Amazonia. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 86:654-81.
- Dever, W . G. 1995. Social Structure in the Early Bronze IV Period in Palestine. In The Archaeology of Society in the Holy Land , ed. T . E. Levy, pp. 282-96. New York: Facts on File.
- Dziewonski, K. 1972. General Theory of Rank-Size Distributions  in Regional Settlement  Systems: Reappraisal and Reformulation of the Rank-Size Rule. Papers of the Regional Science Association 29:75-86.
- Eickelmann, D. F . 1989. The Middle East: An Anthropological Approach. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
- Falconer, S. E. 1994. The Development and Decline of Bronze Age Civilisation in the Southern Levant: A Reassessment of Urbanism and Ruralism. In Development and Decline in the Mediterranean Bronze Age , ed. C. Mathers and S. Stoddart, pp. 305-33. Sheffield, U.K.: Sheffield Academic Press.

- ---. 1995. Rural Responses to Early Urbanism: Bronze Age Household and Village Economy at Tell el-Hayyat, Jordan. Journal of Field Archaeology 22:399-419.
- ---and Magness-Gardiner, B. 1989. Bronze Age Village Life in the Jordan V alley: Archaeological Investigations at T ell el-Hayyat and T ell Abu enNi'aj. National Geographic Research 5:335-47.
- ---and Savage, S. H. 1995. Heartlands and Hinterlands: Alternative T rajectories of Early Urbanization in Mesopotamia and the Southern Levant. American Antiquity 60:37-58.
- Fall, P . L. 1983. La Flore a Tell el-Hayyat. Syria 60(3-4):309-10.
- Gerstenblith, P . 1983. The Levant at the Beginning of the Middle Bronze . American Schools of Oriental Research Dissertation Series 5. Winona Lake IN: American Schools of Oriental Research.
- Gonen, R. 1984. Urban Canaan in the Late Bronze Age. Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research 253:61-73.
- Gophna, R.; Liphschitz, N.; and Lev-Yadun, S. 1986. Man's Impact on the Natural V egetation in the Central Coastal Plain of Israel during the Chalcolithic and the Bronze Ages (ca. 4000-1600 B.C.). T el Aviv 13:69-82.
- --- and Portugali, J. 1988. Settlement and Demographic Processes in Israel's Coastal Plain from the Chalcolithic to the Middle Bronze Age. Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research 269:11-18.
- Grigson, C. 1982. Porridge and Pannage: Pig Husbandry in Neolithic England. In Archaeological Aspects of W oodland Ecology. British Archaeological Reports International Series 146, ed. M. Bell and S. Limbrey, pp. 297-314. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
- Helbaek, H. 1958. Plant Economy in Ancient Lachish. In Lachish (T ell ed-Duweir) IV . The Bronze Age, ed. O. T ufnell, Appendix A, pp. 309-17. London: Oxford University Press.
- ---. 1966. The Plant Remains from Nimrud. In Nimrud and Its Remains , Appendix I, vol. 2, ed. M. E. L. Mallowan, pp. 613-20. London: Collins.
- Helmer, D. 1989. Le developement de la domestication au Proche-Orient de 9500 à 7500 B.P .: Les Nouvelles données d'El Kown et de Ras Shamra. Paleorient 15:111-21.
- Helms, S. 1986. Excavations at T ell Umm Hammad, 1984. Levant 18:25-50.
- Hopf, M. 1978. Plant Remains, Strata V-I. In Early Arad , pp. 64-82. Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society.
- ---.1983.JerichoPlantRemains. In Excavations at Jericho , ed. K. M. Kenyon and T . A. Holland, pp. 576-621. London: British School of Archaeology at Jerusalem.
- Hopkins, D. C. 1985. The Highlands of Canaan. Agricultural Life in the Early Iron Age . Sheffield, U.K.: Almond Press.
- Horowitz, A. 1979. The Quaternary of Israel . New Y ork: Academic Press.
- Horwitz, L. 1989. Diachronic Changes in Rural Husbandry Practices in Bronze Age Settlements from the Refaim  Valley, Israel. Palestine  Exploration Quarterly 121:44-54.
- ---and Tchernov, E. 1989. Animal Exploitation in the Early Bronze Age of the Southern Levant. In L 'Urbanisation de la Palestine a l'Age du Bronze Ancien. British Archaeological Reports, International Series 527, ed. P . de Miroschedji, pp. 279-96. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
- Ibrahim, M.; Sauer, J.; and Y assine, K. 1976. The East Jordan Valley Survey, 1975. Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research 222:41-66.
- ---. 1988. The East Jordan Valley Survey, 1976, Part 2. In Archaeology of Jordan: Essays and Reports , ed. K. Y assine, pp. 189-207. Amman: University of Jordan.
- Ilan, D. 1995. The Dawn of Internationalism-The Middle Bronze Age. In The Archaeology of Society in the Holy Land , ed. T . E. Levy, pp. 297-319. New York: Facts on File.
- Jefferson, M. 1939. The Law of the Primate City. Geographical Review 29:226-32.
- Joffe, A. H. 1993. Settlement and Society in Early Bronze I and II Southern Levant . Sheffield, U.K.: Sheffield Academic Press.
- Johnson, G. A. 1977. Aspects of Regional Analysis in Archaeology. Annual Review of Anthropology 6:479-508.
- ---. 1980. Rank-size Convexity and System Integration: A View from Archaeology. Economic Geography 56:234-47.
- Kantor, H. J. 1992. The Relative Chronology of Egypt and Its Foreign Correlations before the First Intermediate Period. In Chronologies in Old World Archaeology , ed. R.W . Ehrich, pp. 3-21. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Knapp, G. 1991. Andean Ecology: Adaptive Dynamics in Ecuador . Boulder, CO: W estview Press.
- Köhler-Rollefson, I. 1988. The Aftermath of the Levantine Neolithic Revolution in the Light of Ecological and Ethnographic Evidence. Paleorient 14:87-93.
- ---. 1992. A Model for the Development of Nomadic Pastoralism on the T ransjordanian Plateau. In Pastoralism in the Southern Levant: Archaeological Materials in Anthropological Perspectives. Monographs in W orld Archaeology 10, ed. O. Bar-Y osef and A. Khazarov, pp. 11-18. Madison: Prehistory Press.
- --- and Rollefson, G. O. 1990. The Impact of Neolithic Subsistence Strategies on the Environment: The Case of ' Ain Ghazal, Jordan. In Man's Role in the Shaping of the Eastern Mediterranean Landscape , ed. S. Bottema, G. Entjes-Nieborg, and W. van Zeist, 3-14. Rotterdam: A. A. Balkema.

- Kowalewski, S. 1982. The Evolution of Primate Regional Systems. Comparative Urban Research 9:60-68.
- Kramer, C. 1982. Village Ethnoarchaeology. Rural Iran in Archaeological Perspective . New York: Academic Press.
- LaBianca, O.S. 1990. Hesban 1: Sedentarization and Nomadization . Berrien Springs, MI: Andrews University Press.
- Lathrap, D. W . 1973. The Antiquity and Importance of Long-Distance Trade Relationships in the Moist T ropics of Pre-Columbian South America. World Archaeology 5:170-86.
- Levy, T .E. 1995. Cult, Metallurgy and Rank Societies-Chalcolithic Period (ca. 4500-3500 B.C.E.). In The Archaeology of Society in the Holy Land , ed. T .E. Levy, pp. 226-44. New Y ork: Facts on File.
- Lines, L. 1995. Bronze Age Orchard Cultivation and Urbanization in the Jordan River Valley. Ph.D. dissertation, Arizona State University.
- Linsky, A.S. 1965. Some Generalizations Concerning Primate Cities. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 55:506-13.
- Liphschitz, N.; Gophna, R.; and Lev-Yadun, S. 1989. Man's Impact on the V egetational Landscape of Israel in the Early Bronze Age II-III. In L 'urbani sation de la Palestine à l'âge du Bronze ancien , ed. P . Miroschedji, pp. 263-68. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports, International Series 527.
- ---;Gophna,R.;Hartman,M.;andBiger,G.1991. The Beginning of Olive ( Olea europaea ) Cultivation in the Old W orld: A Reassessment. Journal of Archaeological Science 18:441-53.
- Magness-Gardiner, B., and Falconer, S.E. 1994. Community, Polity and Ritual in a Middle Bronze Age Levantine Village. Journal of Mediterranean Archaeology 7(2):3-40.
- Mann, M. 1986. The Sources of Social Power . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- McCreery, D.W . 1980. The Nature and Cultural Implications of Early Bronze Age Agriculture in the Southern Ghor of Jordan: An Archaeoelogical Reconstruction. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburgh.
- Mehta, S.K. 1964. Some Demographic and Economic Correlates of Primate Cities: a Case for Revaluation. Demography 1:136-47.
- Metzger, M.C. 1984. Faunal Remains at T ell el-Hayyat: Preliminary Results. Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research 255:68-69.
- ---.1985.Tell el-Hayyat in the Late Third Millennium  B.C.:  Archaeozoological  Perspectives on Cultural Change. M.A. thesis, University of Alabama, Birmingham.
- Miller, N.F . 1988. Ratios in Paleoethnobotanical Analysis. In Current Paleoethnobotany: Analytical Methods and Cultural Interpretations of Archaeological Plant Remains , ed. C.A. Hastorf and V .S. Popper, pp. 72-85. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- ---.1991. The Near East. In Progress in Old W orld Paleoethnobotany: A Retrospective View on the Occasion of 20 Y ears of the International W ork Group for Palaeoethnobotany , eds. W. Van Zeist, K. Wasylikowa, and K.-E. Behre, pp. 133-60. Rotterdam: Balkema.
- Moore, T . 1959. A Note on City Size Distributions. Economic Development and Culture Change 6:465-66.
- Morse, R.M. 1962. Latin American Cities: Aspects of Function and Structure. Comparative Studies in Social History 4:473-93.
- Nabhan, G. P . 1987. Ethnobiology and Conservation: Valuing Diversity. Environment Southwest 8:28-31.
- Neef, R. 1990. Introduction, Development and Environmental Implications of Olive Culture: The Evidence from Jordan. In Man's Role in the Shaping of the Eastern Mediterranean Landscape , ed. S. Bottema, G. Entjes-Nieborg, and W . van Zeist, pp. 295-306. Rotterdam: Balkema.
- Paynter, R.W . 1983. Expanding the Scope of Settlement Analysis. In Archaeological Hammers and Theories , ed. J. Moore and A. Keene, pp. 233-75. New York: Academic Press.
- Pearsall, D.M. 1989. Paleoethnobotany: A Handbook of Procedures. San Diego: Academic Press.
- Plowman, T . 1984. The Origin, Evolution and Diffusion of Coca, Erythroxylum spp., in South and Central America. In Pre-Columbian Plant Migration, ed. D. Stone, pp. 125-64. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
- Polunin, O. and Huxley, A. 1965. Flowers of the Mediterranean. London: Hogarth.
- Posener, G. 1971. Syria and Palestine, ca. 2160-1780 B.C.: Relations with Eqypt. In Cambridge Ancient History , vol. 1, part 2, pp. 532-58. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Postgate, J.N. 1994. Early Mesopotamia. Society and Economy at the Dawn of History. New York: Routledge.
- Redman, C.L. 1978. The Rise of Civilization . San Francisco: W . H. Freeman.
- Redding, R. 1984. Theoretical Determinants of a Herder's Decisions: Modeling Variation in the Sheep/Goat Ratio. In Animals and Archaeology 3. Early Herders and Their Flocks. British Archaeological Reports International Series 202, ed. J. Clutton-Brock and C. Grigson, 161-70. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
- Redfield, R. 1953. The Primitive World and Its T ransformations . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
- Renfrew, J.M. 1973. Paleoethnobotany: The Prehistoric Food Plants of the Near East and Europe . New Y ork: Columbia University Press.
- Richard, S. 1986. Excavations at Khirbet Iskander, Jordan: A  Glimpse at Settled Life during the 'Dark Age' in Palestinian Archaeology. Expedition 28:3-12.

- Richardson, H.W . 1973. Theory of the Distribution of City Sizes: Review and Prospects. Regional Studies 7:239-51.
- Rodrigue, C. M. 1992. Can Religion Account for Early Animal Domestication? A Critical Assessment of the Cultural Geographic Argument, Based on Near Eastern Archaeological Data. The Professional Geographer 44:417-30.
- Rollefson, G. O., and Köhler-Rollefson, I. 1992. Early Neolithic Exploitation Patterns in the Levant: Cultural Impact on the Environment. Population and Environment 13:243-54.
- ---;Simmons, A.; and Kaffafi, Z. 1992. Neolithic cultures at ' Ain Ghazal, Jordan. Journal of Field Archaeology 19:443-70.
- Schwartz, G. M., and Falconer, S.E. 1994. Rural Approaches to Social Complexity. In Archaeological Views from the Countryside: Village Communities in Early Complex Societies , ed. G.M. Schwartz and S. E. Falconer, pp. 1-9. W ashington: Smithsonian Institution Press.
- Sherratt, A. G. 1981. Plough and Pastoralism: Aspects of the Secondary Products Revolution. In Pattern of the Past: Studies in Memory of David Clarke , ed. I. Hodder, G. Isaac, and N. Hammond, pp. 261-305. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Spengler,  O.  1923. Der Untergang des Abendlandes: Umrisse einer Morphologie der W eltgeschichte . Munich: Oskar Beck.
- Stager, L. E. 1985. The Firstfruits of Civilization. In Palestine in the Bronze and Iron Ages. Papers in Honor of Olga T ufnell, Institute of Archaeology Occasional Papers 11, ed. J.N. T ubb, pp. 172-88. London: Institute of Archaeology.
- ---.  1992. The Periodization of Palestine from Neolithic through Early Bronze Times. In Chronologies in Old W orld Archaeology , ed. R.W . Ehrich, pp. 22-41. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Turner, B. L. II, and Miksicek, C. H. 1984. Economic Plant Species Associated with Prehistoric Agriculture in the Maya Lowlands. Economic Botany 38:179-93.
- Turrill, W . B. 1952. Wild and Cultivated Olives. Kew Bulletin 7:437.
- van Zeist, W . 1988. Some Aspects of Early Neolithic Plant Husbandry in the Near East. Anatolica 15:49-68.
- Vapnarsky, C. A. 1968. On Rank-Size Distributions of Cities: An Ecological Approach. Economic Development and Culture Change 17:584-95.
- Wapnish, P ., and Hesse, B. 1988. Urbanization and the Organization of Animal Production at T ell Jemmeh in the Middle Bronze Age Levant. Journal of Near Eastern Studies 47(2):81-94.
- Weber, M. 1958. The City. New York: Macmillan.
- Whitmore, T . M., and T urner, B.L. II. 1992. Landscapes of Cultivation in Mesoamerica on the Eve of the Conquest. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 82:402-25.
- Wirth, L. 1938. Urbanism as a Way of Life. American Journal of Sociology 44:3-21.
- Zeder, M. 1990. Animal Exploitation at Tell Halif. Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research, Supplement 26:24-30.
- Zimmerer, K. S. 1991. W etland Production and Smallholder Persistence: Agricultural Change  in a Highland Peruvian Region. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 81:443-63.
- ---. 1993. Agricultural Biodiversity and Peasant Rights to Subsistence in the Central Andes during Inca Rule. Journal of Historical Geography 19:15-32.
- Zipf, G. K. 1949. Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort . Cambridge, MA: Addison-W esley.
- Zohary, D., and Hopf, M. 1988. Domestication of Plants in the Old World. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
- Zohary, M. 1982. Plants of the Bible . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Correspondence: Department of Geography, Arizona State University, T empe, AZ 85287, email fall@ASU.edu (Fall); Department of Environmental Studies, Rollins College, Winter Park, FL 32789 (Lines); Department of Anthropology, Arizona State University, T empe, AZ 85287 (Falconer).