<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Analysis on the Relationship between Regional Innovation and Income Inequality in Chinese City Regions

## Quanen Guo

To cite this article: Quanen Guo (2019): Analysis on the Relationship between Regional Innovation and Income Inequality in Chinese City Regions, The Professional Geographer, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2018.1559653

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2018.1559653

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 05 Apr 2019.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 8

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Analysis on the Relationship between Regional Innovation and Income Inequality in Chinese City Regions

<!-- image -->

Quanen Guo Nanchang University

Previous literature has not yet reached a conclusion on the relationship between innovation and income inequality; thus, this study examines this relationship across Chinese city regions from 2004 to 2012. A nonlinear relationship between innovation and income inequality is observed, and this result is robust to different measures of income inequality, threshold effect models, and subsample analysis and is also supported by a disaggregate analysis based on individual incomes. These findings suggest directions for public policy. To moderate income inequality attributed to innovation, policy should facilitate the income spillover to less skilled laborers by improving human capital and maximizing the employment compensation effect through reducing discrimination against the less skilled, particularly less skilled rural migrants. Key Words: China, income inequality, innovation, nonlinear relationship.

过 去 的 文 献 对 于 创 新 和 所 得 不 均 之 间 的 关 系 仍 未有 定 论 ， 因 此 本 研 究 检 视 自 2004 年 至 2012 年 间 ， 两 者 在 中 国 城 市 区 域 中 的 关 系 。 本 研 究 观 察 到创 新 与 所 得 不 均 之 间 的 非 线 性 关 系 ， 而 此 结 果 对 不 同 的 所 得 不 均 、 家 户 效 应 模 型 ， 以 及 副 样 本 分 析 之 测 量 方 法 而 言 皆相 当强 健 ， 并 且 受 到 根 据 个人 所 得 的 非 集 计 分 析 所 支 持 。 为了 缓 和 创 新 造 成 的 所 得 不 均 ， 政 策 应 该 通 过 改 善 人 力 资 本 ， 并 藉 由 减 少 对 低 技 术 工 作 、 特 别 是 低 技 术 农 民 工 的 歧 视 来最 大 化 就 业 补 偿 效 应 ， 以 促 进 所 得 外 溢 至 较 低 技 术 的 劳动 者 。 关 键 词 ： 中 国 ， 所 得 不 均 ， 创 新 ， 非 线 性 关 系 。

En la literatura anterior no se ha llegado a una conclusi  on sobre la relaci  on entre innovaci  on y desigualdad del ingreso; por eso, este estudio examina esta relaci  on a trav  es de ciudades-regi  on chinas del 2004 al 2012. Se observa una relaci  on no linear entre innovaci  on y desigualdad del ingreso, resultado que es robusto en diferentes mediciones de desigualdad del ingreso, modelos del efecto del umbral y an  alisis de submuestra, y que tambi  en es apoyado por un an  alisis de desagregaci  on basado en ingresos individuales. Estos descubrimientos sugieren direcciones de pol  ı ticas p  ublicas. Para moderar la desigualdad del ingreso atribuida a la innovaci  on, las pol  ı ticas deben favorecer el desborde del ingreso hacia trabajadores menos capacitados mejorando el capital humano y maximizando el efecto de la compensaci  on del empleo reduciendo la discriminaci  on contra los menos capacitados, en particular los migrantes rurales de menor capacitaci  on laboral. Palabras clave: China, desigualdad de ingresos, innovaci  on, relaci  on no linear.

I n recent decades, innovation has been recognized as a vital driver of economic growth and change (Pianta and Tancioni 2008). It leads to the emergence of new products, increased productivity, and development of new economic sectors. At the same time, innovation can also affect income distribution. Florida (2007) found that cities with higher innovation levels face greater income inequality in the United States because innovation increases the income of highly skilled laborers, but the effect does not ' trickle down ' to their less skilled counterparts. The advanced technology deriving from innovative activities inevitably increases the demand for highskilled laborers and their income and further encourages highly skilled laborers to migrate to other regions that have more job opportunities; this migration consequently increases income inequality in their home regions (Florida 2005, 2007). In many circumstances, less skilled laborers confront lower income and frequent unemployment. Similar conclusions are drawn by several empirical studies, which find innovation to be positively associated with income inequality (Faggio, Salvanes, and Van-Reenen 2010; Weiss and Garloff 2011; Breau, Kogler, and Bolton 2014). Other studies, however, suggest that innovation has a moderating effect on income inequality. According to this view, highly skilled laborers are found to help less skilled laborers develop and apply their innovative capabilities. Over time, less skilled but talented laborers evolve into highly skilled laborers (Florida 2005; Donegan and Lowe 2008). Moreover, innovation development spurs demand across the economy, not just in high-technology, skill-intensive sectors (Lusch and Nambisan 2015). Empirical studies also confirm the inequality-reducing effect of innovation (Antonelli and Gehringer 2013; Hopkin, Lapuente, and Moller 2014), and some research clearly indicates that innovation is the solution to income inequality (Maliszewski 2003; Peck 2005; McCann 2007; Donegan and Lowe 2008).

The literature just cited mainly focuses on developed countries, and only two studies investigate the effect of innovation on income inequality in the context of China. One of them finds a U-shaped relationship between innovation and income inequality, with the urban -rural income gap as an indicator of income inequality and an inverse U-shaped relationship, with the proportion of highly skilled workers proxying for income inequality (Liu and Lawell 2015), whereas the other finds innovation to be positively correlated with income inequality (Li and Yang 2016). Although both studies are based on

Chinese province-level data, they do not agree on the link between innovation and income inequality. According to the World Bank, significant income inequality has existed in China since the 1970s, and the Gini coefficient has exceeded acceptable levels (based on international standards) since the beginning of the twenty-first century (Han, Liu, and Zhang 2012; Appleton, Song, and Xia 2014). There is increasing interest in examining how innovation might be complicit in these trends.

In this study, we investigate the link between innovation and income inequality in a panel of Chinese city regions for the period from 2004 to 2012. The results provide clear evidence of a nonlinear relationship between innovation and income inequality, which is robust to tests using other measures of income inequality, threshold effect models, and subsample analysis across four major areas and is also supported by evidence from disaggregate analysis.

This study aims to contribute to the literature in three ways. First, it is one of the earliest studies to establish a nonlinear relationship between innovation and income inequality in China. Second, it is the first study to establish a triple-threshold effect of gross domestic product (GDP) per capita on the influence of innovation on income inequality. Third, it differentiates itself from previous studies on China, which conduct the analysis at the provincial level by using the (less heterogeneous) city region scale.

The rest of the article proceeds as follows. The next section provides an overview of the literature. We then introduce the study setting, research methodologies, variables, and data. We next give the empirical results and related robust tests. The section that follows provides further evidence based on disaggregate analysis. Finally, we present conclusions.

## Theoretical Framework

Innovation has received great attention over the past decades as a driver of economic growth (Chesbrough 2006; N. Lee 2011). Since Florida (2005, 2007) pointed out the highly disproportional income distributions in more innovative cities, several confirmatory investigations have been published (N. Lee 2011; Aghion et al. 2015; Liu and Lawell 2015).

The empirical literature on the relationship between innovation and income inequality mainly focuses on how innovation affects aggregate inequality (Donegan and Lowe 2008; Glaeser, Resseger, and Tobio 2009; Breau, Kogler, and Bolton 2014). Most of them support the positive relationship between skill-biased technology change and income inequality (Acemoglu, Aghion, and Violante 2001; Acemoglu 2002; Pan and Li 2010), whereas some argue that income inequality is not an inevitable byproduct of technology change (Grimalda 2004; Xu, Yan, and Zhang 2011).

Some disaggregated studies also examine how innovation affects the incomes of different types of laborers and, thus, the income distribution (Pehkonen and Ojala 2009; H € uhne and Herzer 2017). Allen (2001) found that technical variables lead to 30 percent of the increases in the income inequality between university graduates and high school graduates in the research and development (R&amp;D) and high-technology-intensive industries. Moreover, the relative supply of highly skilled workers resulting from the higher education development reduces the need for such laborers and then decreases inequality, and the technical spillovers among different types of laborers are responsible for the declines in the skill premium as well (Fang, Huang, and Wang 2008).

Figure 1 Links between innovation and income.

<!-- image -->

To summarize, there are five channels through which innovation might influence income distribution, which we describe in detail here (Figure 1). First, the productivity resulting from innovation positively affects the incomes of both highly and less skilled laborers. Undoubtedly, innovation could enhance productivity and efficiency. Even though several studies indicate that productivity mainly promotes the income of highly skilled laborers (Pianta and Tancioni 2008; Angelini, Farina, and Pianta 2009), productivity significantly increases income per capita in a region and both highly and less skilled laborers benefit from this effect (Antonelli and Gehringer 2013). Both groups gain but by different amounts. Jaumotte, Lall, and Papageorgiou (2013) indicated that the productivity increase is expected to reduce income inequality by increasing the laborers ' incomes.

Second, patents create income for inventors and patent owners, who are mainly highly skilled. As the intermediate products in innovative activities, patents have frequently been used as a measure of innovative capability since the 1970s (Arundel 2001). Some studies show evidence of a high elasticity coefficient between patents and profit (Coad and Rao 2008). Most patents are sold to enterprises or applied to production processes and bring high returns to the owners. Meanwhile, the patent protection institutions strengthen these effects (Zhang, Du, and Park 2015). The labor structure influences the optimal patent system. Because the increase in the number of highly skilled laborers enhances the benefits of the protection for skill-complimentary patents, patent protection is skill biased and leads to widening inequality (Pan and Li 2010).

Third, labor migration, which happens more frequently in regions with high innovation levels, benefits highly and less skilled laborers alike. On one hand, labor input, especially that of highly skilled laborers, strengthens innovative activities and increases the average income of laborers in that region (Glaeser, Resseger, and Tobio 2009; Moretti 2013). On the other hand, an increasing number of highly skilled laborers benefits the less skilled with superior learning capabilities who receive help to develop and apply their talents to their work (Wheeler 2004; Florida 2007; Winters 2013). The spillover of technology between highly and less skilled laborers causes the income of less skilled

Table 1 Administrative regions in different areas

| Areas          | Provinces or super city regions (abbreviation)                                                                                                                                |   Count |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|
| Eastern area   | Beijing (BJ), Tianjin (TJ), Hebei (HeB), Shanghai (SH), Jiangsu (JS), Zhejiang (ZJ), Fujian (FJ), Shandong (SD), Guangdong (GD), Hainan (HaN)                                 |      10 |
| Northeast area | Liaoning (LN), Jilin (JL), Heilongjiang (HLJ)                                                                                                                                 |       3 |
| Central area   | Shanxi (SX), Anhui (AH), Jiangxi (JX), Henan (HeN), Hubei (HuB), Hunan (HuN)                                                                                                  |       6 |
| Western area   | Chongqing (CQ), Sichuan (SC), Guizhou (GZ), Yunnan (YN), Tibet (XZ), Shaanxi (SaX), Gansu (GS), Qinghai (QH), Ningxia (NX), Xinjiang (XJ), Inner Mongolia (NMG), Guangxi (GX) |      12 |

laborers to increase and the income inequality to decline (Das 2008).

Fourth, that innovation is skill biased has been one of the most popular explanations for the rising inequality in many countries (Acemoglu 2002; Autor, Katz, and Kearney 2008; Lemieux 2008; Kurokawa 2014; J.-W. Lee and Wie 2015). The theory indicates that skill-biased technology change (SBTC) increases the demand only for highly skilled laborers, but the less skilled must face decreased income or even unemployment as their jobs succumb to automation and relocation (Moore and Ranjan 2005). By increasing the options for highly skilled laborers, SBTC leads to deunionization among highly and less skilled laborers, which amplifies the direct effect of SBTC on inequality (Acemoglu, Aghion, and Violante 2001).

Fifth, innovation is positively related to the income of less skilled laborers through employment compensation. In a region with a high innovation capacity, skilled laborers become increasingly busier, richer, and reluctant to do housework. This effect, in turn, leads to higher demand for less skilled work related to domestic services (Goos, Manning, and Salomons 2009; Eeckhout, Pinheiro, and Schmidheiny 2014). Autor and Dorn (2013) examined the employment and wage differentiation in the United States and found that less skilled laborers were absorbed into the service sector and their income improved.

According to the foregoing theoretical framework, innovation might have both positive and negative effects on income inequality, depending on the identified channel. In reality, though, these factors do not work at the same time. The increased productivity, knowledge spillover from highly skilled laborers, and less skilled compensation all contribute to the income of less skilled laborers, and the narrowing of the income gap resulting from innovation happens in a later period. Therefore, this study assumes that the relationship between innovation and income inequality might be nonlinear.

## Method

Study Areas

China is administratively divided into twenty-seven provinces and four province-status ' super city

Figure 3 Innovation levels in four areas.

<!-- image -->

regions '-Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, and Chongqing. Under the jurisdiction of the twentyseven provinces, there were 285 city regions at the prefecture level and above in 2012. Each city region administers a central city, a few county-level cities, and counties. Our study sample consists of those city regions and four province-status super city regions.

In China, city regions were traditionally sorted into eastern, northeastern, central, and western areas (Table 1, Figure 2). From 2004 to 2012, the innovation level in the eastern area was much higher than that in other areas and the innovation gap became increasingly obvious. The northeastern area had a slightly higher innovation level than others, and the western area had the lowest level of innovation (Figure 3).

## Models and Data

Empirical Models. To test the relationship between innovation and regional income inequality, the level of income inequality in a city region is estimated as a function of innovation level and a set of other factors that are identified in the previous literature to influence income inequality. These factors include

industrial structure improvements, proportion of primary sector activities among all, openness, human capital, GDP per capita, and size of a city region. The model adopts the following form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Inequality represents the dependent variable, one measure of income inequality. Subscript i stands for a city region, and subscript t represents the period ranging from 2004 to 2012. Innovation is a measure of the innovation level in a city region; IndustUpg stands for upgrades or improvements to the industrial structure; PriIndust is the proportion of primary industry; Openness represents market openness; Education is human capital; PGDP is GDP per capita; and CitySize is the size of a city region.

To examine the relationship between innovation and inequality, we add the square term of Innovation into Equation 1 and then take the natural logarithms of both sides. Thus, it is assumed that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In Equation 2, b 1 and b 2, which are the coefficients on Innovation and Innovation 2 , are the effects of innovation on inequality. If b 1 and b 2 are both significantly positive (negative), then innovation has a nonlinear impact on this region ' s income inequality. u is a regional fixed effect.  accounts for all unobserved region-specific characteristics that are time invariant. a is the constant, and e is the error term.

To test the robustness of the result, we use a threshold effect model to investigate the relationship between innovation and income inequality. To avoid any bias from an artificially set threshold, Hansen ' s advice is followed and an endogenous threshold effect is determined (Hansen 1999). The following is a single endogenous threshold model, based on the level of a threshold variable. It can be extended into a multiple endogenous threshold model accordingly.

The single-threshold model is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where g is the threshold variable, and c is the threshold value to be estimated. I (.) is an indicator function, x is the set of control variables, and h is the corresponding coefficient vector. In reality, there could be more than one threshold. A doublethreshold model can be established as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The hypothesis tests for a multithreshold model are similar to those for a single-threshold model, but they are not described here.

Variables and Data. Due to the limited data, we focus on the income inequality between urban and rural areas, following previous literature (Wei and Wu 2001; Jiang and Zhang 2008; Lei, Chen, and Qin 2014; Liu and Lawell 2015). Generally, in China, high-income people live in cities and lowincome people stay in rural areas and, therefore, urban -rural income disparity can reflect the inequality within a city region to a high degree. In fact, it has been verified that for the Chinese case, income inequality between urban and rural areas exceeds income inequality within either urban or rural areas (Wei and Wu 2001; Lu and Chen 2004; Wan and Zhou 2005; Xie and Zhou 2014). In addition, the World Bank has estimated that urban -rural inequality accounts for more than half of the change in the overall income inequality in China (World Bank 1997). Wei and Wu (2001) used the ratio of urban per capita disposable income to rural per capita net income as a measure of inequality, which we adopt as our Income inequality 1 . We also estimate the inequality by the ratio of the urban and rural per capita income difference to city region per capita income (Lin and Chen 2004), labeling this variable Income inequality 2 .

In the literature, Innovation is usually measured by R&amp;D expenditure or intermediate outputs such as number of patents. One problem with R&amp;D expenditure, however, is that it is only a measure of the resource budgeted for innovative activities and does not capture innovation outputs (Acs, Anselin, and Varga 2002). Although the use of patents as a measure of innovative capability has long been popular, patent studies are not always robust due to

high patenting heterogeneity across industries, regions, and periods. Moreover, not all innovations are patented because secrecy can be used to prevent competitors from imitation. Despite these difficulties, patent statistics remain a unique resource for analyzing the process of technical change, as they are readily available, related to inventiveness, and based on an objective and only slowly changing standard. Furthermore, evidence suggests that patents provide a fairly reliable measure of innovation at the regional level (Rodr  ı guez-Pose and Comptour 2012). As in Bilbao-Osorio and Rodr  ı guez-Pose (2004), this study uses the number of patent applications per million residents as a proxy for regional innovation level.

The upgrade of industrial structure ( IndustUpg ) facilitates the absorption of remaining laborers but mainly benefits the employment of highly skilled laborers and increases the inequality standard (Li and Yang 2016). Because laborers in the primary sector are mostly low skilled, the development of the primary sector ( PriIndust ) increases the income of less skilled laborers and moderates inequality as well (Wu and Liu 2013). Openness helps to introduce high technology and advanced knowledge and

Table 2 Description of variables

| Variables           | Description                                                                                                                                      | Source                                                                        |
|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Income inequality 1 | The ratio of urban per capita disposable income to rural per capita net income                                                                   | China Regional Economic Statistical Yearbook                                  |
| Income inequality 2 | The ratio of urban and rural per capita incomes difference to city region per capita income                                                      | China Regional Economic Statistical Yearbook; Chinese City Statistic Yearbook |
| Innovation          | Patent applications per million residents                                                                                                        | State Intellectual Property Office                                            |
| IndustUpg           | Upgrade of industrial structure, calculated as the output value of the tertiary industry, divided by the value of the secondary industry         | Chinese City Statistic Yearbook                                               |
| PriIndust           | The share of total economic activity commanded by pri- mary industry, calculated as the output value of the primary industry, divided by the GDP | China Regional Economic Statistical Yearbook                                  |
| Openness            | Market openness, calculated as the level of foreign investment divided by the GDP                                                                | China Regional Economic Statistical Yearbook                                  |
| Education           | Human capital, calculated as the number of high school full-time teachers per hundred students a                                                 | China Regional Economic Statistical Yearbook                                  |
| PGDP                | GDP per capita in base period prices                                                                                                             | Chinese City Statistic Yearbook                                               |
| CitySize            | The population size of the city region                                                                                                           | Chinese City Statistic Yearbook                                               |
| City Region         | China ' s prefecture-level and above cities                                                                                                      | Chinese City Statistic Yearbook                                               |

Notes: GDP ¼ gross domestic product.

a Due to data limitations, we use the teacher -student ratio to represent human capital, which is often used in related literature, rather than the share of individuals with a high-school diploma.

Table 3 Descriptive statistics of variables

| Variables           |   Observation |         M |        SD |   Minimum |    Maximum |
|---------------------|---------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|------------|
| Income inequality 1 |         2,551 |     2.748 |     0.666 |     1.296 |      6.885 |
| Income inequality 2 |         2,454 |     1.068 |     0.407 |     0.248 |      3.996 |
| Innovation          |         2,592 |   424.087 |  1415.93  |     0     |  23532.3   |
| IndustUpg           |         2,592 |     0.799 |     0.388 |     0.059 |      3.368 |
| PriIndust           |         2,590 |    15.235 |     9.289 |     0.049 |     49.89  |
| Openness            |         2,495 |    22.178 |    41.183 |     0.003 |    462.178 |
| Education           |         2,592 |     6.544 |     2.266 |     2.541 |     32.124 |
| PGDP                |         2,591 | 27678.2   | 33155.4   |  2123     | 454271     |
| CitySize            |         2,592 |   428.992 |   300.871 |    16.76  |   3343.4   |
| City region         |         2,592 |   144.5   |    83.154 |     1     |    288     |
| Year                |         2,592 |  2008     |     2.582 |  2004     |   2012     |

boosts productivity. This factor enhances not only the income of highly skilled laborers (Krishna, Poole, and Senses 2012) but also that of less skilled laborers. The increased human capital ( Education ) benefits the efficiency of resource allocation and the average incomes of both groups of laborers increase. Moreover, it can also benefit laborers, especially less skilled laborers, by providing more employment opportunities (Guo 2005). The increase of GDP per capita ( PGDP ) benefits both highly and less skilled laborers and the income inequality is moderated (Afridi, Li, and Ren 2015). In a larger city region ( CitySize ), knowledge spillovers happen frequently through communication among laborers. Less skilled laborers with better learning capabilities can obtain opportunities to learn from the highly skilled and earn much more than before (Glaeser, Resseger, and Tobio 2009).

Our main data set is drawn from the State Intellectual Property Office (2004 -2012), the National Statistical Bureau ' s Chinese City Statistic Yearbook (2004 -2012) and Chinese Regional Economy Statistic Yearbook (2004 -2012). This study covers 288 city regions in China except for Lhasa, due to insufficient data for that region. To remove the influence of price

levels, all relevant variables are expressed using 2004 prices. We add one to the innovation variable, enabling it to be logged (Wooldridge 2012). The description of variables is presented in Table 2, and the basic statistics of the samples are provided in Table 3.

## Methodology of Disaggregate Analysis

To support the influence of innovation on income inequality from a microperspective, we further examine how innovation affects the wages of less and highly skilled laborers based on the wage equation from Mincer (1974). The model is as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where income is the average monthly income of a less or highly skilled laborer; inno represents the innovation level of city i ; edu is the individual schooling years; X is the other individual control variables, including gender, age, the square of age, marital status, and health; Z stands for the city characteristic variables influencing individual income, including the average level of human capital, city size, fixed assets, and openness; e is the error term; i is the

Table 4 Variable descriptions for disaggregate analysis

| Variables            | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Individual variables |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| income               | Individual monthly income                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| male                 | Male ¼ 1, female ¼ 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| age                  | Male aged 18 to 60 years, female aged 18 to 55 years                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| edu                  | No education or private school ¼ 0, primary school ¼ 6, middle school ¼ 9, vocational high school, technical school, ordinary high school, and secondary school ¼ 12, university college ¼ 15, bachelor ' s degree ¼ 16, graduate and above ¼ 19 |
| marry                | Married ¼ 1, others ¼ 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| party                | Communist party members ¼ 1, others ¼ 0                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| union                | Union member ¼ 1, nonunion member ¼ 0                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| health               | Very unhealthy ¼ 1, relatively unhealthy ¼ 2, generally ¼ 3, more healthy ¼ 4, very healthy ¼ 5                                                                                                                                                  |
| hukou                | Rural registered permanent residence ¼ 0, others ¼ 1                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| City                 | variables                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| inno                 | Patent applications per million residents                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| hum                  | The number of high school full-time teachers per hundred students                                                                                                                                                                                |
| size                 | The population size of the city region                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| fixed                | The level of fixed assets investment divided by the GDP                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| openness             | The level of foreign investment divided by the GDP                                                                                                                                                                                               |

Notes: GDP ¼ gross domestic product.

Table 5 Variable descriptive statistics for disaggregate analysis

| Variables   |   Observation |        M |       SD |   Minimum |    Maximum |
|-------------|---------------|----------|----------|-----------|------------|
| income      |         6,799 | 2001.21  | 8112.29  |     0.667 | 500000     |
| inno        |         6,500 |  790.849 | 1778.92  |     3.831 |  16316.5   |
| male        |         6,799 |    0.559 |    0.497 |     0     |      1     |
| age         |         6,799 |   40.827 |   10.429 |    18     |     60     |
| edu         |         6,796 |    9.548 |    4.148 |     0     |     19     |
| marry       |         6,797 |    0.857 |    0.35  |     0     |      1     |
| party       |         6,790 |    0.125 |    0.331 |     0     |      1     |
| union       |         6,739 |    0.151 |    0.358 |     0     |      1     |
| health      |         6,793 |    3.802 |    1.05  |     1     |      5     |
| hukou       |         6,796 |    0.458 |    0.498 |     0     |      1     |
| hum         |         6,320 |    7.129 |    1.566 |     4.161 |     12.254 |
| size        |         6,500 |  676.72  |  519.19  |    85.31  |   3275.61  |
| fixed       |         6,500 |   64.657 |   20.075 |    28.037 |    128.946 |
| openness    |         6,500 |   26.387 |   39.535 |     0.21  |    225.016 |

individual; and j is the city. Following Bellante (1979), Huang and Yan (2016), and Zhao et al. (2016), this study defines a laborer whose highest degree of education is at or above the tertiary level as highly skilled and a laborer whose highest degree of education is at the high school level and below as low skilled, using the observable educational premium to represent skill gains (Acemoglu 2002).

Considering that Chinese official statistics are influenced by some subjective factors, this study applies data collected by the China General Social Survey (CGSS) in 2010 to examine the robustness of the conclusion. The CGSS data were published by the People ' s University of China and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. The data are collected from face-to-face communication between investigators and residents who live in urban or rural areas. The survey was conducted over two years. The CGSS data has not included the location information of survey participants since 2012, and the data for 2010 are the last to include the individual participants ' locations, with which regional innovation level and other characteristics can be measured. According to the principle of random sampling, the 2010 CGSS data were obtained

Figure 4 Box plot of income inequality in city regions in China, 2004 -2012. Note: Asterisks denote maximums and minimums. The error bars, box extents, and lines inside the box denote the 99th, 1st, 75th, 25th and 50th percentiles. The white block represents average values. Income inequality here is calculated by the ratio of urban per capita disposable income to rural per capita net income.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5 Regional income inequality in China, 2004 -2012. Note: Income inequality here is calculated by the ratio of urban per capita disposable income to rural per capita net income.

<!-- image -->

from a survey of inhabitants of eighty-three prefecture-level cities and above, which were evenly distributed in China. Ultimately, the survey retrieved 11,783 valid questionnaires. The study sample size is 6,799. Tables 4 and 5 present the variable descriptions and basic statistics, respectively.

## Empirical Results and Robustness Tests

## Descriptive Analysis

As indicated in Figure 4, even though there was a trend toward moderation, there was a striking level of income inequality in Chinese city regions from 2004 to 2012. From 2004 to 2009, the maximum and 99th percentile values of income inequality decreased from 6.8 to 5 and 5.6 to 4.8, respectively. The average and median values were both beyond 2.5, and the minimum level of inequality remained higher than 1.5 throughout the period. In the following period, from 2010 to 2012, the maximum and 99th percentile values of inequality decreased continuously, the average and median values remained beyond 2.5, and the minimum and 1st percentile values stayed at roughly 1.5. This result means that the income of city residents was more

than 2.5 times that of rural residents in half of the city regions during the whole period.

We calculate the average income inequality in the eastern, northeast, central, and western areas. As shown in Figure 5, the regional trends were generally consistent with the global results of the whole sample, which was a narrowing trend after the inequality increased, but the regional disparity in income inequality was obvious. The western region had the worst inequality in China, and the income inequality in the western and central regions was higher than the national average. From 2004 to 2012, even though the inequalities in the four areas all showed moderating trends, the values were still higher than 2, which meant that the income of urban residents was twice that of rural residents in each area.

The findings show that, across Chinese city regions and areas, income inequality is an obvious trend. Therefore, we use the econometric models to examine whether innovation is responsible for income inequality in China.

## Baseline Regressions

The models are estimated with panel data regressions and run with a maximum of 288 city regions, yielding 2,592 observations for the period from 2004 to 2012. Time-invariant regional characteristics are likely to alter the inequality level in particular city regions and areas. To control for these characteristics and following the Hausman test results, the models are estimated with fixed effects.

Table 6 Estimations for baseline models

|                                 | Income inequality 1   | Income inequality 1   | Income inequality 1   | Income inequality 2   | Income inequality 2   | Income inequality 2   |
|---------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| Independent variables           | (1)                   | (2)                   | (3)                   | (4)                   | (5)                   | (6)                   |
| Innovation(ln)                  | 0.004 (0.005)         | 0.035  (0.011)   0.004                        | 0.038  (0.011)   0.004                        | 0.002 (0.005)         | 0.026  (0.011)   0.003                        | 0.030  (0.010)   0.003                        |
| Innovation 2 (ln) IndustUpg(ln) | 0.034  (0.019)                       | (0.001) 0.051  (0.020)                       | (0.001) 0.043  (0.019)                       | 0.048  (0.018)                       | (0.001) 0.062  (0.018)                       | (0.001) 0.059  (0.017)                       |
| PriIndust(ln)                   |   0.057  (0.029)                       |   0.063  (0.028)                       |   0.096  (0.035)                       |   0.050 (0.032)        |   0.053  (0.031)                       |   0.103  (0.037)                       |
| Openness(ln)                    |   0.007 (0.006)        |   0.008 (0.006)        |   0.010  (0.006)                       |   0.009 (0.006)        |   0.010 (0.007)        |   0.012  (0.007)                       |
| Education(ln) PGDP(ln)          |                       |                       | 0.008 (0.014)   0.073                        |                       |                       | 0.008 (0.014) 0.080   |
| CitySize(ln)                    |                       |                       | (0.033)   0.028        |                       |                       |    (0.035)   0.416                        |
| Constant                        | 1.126  (0.085)                       | 1.091  (0.082)                       | (0.049) 2.008  (0.569)                       | 0.163  (0.094)                       | 0.133 (0.094)         | (0.126) 3.440  (0.839)                       |
| Year                            | Yes                   | Yes Yes               | Yes Yes               | Yes Yes               | Yes Yes               | Yes                   |
| City regions                    | Yes                   |                       | 2,453                 |                       |                       | Yes                   |
| Observations                    | 2,453 285             | 2,453 285             |                       | 2,359                 | 2,359                 | 2,359                 |
| Number of city regions          | 0.227                 | 0.240                 | 285                   | 274                   | 274                   | 274                   |
| Adjusted R 2                    |                       |                       | 0.246                 | 0.269                 | 0.275                 | 0.288                 |

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses.

 p &lt; 0.05.

 p &lt; 0.1.

 p &lt; 0.01.

The estimation results are presented in Table 6. Columns 1 to 3 show the results using Income inequality 1 as the dependent variable, and columns 4 to 6 show the results based on Income inequality 2 . In each case, the model is estimated starting with a parsimonious specification where only Innovation combined with IndustUpg , PriIndust , and Openness comprise the independent variables before adding Innovation 2 and another set of predictors ( Education, PGDP, and CitySize ) to research the fully specified model in columns 3 and 6. Taking Income inequality 1 as the dependent variable, the adjusted R 2 increases from 0.227 to 0.246. When the dependent variable is Income inequality 2 , the adjusted R 2 increases from 0.269 to 0.288.

The regression results in column 1 indicate an insignificant effect of Innovation on Income inequality 1 . After adding the square term of Innovation in column 2, we find that Innovation and Innovation 2 are positively and negatively associated with Income inequality 1 , respectively. As we add other controls to the mix, the results for the fully specified model in column 3 still suggest that innovation has a nonlinear connection with inequality. The inflection point value of the inverted U-shaped curve is 4.75, and the average of Innovation is 4.483. The sample is distributed evenly on both sides of the curve, indicating a nonlinear relationship between innovation and income inequality. The results using Income inequality 2 as the dependent variable in columns 4 to 6 mirror those in columns 1 to 3, suggesting the robustness of the nonlinear link between innovation and income inequality. The value of the inflection point is 5.

Some 64 percent of the sample is allocated to the left of the symmetry axis and 36 percent to the right. The nonlinear relationship between innovation and income inequality actually exists as well.

These results suggest an inverted U-shaped relationship between innovation and income inequality. In the initial stage of development, innovation positively affects income inequality. As the innovation level increases, innovation begins to moderate inequality. A possible explanation for this finding is that innovation mainly benefits highly skilled laborers through increased productivity, return to patents, immigration, and SBTC at the early stage (Baum Snow and Pavan 2013; Breau, Kogler, and Bolton 2014), and the increased productivity, spillover effects from immigration, and less-skilled compensation begin to positively affect the income of less skilled laborers and moderate inequality at the later stage (McCann 2007; Donegan and Lowe 2008).

We now turn our attention to the control variables. As expected, the coefficient of IndustUpg is significant and positive. City regions with more developed industrial structures face more severe income inequality. The estimate of PriIndust carries the expected negative sign, suggesting that city regions with a higher share of primary industries have more moderate income equality. The coefficient of Openness is negatively significant at the 0.10 level, meaning that openness can moderate income inequality. The negative sign on the estimated coefficient of PGDP , which is significant at the 0.05 level, indicates that an increase in GDP per capita generally leads to lower inequality. It also supports Kuznets ' s hypothesis (Kuznets 1955). The estimated coefficients for Education and CitySize are not statistically significant, however.

Table 7 Threshold effect tests (dependent variable: Income inequality 1; threshold variable: PGDP)

|                  |         |         | Critical value   | Critical value   | Critical value   |
|------------------|---------|---------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Test             | F value | p value | 1 %              | 5 %              | 10 %             |
| Single-threshold | 30.680          | 0.014   | 37.218           | 23.584           | 16.400           |
| Double-threshold | 22.795          | 0.024   | 31.691           | 18.829           | 13.808           |
| Triple-threshold | 22.900          | 0.016   | 26.331           | 12.995           | 8.657            |

Notes: p values and critical values are the results of the bootstrap simulation for 500 times.

 p &lt; 0.05.

Table 8 Estimated threshold values and their confidence intervals (dependent variable: Income inequality 1; threshold variable: PGDP)

| Threshold   |   Estimated value | 95 % confidence interval   |
|-------------|-------------------|----------------------------|
| c 1         |             8.412 | [8.412, 8.426]             |
| c 2         |            10.008 | [9.948, 10.122]            |
| c 3         |            11.204 | [8.412, 11.712]            |

Regressions with Threshold Effect Model

To test the robustness of the preceding results, we also apply the threshold effect model to explore a possible nonlinear relationship between innovation and income inequality. Based on Equations 3 and 4, we set the control variable as the threshold variable to examine the threshold effect. The results that treat Income inequality 1 as the dependent variable show that only the threshold effect of PGDP is significant at the 5 percent level for the triple thresholds (Table 7). Therefore, we focus on the triple thresholds model.

After the threshold effect tests, the values of the triple-threshold models are examined. Table 8 reports the estimation results of the threshold values and the 95 percent confidence intervals. The relationships between the likelihood ratio and the threshold parameters are shown in Figures 6 to 8. The dotted lines are the critical values of the likelihood ratio statistic. 1 When the estimated value of the first threshold is 8.412 and those of the second and third thresholds are 10.008 and 11.204, respectively, the likelihood ratios are all zero. When the estimated value of the first threshold lies in the range [8.412, 8.426], the second threshold ' s value lies in the range [9.948, 10.122], and that of the third threshold lies in the range [8.412, 11.712], the likelihood ratios are less than the critical values at the 5 percent significance level. That means that the ratio lies within the acceptance interval of the null hypothesis; that is, the three threshold values are all equal to the actual threshold values.

Based on the results of the triple-threshold model, the observations can be divided into four groups according to the values of threshold variables: the first group (ln PGDP  c 1 ), the second group ( c 1 &lt; ln PGDP  c 2 ), the third group ( c 2 &lt; ln PGDP  c 3), and the fourth group (ln PGDP &gt; c 3 ). After the thresholds c 1 , c 2, and c 3 are estimated, we can estimate the parameters of the triple-threshold model. Replacing the dependent variable with Income inequality 2 , the triple-threshold model is verified as well and the results of the positive effect from innovation in the first group and the negative effects in the other three groups are confirmed (Tables A.1 to A.3, Figures A.1 to A.3).

The results based on both measures of income inequality in Table 9 show a robust nonlinear relationship between innovation and income inequality; in other words, a triple-threshold effect. When the level of GDP per capita is below the value of threshold c 1, the effect of innovation on income inequality is positive. When the level of GDP per capita is higher than the value of threshold c 1 , innovation negatively affects income inequality in the following three groups. The different coefficients indicate that the reduction in income inequality increases as the GDP per capita exceeds the first, second, and third thresholds.

<!-- image -->

Figure 6 Ninety-five percent confidence interval construction of first threshold (dependent variable: Income inequality 1).

Figure 7 Ninety-five percent confidence interval construction of second threshold (dependent variable: Income inequality 1).

<!-- image -->

Figure 8 Ninety-five percent confidence interval construction of third threshold (dependent variable: Income inequality 1).

<!-- image -->

Table 9 Estimated parameters for triple thresholds

|                        | Income inequality 1   | Income inequality 2   |
|------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| Independent variables  | (1)                   | (2)                   |
| Innovation_first(ln)   | 0.017                        | 0.011                        |
|                        | (0.007)               | (0.007)               |
| Innovation_second(ln)  |   0.011                        |   0.014                        |
|                        | (0.003)               | (0.003)               |
| Innovation_third(ln)   |   0.018                        |   0.019                        |
|                        | (0.003)               | (0.004)               |
| Innovation_forth(ln)   |   0.024                        |   0.022                        |
|                        | (0.004)               | (0.003)               |
| IndustUpg(ln)          | 0.052                        | 0.059                        |
|                        | (0.009)               | (0.01)                |
| PriIndust(ln)          |   0.142                        |   0.100                        |
|                        | (0.014)               | (0.015)               |
| Openness(ln)           |   0.005                |   0.005                |
|                        | (0.004)               | (0.004)               |
| Education(ln)          | 0.022                        |   0.001                |
|                        | (0.01)                | (0.010)               |
| PGDP(ln)               |   0.042                        |   0.022                        |
|                        | (0.009)               | (0.010)               |
| CitySize(ln)           |   0.018                |   0.358                        |
|                        | (0.038)               | (0.062)               |
| Constant               | 1.686                        | 2.704                        |
|                        | (0.239)               | (0.366)               |
| Observations           | 2,421                 | 2,429                 |
| Number of city regions | 269                   | 270                   |
| Adjusted R 2           | 0.161                 | 0.214                 |

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses.

 p &lt; 0.05.

 p &lt; 0.1.

 p &lt; 0.01.

Table 10 Estimations for different areas (dependent variable: Income inequality 1) a

|                       | Eastern area          | Eastern area           | Northeast area         | Northeast area   | Central area   | Central area          | Western area           | Western area           |
|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|------------------------|------------------|----------------|-----------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Independent variables | (1)                   | (2)                    | (3)                    | (4)              | (5)            | (6)                   | (7)                    | (8)                    |
| Innovation(ln)        |   0.021                        | 0.007 (0.021)          | 0.010 (0.030)          | 0.090 (0.067)    | 0.012 (0.008)  | 0.048  (0.021)                       | 0.019  (0.010)                        | 0.018 (0.014)          |
| Innovation 2 (ln)     | (0.009)               |   0.002 (0.002)         |                        |   0.009 (0.006)   |                |   0.004  (0.002)                       |                        | 0.000 (0.002)          |
| IndustUpg(ln)         |   0.020 (0.031)        |   0.008 (0.032)         | 0.002 (0.052)          | 0.006 (0.051)    | 0.122  (0.029)                | 0.125  (0.028)                       |   0.019 (0.029)         |   0.019 (0.029)         |
| PriIndust(ln)         | 0.030 (0.038)         | 0.022 (0.037)          |   0.339  (0.105)                        |   0.332  (0.101)                  | 0.027 (0.043)  | 0.013 (0.043)         |   0.182  (0.047)                        |   0.182  (0.046)                        |
| Openness(ln)          |   0.002 (0.009)        |   0.005 (0.009)         |   0.052  (0.028)                        |   0.056  (0.027)                  | 0.006 (0.009)  | 0.004 (0.009)         |   0.009 (0.008)         |   0.009 (0.008)         |
| Education(ln)         | 0.001                 |   0.004                 | 0.011                  | 0.012            |   0.101                 |   0.086                        | 0.012                  | 0.012                  |
| PGDP(ln)              | (0.061)   0.010        | (0.059)   0.021 (0.081) | (0.021)   0.146 (0.093) | (0.021)   0.176  (0.089)                  | (0.051) 0.083  (0.046)                | (0.050) 0.081  (0.045)                       | (0.014)   0.158                         | (0.014)   0.157                         |
| CitySize(ln)          | (0.083) 0.029         | 0.005 (0.072)          |   1.208                 |   1.014 (1.119)   |   0.009 (0.127) |   0.051                | (0.044)   0.163 (0.144) | (0.044)   0.163 (0.144) |
| Constant              | (0.069) 0.808 (1.183) | 1.032 (1.171)          | (1.151) 9.878 (7.095)  | 8.898 (6.855)    | 0.364 (0.967)  | (0.139) 0.582 (1.032) | 3.908  (1.016)                        | 3.905  (1.006)                        |
| Year                  | Yes                   | Yes                    | Yes                    | Yes              | Yes            | Yes                   | Yes                    | Yes                    |
| City regions          | Yes                   | Yes                    | Yes                    | Yes              | Yes            | Yes                   | Yes                    | Yes                    |
|                       |                       |                        |                        |                  |                |                       |                        | 614                    |
| Observations          | 748                   | 748                    | 291                    |                  | 800            |                       |                        |                        |
|                       |                       |                        |                        | 291              |                | 800                   | 614                    |                        |
| Number of city        | 86                    | 86                     | 34                     |                  |                |                       |                        |                        |
| regions               |                       |                        |                        | 34               | 89             | 89                    | 76                     | 76                     |
| Adjusted R 2          | 0.205                 | 0.210                  | 0.455                  |                  |                |                       |                        | 0.293                  |
|                       |                       |                        |                        | 0.464            | 0.315          | 0.332                 | 0.294                  |                        |

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses.

a Because the collinearity between a variable and its quadratic term leads to the insignificance of the higher order term, we center Innovation and replace it with Innovation 2 in the models (Xie 2010; Hamilton 2012). The correlation coefficient between Innovation and Innovation 2 degrades from 0.974 to 0.024.

 p &lt; 0.05.

 p &lt; 0.1.

 p &lt; 0.01.

To summarize our findings thus far, PGDP has a threshold effect on the relationship between innovation and income inequality. The moderating effect of innovation on income inequality is conditional and depends on the level of GDP per capita. Only when the level of PGDP reaches the first threshold value is innovation negatively related to inequality in that region.

Table 11 Estimations for different areas (dependent variable: Income inequality 2)

|                       | Eastern area          | Eastern area   | Northeast area         | Northeast area         | Central area   | Central area   | Western area   | Western area        |
|-----------------------|-----------------------|----------------|------------------------|------------------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|---------------------|
| Independent variables | (1)                   | (2)            | (3)                    | (4)                    | (5)            | (6)            | (7)            | (8)                 |
| Innovation(ln)        |   0.038  (0.011)                       |   0.032 (0.025) | 0.002 (0.037)          | 0.123 (0.073)          | 0.014 (0.009)  | 0.046  (0.021) 0.004                 | 0.016  (0.009)                | 0.007 (0.013) 0.002 |
| Innovation 2 (ln)     |                       |   0.001 (0.002) |                        |   0.014  (0.006)                        |                |   (0.002)       |                | (0.002)             |
| IndustUpg(ln)         | 0.013 (0.039)         | 0.017 (0.041)  | 0.051 (0.048)          | 0.057 (0.053)          | 0.118  (0.030)                | 0.120  (0.030)                |   0.013 (0.026) |   0.017 (0.026)      |
| PriIndust(ln)         | 0.019 (0.065)         | 0.017 (0.063)  |   0.321  (0.096)                        |   0.311  (0.091)                        | 0.052 (0.041)  | 0.040 (0.041)  |   0.160  (0.047)                |   0.156  (0.046)                     |
| Openness(ln)          |   0.003 (0.012)        |   0.004 (0.012) |   0.028 (0.026)         |   0.034 (0.025)         | 0.007 (0.009)  | 0.005 (0.009)  |   0.014 (0.011) |   0.013 (0.011)      |
| Education(ln)         | 0.054 (0.083)         | 0.053 (0.082)  | 0.013                  | 0.014                  |   0.039         |   0.027         |   0.002 (0.015) |   0.002              |
| PGDP(ln)              |   0.073 (0.087)        |   0.076 (0.088) | (0.024)   0.065 (0.112) | (0.022)   0.110 (0.109) | (0.048) 0.089  (0.044)                | (0.047) 0.087  (0.044)                |   0.139  (0.049)                | (0.014)   0.136                      |
| CitySize(ln)          |   0.565                |   0.580 (0.506) | 0.311 (0.920)          | 0.606 (0.895)          |   0.387  (0.134)                |   0.422  (0.160)                |   0.658  (0.210)                | (0.048)   0.650  (0.205)                     |
| Constant              | (0.493) 4.132 (3.203) | 4.236 (3.298)  |   0.516 (5.769)         |   2.003 (5.656)         | 1.421 (1.007)  | 1.605 (1.151)  | 5.654  (1.331)                | 5.573  (1.281)                     |
| Year                  | Yes                   | Yes            | Yes                    | Yes                    | Yes            | Yes            | Yes            | Yes                 |
| City regions          | Yes                   | Yes 695        | Yes                    | Yes                    | Yes            | Yes            | Yes            | Yes                 |
| Observations          | 695                   |                | 291                    | 291                    | 774            | 774            |                | 599                 |
| Number of city        | 80                    |                | 34                     |                        |                |                | 599            |                     |
|                       |                       | 80             |                        | 34                     | 86             | 86             | 74             | 74                  |
| regions               |                       |                |                        |                        |                |                |                |                     |
| Adjusted R 2          | 0.252                 | 0.251          | 0.390                  | 0.406                  | 0.397          | 0.407          | 0.330          | 0.331               |

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses.

 p &lt; 0.05.

 p &lt; 0.1.

 p &lt; 0.01.

Table 12 Estimation results

|                       | Less skilled laborer   | Less skilled laborer   | Highly skilled laborer   | Highly skilled laborer   |
|-----------------------|------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
| Independent variables | (1)                    | (2)                    | (3)                      | (4)                      |
| inno(ln)              | 0.014                  |   0.186                         | 0.071                           |   0.048                   |
| inno 2 (ln)           | (0.020)                | (0.070) 0.021  (0.007)                        | (0.027)                  | (0.099) 0.012 (0.010)    |
| male age              | 0.390  (0.035) 0.037                         | 0.387  (0.035) 0.036  (0.012)                        | 0.216  (0.047) 0.092  (0.024)                          | 0.212  (0.047) 0.091                           |
| age 2                 | (0.012)   0.001  (0.000)                        |   0.001                         |   0.001  (0.000)                          | (0.023)   0.001  (0.000)                          |
| edu                   | 0.051  (0.007)                        | (0.000) 0.051                         | 0.170                           | 0.171                           |
| marry                 | 0.078 (0.050)          | (0.007) 0.080          | (0.024)   0.023           | (0.024) 0.023            |
| party                 | 0.034                  | (0.050) 0.033          | (0.069)                  |   (0.069)                           |
|                       | (0.059)                | (0.059)                | 0.095                           | 0.093                    |
| union                 | 0.145  (0.046)                        | 0.140  (0.046)                        | (0.050)   0.037 (0.048)   | (0.050)   0.037           |
| health                | 0.085  (0.017)                        | 0.084  (0.017)                        | 0.016                    | (0.048) 0.016 (0.030)    |
| hukou                 | 0.027 (0.038)          | 0.028 (0.038)          | (0.030) 0.235  (0.128)                          | 0.237  (0.129)                          |
| contr-city province   | Yes Yes                | Yes Yes                | Yes Yes                  | Yes Yes                  |
| industry              | Yes                    | Yes                         | Yes                      | Yes                      |
| Constant              | 5.352                         | 6.350                  | 0.836                    | 1.359                    |
|                       | (0.608)                | (0.706)                |                          |                          |
| 2                     | 2,465                  |                        | (1.148)                  |                          |
| Observations          |                        |                        |                          | (1.252)                  |
| Adjusted R            |                        | 2,465                  | 1,067                    | 1,067                    |
|                       | 0.253                  | 0.256                  | 0.366                    |                          |
|                       |                        |                        |                          | 0.367                    |

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Contr-city is a group of variables reflecting city-region characteristics, including average level of human capital, city size, fixed assets, and openness.

 p &lt; 0.05.

 p &lt; 0.1.

 p &lt; 0.01.

Table 13 Robustness test of individual analysis

0.01.

&lt;

p



Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Contr-city is individual variable, including male , age , age 2 , edu , marry , party , union , health , and hukou; Contr-city is city-region characteristic variable, including hum , size , fixed, and openness .  p &lt; 0.05.

| Highly laborer      | (12)                                            | 0.043                        | (0.076) 0.007 (0.011) Yes Yes Yes Yes 1.381 (1.241) 1,047 0.369                           |
|---------------------|-------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| skilled             | (11)                                            | 0.092                               | (0.030) Yes Yes Yes Yes 1.206 (1.184) 1,047 0.370                                         |
| skilled laborer     | (10)                                            |   0.245                               | (0.055) 0.042  (0.008) Yes Yes Yes Yes 6.729  (0.697) 2,394 0.266                                                                                           |
| Less                | (9)                                             | 0.022 (0.024)                | Yes Yes Yes Yes 5.349  (0.643) 2,394 0.258                                                                                           |
| Highly laborer      | (8)                                             |   0.022 (0.077) 0.011 (0.009) | Yes Yes Yes Yes 1.475 (1.264) 1,065 0.367                                                 |
| skilled             | (7)                                             | 0.072  (0.030)                              | Yes Yes Yes Yes 1.084 (1.197) 1,065 0.366                                                 |
| laborer             | (6)                                             |   0.145  (0.055) 0.024  (0.007)                              | Yes Yes Yes Yes 6.499  (0.695) 2,453 0.257                                                                                           |
| Less skilled        | (5)                                             | 0.033 (0.021)                | Yes Yes Yes Yes 5.499  (0.622) 2,453 0.254                                                                                           |
| Highly laborer (4)  |   0.013 (0.090) 0.009                            |                              | Yes Yes Yes Yes 1.382 (1.249) 1,067 0.367                                                 |
| skilled (3)         | 0.076  (0.028)                                                 |                              | Yes Yes Yes Yes 1.013 (1.170) 1,067 0.367                                                 |
| skilled laborer (2) |   0.175  (0.061) 0.021                                                  | (0.007)                      | Yes Yes Yes Yes 6.357  (0.695) 2,465 0.256                                                                                           |
| Less (1)            | 0.014 (0.020)                                   |                              | Yes Yes Yes Yes 5.369  (0.615) 2,465 0.253                                                                                           |
|                     | Independent variables inno08 (ln) inno08 2 (ln) | inno04 (ln) inno04 2 (ln)    | inno99 2 (ln) contr-indiv contr-city province industry Constant Observations Adjusted R 2 |

The preceding findings are drawn from a national sample. Would the findings be similar for the different regions? Tables 10 and 11 show the results across areas using Income inequality 1 and Income inequality 2 as the dependent variable, respectively. Innovation is negatively associated with income inequality in the eastern area, which is the most innovative area, and it is positively related to income inequality in the western area, which is the least innovative area. In the central area, which lies in the middle level of innovation in China, the effect of innovation on inequality has an inverted U-shape, whereas the relationship between innovation and income inequality in the northeastern area is insignificant. All of these results support a nonlinear relationship between innovation and inequality in the whole sample.

In the eastern area, innovation rapidly develops in some cities, including Shenzhen. Therefore, the innovation standard here is high and at an advanced stage. Innovation development can increase the income of less skilled laborers and narrow the income gap. In the western area, the innovation standard is relatively low. The benefits from innovation development are enjoyed only by the people who have access to high technology and thus increase income inequality. In the central area, innovation development is at the middle level. In some cities, innovation increases the less skilled laborers ' income. Therefore, in this area, the income gap increases first and then decreases.

## Further Evidence from Individual Analysis

To explain the impact of innovation on income inequality from a microperspective, we add inno into the Mincer wage equation to further examine how innovation affects the incomes of less and highly skilled laborers. Table 12 presents the estimation results based on Equation 5. The results in columns 1 and 2 indicate a U-shaped relationship between innovation and the income of less skilled laborers. That is, as innovation levels increase in city regions, less skilled laborers ' income declines first and then improves. The results in columns 3 and 4 show that the income of highly skilled laborers is positively related to innovation. Highly skilled laborers gain more in regions with higher levels of innovation. Considering the potential hysteresis effect of innovation on laborers ' incomes and also to curb the possibility of reverse causality, we further lag innovation for one year, five years, and ten years, respectively, and add them into the model. The results also provide evidence for a U-shaped relationship between innovation and income for less skilled laborers and a positive one for highly skilled laborers (Table 13). These estimation results from the individual analysis support the empirical results of the aggregate analysis described in earlier section.

## Conclusion

Using a data set for 288 city regions in China from 2004 to 2012, this study examined whether innovation is related to income inequality. We conclude that (1) there is a nonlinear relationship between innovation and income inequality; that is, as innovation level increases, income inequality within city regions rises first and then decreases. This finding is also supported by the results of the disaggregate analysis based on individual income, in which the income of less skilled laborers decreases first and then increases during innovation improvement and the income of highly skilled laborers increases all along. We also conclude that (2) there is a triple-threshold effect on GDP per capita through the relationship between innovation and income inequality. Innovation contributes to income inequality in city regions where GDP per capita is lower than the first threshold and reduces income inequality in city regions where GDP per capita is higher than the first threshold. Further, the income inequality reduction increases as GDP per capita exceeds the first, second, and third thresholds. Finally, we conclude that (3) the impact of innovation on income inequality is heterogeneous across areas. Innovation negatively affects income inequality in the eastern area but significantly and positively influences income inequality in the western area.

This study is limited by its design in several ways, which are worth mentioning. Measuring the level of innovation is a tough task, and this study uses patent count as the index of innovation because the data are widely available. As we pointed out earlier in this article, patent number cannot perfectly reflect eventual innovation output. Therefore, future studies might use a more reliable, output-oriented measure. Similarly, due to data inaccessibility, urban -rural income gap is used as a proxy for the income inequality of highly and less skilled laborers, following previous literature. A more accurate measure of income inequality is expected to be used in future studies.

Despite its limitations, this study significantly contributes to the literature by finding a nonlinear relationship between innovation and income inequality in Chinese city regions. Compared to previous studies, most of which only found that innovation increases or decreases income inequality, this study provides empirical evidence of the different effects of innovation at different development stages on inequality. It also sheds light on how GDP per capita influences the threshold effect of innovation on income inequality.

Our study ' s findings carry several implications for policymakers. First, to moderate income inequality attributed to innovation, income spillovers from highly to less skilled laborers should be facilitated. We also advocate policies to improve education level and specialized skill development among less skilled

laborers. Second, we encourage urban policymakers to abandon discriminatory policies against less skilled laborers, especially those from the countryside, and instead seek to maximize the employment compensation effect. /H17039

## Acknowledgments

The data used in the article is partly from the China Comprehensive Social Survey (CGSS) project hosted by the China Survey and Data Center of Renmin University of China. The author is grateful to the agency and its staff for providing data assistance. The content of this article is the responsibility of the author. The author appreciates the insightful feedback provided by anonymous reviewers and Dr. Barney Warf.

## Funding

Jiangxi Social Science Planning Project (No. 18GL32); Bidding topic of the key research base of humanities and social sciences in Jiangxi Province (No. JD18024).

## Note

- 1 Following Hansen ' s calculation method for the critical value of the likelihood ratio at the 5 percent level of significance, the likelihood ratio test statistic is 7.35.

## ORCID

Quanen Guo 2595-2521

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-

<!-- image -->

## Literature Cited

- Acemoglu, D. 2002. Technical change, inequality, and the labor market. Journal of Economic Literature 40 (1):7 -72. doi: 10.1257/0022051026976.
- Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, and G. L. Violante. 2001. Deunionization, technical change and inequality. CEPR Discussion Papers 55 (1):229 -64. doi: 10.1016/S01672231(01)00058-6.
- Acs, Z. J., L. Anselin, and A. Varga. 2002. Patents and innovation counts as measures of regional production of new knowledge. Research Policy 31 (7):1069 -85. doi: 10.1016/S0048-7333(01)00184-6.
- Afridi, F., S. X. Li, and Y. Ren. 2015. Social identity and inequality: The impact of China ' s hukou system. Journal of Public Economics 123:17 -29. doi: 10.1016/ j.jpubeco.2014.12.011.
- Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, A. Bergeaud., R. Blundell, and D. H  emous. 2015. Innovation and top income inequality.
- NBER Working Papers No. 21247, National Bureau of Economic Research. doi: 10.1093/restud/rdy027.
- Allen, S. G. 2001. Technology and the wage structure. Journal of Labor Economics 19 (2):440 -83. doi: 10.1086/ 319567.
- Angelini, E. C., F. Farina, and M. Pianta. 2009. Innovation and wage polarisation in Europe. International Review of Applied Economics 23 (3):309 -25. doi: 10.1080/ 02692170902811736.
- Antonelli, C., and A. Gehringer. 2013. Innovation and income inequality. IDEAS Working Paper No. 201324, University of Turin.
- Appleton, S., L. Song, and Q. Xia. 2014. Understanding urban wage inequality in China 1988 -2008: Evidence from quantile analysis. World Development 62:1 -13. doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.04.005.
- Arundel, A. 2001. The relative effectiveness of patents and secrecy for appropriation. Research Policy 30 (4):611 -24. doi: 10.1016/S0048-7333(00)00100-1.
- Autor, D. H., and D. Dorn. 2013. The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of the U.S. labor market. NBER Working Papers 103:1553 -97. doi: 10.1257/ aer.103.5.1553.
- Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney. 2008. Trends in U.S. wage inequality: Revising the revisionists. Review of Economics &amp; Statistics 90 (2):300 -323. doi: 10.1162/rest.90.2.300.
- Baum Snow, N., and R. Pavan. 2013. Inequality and city size. Review of Economics and Statistics 95:1535 -48. doi: 10.1162/REST\_a\_00328.
- Bellante, D. 1979. The north -south differential and the migration of heterogeneous labor. American Economic Review 69:166 -75.
- Bilbao-Osorio, B., and A. Rodr  ı guez-Pose. 2004. From R&amp;D to innovation and economic growth in the EU. Growth and Change 35:434 -55. doi: 10.1111/j.14682257.2004.00256.x.
- Breau, S., D. F. Kogler, and K. C. Bolton. 2014. On the relationship between innovation and wage inequality: New evidence from Canadian cities. Economic Geography 90 (4):351 -73. doi: 10.1111/ecge.12056.
- Chesbrough, H. W. 2006. Open innovation: The new imperative for creating and profiting from technology . Boston: Harvard Business Press.
- Coad, A., and R. Rao. 2008. Innovation and firm growth in high-tech sectors: A quantile regression approach. Research Policy 37 (4):633 -48. doi: 10.1016/ j.respol.2008.01.003.
- Das, G. G. 2008. Does trade and technology transmission facilitate convergence? The role of technology adoption in reducing the inequality of nations. Journal of Economic Policy Reform 11 (1):67 -92. doi: 10.1080/ 17487870802134942.
- Donegan, M., and N. Lowe. 2008. Inequality in the creative city: Is there still a place for ' old-fashioned ' institutions? Economic Development Quarterly 22 (1):46 -62. doi: 10.1177/0891242407310722.
- Eeckhout, J., R. Pinheiro, and K. Schmidheiny. 2014. Spatial sorting. Journal of Political Economy 122 (3): 554 -620. doi: 10.1086/676141.
- Faggio, G., K. G. Salvanes, and J. Van-Reenen. 2010. The evolution of inequality in productivity and wages: Panel

- data evidence. Industrial and Corporate Change 19 (6): 1919 -51. doi: 10.1093/icc/dtq058.
- Fang, C. R., L. H. Huang, and M. C. Wang. 2008. Technology spillover and wage inequality. Economic Modelling 25 (1):137 -47. doi: 10.1016/ j.econmod.2007.05.002.
- Florida, R. 2005. Cities and the creative class . London and New York: Routledge.
- ---. 2007. The flight of the creative class: The new global competition for talent . New York: Harper Business.
- Glaeser, E. L., M. Resseger, and K. Tobio. 2009. Inequality in cities. Journal of Regional Science 49 (4): 617 -46. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9787.2009.00627.x.
- Goos, M., A. Manning, and A. Salomons. 2009. Job polarization in Europe. The American Economic Review 99 (2): 58 -63. doi: 10.1257/aer.99.2.58.
- Grimalda, G. F. 2004. One or many Kuznets curves? Short and long run effects of the impact of skill-biased technological change on income inequality . Rochester, NY: Social Science Electronic Publishing.
- Guo, J. 2005. Human capital, the birth rate and the narrowing of the urban rural income gap. Social Sciences in China 3:27 -37.
- Hamilton, L. 2012. Statistics with Stata: Version 12 . Boston: Cengage Learning.
- Han, J., R. Liu, and J. Zhang. 2012. Globalization and wage inequality: Evidence from urban China. Journal of International Economics 87 (2):288 -97. doi: 10.1016/ j.jinteco.2011.12.006.
- Hansen, B. E. 1999. Threshold effects in non-dynamic panels: Estimation, testing, and inference. Journal of Econometrics 93 (2):345 -68. doi: 10.1016/S03044076(99)00025-1.
- Hopkin, J., V. Lapuente, and L. Moller. 2014. Lower levels of inequality are linked with greater innovation in economies. LSE American Politics and Policy , January 23. Accessed January 10, 2019. http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/ 58473/.
- Huang, C., and Y. F. Yan. 2016. Trade openness and income gap in China: An empirical study based on the dataset of China household income projects. Economic Problems 11:84 -88. doi: 10.16011/j.cnki.jjwt.2016.11.017.
- H € uhne, P., and D. Herzer. 2017. Is inequality an inevitable by-product of skill-biased technical change? Applied Economics Letters 24 (18):1 -5. doi: 10.1080/ 13504851.2017.1279259.
- Jaumotte, F., S. Lall, and C. Papageorgiou. 2013. Rising income inequality: Technology, or trade and financial globalization? IMF Economic Review 61 (2):271 -309. doi: 10.1057/imfer.2013.7.
- Jiang, H., and B. Zhang. 2008. Regional competitiveness and residents income inequality in China: Based on principal-agent model analysis. Economic Review 5:32 -41. doi: 10.19361/j.er.2008.05.005.
- Krishna, P., J. P. Poole, and M. Z. Senses. 2012. Trade, labor market frictions, and residual wage inequality across worker groups. The American Economic Review 102 (3):417 -23. doi: 10.1257/aer.102.3.417.
- Kurokawa, Y. 2014. A survey of trade and wage inequality: Anomalies, resolutions and new trends. Journal of Economic Surveys 28 (1):169 -93. doi: 10.1111/joes.12007.
- Kuznets, S. 1955. Economic growth and income inequality. The American Economic Review 45 (1):1 -28.
- Lee, J.-W., and D. Wie. 2015. Technological change, skill demand, and wage inequality: Evidence from Indonesia. World Development 67:238 -50. doi: 10.1016/ j.worlddev.2014.10.020.
- Lee, N. 2011. Are innovative regions more unequal? Evidence from Europe. Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 29 (1):2 -23. doi: 10.1068/c1046r.
- Lei, X., J. Chen, and S. Qin. 2014. Openness, innovation and income inequality: Empirical evidence from China. Economic Management 5:1 -12. doi: 10.19616/ j.cnki.bmj.2014.05.003.
- Lemieux, T. 2008. The changing nature of wage inequality. Journal of Population Economics 21 (1):21 -48. doi: 10.1007/s00148-007-0169-0.
- Li, Z., and S. Yang. 2016. Innovation, industry upgrade and urban -rural income inequality. Social Science Research 38 (2):1 -7.
- Lin, H., and G. Chen. 2004. A survey on indexes and methods to measure income gap. Market &amp; Demograohic Analysis 10 (4):63 -66.
- Liu, Q., and C.-Y. C. L. Lawell. 2015. The effects of innovation on income inequality in China. Working paper, The University of California, Davis.
- Lu, M., and Z. Chen. 2004. Urbanization, urban-biased economic policies and urban -rural inequality. Economic Research Journal 50 (6):50 -58.
- Lusch, R. F., and S. Nambisan. 2015. Service innovation: A service-dominant logic perspective. MIS Quarterly 39 (1):155 -75. doi: 10.25300/MISQ/2015/39.1.07.
- Maliszewski, P. 2003. Flexibility and its discontents. The Baffler 16:69 -79. doi: 10.1162/bflr.2003.16.69.
- McCann, E. J. 2007. Inequality and politics in the creative city-region: Questions of livability and state strategy. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 31 (1):188 -96. doi: 10.1111/j.14682427.2007.00713.x.
- Mincer, J. A. 1974. Schooling and earnings. NBER Working Paper 41 -63, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
- Moore, M. P., and P. Ranjan. 2005. Globalisation vs. skill-biased technological change: Implications for unemployment and wage inequality. The Economic Journal 115 (503):391 -422. doi: 10.1111/j.14680297.2005.00994.x.
- Moretti, E. 2013. Local multipliers and human capital in the United States and Sweden. Industrial &amp; Corporate Change 22 (1):339 -62. doi: 10.1093/icc/dts051.
- Pan, S., and T. Li. 2010. Patent protection, technological change and wage inequality . Beijing: China Economics and Management Academy, Central University of Finance and Economics.
- Peck, J. 2005. Struggling with the creative class. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 29 (4):740 -70. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2427.2005.00620.x.
- Pehkonen, J., and J. Ojala. 2009. Technological changes, wage inequality and skill premiums: Evidence over three centuries. Working Paper 5, VATT Institute for Economic Research.

- Pianta, M., and M. Tancioni. 2008. Innovations, wages, and profits. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics 31 (1): 101 -23. doi: 10.2753/PKE0160-3477310105.
- Rodr  ı guez-Pose, A., and F. Comptour. 2012. Do clusters generate greater innovation and growth? An analysis of European regions. The Professional Geographer 64 (2):211 -31. doi: 10.1080/ 00330124.2011.583591.
- Wan, G., and Z. Zhou. 2005. Income inequality in rural China: Regression-based decomposition using household data. Review of Development Economics 9 (1):107 -20. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9361.2005.00266.x
- Wei, S., and Y. Wu. 2001. Globalization and inequality: Evidence from within China. NBER Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
- Weiss, M., and A. Garloff. 2011. Skill-biased technological change and endogenous benefits: The dynamics of unemployment and wage inequality. Applied Economics 43 (7):811 -21. doi: 10.1080/00036840802599933.
- Wheeler, C. H. 2004. On the distributional aspects of urban growth. Journal of Urban Economics 55 (2):371 -97. doi: 10.1016/j.jue.2003.10.005.
- Winters, J. V. 2013. Human capital externalities and employment differences across metropolitan areas of the USA. Journal of Economic Geography 13 (5):799 -822. doi: 10.1093/jeg/lbs046.
- Wooldridge, J. 2012. Introductory econometrics: A modern approach . Stanford, CA: Cengage Learning.
- World Bank. 1997. Sharing rising incomes: Disparities in China . Washington, DC: World Bank.

## Appendix: Threshold Effect

Table A.1 Threshold effect tests (dependent variable: Income inequality 2; threshold variable: PGDP)

|                  |         |         | Critical value   | Critical value   | Critical value   |
|------------------|---------|---------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Threshold models | F value | p value | 1 %              | 5 %              | 10 %             |
| Single-threshold | 38.363          | 0.002   | 31.346           | 18.211           | 13.419           |
| Double-threshold | 19.147          | 0.012   | 20.357           | 12.002           | 9.089            |
| Triple-threshold | 11.718          | 0.090   | 23.497           | 16.121           | 11.208           |

Notes: p values and critical values are the results of the bootstrap simulation for 500 times.

 p &lt; 0.05.

 p &lt; 0.1.

 p &lt; 0.01.

Table A.2 Estimated threshold values and their confidence intervals (dependent variable: Income inequality 2; threshold variable: PGDP)

| Threshold   |   Estimated value | 95 % confidence interval   |
|-------------|-------------------|----------------------------|
| c 1         |             8.42  | [8.371, 10.243]            |
| c 2         |             9.973 | [9.962, 10.163]            |
| c 3         |            10.243 | [8.895, 11.833]            |

- Wu, X., and Z. Liu. 2013. The formation and governance logic of urban -rural gap: Theoretical analysis and empirical test from the perspective of urban-bias theory. Journal of Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics 88 (4):78 -86.
- Xie, Y. 2010. Regression analysis . Revised ed. Beijing: Social Sciences Academic Press.
- Xie, Y., and X. Zhou. 2014. Income inequality in today ' s China. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 (19):6928 -33. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1403158111.
- Xu, Z., J. Yan, and P. Zhang. 2011. Does skill-biased technological change necessarily cause increase in wage inequality? Economic Review 3:1 -5. doi: 10.19361/ j.er.2011.03.003.
- Zhang, J., D. Du, and W. G. Park. 2015. How private property protection influences the impact of intellectual property rights on economic growth? Global Economic Review 44 (1):1 -30. doi: 10.1080/ 1226508X.2014.961093.
- Zhao, C. M., H. B. Li, H. B. Cai, and Y. J. Wang. 2016. Export endogenous market access, spatial externality and urban wage gap. The Journal of World Economy 12:47 -71.

QUANEN GUO is a lecturer in the School of Tourism at Nanchang University, Jiangxi, China 330031. E-mail: annaguo@ncu.edu.cn. Her research interests include regional economics, tourism economics, and human geography.

<!-- image -->

Figure A.1 Ninety-five percent confidence interval construction of first threshold (dependent variable: Income inequality 2).

Figure A.2 Ninety-five percent confidence interval construction of second threshold (dependent variable: Income inequality 2).

<!-- image -->

Figure A.3 Ninety-five percent confidence interval construction of third threshold (dependent variable: Income inequality 2).

<!-- image -->