## Towards the Reconstruction of Agriculture: Paths of Change and Adjustment*

## John T.   Pierce

Simon Fraser University

This paper provides both reaospective and prospective insights into the processes of agricultural change. It begins with  an analysis of  suuctural change in  Canadian  agriculture and  goes  on to interpret these changes within  the context of a number of contemporary theories and models of agricultural development and restructuring. It is clear from  this  discussion  that  there is no  unified  pattern  of  change or response  to  uncertainty.  Instead  there  is  a multiplicity of  strategies which  are  formulated  on  the  basis  of  complex farm-based  and  external factors. Since agricultural policy has played  such a  significant role in  shaping much of the sector today, it is  argued that  society has the potential to create new opportunities and development paths which fulfill many of the criteria for sustainable food and rural systems. Key Words: structural change, development models, sustainable agriculture.

## The Problem and the Challenge

hange and instability are endemic features C of  food  and  agricultural  systems  in  the Western world. The current financial crisis in agriculture differs from previous ones in terms of its persistence, scale, and international character. As  agriculture  has  become increasingly internationalized, drawn into the world economy through trade,  technology, finance, contracts,  and  patenting  arrangements,  and  thus mimicking structural  trends  in  the  economy, commodity  producers  have  become  increasingly segmented  and  differentiated. Not  surprisingly therefore, the farm crisis is part of  a larger  crisis in the global economy which began in the mid-1970s (Butte1 1989).

The worsening economic situation in farming systems has  manifested  itself in  processes of  uneven  development and  restructuring  involving two broad classes of negative impactseffects on the physical environment and effects on  rural  socioeconomic  systems  (Troughton 1992). Increased levels  of capitalization, farm size,  specialization,  and  energy  throughput have  altered  the  balance  between  agriculture and the natural environment. The drainage of wetlands, contamination  of  groundwater,  destruction of soil microbes, and soil erosion are symptomatic of  this  imbalance  (Pierce  1993; Smit and Smithers 1993). With respect to socioeconomic effects, restructuring has contrib- uted  to the  depopulation  and marginalization of rural areas, concentration of ownership, and increasing dependency upon input and product markets.

The process of  restructuring  has  attracted the attention of researchers from a wide spectrum of interests who are concerned as much with its systemic features as with its more outward  manifestations. Understanding  and  unraveling  this  process  are  made  all  the  more difficult by the existence of a series of underlying  contradictions  characterizing  agricultural production.  Some of the most glaring are increasing production  fueled by public subsidies and technological change in the face of inelastic demand; the perception of the continued value and  independence  of  the  family  farm  against the  reality  of  growing  concentration  and  hegemony of agribusiness;  the continued belief in the sanctity of private property and the growing  problem  of social  costs  both  on-site  and off-site; and  the  management  of  a  renewable resource as  if  it were nonrenewable (Marsden et al. 1989;  Troughton 1991a, 1991b). Many of these contradictions have their origins in fiscal and agricultural policies, nationally and internationally, as well as in the increasing influence of  external capital and agribusiness in the dynamics of agricultural operations.

The objectives  of this paper are threefold: (1) to provide a brief empirical analysis of some of the  outward  manifestations  of  the  changing

The author would like to acknowledge the financial support from the British Columbia Science Council's  Sustainable Communities  Initiative. I would  also like to thank Nancy Cashman for research assistance, Ray Squirrel1  for graphics, and two anonymous reviewers for their comments.

Figure 1: Proportion of farms with sales greater and less than $50,000,  7971-1990  (Statistics Canada 1992)

<!-- image -->

structure  and  financial performance  of  Canadian agriculture; (2) to summarize the contemporary theories which interpret the process of restructuring  and  development  in  advanced capitalist countries; and (3) to examine the alternative  development paths  available to agriculture. The underlying  premise of the paper is that since policy has played such a significant role in shaping much of the sector today, society has the potential to create new opportunities and development paths which fulfill many of  the  criteria  for  sustainable food  and  rural systems.  The  paper  therefore  provides  both retrospective and prospective insights into the processes of agricultural change.

## Examples of Structural Change in Canada

Canadian  agriculture,  like  its  counterparts  in other Western industrialized countries, has undergone dramatic structural  changes since the early  1970s.  Typical  measures  of  structural change in agriculture include time series analyses of  farm numbers, size, gross receipts, and type of operating arrangement.  Among other things these measures point to a reorganization of  agriculture  which  is  increasingly  concentrated  and  polarized.  For  example,  between 1971 and 1991 total farm numbers declined by

24% with average farm size increasing by 29%. The rental of farmland increased by 28% during  the  same  period. Individual  or  family farms' share of total farms fell to 63% in 1991 from  almost 92%  two  decades earlier. Farms with  gross  receipts  of  $50,000  or  over  (constant  1990  dollars)  have  increased  by  75%. Farms within this category represented 42 % of all  census farms in  1991 compared to  18% in 1971 (Fig.  1).  For this same class of farm, share of total gross receipts rose from 44.5% in 1971 to  78.4%  in  1986 (Troughton  1992). Farms with  more than  1,120 acres of  land increased from 9% in 1971 to over 15% in 1991. While there  was  a  significant  decrease  during  this same  period  in  the  number  of  farms  in  the 1361,119-acre size class (63 to 56%), the under 130 acre-class remained constant (Statistics Canada 1992).

Paralleling these changes in the structure of agriculture  were  significant  changes  in  the financial performance and viability of the sector. During the 1970s farm product prices, particularly cereals, rose  rapidly  as  a  result  of  a variety of mutually reinforcing short-term factors including declines in crop yields in major cereal producing regions, principally  the Soviet Union, rising energy costs, and growth in the international demand  for cereals  (Fig. 2). These higher prices and the promise of more

-

-

-

a

H

Figure 2: Farm product prices and value of farm capital,  1976-1991  (Statistics Canada 19971

<!-- image -->

stable income from government support programs quickly became capitalized into  the value of  farmland and buildings. Enhanced farm equity  levels  contributed  to  increased  borrowing-often for speculative purposes. The cycle of rapidly rising real interest rates, policies favoring debt over equity, and a decline in commodity prices beginning in the early 1980s culminated in a severe cost-price squeeze. Total debt exceeded farm cash receipts from 1981 to 1989 despite an increase in farm support payments. Figure 3 portrays the increase in farm debt in proportion to equity and total assets o f the farm. These trends  preceded (by three  to four years) those for the international economy as a whole where 'the self-reinforcing process by  which  credit  and  rising  asset  values sustained  a  boom  in  the  eighties has  gone  into reverse in the nineties' (Ritchie  1992, A3). A number  of  indicators suggest that we are now entering  a  deflationary period  representing  a fundamental shift away from inflationary trends  of  the  previous 30 to 40 years.  I f   this interpretation  is  correct, restructuring  and rationalization of agriculture is likely to intensify in  the  absence of  countervailing  agricultural policy.

These changes in the financial and socioeconomic characteristics of  agriculture have their genesis in a number of interrelated macro-level and longer-term  forces and processes in both competitive and policy-induced environments. On the supply side, the growth in food output has been heavily influenced by high factor productivity  growth in  both First and  Third World countries and escalating subsidies among  most  OECD (Organization for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development) countries. For example, the passage  in  1985 of the U.S.  Farm  Bill  set  the  stage for  a  protracted trade  war  in  agricultural  products  between North America  and Europe. On the demand side, as  population  growth  rates  slackened in industrialized  countries,  consumers were  not only diverting an increasing  proportion of their income to nonfood  items  but  farmers themselves were  receiving a smaller proportion  of the total income spent on food because of increases  in  processing and  changes  to  dietary habits. The impact of slow growth in national demand could of  course be mitigated so long as there was strong growth internationally.  Unfortunately,  Third  World  countries  reduced their  demand  for  grains  in  the  early  1980s. Furthermore,  access  to  international  markets after this time became limited as subsidy-driven production  in  the  United  States and  Europe flooded  the  international  market  with  cheap food.

Without access to off-farm sources of work (pursued by approximately  40% of farmers) and a  variety of  income assistance measures from

Figure 3 : Measures of debt to asset ratios,  1980-1991  (Statistics Canada  1997).

<!-- image -->

the government,  average farm incomes would have  fallen  far  below  the  Canadian  average during  the  1980s and  farm  debt  would  have been much higher. Particularly hard hit by the change in the international demand for cereals was Saskatchewan,  Canada's largest grain producer. Figure 4 profiles the dramatic rise in the importance  of  direct  program  payments relative  to  net  farm  income.  In  1988 these  payments represented close to one-half of total net income  received  by  farmers.  Program  payments declined in absolute and relative terms until  1990 and have shown only modest  gains since that time, largely as a result of emergency cash payments to Prairie  grain  producers. As the federal government attempts to disengage itself in the  1990s from a range of social programs, the prospects for a continuation in program payments dim.

## Overview of Development Models

The trends identified in the discussion o f   the structural  reorganization and  financial  per- formance  of  Canadian  agriculture  are  generally representative of most Western industrialized countries (OECD 1987).  The problems of increasing polarization within the industry, declining profit  margins, and increasing control by agribusiness are symptomatic of expanding integration and internationalization of agriculture. Embedded within these trends, however, are  variations  in  the  responses/strategies  to changing economic conditions, reflecting not only  long-standing  differences in  agricultural policy but also a complex of historical, cultural resource, and economic conditions.  Thus, there  are  counterpoints  within  the  theme  of restructuring which,  not surprisingly,  have captured the intellectual imaginations o f   many scholars contributing to a considerable body of theory.

In  the  vanguard  were  M a n   and  Lenin's theoretical analyses of the penetration of capitalist exchange  relations into rural areas and the resulting impact upon the structure and function of  farm labor and enterprise. Their analyses were,  on the one hand, prophetic,  within

Figure 4: Total net  farm income and direct prog, ram payments,  1979-1997 (Statistics Canada  19911.

<!-- image -->

the context of the early development of nationally based industrial economies (particularly in terms  of increasing  concentration,  displacement of  small scale production,  and the division  of  wage  labor), and,  on the  other,  constrained  and  limited  by  ignoring  significant differences  in the parameters which govern agriculture and manufacturing and underestimating the adaptability  of farmers.  The persistence of simple commodity production, for example, has  been  explained in  terms  of  the biological nature of farming (which reduces its attractiveness  to capital invesanent),  the importance  of land  as  a factor  of  production  (immobile and limited  in  supply),  and  the  capacity  for  self exploitation. Lobao  (1990) also observed that the process of integration of agriculture within the industrial system was relatively positive in its  outcome  for  farmers  as  long  as  Fordism remained  a viable strategy of  accumulationwhich it generally  did between the 1940s  to the 1970s.

More recent theoretical work on improving our  understanding  of  the  process  of  agricultural change testifies to the importance of  the contributions of Marx and Lenin while, at the same time, providing a number  of  significant points of  departure.  It is  to these nascent approaches that I now turn.

Table 1 provides an overview of six possible groupings of  some  of  the  major  themes  and interpretations  (both process and outcome) of contemporary agricultural developmenthestructuring for  advanced  capitalist economies during the last two decades. In some cases the groupings  represent  model  descriptions  and proponents which are clearly identifiable  in the literature (A, B, and D), whereas in other cases the groupings represent  collective expressions of  more general but related research perspectives (C, E,  and F ) . Although neither entirely inclusive  of  the  full  spectrum  of  theoretical contributions  on the subject nor mutually exclusive, the models provide important insights and  perspectives  into  some  of  the  dominant underlying dynamics responsible for reshaping the structure and function of Western agriculture and rural areas at a variety of spatial scales.

Originally promulgated as an 'induced technical change' model (A) in which the choice of technology  and  production strategy  was a product of resource endowments and economic forces (Hayami  and  Ruttan  1985), the  model was subsequently revised to include the role of institutional change and innovation in affecting agricultural  development (Ruttan  1989). One of the important values of  this revision lies in the  emphasis on understanding  development within the context of the close interdependence of  technical and institutional change. Perhaps one of  the best examples of this interrelationship is that in all industrialized countries as the

Table 1 Agricultural  Development/Restructring Models

| Description                                      | Proponents                                                                                    | Features**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|--------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| A. Induced Technicaland Institutional Innovation | 1-Hayamrand Ruttan (1985)' 2-Ruttan (1989)                                                    | 1-technical change IS determined by a nation's resource endowment and relative cost of input factors 2-shifts in demand for institutional innovation are induced by changes in relative resource endowments and                                                                                            |
| B Productionisti Capital Penetration             | 1-Goodman and Redclift (1989) 5-Buttel (1989) 3-Friedman and McMichael (19891 GCommins (1990) | by technical change l-crisis of 1980s represents end of post war cycle of agrwndustrial accumulation and the structures of Z-cycles of expansion and contraction 3-transnational and intrasectorai regulation integration of advanced capitalist economies                                                 |
| C Subsumptionl Uneven Development                | 1-Whatmore et al. (19871' 2-Lobao (19901 3-Roberts (1992)                                     | 14irect and indirect control by external capitals of production relations 2-increasing segmentation and dualistic farm structure 3-uneven development the product of dialectical construction of                                                                                                           |
| 0. Appropriationisml Substitution                | 1-Goodman et al. (19871'                                                                      | l4ismiss importance of social structure and resource endowment 1-natural reproduction of plants and animals is being internalized via science in the reproduction of industrial capitals 1-bioindustrialization                                                                                            |
| E. Postindustrial1 Human Agency                  | 1-Bryant and Johnston (19921 2-Marsden et al. (19891 3-Moran (1988) 4-llbeiy (19921           | 1-landscapes of degeneration. adaptation and development are reflection of different exchange systems and their sensitivities to internallexternal factors processes at farm level Z-continuous adaptations in labor 3-farm equity cycle                                                                   |
| F. Societal-Environ- mental Dialectic            | 1-Schnaiberg (19801' 2-Troughton (1991a) 3-MacRae et al. (1990)                               | 1-Schnaiberg's three alternative syntheses' economic, planned scarcity, and ecological modes of production and environmental sustainability 3-transition to sustainable agriculture involves three overlapping strategies. efficiency. substitution. and redesign ;-inherent incompatibility of industrial |

value  of  labor  rose  relative  to  other  inputs, technological  change  permitted  the  substitution  of capital and information  for labor. As a result, rapid productivity gains and oversupply of  food  resulting  from  this  strategy  required new institutions or policy responses to encourage the off-farm migration  of  farmers and to protect  the welfare of the  remaining farmers. Bromley (1991) has noted, for example, that in addition to being successful at capitalizing the value  of  support  programs  into  the  value  of farmlands,  farmers  have  been successful  at capitalizing their  property rights  into agricultural  subsidies.  In  short,  presumed  property rights in land became translated into presumptive entitlements  in agricultural policy. Farming  land  became  synonymous  with  farming policy!

Against  this  largely  neoclassical interpretation of agricultural development stands a variety  of  political  economy  approaches  which principally have  been concerned with restructuring  of  agricultural operations  during postwar years. Within the domain of the 'productionistlcapital  penetration'' camp (B),  agriculture is seen as becoming increasingly internationalized, penetrated  by external capitals and driven by  a technological treadmill. With in-

creasing integration  into the  world  economy through  the  development of  a modern  global food  system,  agriculture  follows paths  of  expansion  and  contraction.  In  its  present  contracting  stage,  Buttel  (1989)  noted  that  the farm crisis has impacted farms in terms of the marginalization of  small producers,  a new international  division  of  labor,  devaluation  of farm assets,  and a scramble for new technology.

Closely  related  to  this  interpretation  and perspective are the processes of  'subsumption and uneven development'(C). The former refers to the transformations of the internal and external  production  relations  of  the  farm  by nonfarm capitals. Whatmore et al. (1987) argued that capital penetration manifests itself in the direct ownership and management of farm units by agribusiness  as well as indirect control through  the capture  of  surplus and  influence over markets. The latter term indicates a trend towards an increasingly  dualistic  farm structure through the processes of segmentation and differentiation  of commodity producers as  competition intensifies from technological change. Roberts (1992, 12 1) has suggested that uneven development  in  agriculture  serves  as  a  midlevel theoretical construct which is 'capable of contributing  insight  into both  the large scale forces  that structure the resource landscape and the  way  those  forces interact  with  nature  to produce  a  mosaic  of places.'  In this  way Roberts has provided an important and further elaboration on uneven development by arguing that it is a dialectical process involving the interaction  of  technology  and  social  processes within the  context of specific resource conditions at the local and regional scale.

Despite agriculture's complex interrelations with the environment, there is a lacuna of theoretical  insights  into nature's role  in  affecting restructuring  and  the  reverse  process  of  the social production of nature (Fitzsimmons 1989). Exceptions include  Lobao  (1990) who suggested that because of the biological nature of  farming some agricultural operations  have resisted  capital  penetration.  Similarly Goodman et al. (1987) argued that agriculture confronts  capitalism  with  a  natural  production process. In response to this, capitalism has attempted to 'appropriate' and 'substitute' (D) many  aspects  of  agricultural production  into industrial  processes,  thereby  reducing  uncertainty.  The  growth  in  the importance of biotechnology and bioindustrialization serve as media  or vectors  for  capital  penetration  into agriculture. Marginal  farm producers are further disadvantaged by this process, creating additional demands for state intervention (Wallace  1985).

While the political economy approaches (B, C, and D) are useful in defining the large scale context  of  agricultural  change  and  exploring some of the trends towards concentration, dualism, marginalization, declines  in  the  family farm,  persistence  of the  cosdprice  squeeze, etc., they tend to underestimate the importance of  internal  environments,  life cycle  of  farms, human agency, and institutions in shaping opportunity sets for farmers. For example, Buttel (1989) in  discussing the  U.S.  farm  crisis believed that, regardless of whether the U.S.  becomes  more  protectionist  or  adopts  a  more market-oriented  approach to agricultural policy which leads to the further internationalization of the world food economy (and denationalization of agriculture), agriculture will likely continue towards increased concentration  and centralization, although by different routes. 1 1 bery (1992, 101) argued that the political economy approach 'relegates farmers to the role of non-decision makers and constraints are emphasized  at the expense of choices.' Trend, therefore, should not be interpreted as destiny.

The work by Bryant and Johnston (1992) is timely in  this  regard  (E). Beginning with the premise  that  capitalist and  industrial  production  systems  do  not  necessarily  go  hand  in hand,  they  suggested that  to  understand  the postindustrial agricultural landscape in the vicinity  of  urban  areas  consideration  must  be given to systems of exchange in which farmers operate, life cycle of  the family, location with respect to markets, and policy-related  factors. In short, the authors contend that the complexity of change in the agricultural landscape (e.g., degeneration, adaptation, and development) is the product  of different modes of  production (e.g., industrial and postindustrial), each predisposed to respond differently to the same external stimuli at a variety of spatial scales. In support  of  this,  Moran  (1988) has  demonstrated for New Zealand that the internal relations of the  farm, as  defined by life and equity cycles, predispose farmers to select certain production strategies.  T o   provide  another  example,  in Britain Marsden  et al.  (1989) emphasized the

importance of the family development cycle in determining the choice of what they term 'survival' or 'accumulation' strategies.

None of the previous approaches, however, examined the process of restructuring and agricultural  development  within  the  framework of ecosystem stability or ecological sustainability ( F ) . As capitalism  has  increasingly penetrated  the  internal  and  external  relations  o f agriculture, it has dramatically altered the balance between the natural economy and the human economy. As Troughton (1991b, 78) argued,  'the focus of stress seems to lie in  the inherent  contradictions  between  the  nonrenewable approach to the management of what should be renewable rural resources.' Others, such  as  Schnaiberg  (1980)  with  his  'societallenvironmental dialectic,' argued that whereas most Western societies  have organized production according to either an economic or planned scarcity model (the latter pursuing an ago-industrial  mode  of  production  like  the former but one which is more sensitive to environmental  processes),  these  approaches  are unsustainable over the long term. Agricultural operations in his view need to be restructured in  such  a  way  that  ecological principles  and processes become of paramount importance in decision making.

## Alternative  Paths of  Development

The previous brief  overview of  some  of  the major  themes  and  theoretical  interpretations of  the processes of  contemporary  agricultural development and restructuring provides a useful  backdrop  for  a  forward-looking  and  descriptive analysis of  the current  options available to that sector. These options can be considered  strategic  and adaptive,  representing different opportunities for farmers and agriculture  over  the  short to  medium  term.  At  the same time,  they  contain  different  ecological, social, economic, and political implications, regionally and  nationally, which  to  date  are  at best only vaguely understood.

A number of researchers have argued, on the basis  of  empirical  research,  that  there  is  no 'unified pattern  of  development,'  suggesting that  numerous  survival strategies  or paths  of development  are  being  pursued  and  worked out literally on a daily basis in both rural  and peri-urban  regions.  Bowler  (1  992),  following

## Table 2 Paths of Development

1. Extension of the industrial model of farm business development based on traditional products and services
2.  Redeployment of farm resources (including human capital) into new agricultural products or services.
3. Redeployment of farm resources (including human capital) into new nonfarm products or services.
4. Redeployment of human capital into an off-farm occupation
5. Maintenance of traditional farm production and services with either reduced inputs andlor reduced income.
6. Hobbv or Dart-time (semi-retired)  farmina.

Source: Bowler (1

992).

earlier  research  by  Whatmore  et  al.  (1987), identified six 'paths  of  development'  which, individually  or in combination, farm businesses are  pursuing  in  response  to  the  international farm  crisis  (Table 2). He suggested that  the typology can in fact be collapsed into a 'three dimensional division of  farm business  trends' (p. 238). Paths  1 and 2 represent the continuation if not strengthening of full-time agriculture based upon the ago-industrial  model. In contrast,  Paths 3 and  4  represent  a  form  of diversification of the income base by pursuing off-farm  and nonfarm  activity. Paths 5 and  6 are indicative of a process of decline and marginalization.

Given the increased importance of biotechnology and capital in  food production,  not  to mention  the  pressure  for  change  from  scale economies, Bowler emphasized that there is a fundamental asymmetry in the ease with which it is possible to move between these paths. In short it will be far more difficult to move in an upward fashion (6 to 1) than in downward fashion (1 to 6). Furthermore, the deregulation of agriculture  and  the  desire  to  make  it  more 'market oriented,' as proposed under GATT's 'Dunkel draft agreement,' promise to intensify the polarization of producuon further by shifting  an  even  larger  share  of  total  output  to larger  units.  These  proposed  changes  could sow the  seeds of  great uncertainty  and  undo many  of  the  positive  post  war  developments that have resulted from agricultural policy.

While the previous typology contained examples of  restructuring,  including diversification  (Paths 3 and  4),  which  may represent  a departure from the hegemony of the urban-industrial model, there is no explicit sustainable

agriculture growth path  or option.  Given the present  policy  environment  and  the  importance of  scale economies, this should come as no surprise.

If a sustainable agriculture option were to be included,  what  would  be  its  distinguishing characteristics? Bowler  (1992)  himself  identifies  degrees of  sustainable agriculture based upon the application  of a checklist  of ecological principles  to the  farm  business.  Along  an imaginary continuum, he defines three typesdiversified,  low input-output, and organic farming. While adherence to ecological principles  is  a  basic  canon  of  the  agro-ecosystem approach to sustainable agriculture, the definitional field  remains wide and  complex (Lockeretz  1990). For  example, Crosson  (1992) recently  suggested  that  while  sustainability  is ecologically based, it cannot be  defined independently of our culture, the values associated with that culture, technology, and economy. To Crosson (1992, 2) a sustainable food system is 'one  that  can  indefinitely meet  demands  for food and fiber at socially acceptable economic and environmental costs.' Still others prefer to take a more comprehensive  view of sustainability, combining the notion of stewardship with adequate  economic/social  rewards  and  sufficient food supply (Brklacich et al.  1990; Smit and Smithers 1993). Notwithstanding the great diversity of views as to what constitutes a sustainable agricultural system, the following discussion  will address  sustainability  primarily within the context of its ecological dimension.

## Synthesis

Implicit in the models of structural change and of  the  farmers' response  to  uncertainty  is  an expectation of  outcomes which involve strategies leading to the reorganization of the commodity  or output  functions of  agriculture  on the  one  hand,  and  changes to  the  modes  of production,  relations,  and  the  basic inputs to agriculture on the other. In an attempt to unify these themes and to further our understanding of  the  development options  available to farm operators, it is necessary to simplify and to cast structural  change  according to  two  dominant dimensions as outlined in Figure 5 .

The  horizontal  dimension  represents  the output functions or 'end uses' of agricultural operations and rural lands. Hence the dimen- sion is  defined in terms of the broad range of commodities and services that farms and these lands are capable of producing, both food and nonfood  related.  To  achieve these  end  uses, capital,  labor,  and  resources  will  have  to  be deployed and redeployed within and between farm and nonfarm uses.

The  vertical dimension is more complex  representing an industrial and postindustrial continuum where  the standard agro-industrial model  of  production relations,  inputs,  and dominance over the use of rural land resources stands  in  marked  contrast  to  an  alternative model of relations and inputs in which ecologically sustainable agriculture is developed within more diverse rural landscapes. In moving along the continuum from the industrial towards the postindustrial, declines occur in capital intensity,  throughput  of  nonrenewable  resources, and the firm's level of subsumption by agro-industry.  Other  distinguishing  features  of  the postindustrial model  include a  recognition  of the  importance of  nonmarket values inherent in rural lands, a shift toward more knowledge based management solutions, as well as strategies which integrate crop and livestock  production.

A diverse  range  of  'survival' and  adaptive strategies to restructuring, based largely on the earlier discussion,  are mapped against these dimensions.  Each  strategy  is  represented  by  a letter  and  subscript  indicating  a  sequence  of change. The exact origin  of  each  strategy  is arbitrary. The path, Al,  A*, A3, represents  a typical  accumulation  strategy  pursued  by  a relatively small number of highly capital intensive enterprises. The path  suggests increasing subsumption  into  the agro-industrial food complex. The future  significance and  importance of  this  strategy will  depend in no small way  upon  the  degree of  deregulation in agriculture in terms of subsidies, tariffs, and quotas, a  continuation  of  cheap  energy, relatively lax environmental  regulations,  and  the  pace  of technological change. It will also depend upon the sociallethical  acceptability  of the new products and modes of production  associated with the growth in the use of biotechnology on and off  the farm.

Another adaptive strategy reflects two courses of action involving some form of diversification. In the one, B1 to Bz, new agricultural products and services are developed to broaden

<!-- image -->

Market/non-market values

Figure 5 A synopsjs of paths of change and adjtrstment for farm and nonfarm based activities.

the economic base of the enterprise but within the confines of the dominant rules which govem the  agro-industrial  model; in  the  second, B1 to B3, an  attempt  is  made  to  spread  risk through  a  change  in  production  strategies to include  fewer  petrochemical  inputs  and  processing of food items. There are numerous examples of both of these strategies in peri-urban areas in the form of the development and marketing of  specialized crops,  fish  farming, and direct sales of produce.

In the upper left quadrant, C1  to C3 represents an all too common option in which a farm is sold for conversion to urban use or amenity agriculture. Whereas the predisposition to pursue  this  strategy  is  heavily  influenced by  age and life cycle of the operator,  the impetus  to do so is closely tied to location with respect to urbadrecreational areas (and hence the opportunity cost of remaining in agriculture) and the limitations  posed by farmland  preservation programs.

An alternative path,  and one which has become increasingly important in terms of farm numbers,  if  not  sharesof  total  farm  income, is  the  redeployment  of  farm  resources  and labor  to  nonfarm  activities  in  the  form  of hobby/equestrian farms, gardeninghecreational centers, golf courses, and secondary and tertiary industrial employment (D1 to D3). The creation  and evolution of  pluriactive environments represents a broadening of the social  and economic cultures of rural regions. Yet another strategy  is  the  development  of  ecological  or conservation reserves (D, to D4) through such things as land msts. As consumptive activities (pleasure and  recreation),  these  uses  stand  in marked contrast to the production activities in the upper right quadrant, particularly in terms of  their  biological  diversity and  their  largely positive environmental effects.

The fifth option (El to E3) represents a dramatic shift in the culture of  production  of the farm unit away from the agro-industrial mode

towards a system which is far more integrative of environmental processes and farming activities (i.e.,  crop and livestock). Depending upon the scale and concentration of these modes of production, we can expect to see something of a reversal in the historical process of subsumption. Moreover, a considerable amount of  redeployment of  resources will occur as local areas and regions attempt to become more selfsufficient in food. Although the pathway chosen  represents  Bowler's  (1 992) sequence  of diversified, low  input,  and organic farming, a number of parallel or similar sequences could have  been  used  to  illustrate  the  evolution of farm units towards a  state of 'ecological synthesis'  and  sustainability. At  the  same  time, other  examples  could  have  been  included  to illustrate  options  which  would  favor a  better baIance between the commodity and noncommodity functions of  the land  base.  While the locus of production will remain in rural areas, a  significant proportion  of  food  will  be  produced in  pen-urban  regions. The cumulative importance of this shift in modes of production for the food  producing sector as  a  whole will depend in no small way upon the average cost of producing  the  food,  consumer  attitudes about environmentaVecosystem  health and quality  of  food,  competition  from  consumptive-based  activities  (e.g.,  D1  to  D4),  agricultural policy which influences the 'opportunity sets'  available  to  farmers,  and  international competition for food products. The liberalizing of trade will,  all  other things equal, act as a  counterincentive  to  those  contemplating  a shift to more environmentally positive agriculture.

## Towards Reconstruction

Since the 1930s agricultural policy has favored the  industrial  productionist  mode,  leading  to rapid growth in yields, dependence on external inputs, and capital intensification. While society and farmers benefited from this policy, the international  financial crisis in  farming  along with  a  growing  number  of  externalities  and environmental effects clearly indicate that significant changes are now required in the methods of food production and in the management of  rural  resources, not  only in  Canada,  from which  specific  examples  were  drawn  in  this paper,  but  also  in  most  other  industrialized countries.  Hence,  given the  historical importance  of  policy  in  shaping  agricultural practices, the potential  exists  to bring  agricultural activities into line  with  the  basic  precepts  of sustainable agricultural systems at  an  acceptable  cost.  At  the  same  time,  society has  the potential  to achieve a  better  balance between the  production  and  consumption functions of the land.

Ruttan (1989,  1376) reminds us  that  'institutions  have  a crucial role  in  establishing expectations about the rights to use resources in economic activities and about the partitioning of the income streams resulting from economic activity.' He also reminds us that there is both a demand and supply side to institutional innovation. The demand for this institutional innovation  comes  from  a  variety  of  overlapping forces  and  trends  including  increasing value attached  to  ecosystem  health  and  landscape amenity,  escalating  environmental  effects  of agriculture, a desire for fresher and chemically free food, and the oversupply of food. There is also a real and legitimate concern for the welfare of rural communities and cultures.

On the supply side, governments and interest groups are aware that many of the current policies are no longer appropriate because they have  achieved  many  of  their  original  goals, such  as  adequate  supplies of  food,  and  most countries no longer have the fiscal flexibility  to sustain  the  costs  of  these  programs.  Equally compelling is the fact that there are new tools and approaches which can be used to achieve a number of  goals in keeping with pathways B, E,  and  D  in  Figure 5 . On the basis  of  these conditions, society is  able to initiate new and innovative policies which can mitigate some of the  present  contradictions  in  agriculture  and the forces underlying restructuring and, in the process, provide new opportunity sets for farmers and residents of rural areas that can lead to a more sustainable  future. In short, we have the potential to reconstruct  our agricultural landscapes.

As a  catalyst for  improvement, two important  changes must  take place.  First, and most importantly, sustainable or alternative agriculture must be put on an equal footing with its industrial counterpart. To achieve this, industrial agriculture must be  compelled to pay the true  costs  of  production.  Alternative  agricultural systems already internalize most of  their

costs  of  production  which  lead,  generally,  to higher average costs of producing food. There are a variety of regulatory and incentive based approaches, some of which are already in place (e.g.,  'extensification' programs  in  the  European Community), which can lead to the internalizing of a far higher percentage of the costs of production  in conventional agricultural systems. These actions however must be  accompanied by  the removal of  agricultural policies which distort production  decisions in favor of environmentally harmful  practices (e.g.,  1990 U.S. Farm Bill) and strictly commodity uses of the  land.  (For  a  more  detailed  discussion  of these issues see Pierce  1993.) Second, there is a need for proactive strategies which will result in a reform of government-based or supported research  centers,  increased  assistance  for  the preservation of rural communities, and a better balance between the commodity and noncommodity uses of  the land resource base.  These strategies must also be sensitive  to the existence of  different regional ecosystems for food production and variations in systems of exchange within which farmers operate.

The obstacles to making these changes are predictably  large,  particularly  in  view  of  the push to free trade, but not insurmountable. It is assumed that the prospects for success of the proposed  changes  are  enhanced  by  progress being made toward sustainability in other sectors of the economy and society. More to the point,  however,  the  costs  of  an  ecologically sound agricultural system would be acceptable, provided competing  agricultural policy measures were phased out and rules or agreements were established amongst trading partqers that would guarantee that everyone would operate under  similar  environmental  constraints.  An environment must be created which lowers the risk to farmers in shifting to alternative modes of production.  And institutionally, if property rights  in  land  could  be  decoupled  from  presumptive entitlements in agricultural policy,  a major impediment  to the greening of agriculture would be removed. Finally, in the design of policy itself, by building upon a large body of knowledge held by stakeholders in general and  farmers specifically, it will  be  possible  to expand its appeal and effectiveness. Ideally, the final outcome of these policy initiatives  will be rural  landscapes  and  agro-ecosystems which are  far more  diverse and  adaptive than  today, capable of responding to the wide spectrum of economic, environmental, and social demands of  a postindustrial society.

## Literature Cited

Bowler,  I.  R.  1992. 'Sustainable agriculture' as  an alternative path of farm business development. In Contemporary Rural Systems in Transition, ed. I. R. Bowler, C. R.  Bryant, and M. D. Nellis, 237-53. Wallingford: C.A.B. International.

Brklacich, M.,  C.  R.  Bryant,  and  B . Smit.  1990. Review and appraisal of the concept of sustainable food production systems. Environmental Management 15:l-14.

Bromley,  D.  1991. Environment and Economy, Property Rights and Public Policy. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.

- Bryant, C. R.,  and T.  Johnston.  1992. Agriculture i n the City's Counqside. Toronto: University  of Toronto Press.
- Buttel,  F.   H.  1989. The  US  farm  crisis  and  the restructuring  of  American agriculture: Domestic and international dimensions. In The Intaational Farm C * , ed.  D.  Goodman  and  M.  Redclift, 46-83.  New York: St. Martin's Press.
- Commins, P.  1990. Resmcturing agriculture in advanced  societies: Transformation,  crisis  and  responses. In Rural Restructuring, ed. T .  Marsden, P. Lowe, and S. Whatmore, 45-76. London: David Fulton.
- Crosson, P.  1992. Sustainable food and fiber production. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of Science, Chicago, IL.

Fitzsimmons, M.  1989. The matter  of  nature. Antipode 2 1 : 106-20.

Friedman, H., and P. McMichael. 1989. Agriculture and the state system. Sociologia Ruralis 29:93-117. Goodman, D., and M. Redclift. 1989. Introduction: International farm crisis.  In The  International  Farm Crh, ed.  D.  Goodman  and  M.  Redclift,  1-22. New York: St. Mamn's Press.

- Goodman, D., B.  Sorj, and J. Wilkinson. 1987. From Farming  to Biotechnology: A Theory o f Agro-Indwtrial Development. New York: Basil Blackwell.
- Hayami, Y., and V. W.  Ruttan.  1985. Agrincltural Development: An International  Perspective. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
- Ilbery, B.   W .   1992.  State assisted farm diversification in  the  United  Kingdom.  In Contemporary  Rural System in Transition, ed. I. R. Bowler, C. R. Bryant, and  M.  D. Nellis, 100-16. Wallingford: C.A.B. International.
- Lobao, L. M.  1990. Locality and Inequulity: Farm and Industiy Structure and Socio-economic Conditions. Albany: State University of New York Press.

- Lockeretz,  W.  1990. Major issues confronting sustainable  agriculture.  In Sustainable  Agriculture i n Temperate Zones, ed. C. A.  Francis et al., 423-38. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
- MacRae, R. J.,  S.  Hill, J.  Henning and A.  Bentley. 1990. Policies, programs  and  regulations to supDOIT the  transition  to  sustainable  aericulture  in Y Canada. American j4nmnal o f Alternative Agrinclture 5:7692.
- Marsden, T. K., R. J.  C. Munton,  S. J. Mihamore, and J.  K.  Little.  1989.  Strategies  for  coping  in capitalist agriculture; An  examination of  the  response  of  farm  families  in  British  Agriculture. Geofrum 2O:l-14.
- Moran, W.  1988. The farm equity cycle and enterprise choice. Geographical Analysis 20:84-91.
- OECD.  1987. Smcctural  Adjustment  and  Economic Pe7fomance. Paris: OECD.
- Pierce,  J. T. 1993.  Agriculture, sustainability and the imperatives of  policy reform. Geofmm 24:38196.
- Ritchie, C. E. 1992.  Coping with deflation: The new risk environment. The Globe and Mail November 19:A3.
- Roberts, R.  1992. Nature,  uneven development and the  agricultural landscape. In Contemporary Rural System in Transition, ed. I. R.  Bowler, C. R.  Bryant, and  M.  D. Nellis, 119-30. Wallingford: C.A.B. International.
- Ruttan, U.  1989. Institutional  innovation  and agricultural development. World Deuelopment 17: 1375-87.
- Schnaiberg, A.  1980. The Environment: From Surplus t o   Scarcity. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Smith, B.,  and J.  Smithers.  1993. Sustainable agriculture;  Interpretations,  analyses  and  prospects. Canadian 30urnal o f Regional Science, forthcoming.
- Statistics Canada.  1991. Agriculture Economic Stattitics. Cat-2 1-603. Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
- Statistics Canada.  1992. Cen s u s Overview OfCanadian Agriculture. Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
- Troughton, M. J.  1991a. Ecological assessment of modem agriculture. In Limitr  to Rural Land Use, ed.  G. M. R.  A.  van  Oort, L.  M.  van  den  Berg, J.  G.  Groenendijk,  and A. H. H. M. Kempers, 141-55.  Wageningen: Pudoc.
- Troughton, M. J. 1991b. Agriculture and  rural  resources. In Resource  Management and  Development, ed. B.  Mitchell,  53-84.  Toronto:  Oxford University Press.
- Troughton, M. J.  1992. The restructuring of Canadian agriculture. In Contemporary Rural Systems in Transition, ed.  I.  R.  Bowler,  C.  R.  Bryant,  and M. D. Nellis, 29-42. Wallingford: C.A.B. Intemational.
- Wallace, I. 1985. Towards a geography of agribusiness. Progress in Human Geography 9:491-514.
- Whatmore, S. J.,  R. J.  C. Munton, T. K. Marsden, and J. K. Little.  1987.  Towards a typology of farm business in advanced capitalist agriculture. Sociologia Ruralis 27~21-37.

JOHN T. PIERCE (Ph.D. London  School of Economics)  is  Chair  and  Professor  of  Geography  at Simon Fraser  University, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada VSA 1S6. His current research interests include  environmental  issues  in  food  production, strategies for sustainable development, and community  economic  development  in  resource  dependent regions.