## Building Co-ops, Constructing Cooperation: Spatial Strategies and Development Politics in a Mexican Village

Tad Mutersbaugh

Department of Geography, University of Iowa

Cooperative rural development has been the subject of much scholarship, yet little attention has been paid to the importance of cooperative spatial strategies. In this study, the efforts of an Oaxacan (Mexican) rural producer cooperative to construct a co-op building appear to far exceed the structure's potential contribution to commodity production. This research argues that the outsized investment into co-op infrastructure is explicable when the cultural and political economy of cooperation is analyzed. It is found that (1) well-defined co-op spaces are necessary if co-op members are to meet market-driven quality standards, yet these autonomous production spaces exclude nonmember villagers upon whom the co-op depends. Given this sentiment, (2) the co-op building plays an important political role in persuading villagers to provide social support and access to communal resources by (3) demonstrating that production cooperation presents a reasonable development alternative and that co-op members have the managerial capacity to achieve it. The article finishes by calling for a greater attention to co-op member development visions and spatial strategies, and to the contributions that geographic and ethnographic research may make to the analysis of co-op formation and survival. Key Words: critical development geography, indigenous peoples, MexicoOaxaca , production cooperatives.

rossing  the  cordillera  east  from  the  highland Chinantec  villages,  the  trail-a  section  of  the Camino Real connecting Ixtlan and Tuxtepecpasses a vantage point known as the Buena Vista. To the north and east lie serried mountain ridges stretching into the state of Veracruz; below, we take in the sharply incised,  emerald-hued  Santa  Cruz  valley.  Three  hours later, and two thousand vertical meters below, we arrive at the outskirts of the Santa Cruz village, where children offer  us  fresh-cut  oranges  and  bananas.  Sepia-toned homes, built of weathered, hand-cut boards or of jonote (split  palm  trunks)  lashed  together  with bejuco (bark strips) and roofed with corrugated asphalt panels or palm thatch, blend into a landscape of red clay earth and lush home gardens, coffee plots, milpa cornfields, and forest. Continuing  down  through  the  village,  stretched  for  a kilometer along the ridge (Figure 1), I descend a stairway of worn river stone as it zigzags down among dozens of homes and then opens onto a broad avenue. C

The co-op building, home of the La Luz de la Chinantla  (Light  of  the  Chinantla) 1   production  cooperative, 2   is  located  here.  The  two-story  co-op  building, made of hand-poured cinder blocks laid within a reinforced cement frame (Figure 2), is at once impressive and incongruous. It is  also,  I  will  suggest,  something  of  an anomaly, in the sense that it presents an empirical in- stance that does not concord with existing theory (Burawoy 2000, 28). When I joined in on the initial stages of building construction, this anomalous character was not evident, yet as I gained a deeper appreciation of the village economy and social milieu, the place of construction efforts within the broader context of household and co-op labor allocations became increasingly enigmatic. By any measure, the eight hundred labor-days required to construct the building, even when spread out over a sixyear  period,  constitute  a  significant  burden  given  the small number of co-op member families involved. 3  And, as I came to appreciate the scarcity of spare labor days within the demanding agricultural calendar, the magnitude  of  the  effort  appeared  all  the  greater.  The  co-op building did not appear to promote commodity production in any way that would not have been served by a much simpler structure, and it absorbed labor that might have been directed to commodity production.

This enigma, it will be argued, raises two key points. First, people exercise agency in the making of development outcomes, and this agency is embedded in cultural understandings of what development is and how it operates. This 'development culture' is not limited to and reproduced  strictly  within  delimited  locales  such  as  villages or urban neighborhoods, but rather unfolds within a 'longer, sedimented history of a place and its linkages

Figure 1. Santa Cruz village lands.

<!-- image -->

with  the  wider  world'  (Bebbington  2000)  of  markets, state agencies, social movements, and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). The present case illustrates this situatedness  as  Santa  Cruz  cooperativists,  operating within and informed by their development culture, design  and  enact  strategies  that  they  believe  will  allow them to achieve an improved standard of living in an economic sense. A second point, however, is this. Production cooperation embeds certain notions of the fu-

Figure 2. La Luz co-op building.

<!-- image -->

ture,  certain  development  teleologies  with  respect  to what  constitutes  appropriate  and  meaningful  development  (Escobar  1995;  Mitchell  1997;  Ferguson  1999), that cooperativists hope to make real. Others may not share these particular ideals and may choose to contest them. While it is certainly the case that local cultures are not  destroyed  by  development  but  rather  reworked within the context of an active engagement with states, markets, and civil society, it is also clear that this engagement is productive of tension, conflict, and cooperation as wealth and power are redistributed among organizations, persons, and classes.

It is towards an understanding of these tensions and the ways in which they are enacted and resolved within and between organizations that the present study is directed. Those spaces that La Luz uses in its operations, such as the co-op building, play a dual role in cooperative life: they facilitate cooperative production, yet they must also sustain the social relations that make cooperation possible. This study will suggest that these two aspects are not always mutually supportive. For instance, work rules  meant  to  guarantee  product  quality  may  exclude some members, while practices meant to ensure co-op autonomy  may  create  social  tensions.  The  empirical

focus of this article, then, will be to examine evolving co-op member strategies, first as members rearrange their lives to enable production cooperation, and then as they attempt to resolve the resulting social tensions. Let me note at this point that the notion of a 'group strategy' as used in this article refers to collective agreements that organize group action. These are understood to be negotiated, unstable, transitory, and conflict-ridden, and yet also necessary to coordinate social action. To this end, the first section will critique the production cooperative (hereafter PC) studies literature for its failure to problematize sociospatial processes. Using this critique as a springboard, I will suggest that theories of culture and representation-particularly those elaborated within labor process (Willis 1977; Fantasia 1988; Pred 1990; Watts 1992; Lee 1998; Burawoy 2000) and gender/household studies traditions (Carney and Watts 1990; Hart 1992; Wolf  1992;  Schroeder  1999)-critique  the  notion  of unitary  strategy  and  provide  additional  insights  into the  tensions  engendered  by  cooperative  development. The article then turns to a case study of the La Luz de la Chinantla cooperative and undertakes a close examination  of  cooperativist  social  and  spatial  strategies,  both practical and representational.

## Producer Cooperatives in Theory and Practice

PC studies provide a rich empirical and theoretical literature  of  importance  to  geography.  First,  PC  studies highlight  the  importance  of  organizations  in  development, challenging the notion that atomized individuals, or  households  construed  as  such,  may  form  the  basic building  blocks  of  equitable  development  or  development policy (Putterman 1983; Tendler 1988; Hirschman 1993). Second, PC studies underscore the importance of rules to organizational life. Differences in organizational structure and practice affect the social logic of cooperation, as evidenced by studies of patterns of authority and ownership (Gui 1984; Bowles 1985; Gartrell and Paille 1997), financial and other incentives structures (Putterman 1983, 1987; Jin 1993), and work-group interactions (e.g., Gui 1984; Putterman 1987, 1983; Craig 1993; Jin 1993). This study argues, however, that this sensitivity to organizational practice is undercut by a tendency to view cooperative logic as an attribute of social structures, rather  than  as  agreements  negotiated  within  specific contexts.  This  is  seen  most  clearly  in  rational-choiceinformed PC studies that remain close to Olson's (1971) attempt to derive a single, unitary logic to explain each instance of collective action. It is less evident, though still influential, in the many contemporary studies that understand production cooperatives to be specific to social and industrial contexts (e.g., for the Basque region, Whyte 1988, 1999; in the Third Italy, Bartlett 1992 and Jones and Svejnar 1985; in the northwest U.S. woodproducts sector, Craig 1992 and Gartrell and Paille 1997). 4

Critical  PC  scholars  Bonin,  Jones,  and  Putterman (1993) note this failure to problematize the divergence between  rational-choice-based  theoretical  frameworks and  empirical  studies.  Identifying  the  analytical  problems of 'reverse causalities' and 'isolation,'  they underscore  the  inherent  difficulties  involved  in  teasing  out cause and effect in co-op member actions-for example, in  studies  of  northwestern  U.S.  plywood  co-operatives (Craig 1992; Gartrell and Paille 1997). 5  Bowles (1985) likewise notes these failings in PC studies, but attributes them to a deeply rooted 'neo-Hobbesian' essentialism that views malfeasance (e.g., free-riding, work shirking) as  an  intrinsic  aspect  of  work  (rather  than  as,  for  instance, a form of class-based, everyday resistance [Pred 1990]). 6   Mooney,  Roahrig,  and  Gray  (1996)  similarly view rational-choice approaches as a 'depoliticization' of PC studies (see also Macdonald 1997 for similar observations  with  respect  to  the  NGO-development  literature).  In  addition,  I  would  offer  that  the  use  of  gametheoretic  tools  necessarily  involves  a  priori  analytical practices that overly narrow the scope of investigation. 7 When, prior to analysis, co-op membership is limited to 'fully participatory' individuals, a large number of partially participatory members are excluded, and the oftendifficult intra-group negotiations over what constitutes an acceptable level of participation are placed outside of the analytical framework.

Taken together, these critiques point to a problem of essentialism within PC studies in which the character of cooperation is understood as structurally determined rather than shaped by historically- and geographicallyembedded practices of negotiation and conflict. While this conflation of process to structure facilitates the deployment of microeconomic and game-theoretic tools, it leaves us with a view of the cooperative as a bounded entity that precludes an integrated analysis of social relations that reach across and complicate institutional borders.  Gender  (Hart  1992;  Wolf  1992;  Mutersbaugh 1999), ethnicity (Bowles 1986; Whyte 1998), and class (Gibson-Graham et al. 2000) relations that join co-ops to other organizations such as households or village associations are, in this view, conceived of as causal links or articulations. Tendler (1988) provides a relevant example in her examination of 'spillover effects' in Bolivian production cooperatives. She addresses an important empirical tendency in which development-production cooperatives  begin  as  relatively  larger  organizations  and

then decline in membership. She attributes this to the presence of spillover effects, in which nonmembers may receive  some  benefits  from  a  co-op  even  though  they quit (or do not join) the co-op. 8  Under spillover conditions, nonmembers have little incentive to shoulder the economic  burden  of  co-op  membership,  and  existing members will want to exit.

If we follow Tendler's spillovers argument a step further,  it  would  appear  that  a  solution  to  co-op  decline would be found in a 'cooperativism on the cheap,' in which membership costs are pared to the bone in order to retain a positive price differential attributable to co-op membership.  Empirically,  however,  this  solution  does not jibe with either the outsized investment into co-op building construction undertaken in Santa Cruz or with Tendler's  (1983)  own  recommendation  that  development aid to co-ops be focused on fixed investments such as buildings. Perhaps La Luz cooperativists have made a strategic error with their co-op building investment? Or perhaps, as this article will argue, a co-op building strategy makes sense within the context of Santa Cruz cultural politics. In making this argument, this study does not mean to reject the contributions of PC studies, but rather to problematize their tendency to constitute cooperative geography in terms of separate or bounded realms with discrete sets of social relations, labor processes, production  norms,  and  spatiotemporalities. 9   Apropos,  the present case study argues that a rational-choice framing fails  to  explain  empirical  instances  of  cooperationco-op overbuilding in particular-and asserts the importance  of  cultural  politics  and  sociospatial  strategies  to co-op analysis.

## Geography and Organizations

The present study is relevant to recent geographic interest in the organizational context of economic development,  environmental  protection,  and  organizations within civil society (Price 1994; Murdock 1997; Del Casino et al. 2000; Tomkin 2000). Organizational geographies figure in geographic studies ranging from development  and  environment  organizations  (Rangan  1997; Neumann 1998; Bassett 1999; Robbins 2000) to worker organizations (Herod 1998; Chari 2000) and social movements (Pile 1997; Routledge 1997). Bryant and Bailey (1997, 24), for instance, call for organizational geographies to better delineate the linkage between the character  of  agencies  involved  in  environment  and  development work and the sorts of practices that they engender. The present  study  contributes  to  this  agenda,  perhaps particularly in a manner relevant to NGO studies (Beb- bington  et  al.  1993;  Price  1994).  Many,  if  not  most, NGOs meet the 'labor-owned and managed' PC studies standard and may be classed as production co-ops in the sense that they produce environmental or development services, such as reports and project management. The present  study  provides  conceptual  tools  for  unpacking inter- and intraorganizational geographies and advancing the understanding of social processes through which organizations develop and articulate organizational action strategies, set rules and norms, and negotiate relationships with other, co-existing organizations.

## Cultural Politics and the Labor Process

In identifying a conceptual approach, this study inverts the  rational-choice-informed  PC  studies  formulation. Rather than ask how member actions reflect a group interest or rationale, this study problematizes the processes through  which  organizational  interests,  identities,  and strategies are made. How, I ask, do Oaxacan village cooperativists create the solidarity to sustain them through the lengthy, expensive, and conflict-ridden processes of setting  out  group  aims  and  goals,  establishing  member norms, and constituting organizational boundaries?

To frame this question, I draw on the conceptual tools of a cultural Marxist literature that examines how groups build solidarity within workplace contexts, and I find it useful to think in terms of class. This concept of class is not, however, a binary one, but rather draws upon Eric Wolf's flexible notion of classes as '. . . quite real clusters of people whose development or decline is predicated on particular historical circumstances, and who act together or  against  each  other  in  pursuit  of  particular  interests prompted by these circumstances' (Wolf 1969, xii; cited in Roseberry 1995, 57). This conceptual approach, applied to empirical studies of co-ops, would suggest that co-ops do not merely form a new grouping within the local milieu, but in fact pursue a unique relationship to key aspects of village life, such as resource usufruct and labor mobilization. This 'co-op class' is distinct, as we shall see, from existing class positions of villager or householder  and  from  state-mediated caciquista (patronage networks) in that it requires its members to work, make use of village resources, engage village social space, and participate in extralocal networks in ways that are quite distinct.

Clearly, the dense web of social interactions in Santa Cruz  complicates  an  attempt  to  distinguish  a  separate co-op class, since cooperativists are at the same time also householders and villagers and as such engage in everyday work and social activities in these other 'class' con-

texts,  sometimes  even  as  they  engage  in  co-op  tasks (Mutersbaugh 1999). In this regard, the work of (the collective author) Gibson-Graham (1996) is insightful. Arguing along lines that complement Eric Wolf's, they argue that class analysis must be extended beyond the capitalist  workplace  to  include  the  separate  class  processes of parallel institutions such as households. Class analysis,  that  is  to  say,  must  incorporate  the  idea  that persons are multiply situated within classes. Sorted against this  Wolfian  notion  of  class,  we  may  set  Lefebvre's (1991, 55) observation that 'The production of space . . . is  performed  solely  by  classes,  fractions  of  classes  and groups representative of classes. . . . the class struggle is inscribed in space.' The La Luz co-op, I will argue, acts as a class, not only to form a distinctly different set of social and resource relations, but also to make social and physical  space in ways that differ from households and the village.

The present study, then, views co-op-making not only as a cultural and political process, but also as one of class formation enacted in and through village space. Hägerstrand's (1974, 21) time-geographic notion of the 'pocket of  local  order'  provides  a  conceptual  framework  that shows how this may be enacted in co-occupied, multiorganizational  village  social  spaces. 10   Cooperative  production spaces depend upon an ordered interweaving of the space-time paths of workers, tools, and production inputs (see also Pred 1981; Carlstein 1982). Hägerstrand (1974) demonstrates that these spaces of order are porous,  ephemeral, and difficult to maintain even in the best of circumstances, and perhaps particularly within a multi-institutional agrarian setting. 11  He also shows how the pocket of order is interleaved spatially and temporally with other, competing social projects of householders and villagers and must compete with them for labor and resources within a 'sociotechnical' space. If we understand,  then,  that  the  process  of  co-op  formation  is also one in which the spatiotemporal character and content  of  everyday  life  and  usufruct  is  redrawn,  we  may begin to see the class tensions that attend this process.

To return to the question of how a co-op unfurls a new spatial  practice  within  an  existing  milieu,  this  study draws on studies in labor process (Fantasia 1988; Pringle 1989; Pred 1990; Watts 1992; Lee 1998; Burawoy 2000) and cultural Marxism (Gramsci 1971; Williams 1977). Cultural  Marxist  notions  of  class  emphasize  classfor -itself,  in  which  class  is  historically  and  geographically contingent and 'present at its own making' as persons act to shape their class ideals and practices (Thompson 1966, 9). Fantasia (1988) draws out this distinction in his analysis of 'solidarity cultures.' In an examination of strike actions, he traces the emergence of cultures of solidarity, in which class cohesion is built and (importantly) maintained not just through engagement in activities  of  shop  and  union  hall,  but  in  homes,  church basements,  and  union-membership  drives.  Class  acts, both narrative and practical, build a sense of shared purpose and provide opportunities to forge a common strategy.

A  key  analytical  moment  in  this  article,  then,  addresses  the  tension  between  co-op  solidarity  and  nonmember exclusion. As co-op members develop production  autonomy, they make new uses of local resources and spaces, become differently linked to regional social and economic networks of development assistance (Fox 1992) and patronage (Bartra 1982; Hernández Navarro 1991)  and  uniquely  embedded  with  respect  to  a  'regional  discursive  formation'  (Peet  and  Watts  1996) within  which  notions  of  appropriate  development  are framed. 12  However, the setting out of autonomous production spaces also excludes nonmember villagers from these spaces/activities. This could mean only the development of new, nonantagonistic forms of social difference.  The  problem,  however,  is  this.  Co-op  members depend, as will be shown, upon village spaces, material resources, and cultural norms to realize their production activities: they share local histories, usufruct rights, and mutual social and economic obligations with other villagers in a remarkably dense social landscape, yet they must remake a portion of this shared space as cooperative and turn a portion of village resources to co-op use. Cooperativists recognize this tension, yet as they seek a resolution, treading a social landscape that they know well, they find that the politics of autonomy requires not only many modifications in co-op practice, but also a successful politics of representation. In order to unravel these politics of representation, I integrate Lefebvre's (1991) concepts  of  representational  space  into  the  analysis. These  ideas  bring  to  labor-process  studies  an  element that is otherwise muted: namely, a way to unpack these representations and relate them to labor-process politics.

## Study Methodology

The  study  is  built  around  a  long-term,  multivisit engagement  with  the  La  Luz  co-op. 13   Following  the 'extended  case'  methodology  advocated  by  Burawoy (2000, 28), in which theoretical and practical knowledge is extended via examination of empirical situations that appear anomalous in light of existing scholarship, this study  makes  use  of  'cross-sectional'  methodologies such as extended surveys, agrotechnical field surveys, and quantitative assessments of labor-allocation spatiotemporalies to gain an overview of production practices,

political attitudes, and political culture. These are joined to participant observation and informal survey methodologies to study the meanings and historical context of co-op life. This aspect of research activity was markedly enhanced by the contributions of my spouse, Elizabeth Carmona Jaramillo, who taught a knitting workshop and participated in women's household activities. Multivisit studies confer some advantage when the aim of the study is to evaluate processes of social transformation. In the present  study,  for  instance,  the  contrast  between  the labor investment in the co-op building and its usefulness as a production site became evident early on, yet the importance of representation only became apparent years later. Time-geographic studies capably document the crises that confound production cooperatives situated within agrotechnically complex and gender-divided contexts (Mutersbaugh 1999), yet representational strategies are not so easily grasped. Because they do not emerge fully formed, because they unfurl haltingly and are imbued with culturally specific meanings, they are not readily perceived until they become the stuff of village politics, often long after they were initiated. In the present case, the importance of representational strategies only became evident to me years after the fact when the building effort, and my participation in it, became the grist for village debates over the merits of production cooperation. 14

## La Luz de la Chinantla: Production Cooperation in a Chinantec Village

The village lands, illustrated in Figure 1, are set on the verdant eastern flanks of Oaxaca's northern Sierra Juarez. Ranging from nearly 3,000 meters in altitude in the south near Cerro Pelón to 500 meters where the Rio Perfume drains to the Rio Papaloapan, village lands are well watered (over 3,000 ml/year in the highest elevations) by abundant, year-round orographic precipitation driven by prevailing winds from the Gulf of Mexico. This rainfall supports two subsistence crops per year and an abundant  coffee  harvest.  The  indigenous  Chinantec-  and Spanish-speaking  village  is  composed  exclusively  of village-regulated common property ( propiedad comunitaria ). One  hundred  and  twenty  village  families  (~750  total population)  are  listed  as comuneros and  have  usufruct rights  to  work  the  land.  Villagers  combine householdorganized  subsistence  slash-and-burn  agriculture  with village-mediated access to government-subsidized rural store stocks (see Fox 1992). Cash needs are met primarily through coffee production-mostly women's labor-and men's labor migration, with less significant contributions from  petty  commodity  production.  Since  communal lands encompass more than 5,000 hectares, and usufruct is  limited to what a family may cultivate with its own labor, there is no land shortage, although plots may be up to two hours' walk from the village. 15

The village assembly-comprised of village males aged eighteen and over-undertakes commons management, setting  out  village  resource  policies,  adjudicating  disputes, and enforcing usufruct rules. The predominance of common property gives the village assembly significant leverage  over  villagers.  Household  usufruct  rights  are tied  to  men's  participation  in  village  communal  labor activities that include both tequios (manual labor) and three-year cargos (a village administrative appointment). Failure to perform tequios or cargos may result in a loss of comunero status, hence loss of usufruct rights (see also Mountz  and  Wright  1996;  Cohen  1998).  This tequio / cargo system forms an instance of what may be termed 'labor organizational technologies' (Sayer and Walker 1992, 17). 16   This is analytically important because the tequio / cargo system  provides  a  set  of  cultural  templates that cooperativists use to manage co-op activities. It is an indigenous system found throughout Oaxaca and Southern Mexico, but I refrain from terming it 'traditional' because its present form reflects a contemporary reformulation within a post-Mexican Revolutionary social framework (Rus 1994). This communal labor structure affects  production  cooperation  in  often-contradictory ways. On the one hand, village migration policy supports production cooperation by keeping cooperativists tied to village life. On the other hand, village property ownership constrains co-op resource access, and the use of tequio / cargo management techniques complicates the exercise of co-op authority.

Since  cooperativists  currently  account  for  only  25 percent of village families (and village assembly votes), they  must  cultivate  village  support.  This  disadvantageous  structural  relationship  is  further  complicated  by ideological conflict over the terms and goals of village development. Santa Cruz cooperativists ( cooperativistas ) advocate community development via collective use of  village-managed resources. They are opposed by an equally  large  caciquista  village  group  that  advocates privatization. A third, larger yet less well-defined group of independent villagers  takes  a  middle  path,  rejecting privatization yet also wary of permitting unlimited co-op resource access. This local impulse to privatization is to some degree a reflection of government efforts to privatize  rural  lands  (Gates  1996;  Stephen  1997).  In  Santa Cruz, however, there is an additional historical context. Those favoring privatization are, for the most part, members of a group formerly associated with the excacique (an indigenous political boss linked into state-sponsored

regional patronage networks) who once controlled Santa Cruz.  Ironically,  he  and  his  followers  once  benefited handsomely from the communalism that they now oppose. Until the 1950s, they used tequios as forced labor to compel comuneros to produce coffee, alcohol (from sugar cane), corn, and firewood. Stripped of power by a 1960s village revolt, this caciquista group now favors privatization.

Equally important to this study is the relationship that joins the co-op to member households. Since the co-op's inception, the relative allocation of labor between co-op and  household  tasks  has  been  a  point  of  contention (Mutersbaugh  1999).  Both  household  and  co-op  tasks make use of the same pool of labor power, and, as a consequence, moments arise when individuals must choose between  them.  In  principle,  these  labor  bottlenecks might be resolved via cross-gender task transfers or by integrating co-op and household tasks. However, women are understandably reluctant to take on additional tasks given that their labor intensity, measured as hours per day, is  on  average  significantly  higher  than  men's  and consistently  higher  throughout  the  year  (Mutersbaugh 1998, 1999). 17

These social tensions are reflected in co-op history, here divided into three phases (Table 1). When La Luz was initiated in 1986-1987, the majority of Santa Cruz villagers joined the co-op (~154 comuneros). In this initial phase, men's projects included a milking herd, honey production,  furniture-making,  hog  production,  a  gristmill, and weaving looms. However, political opposition from  regional  and  Oaxacan  state  government  officials countered this early success, and the number of co-op member  families  declined  precipitously.  Despite  this pressure, a group of over fifty cooperativist families persevered, and the La Luz initiative joined a statewide blossoming of literally hundreds of new co-ops in the late 1980s (Gates 1996, 57; Harvey 1996, 191) and received support from NGOs and some government agencies (this divided Mexican government response-some agencies and  persons  supporting  independent  cooperatives  and others  opposing  them-reflecting  sharp  interagency differences). 18  In part, this co-op boom reflected a need for development initiatives in the 1980s period called La Crisis, when the Mexican economy was rocked by declining  oil  prices  and  high  interest  on  debt-service payments, and the Oaxacan rural economy was hit by sharp declines in real commodity prices-particularly of coffee-and federal funding cutbacks in education and social  services  (Miguel  1997).  Cooperatives  also  drew significant  support  from  statewide  peasant  confederations. When the Mexican government eliminated coffee export subsidies and dismantled the INMECAFE coffee parastatal (Hernandez 1991), coffee producer organizations did not disappear, but rather formed statewide networks of rural communities. These peasant associations were met 'from above' by pro-peasant government agencies and by an NGO boom that partially filled the political space vacated by government agencies during 1980s retrenchment (Macdonald 1997).

Table 1. Phases of La Luz Co-op Production, 1988-2000

| Phase/Year          | Number of Co-op Member Families                           | Projects Initiated                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Major Axis of Conflict                                                                                                                                    |
|---------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Phase I 1988-1990   | Initial Group: 50 1989: 154 families 1990: 50-60 families | 1988: Gristmill 1989-1990: beekeeping, woodworking, weaving, hog production, milking herd                                                                                                                                                         | Political conflict between co-op and caciquista factions Politics of confrontation: 'independent' versus 'official' (government- sponsored) organizations |
| Phase II 1990-1994  | 1990: 50-60 families 1994: 35 families                    | 1990: Phase I projects continue except weaving 1991: Building construction begun 1991: Co-op undertakes village-aid projects: roofing materials, transport mules, power line                                                                      | Gender conflict between women and men 1990-1993: Intrahousehold conflict 1993-1994: Women's extrahousehold mobilization                                   |
| Phase III 1995-2000 | 1995: 45 families 1998: 33 families                       | 1995: Women's bakery opens 1996-1997: Co-op building substantially completed Continuing projects, 2000: furniture- making, milking herd, women's bakery New village-aid projects: latrines, pine-tree regeneration 2000: Certified organic coffee | Co-op versus village conflict over resource access agreements; continuing gender conflict                                                                 |

Following the consolidation of La Luz membership, a second phase focused on networking with developmentsupport NGOs and Mexican governmental institutions. Co-op members learned to produce funding proposals, manage loan monies, and initiate contacts with technical extension agents. Co-op/village relations, however, were strained: cooperativists aided the village by obtaining loans for transport mules and grants of roofing materials and latrines, yet were also principal promoters of a contentious project to string  an  electric  power  line  to Santa  Cruz.  The  project  was  controversial  because  it required hundreds of tequio labor days to slash the 12kilometer,  30-meter-wide  swath  up  and  over  3,000meter Cerro Carrizo and then drag and place dozens of power poles. In an unusual coalition of interests, co-op members  (who  wanted  electric  power  for  their  woodshop) joined caciquistas to promote rural electrification against the  opposition  of  many  independent  villagers. The success of this coalition effort, however, hurt co-op outreach to independent villagers: as one independent elder quipped during a powerline tequio, 'The co-op is breaking my back.'

Despite these successes, however, Santa Cruz co-op membership did not increase. On the contrary, gender conflicts led to a decline in membership (Mutersbaugh 1999), as men's labor was diverted from household production to co-op projects. At first, women protested individually, demanding that their husbands drop out of co-op production. In one beekeeping group meeting, for instance,  a  member  protested  that  his  family  simply would not let him continue in the group. Another in the work group (successfully) pleaded with him to continue, noting:

I understand that we've had problems with our families . . . The women help us because we can't do all of the things we are supposed to do; firewood, corn, they help us; the co-op is  a  project  of  the  whole  family.  (Co-op  member,  Santa Cruz, February 1991)

By 1994, though, individual resistance had become women's collective action, as women joined together to demand the  establishment  of  women's  co-op  projects  (Mutersbaugh 1998).

Women's collective action ushered in a third phase of co-op history. They began to operate a co-op bakery section in 1995, and the cooperative added new member families. With gender conflicts somewhat resolved, the co-op shifted attention to negotiating for use of village assets, particularly timber. By the end of 1997, co-op successes had earned members the respect of many villagers, and the village assembly had appointed co-op members to the powerful posts of comiseriado (president) and sec- retary of the communal-goods commission (Comiseriado de Bienes Comunales, the village office responsible for managing  communal  lands  and  resource  usufruct,  including timber, water, and pasture). From these village management positions, cooperativists moved to set out a comprehensive village land-use plan delimiting production zones so as, they calculated, to ensure a sustainable yield of timber sufficient to the needs of both village and co-op. The momentous presentation of the co-op landuse plan to the village assembly brought action, but not of the sort co-op members had hoped for. It is to an examination  of  the  contentious  village  politics  that  attended the co-op's attempt to create a space for production cooperation that we now turn.

## La Luz and La Lucha: Practical and Representational Politics of Production Cooperation

The bright eyes and tousled tops are all that show as children  peer  over  the  cinder-block  sill  of  the  co-op's large  street-facing  windows;  looking  in,  the  children watch as co-op members plane boards and shape them into  beehive  parts.  To  the  back  of  the  shop,  stacked against the wall, are serried ranks of beehives, marketready  but  for  the  sheet-metal  tops.  A  group  of  co-op members step out of the hot noonday sun and into the co-op building, pausing to savor the cool interior. Against the walls lean stacks of boards, individual contributions required of each co-op member. The group moves from stack to stack, measuring boards and checking for warping. On discovery of some defect such as undersized or poor-quality  boards,  the  group  engages  in  sometimes heated debate until they agree on an appropriate course of action. Later, work pauses for the mid-afternoon meal. I have been invited to lunch at a co-op member's house and walk over to enjoy a meal of black beans, tortillas, and  chilies.  As  we  sit  down  to  eat,  their  boy,  who moments before had been among those children peering through the open window into the co-op building, enters. Responding to his father's inquiry as to whether a particular  co-op  member  had  come  to  work  as  scheduled, the child answers, 'Yes, he was there working . . . and the others, too.'

With this I begin a three-part case-study analysis of the  social  and  cultural  tensions  that  accompanied  La Luz's  implementation  of  production  cooperation.  The first section addresses 'internal' dynamics of production cooperation, such as authority and quality control. I will show how village  and  household  practices  are  used  as templates  to  create  an  autonomous  co-op  space  and

organize commodity production within it. The paragraph above  encapsulates  many  of  the  relations  in  question, showing,  for  instance,  how  authority  relations,  quality determination, and monitoring are carried out using village management techniques. I will argue, however, that the co-op's reliance upon indigenous techniques places them in a political bind.  While these practices provide powerful methods for labor management, their use makes the  co-op  dependent  upon  village  social  norms,  practices, and spaces. The second section picks up on these politics and demonstrates how the co-op building supports co-op production by representing cooperativists as competent managers within the context of village political  culture.  To  make  this  point,  the  second  section borrows from Lefebvre's (1991, 33) finding that 'representations of space' enable spatial practice: it also explores the limits and pitfalls of representational strategies. A third section then delves into representational strategies in greater detail, and, drawing on Lefebvre's allied  notion of 'representational spaces,' shows how the co-op's use of the co-op building as a representational strategy is undermined by village counternarratives. Together, these explorations will make a case for the role of overbuilding within the panorama of La Luz production cooperation, and yet also foreground tensions between cooperative development practices and village cultural politics.

## Practices of Cooperation: Quality Determination and Spatial Circumscription

Of the many practices necessary to successful production  cooperation,  quality  control  perhaps  best  exposes the many conundrums of cooperative action. Peasant cooperativists such as those of La Luz seek access to niche and wholesale product markets, but at a price: buyers demand production schedules, delivery dates, and-perhaps most importantly-minimum quality standards. This section will examine the struggles over quality control that characterized the co-op's first two phases during the early 1990s. To meet the challenges of quality control, La Luz drew upon an existing village culture of labor management.  This  involved  the  incorporation  of tequio / cargo labor organizational practices and also, as depicted in the anecdote opening this section, the use of village information channels such as gossip and children to monitor work. The point of importance to the present study is that 'shop-floor' cultures are shaped by the cultural milieus  within which they are situated. This shaping encompasses not only the material pattern of practices but also the meanings and social expectations that accom- pany them, such as the manner in which authority is exercised and decisions taken (Pringle 1989; Carney and Watts 1990; Stephen 1991; Chari 2000).

A key practice during this initial period was that of 'spatial circumscription.' In this spatial practice, co-op members identify places,  activities,  and  times  that  are important to co-op production, and then set out norms of quality and participation to be followed within these spaces  and  establish  borders,  both  physical  and  social, that differentiate this co-op space from co-present household and village communal spaces. For La Luz, spatial circumscription allows the cooperative to refashion indigenous labor management techniques and yet distinguish co-op practices from comparable practices extant in village and household spaces. To revisit Hägerstrand (1974), spatial circumscription permits a co-op 'pocket of order' (in the many senses of order) to be nurtured against  the  destabilizing  influences  of  both  alternative household and village 'activity structures' and their embedded economic and social rationales. The co-op building provides an instance of such a space, circumscribing a zone of production cooperation within which participation and commodity-quality norms may be set out and monitored and anchoring spatially dispersed co-op activities such as dairying, beekeeping, and lumberjacking. In these instances, the co-op building provides cooperativists the opportunity to exchange information about ongoing activities, hold member meetings, and host social events in the evening hours at which members chat informally about co-op matters; and, importantly, it serves as a normative hub that, in a much more limited manner, guides expectations of quality and participation within dispersed activities.

The co-op building thus served to facilitate monitoring and order production, yet these spatial practices did not  go  uncontested.  In  grafting  local  cultures  of  labor management  onto  production  cooperation,  the  co-op encountered  embedded  contradictions  between  practices of labor management and quality determination. In short, market-based mechanisms of quality determination do not conform to the village political culture of quality determination. In agricultural activities, production norms (e.g., how coffee should be picked) are worked out within households; in village activities, production norms (e.g., how trails are to be maintained) are set via lively villageassembly debates. As the following discussion shows, efforts to manage quality produce sharp tensions as cooperativists struggle to define quality, determine who has the authority to judge it, and sanction those who fail to meet agreed-upon quality norms.

The cases  of  the  woodworking  and  baking  working groups  illustrate  these  tensions.  On  occasions  when

buyers rejected merchandise deliveries, complaints were directed to the working-group president, who then relayed criticisms to members. This 'top-down' system of quality determination did not sit well with co-op members, and their grievances came to a head during a carpentry working-group  meeting.  Exhorting  members  to  adhere  to quality standards set by external markets, the president distinguished  between  'rustic'  furniture  produced  for subsistence household consumption and 'fine' furniture produced for market. This led to an acrimonious debate over why the president should be the one to dictate acceptable quality standards, whether the president could indeed  correctly  distinguish  quality,  and  even  as  to whether  the  president  was  truthfully  representing  his conversations with furniture buyers. As one elderly cooperativist put it, 'I've been working wood all my life, and I know what good furniture is.' After lengthy discussion, the membership upheld the authority of co-op leaders to determine quality, a decision that figured in the elderly individual's subsequent withdrawal from the co-op.

Contributing to dissension over quality standards is an unequal distribution of skills and knowledge within the cooperative. 19  Cooperativists who possess good literacy skills have been able to develop extensive political and personal connections with statewide NGO personnel through their service as co-op officers and have become the de facto channels through which information about markets and the quality norms expected therein is communicated to rank-and-file cooperativists. Disagreements over quality, then, involve not only the expression  of  authority,  but  also  its  provenance  and  limits. Many members found it difficult to embrace the notion that they must choose quality ideals favored in extralocal markets over those arising in the everyday, lived experience of household and village life and must also relinquish their right to renegotiate and modify those ideals in accordance with local practice. In addition, as the discussion of literacy skills indicates, the abrogation of village traditions of consensus decision-making practices is made more difficult when new channels through which quality norms are transmitted exacerbate existing social differences.

Conflicts over authority and quality were also intertwined with gender relations, as a 1995 women's breadbaking shift illustrates. As co-op women worked around a large wooden table on which the dough was mixed and kneaded, a husband observing the activity objected to the mixing technique. He took charge of the bread-making process, positioning himself at the center of the table and kneading the dough while the women watched. His authority for doing so was based, he said, on his wife's participation in the shift and on previous (urban) baking experience. This instance was one of many that created antagonisms, causing some women to drop out of the cooperative bakery and others to confront family tensions since,  as  a  woman  baker  explained,  'Men  didn't  like other men telling their wives what to do.'

These two instances illustrate the difficult politics of spatial circumscription. In the furniture case, the drawing of borders in a manner that limits the purchase of village-based quality determination mechanisms results in member exclusion. In the bakery, the difficulty of enforcing co-op boundaries permits the intrusion of household  relations-spouses,  that  is,  who  disrupt  women's activities-in a manner that likewise leads to exclusion.

In woodworker debates over quality control, dissenters had been those who sought to blur the boundaries between co-op and household in order to argue for the local determination  of  quality.  Interestingly  enough,  when confronted  with  dissent,  co-op  leaders  acted  in  a  like manner, reaching across the boundaries between co-op and village to find support for their authority in village cultural norms and practices. This 'crossover' dynamic may be seen in the following instance, in which co-op cattle invaded a nonmember's cornfield. The man managing the animals that day had gone off to check on his crops and left his young son in charge. The son did not stay long with the cows, and soon the herd moved downhill in search of water. The slope becomes steeper as it descends to the river, and perhaps fortuitously the cows came first  to  another  villager's  cornfield  and  began  to feed on the crop. Later that day, two dairy-section leaders met to discuss the incident in the privacy of the co-op gristmill located next to the co-op building (then in its early  stages  of  construction).  After  several  exchanges, however, the two leaders took their discussion outdoors, standing in front of the door to the mill on the main street.

In the early evening, children play in the wide, unpaved avenue and people gather in small groups to chat. The two dairy section leaders speak louder than usual, complaining  of  the  cooperativist,  who  they  feel  has neglected his work obligations. Passers-by stop to listen, and the wife of one of the two leaders approaches us.

'Did the [villagers] see?' she asks.

'Yes,  [looking  from  the  village]  across  the arroyo  del pueblo ,  people  [in  the  village]  could  see  the  [co-op  milk] cows eating maize from a villagers' milpa on Loma de Sangre.  They  could  see  the  four  calves,  and  also  the  co-op member and his son searching for the animals, but the man and his son could not see the animals. Everyone in the village got a good laugh, and [the man and his family] will have to pay the damages done to the cornfield.'

[By this point our circle in the village thoroughfare has expanded to include a dozen adult villagers and as many children.]

'And  what's  worse,'  he  continues,  'the  heifer  rolled over and scraped her ankle.'

'And they did not even come to get [wound] medicine,' adds  the  second.  (Conversation  in  Santa  Cruz,  August 1991)

This public airing provides an effective means of sanctioning. It also, however, requires the co-op to reach beyond its borders to link its participation norms to village norms and rely on village social space. 20

This discussion of quality, authority, and bordering practices has problematized the spatial practice of co-ops, finding that bordering practices are analytically important to production cooperatives. Borders must be well delineated to permit the development of an autonomous production space, yet they remain selectively open to village social spaces that support such a space, and spatial circumscription becomes a key (if internally controversial) co-op activity. If we compare this to rationalchoice accounts, we find that it calls into question the a priori  assignation  of  organizational  borders  and  membership status and points to their negotiated character. This study suggests that borders are flexible rather than fixed and strategically sharpened or blurred to produce certain effects, and that they become a site of conflict in their own right. This set of circumstances points, I will argue, towards an understanding of why so much labor is invested  in  the  co-op  building.  Since  co-op  authority even within circumscribed  production  spaces  depends upon the active support of nonmember villagers and yet excludes  them  from  participation,  cooperativists  find themselves in an awkward political position. The next section will demonstrate that this political circumstance requires that cooperativists represent co-op practice in the best possible light and that the co-op building provides the means to elaborate a representational strategy.

## Representing Cooperation: The Co-op Building as a Political Strategy

Those who oppose the cooperative say, 'Better to let [the fallen  trees]  rot  than  for  the  co-op  to  benefit.'  (Co-op member, Santa Cruz, June 1991)

To better understand how the co-op building comes to operate as a representational strategy, we fast-forward the narrative several years to the mid-1990s. Recalling La Luz's history, we note that the co-op was then entering a third phase, with a focus on access to village resources. Internal conflicts had been somewhat resolved, and, during the second phase, women had become integrated directly into co-op leadership and working groups. Work on the co-op building was also resumed. After the initial  burst  of  work it had been left in a half-finished state, one cinderblock story roofed over with corrugated metal sheeting. Not until 1994-until, I will argue, the building became important not only as a component part of production cooperation, but also as an aspect of the co-op's representational strategy vis-à-vis the villagedid work begin again in earnest.

This section, then, will trace the concurrent and intertwined  histories  of  co-op  building  construction  and efforts  to  obtain  access  to  village  resources  during  this third period. Although La Luz cooperativists had pursued both  avenues  since  the  co-op's  initiation,  the  cultural politics that interrelate the two came to a head in this third  phase.  To  orient  the  analysis  of  representational politics,  and  locate  the  co-op  building  within  it,  both this and the next section will draw on Lefebvre's notions of social space and representation. 21  This section examines co-op member representations of space; the next takes up countervailing representational spaces. Together, these two sections explore how the co-op building becomes a social object of importance to village land-use policy.

By this third phase, many aspects of village/co-op resource relations had been regularized, yet village timber usufruct  remained  a  point  of  contention.  Agreements permitted co-op usufruct of many village spaces and resources,  and  though  these  understandings  were  not spelled out in written contracts, neither were they tacit. When parties felt that the co-op exceeded these understandings, they brought complaints against the co-op directly, to the village communal-goods commission and village  assembly,  or-as  in  the  quote  that  opens  this section-via gossip. This equilibrium was broken, however,  when  the  co-op  elevated  furniture-making  to  a general  co-op  activity  to  include  all  member  families. Co-op working groups had used small amounts of timber since the late 1980s, and as early as 1991 sought village approval for a contract that would specify terms for co-op purchase of village timber. Action by the village assembly was tardy, but by 1995, after a series of meetings and calls by NGO and Mexican governmental authorities to come to terms, the village assembly agreed to permit co-op export of furniture made from village lumber and directed the  comiseriado  of  the  communal-goods  commission  to cut a deal. The communal-goods commission president at that time, however, refused. 22  Facing opposition to timber usufruct, the co-op appealed to NGOs and government agencies for support. The response of NGOs and government agencies, particularly the Mexican national environmental agency Semarnap (Secretaria de Medio Ambiente

Recursos Naturales y Pesca [now called Semarnat]), was to condition support on the village's adoption of a zoning plan to ensure environmental protection. 23  This condition is not surprising, since the remote Santa Cruz village lands  provide  an  important  bioreserve  of  mesophylic (cloud-forest) timber, and indeed, the stands of Pinus chiapensis (a  native  pine  prized  for  its  workability)  that co-op members wished to use comprise an isolated, very northern population that may be important for genetic and ecological reasons. This conditionality complicated co-op efforts by tying support to village politics.

Confronted by the communal-goods president's opposition  to  co-op  timber  access  and  the  impossibility  of procuring substantive changes in communal land-use policies, the co-op decided to put forward their own communalgoods commission candidate slate in 1997. In order to get a  candidate  appointed  by  the  village  assembly,  careful groundwork needed to be laid. Cargo candidates do not stand for election. Rather, each village political faction proposes a candidate, the merits of whom are then debated in open meeting, as factions attempt to build a consensus around their candidate. For a co-op candidate to be appointed to the office of president of the communal-goods commission, two arguments had to carry. First, since the co-op's neocommunal politics were well known to villagers, the general assembly vote was understood in part to be a referendum on the co-op's village-oriented approach to development. Second, cooperativists needed to convince villagers that they could successfully exercise el mando.

In order to 'rise' to an important cargo , a villager must earn el mando, a term variously defined by villagers as the ability to exercise authority in village government and collective labor projects, to be 'heard at meetings,' and to have others respect your decisions. This ability rests on the respect and confidence of peers and is gained by establishing a record of participation in village cargos and tequios (Mutersbaugh 1998). Respect is traditionally accorded  those  persons  who  are cumplido (perform  assigned tasks) and saben mandar -who, that is, display a flair for organizing work parties (often involving scores of individuals) and laying out action plans to achieve village goals. As one co-op member noted,

I have always tried to meet my [ cargo and tequio] obligations. Those who do not, cannot be leaders. They do not have the respect of others. (Santa Cruz, November 1990)

Since the late 1980s, an ability to establish fundraising liaisons with extralocal organizations, whether NGOs or government agencies, has become increasingly important to el mando. Transfers payments important to the village economy since the 1970s, such as subsidized food, crop-support payments, and roadway-building funds, were joined in the 1990s by government health clinics and NGO- and government-sponsored development projects. These transfers must be cultivated and managed by village cargo -holders-hence the expansion of the concept of el mando to include the ability to cultivate transfers. As the current (2001) communal-goods commission president noted,

Since I became the president of the [Santa Cruz] communalgoods commission [in 1998]. . . . I have brought almost a million pesos to the village. (Interview, city of Oaxaca, July 2000).

A review of current village projects indicates that transfers to the village (post-1998 projects) in fact total almost 1.2 million pesos, approximately U.S. $150,000, a figure brought into perspective when one considers that Santa Cruz annual family cash incomes, barring migration, do not exceed U.S. $1,000 per annum.

In this light, the metamorphosis of the co-op building was  not  only  visually  dramatic  but  also  important  for what it contained and the activity that it attracted. A burst of construction and networking activity between 1994 and 1996 resulted in a two-story, multiuse structure containing a woodworking shop, a store, a coffee-receiving station, a library and computer room, and a visitor dormitory. This provided for a much wider set of activities that converted the building into a social and production center replete with items, such as lathes and computers, which had not previously been a part of village life. Cooperativists made contact with dozens of Oaxaca Citybased NGOs and Mexican government agencies, a networking success that, together with Santa Cruz's status as a cloud-forest reserve, attracted academic researchers as well.  The  building  became  the  nerve  center  for  this activity, building the status of cooperativists.

Given  the  requirement  that  potential cargo -holders demonstrate el mando, then, the outsized investment into a cooperative building makes political sense. It shows that co-op leaders have the ability to plan and sustain longterm projects, keep co-op members actively engaged, and garner external NGO and government funds. Furthermore, the building demonstrates a cooperativist willingness to assume social risk, for in the event of failure co-op leaders would have, conversely, demonstrated that they lacked el mando. 24  It must be pointed out, however, that the  co-op  building's  role  in  supporting  cooperativist claims to el mando was not fully evident prior to this mid-1990s building burst: in 1991 cooperativists often spoke of the co-op building using terms such as ' faro ' (beacon,  lighthouse)  to  describe  its  social  impact  and voiced  their  enthusiasm  for  building  construction,  yet they  also  failed  to  show  up  for  building  work-parties.

Ironically, renewed construction was driven in part by village  commentaries  portraying  the  unfinished  co-op building as emblematic of the failure of production cooperation. The point I want to make is that the renewed interest in building construction did not arise as a causal outcome of strategizing, but rather emerged dialectically from  within  the  cultural  politics  of  the  co-op/village relationship.

Based in large part on their record of accomplishment, a co-op slate won appointment to the communal-goods commission in 1997. Reasoning that the sustainability of market-oriented furniture production depended on landuse planning, the cooperativists-cum-communal-goodscommissioners unveiled a land-use zoning plan, the first such plan proposed for Santa Cruz (although they are found in forest-product communities throughout Mexico [e.g., Klooster 2000]). In this plan, village lands would be classed into specific land-use types (e.g., pasture, forest, swidden). Pinus  chiapensis stands  were  to  be  protected not only by setting out land-use zones for forestry and agriculture, but also by limiting swidden burns, regulating pasture expansion, and implementing reforestation using tree nurseries with local genetic stock. The co-op idea of land-use  zoning,  however,  went  beyond  the  environmental protection and biodiversity concerns expressed by environmental agencies. It also incorporated elements meant to strengthen subsistence agriculture through traditional  crop  promotion  and  address  village  health  concerns by removing existing pastures from the watershed above the village's fresh water intake. Together, these initiatives formed a detailed plan that would have significant impacts on patterns of village usufruct, and that cooperativists hoped would stabilize and revitalize village communalism. The diversity of proposals incorporated into  the  plan  also  reflected  the  gestation  of  the  plan within a ten-year history of resource-access politics that extended well beyond Santa Cruz to include Mexican government and NGO involvement.

This vision of sustainable development was not to be realized, however. As the ex-president of the communalgoods commission recounted in an interview, the caciquista faction, still in command of the village mayor's office, reacted swiftly to challenge the performance of duty by  the  cooperativist  communal-goods  commissioners. Significantly,  the  challenge  was  directed  precisely  towards the management of forest product exports:

When the new village mayor was appointed, [co-op opponents] wanted to get us [co-op communal-goods commissioners]. They charged us with stealing five boards from a shipment to Oaxaca. Although the people said not to, the mayor prosecuted us.

They called the county president from Usila, and when he got here he wanted to put us in jail. 'We are going to apply the law,' he said, 'because you have broken it.'

He and his police were seated at the big table in the assembly hall. Villagers filled the main door and windows. I answered him, saying, 'Apply the law, but remember that there is also a law for you. You say that you will apply the law, but if you do not apply it well, for you also there will be an accounting.'

The county president sat thinking. He then said, 'Let's examine the case as it is.'

I said, 'You [do not have the authority to] resolve this; the people of the village who are familiar with the details have the last word.' And with this I turned and left.

During all of this, I was never afraid. What I felt was sadness. [Because of the commissioner cargo ] I could not pick coffee and had been reduced to carrying loads of [other comuneros'] coffee [with a tumpline up the mountain to the road] to earn cash. We had no money. The 500-peso fine cost me, I could have used the money to buy food for my children.

. . . [Subsequently] there were three large village assembly gatherings to try and get us to resume our cargos. But after our experience we were no longer willing to serve. (ex-president, Communal Goods Commission, Santa Cruz, June 1998)

Following the resignation of the president and secretary of the communal-goods commission, another cooperativist was appointed to fill the vacancy in 1998, but the co-op-sponsored land-use plan was tabled. An alternative plan put forth would have divided the indigenous commune into a series of land-use zones, but rather than promoting village-oriented small-scale workshop development, it focused on timber export. This proposal was backed by a Mexican NGO study calling for the production of 'sustainable yield' pencils by Lapimex Corporation in exchange for having the company complete the long-awaited road to Santa Cruz and beyond to the pine forest. 25  This plan managed, with NGO support, to gain federal permission in 2000, but as of 2002 had foundered due  to  opposition  from  Oaxacan  state  environmental protection agencies and the sacking of the communalgoods president and appointment of the third comiseriado since 1997 (they are supposed to serve three-year terms), an  ex-co-op  member.  The  newest  comiseriado,  also  a co-op member, has put forward another comprehensive land-use policy, in the form of a legal estatuto , based in large part on the 1997 proposal. The statue would regulate usufruct in a variety of ways (limiting, for instance, the amount of land that a comunero can possess), set out land-use  zones  (particularly  excluding  virgin  timber areas from future use), and set out specific norms for cargo participation (specific tequio norms are a part of village policy, but cargo norms are less well codified due to their

varying importance and difficulty). The statute is quite controversial  within  the  village,  and  many  details  remain to be decided, yet villagers with whom I spoke are cautiously  confident  that  the  village  general  assembly will approve it in the fall of 2002.

Several factors account for increased villager receptiveness. First, timber is harvested by a village corporation run by the communal-goods commission, as is commonly done in Oaxaca's northern mountains (Klooster 2000). However, due to the small amount of accessible forest, only four full-time villager jobs have been created, a fact that has somewhat dampened villager hopes of forest products income. Second, Oaxacan state agencies are demanding changes in usufruct policies. The president of the communal-goods commission indicated that he was taken  by  'surprise'  during  a  recent  visit  to  Tuxtepec when the Agrarian Reform Agency presented him with a satellite image of Santa Cruz and demanded an end to the clearing of virgin timber (interview, Santa Cruz, 3 July 2002). On the other hand, the Programa de Certificación  de  Derechos  Ejidales  y  Titulación  de  Solares Urbanos (Program for the Certification of Ejidal Rights and Titling of Urban Lots, or PROCEDE) stimulated a rethinking  of  usufruct  when  they  attempted-albeit unsuccessfully-to assign individual agricultural plots to Santa Cruz comuneros. 26  Third, as the following interview (Santa Cruz, summer 2002) with the president of the communal-goods commission indicates, the collapse of coffee prices sharply increased out-migration:

Communal Goods Commission President: We are going to have a general assembly of all the villagers in August, men and women, to vote on the new statute. This is the sixth meeting to discuss the statute, and I believe that the majority are now in favor . . .

T. Mutersbaugh: Women will vote in the assembly?

CGCP: There have been many changes, many changes. . . . Women are now involved in cargos. We in the co-op wanted to [bring women into the village generally assembly] years ago, but there was opposition. . . . Now many have gone north [to the U.S.], and . . . want to have women complete their cargos. . . . If women undertake cargos , they must be present in the assembly . . .

T.M.: Previous comiseriados tried to pass land-use planning . . . CGCP: They were impatient . . . They couldn't wait for consensus. . . . I didn't want to take this cargo . . . the village asked to take it. I said that I would, but that I was going to pass this statute. . . . This is something that we have to do. There are some who have too much land [ abarcan mucho ]. . . . I am patient. We have had many meetings,  spent  many  hours  [discussing  the  statute]. People raise objections, but I tell them, 'I know every one of you; no one can fool me.' I have heard all of the arguments. . . . In some ways that was the positive [of

1997]. The group in opposition . . . exposed themselves; now everyone knows who they are. (Santa Cruz, July 2002)

In conclusion, two points may be made. First, it may be argued that cooperativist representations of space did have a favorable impact on villagers. Not only were co-op proposals with respect to village development dilemmas acceptable to villagers, but also cooperativists were perceived as capable of exercising the necessary authority. The  co-op  building  anchored  these  efforts,  becoming both an expression of el mando and the center of a new spatiality. Yet when the co-op leadership moved to extend this ordering to the whole of village space and assert a  new  communal-resource  relation,  they  confronted strong caciquista opposition and initially failed to garner sufficient support from independent villagers.

Why the diffidence? In the words of the ex-communalgoods commissioner, 'We touched many interests.' I argue, however, that the notion of interests may be understood in terms of class. When cooperativists set out a new set of social and productive activities, when they alter the economic and social character of their insertion into NGO and government-agency networks, and when they attempt to codify a new set of usufruct and spatial relations  within  the  village,  they  make  themselves  a  class apart. I will pursue this point in the next section, and will argue that the ability of one group to thwart the cooperativist exercise of power rested in large part on its use of representational spaces to challenge the success, value, and meaning of the co-op building, and, by so doing, to cast aspersion on el mando of co-op leaders.

## Contesting the Co-op Building: Counternarratives and Representational Spaces

Representational spaces . . . [r]edolent with imaginary and symbolic elements . . . have their source in history-in the history of a people as well as in the history of each individual belonging to that people. Ethnologists . . . are students of such representational spaces . . . , but they nearly always forget to set them alongside those representations of space which coexist, concord, or interfere with them; they even more frequently ignore social practice. (Lefebvre 1991, 41)

The political  importance  of  the  co-op  building  was not lost on villagers: as inputs of collective labor grew ever greater and the building took form, counternarratives emerged to challenge the integrity of co-op efforts. To gain a sense of how the governance of co-op representatives were undercut by counternarratives, this section revisits the same time period (1995-2002) explored in the  previous  section.  This  section,  however,  takes  up

narratives  that  dispute  the  quality  of  co-op  efforts,  attribute the building initiative to nonvillage groups, andperhaps more importantly-draw a comparison between co-op  construction  and  building  efforts  undertaken  in Santa Cruz's troubled past. It returns to Lefebvre's distinction between representations of space and representational spaces, yet where the previous section took the co-op building as a representation of space that served to leverage the political rise of co-op members, this section examines the representational spaces used to challenge co-op representations of space. Representational spaces are  not  physically  separable  from  representations  of space, but as in the quote above, coexist, concord, and/or interfere with them. The difference is found in the manner of their insertion into a cultural politics of space. In Santa Cruz, representational spaces make their appearance in the form of counternarratives that draw imaginative links between places, inflecting them with alternative meanings.

A  particularly  telling  and  clever  counternarrative drawing these links was one that circulated among noncooperativist villagers and-especially prior to the bakery project-among co-op women. This narrative disputed positive readings of production cooperation by equating the co-op building with the village's Catholic church. The church was a massive stone edifice built in the 1950s when the cacique was in command; church construction had required villagers to perform numerous difficult and strenuous tequios hauling stone and sand 500 meters up from the river below. Cement for mortar was carried four days from Ixtlan (in the time before the Oaxaca-Tuxtepec highway), and the bell still gracing the church tower was said  to  have  taken  six  men  ten  days  to  carry,  walking round the clock, the night trail lit  by ocote pine  resin torches. The upshot of church construction, as related by villagers, was that many fled the village, moving to Valle Nacional to avoid the tequios. The Catholic church lost membership to Protestant evangelists, 27  and villager resentment provoked a rebellion that ended the cacique's reign, removing him to a shabby hut at the edge of the village. This history imbues the church with a strong representational character that, when mobilized for church/ co-op comparison, serves to warn cooperativists against authorizing overly taxing tequios that would drive members away. This evocation of a representational space also galvanized and gave shape to the caciquista opposition by providing them with a narrative means-effective despite the  embedded  irony-of  framing  the  co-op's  villageoriented development as a form of authoritarianism, their building tequios just another instance of forced labor.

Co-op women pushed authoritarian counternarratives in another direction by questioning the extraordinary di- version of labor from household tasks to a co-op building that  they  argued  was  a  men's  space.  This  criticismcoming within the context of women's successful efforts to open a women's cooperative bakery-led to changes in the co-op building. The structure was redesigned to remove men's co-op activities to the second floor and replace these with enterprises such as a woman-run co-op store, where women and children now gather to watch telenovelas (soap  operas)  in  the  evenings  (with  men watching from outside). 28

A final  set  of  counternarratives  was  present  among co-op men, who themselves often questioned the building and the rationale behind it even as they worked on its construction. On one occasion, co-op member criticism was registered as we stood balanced above the narrow cement castillo beams of the building's unfinished second floor, using a rope to haul up heavy buckets of wet cement:

'Why are we building this structure so large?' one co-op member asks.

'We met several times when we planned the structure, everyone was invited to the planning meetings, and then it was presented to the co-op general assembly and received approval,' answers another who had been on the planning committee.

'But I did not know it was this big; you cannot see that on a piece of paper,' says the first.

'Well, we calculated how much space would be needed for each function, for the shop, the offices, coffee storage, and then upstairs the library and assembly hall, and this was the minimum size that would include everything,' answers the second. His response was met by silence as we poured the grainy, glistening cement into a wooden castillo mould. (Santa Cruz, February 1991)

The silence did not last long, however. At the following co-op  meeting,  the  president  raised  the  question  of whether construction work should continue or whether they would be better served to roof over the half-finished one-story structure. These comments were met by an extended silence as co-op members pondered the alternatives. Presently the pause was broken and co-op members began, one by one, to speak in favor of continuing the work. They noted that without all of the design components, it would not be possible to create an organization that not only produces and sells commodities, but also serves to educate them and their children and to introduce new ideas and opportunities. For better or worse, the  co-op  building  had  become  inextricably  bound  up with La Luz cooperativism. Unfinished, it had still become a tribute to the power of cooperativism and the prowess of cooperativists, as well as a drag on the energies of  cooperativists  and  their  families,  a  labor  sink  in  a labor-scarce village.

If we are to reach for a fuller accounting of cooperation that does not end with economic processes, we must include sentiments important to cooperativists, ways in which they take their own measure within a world they help to construct. This returns us to the notion that class describes a solidarity relation that is at once rooted in culture  and  remade  within  it.  La  Luz  cooperativists themselves often expressed the sentiment that the co-op was as much a social as an economic institution:

People criticize us, saying, 'you work in the co-op, and earn less  than  I,'  but  we  do  not  work  only  to  earn  money;  if money was all we wanted, we would do something else, like move to the city. What we want is to live together, to share among ourselves, to learn more, and to get some projects underway. He who motivates himself with the idea of getting ahead must first become well educated. (Santa Cruz co-op member, February 1991)

This valuing of education was often cited as a principal reason for working through the problems of cooperation and was reflected in changing perceptions of the co-op experience over time. This variation is reflected in two quotes below, given by the same co-op member but separated by a divide of five years. In 1993, after several setbacks  in  co-op  projects,  I  accompanied  him  as  he dropped his twelve-year-old son off at a tortilleria in the City of Oaxaca, where his son was to work twelve-hour shifts six days a week while attending school:

When I began working in the co-op [in the late 1980s] I thought that I would be able to earn money and pay for my children's schooling [outside of the village, in the City of Oaxaca]. Now I think I would have been better off working on my own. (Co-op member, Santa Cruz, June 1993)

In  1998,  however,  we  celebrated  his  son's  graduation from high school and admission into the University of Oaxaca Benito Juárez Autonomous Law School:

[A couple of years ago] another [noncooperativist] villager [of Santa Cruz] asked me, 'How is it possible that your son got  into  [one  of  Oaxaca  City's  top  public  high  schools] when my son could only gain entry into [a less prestigious school]?' . . . I realized that, really it's a benefit of [the co-op experience] . . . that one learns about certain ideas, certain ways of thinking, and these are communicated to the family . . . well, that's how I understand it. (Co-op member, Santa Cruz, July 1998)

## Conclusion: Cooperative Geographies?

Is the enigma of the co-op building resolved? This research  has  suggested  that  co-op  success  depends  not upon getting incentive structures right, but on successfully negotiating the social milieus within which co-ops are embedded. The co-op-building enigma squares with this finding: overbuilding provides cooperativists with a means to navigate village and regional cultural politics. In the present study, La Luz cooperativists recognize the problematic of exclusion and interdependency and devote the greatest share of their mental, manual, and even emotional energies to resolving the tensions generated by co-op production autonomy. In summary form, I like to refer to this as conflictual cooperations. By this use, I want  to  distinguish  the  view  presented  here  from  the notion of 'cooperative conflicts' common to rationalchoice  theoretic  accounts  and  highlight  the  ways  in which conflict is also productive of cooperation (Williams 1997, 90). By shifting the analytical optic to solidarity relations, I problematize the making and reproduction of cooperative  relations;  as  Burawoy  (1979,  12)  notes, 'Conflict and consent are not primordial conditions but products of the particular organization of work.' Production cooperation provides a means to engage in skilled, value-added labor, yet in Santa Cruz, as in other places, it is undertaken in a social context where the material and sociotechnical knowledge base-the material, trained workforce, and cultural norms upon which cooperativists draw-has been shaped by co-present social organizations.

La Luz cooperativists strategized  to  resolve  the  tensions  that  their  efforts  created,  yet  their  strategies  are better described as unfurled rather than deployed. Cooperativists did not roll out their spatial strategies as a set of reasoned approaches to social action. Rather, their strategies evolved through and because of the social action within which they were engaged. Although the present study concurs with household and gender studies indicating that organizational strategies are negotiated, fragmented, temporary, and conflicted, it is nonetheless apparent that strategies represent more than an averaging of  the  actions  of  individually  positioned  stakeholders. Quality control, authority relations-each tactic requires a negotiated understanding of how it will be employed, yet its exercise also elicits contestation and limits participation. In time, this interplay of strategy and negotiation changed La Luz cooperativists, altering their perspectives with respect to, for instance, the gender division of labor, as co-op women sued for and received cooperativist  status.  This  sense  that  strategies  have  a  spatial  and temporal  depth  is  important  for  several  reasons.  In  a theoretical sense, if we think in terms of development teleologies,  we  see  that  development  is  not  a  matter  of choosing the correct path to progress along 'branches on the tree' of economic options (to borrow Gould's [1995, 63] evolutionary metaphor), but rather involves the actions of

persons who construct a path-immanently, as it weretowards a future forged within contemporaneous action.

Spatial  strategies  also  unfurl  within  a  social  milieu that  contains  both  a  political  culture  of  development and classes that are 'placed within wider social fields, understood  as  'webs'  or  'nets''  (Roseberry  1995,  65).  By combining notions of teleology and class, we may view the birth of a co-op not only as the genesis of an organization with a unique activity structure, but also as the making of a new class with a distinct relation to social space and resources. For La Luz, the co-op building facilitated the remaking of social relations in both senses. 'Spatial  circumscription'  created  a  space  in  which  indigenous labor practices might be adapted to cooperative  commodity  production;  overbuilding  contributed to a representational strategy in which success in building brings respect and hence authority. This is not to say,  however,  that  political  considerations  were  foremost  when  the  building  was  conceived.  It  was  only when the project began to drag, when cooperativist spirits hit low ebb-and, quite ironically, when counternarratives appeared-that cooperativists were able to get a sense of village politics and measure the consequences of failure.

These findings provide an explanation, absent from rational-choice formulations, which may account for the investment of hundreds of labor days into a co-op building. In this manner, geographic theories of culture and representation may complement the work of geographers and PC studies scholars by foregrounding group spatial strategies, both practical and representational. This geographic analysis was facilitated by a multivisit research format.  Although  geographic  ethnographies  with  this temporal depth require a high degree of scholarly investment, they afford unique possibilities for examining the interplay  of  development tensions and human agency. La  Luz  cooperativists  themselves  have  demonstrated  a thoroughgoing appreciation for spatial  strategies.  That these have not been completely successful speaks to the tensions that rive any attempt to establish new patterns of social and technical life. Their building, the centerpiece of their spatial strategy, has become a space shot through with narratives and experiences, inflected with contradictory meanings, which, paradoxically, have both facilitated their rise to positions of village prominence and undercut their authority.

## Acknowledgments

My  heartfelt  thanks  goes  to  the  cooperativists  of Santa Cruz, who spent so many hours sharing their lives and  ideas  and  searching  for,  often  creating,  a  lexicon with which to explain co-op strategies and perspectives. I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  anonymous  reviewers, David Reynolds, Ken MacDonald, and 'People, Place, and Region' editor John Paul Jones, to whom I am indebted for insights that have substantially improved this manuscript. The author, however, retains responsibility for remaining errors.

## Notes

1. ' La luz ' also refers to birth and the Christian spirit, as in ' dar luz ' and ' la Luz de Maria. ' This choice speaks to the co-op's dedication to communicating a vision of collective enterprise to the whole of the Chinantla Chinantec indigenous peoples zone.
2. Production co-ops are distinguished from buyer or marketing co-ops in the production cooperative (PC) studies literature and limited to worker-owned, labor-managed industrial co-ops (Putterman 1983).
3. At a 5:1 sand to cement ratio, one thousand cinderblocks plus the postes (vertical rebar-reinforced support columns), castillos (horizontal  rebar-reinforced  lintels),  and  foundation amounts to over fifteen tons of sand and rock. Sand was dredged  from  the  Rio  Tlaquache  and  sifted  to  a  uniform consistency, loaded into sacks, and carried via tumpline and mule (350 trips) to the community 450 vertical feet above. Seventy trips were required to deliver three tons of cement (60 fifty-kilo sacks) from roadway to village via a daylong, ten-kilometer  journey  with  a  vertical  ascent  over  Cerro Carrizo of 2,000 meters. Co-op members also brought rebar, roofing material, electrical wire, fixtures, and so on. Construction  involved  hand-poured  cement  foundations  and cinderblock manufacture in which cement was poured into molds (forty person-days for this task alone). The postes and castillos  made  necessary  by  the  frequency  and  severity  of earthquakes were framed and poured as well. Add 150 persondays  to  cut,  shape,  and  frame  wooden  planks  for  second story flooring, walls, doorways, windows and roof, and total project labor, using the indigenous tequio (labor drafts system), required over 800 labor days. Add to this planning meetings and unpaid co-op leader administrative cargos.
4. This study focuses upon a subset of a broader PC literature. Work on PCs undertaken within anthropological and historical traditions may evade the pitfalls of rational-choice approaches (e.g., Whyte 1988, 1999; Stephen 1991; Olson 1999). Nevertheless, I would argue that these studies are affected by the paradigmatic centrality of rational-choice theory. Whyte's (1989, 1998) study of the Mondragón cooperative complex in Spain's Basque region, for instance, signals the  importance  of  local  language,  social  structures,  and national struggles (during the Franco dictatorship), yet in underscoring the uniqueness of the Mondragón experience (e.g.,  the  role  played  by  the  founding  father,  a  Spanish priest, and by Basque culture), the study fails to problematize  how  interorganizational  relations  contribute  to  co-op tensions or provide templates for co-op practice.
5. These studies show that cooperativists act to maximize employment, but this finding is confounded by surveys showing

- that workers who join PCs do so because they value stable employment over high wages. Given these paradoxical results, the Wardian [1958] supposition that co-ops differ from conventional firms in that they are driven by an 'objective function' privileging employment over profit becomes difficult to verify.
6. Bowles (1985) argues that class matters in the workplace: the ideological stance of workers affects their inclination to cooperate with or contest management initiatives. For this reason, he argues, production cooperatives may be economically competitive with capitalist firms. PCs may save on the costs of surveillance and ideological suasion and also utilize superior technologies. In a capitalist firm, production technology choice is limited: technology that does not permit surveillance, no matter how productive, is of little value if labor intensity cannot be gauged. Worker-owned co-ops, by contrast, may avoid this problem and realize a competitive advantage (if they overcome obstacles posed by capitalist control of technological innovation).
7. Poststructuralist 'science studies' methods provide a means to examine how rational-choice paradigms are expressed in, and reproduced by, research practices (Latour 1999). From this  perspective,  one  notes  that  rational-choice-informed PC studies undertake what I term 'hermeneutical maneuvers' (to highlight the notion of a guiding tradition that sets out these material practices) in reading and ordering empirical materials prior to and during analysis (Foucault 1977, 167). These operations constitute a first analytical step that defines the character of membership and participation. This done, researchers then proceed with more visible aspects of analysis, such as identifying cooperative attributes such as incentives structures and then, ceteris paribus , assessing their impact upon member behavior.
8. An instance of spillover effects is given by the case in which a co-op negotiates a better price for member products. Nonmembers also may benefit without the costs of co-op membership because local merchants must pay at the co-op rate or lose business.
9. Miller (1992) provides a useful discussion of rational choice in collective action; Bebbington (2000) explores the role of rational choice in development studies.
10. Although Hägerstrand's time-geography and Lefebvre's spatial  dialectics  represent  distinct  theoretical  foundations,  I would  concur  with  Lefebvre's  (1991,  333)  view  that  research may usefully combine deductive and dialectical approaches. To this end, the present research takes a 'metatheoretical' approach (Del Casino et al. 2000, 528).
11. The  'local  pocket  of  order'  approach  must,  however,  be problematized. Geographers have pointed to its tendency to reduce actors to traces in space in a manner that loses sight of  their  performance  of  class,  race,  and  gender  (Gregory 1985; Pred 1992; Rose 1993).
12. The history of postindependence (1821) Mexican development is a history of patronage. Regional patronage networks link  villages  to  state  bureaucracies  and  regional  business networks (Bartra 1982); within indigenous villages, the key players have been caciques ,  or  indigenous  political  bosses, integrated into clientalist networks (Rus 1994). These networks  channel  benefits  to  progovernment  villages  and groups within villages that support the ruling PRI (Partido Revolucionario Institucional) with their vota verde , or peasant ballot-box political support. In the late 1980s, this relationship began to deteriorate, and interagency differences
- came to  the  fore  as  individuals  within  bureaucracies  and peasant communities sought to exploit these fissures.
13. I  made  a  fourteen-month  field  visit  beginning  in  August 1990, followed by subsequent research visits in 1993, 1995, 1997, 1998, 2000, and 2001.
14. This research involved a collaborative process that included discussions of research findings with cooperativists, presentation of research results to a co-op meeting, and invitation of a co-op member to serve as discussant when study results were presented to a conference session (Welte Institute in Oaxaca, Mexico, Summer 1998). This process permitted discussion of development processes and the meanings attached to words, images, and metaphors. This use of a long-term and participatory schema, however, does not reduce issues of power and social  positionality  in  research,  nor  does  it  remedy  problems surrounding the re-presentation of research in scholarly venues. For these concerns, which are equally relevant to all research  activity  regardless  of  method,  research  reflexivitythat is to say, a full accounting of the researcher's paradigms and interactions-forms the principal response.
15. Since villagers are required to live within town limits, the village-to-field distance creates a significant time-economy problem (Mutersbaugh 1999).
16. While  the  notion  of  a  'labor  organizational  technology'  is more commonly used to analyze changing modalities of labor management in post-Fordist factory systems (Sayer and Walker 1992), it provides a useful conceptual tool for the present case.
17. Women  are  primarily  responsible  for  coffee  production (supplying approximately 80 percent of coffee labor) and a significant proportion of bean production, as well as spending many hours in household reproductive tasks such as food preparation,  birth  and  childcare,  firewood  gathering,  and animal husbandry. Men's labor intensity, by contrast, fluctuates  markedly.  During  periods  of  high  labor-intensity, such as the slashing, burning, and planting of corn and bean fields, men work many hours per day, but during other seasons they work fewer hours.
18. Fox (1992) notes significant differences in the stance of various Mexican government bureaucracies vis-à-vis civil society and posits three explanations. First, different bureaucracies draw cadres from distinct classes of Mexican intelligencia: an industrial  elite  occupies  some  bureaucracies,  while  others are occupied by intellectuals of popular origins, radicalized in  the  wake  of  the  Tlaltelolco  massacre  in  October  1968 (and, in Oaxaca, the early 1970s massacre of Oaxacan law students). A second, Weberian explanation explains interagency differences in terms of cadre formation. Third, Fox proposes that interagency variations in constituent access routes result in policy differences. Whatever the explanation, Mexican agencies certainly take divergent, often contradictory approaches to rural development projects.
19. Literacy skills are better among those schooled in the 1970s after the cacique was deposed than among older cooperativists, particularly a group that came as refugees from a coffee plantation after an abortive 1960s uprising against their cacique.
20. Although  cooperativists  do  sanction  members  internally, members are not easily removed from projects because of their legal status as associates of a registered civil association and because of village traditions that tie ownership rights to a history of labor input. Village-level sanctions thus have a potentially  greater  effect,  since  they  reduce  a  villager's chances of consideration for an important cargo , yet there are  risks  attached.  An  open  discussion  of  co-op  member

- faults may undercut the co-op's standing within the village. Perhaps as importantly, the co-op's admission of reliance on village norms may undercut its contention that co-op production practices represent the new path for social and economic advancement implied in the 'La Luz' moniker.
21. The present study of worker-designed spatial strategies does not  so  much  attempt  to  fit  under  Lefebvre's  rubric  as  to make use of his conceptual tools. For Lefebvre (1991, 38), the producers of representations are 'technocratic subdividers and social engineers' who communicate 'conceptions of space' through a 'system of verbal . . . signs,' a concept that would have to be recast in the context of worker-designed spatial strategies. In Lefebvre's (1991) work, the trilectic of spatial  practice,  representations  of  space,  and  representational spaces is most fully developed within the context of 'historical' and 'absolute' spaces associated with contemporary capitalism. La Luz cooperativists would seem rather to inhabit alternative spaces, perhaps those Lefebvre (1991, 52) terms 'differential' or 'contradictory' spaces. Lefebvre does not draw his spatial trilectic through to these spaces, so  perhaps  the  present  study  provides  a  glimpse  of  these dynamics with a postabsolute social space.
22. The co-op also needed to represent itself as successful to the NGOs and government agencies that provide financing and production  equipment  grants.  Although  NGO-to-co-op loans are typically given as a 'revolving' fund in which loan money stays in the village, NGO fundraising creates a dynamic  that  I  term  'portfolio  politics.'  NGOs  depend  on multilateral, bilateral, and private foundations for support, and continued funding depends on a 'portfolio' of positive results-that is to say, a demonstrable record of fund distribution that has resulted in successful projects. Portfolio politics  places  pressure  on  village  associations,  because  if  a co-op does not produce a demonstrable result, NGOs must seek better-performing communities.
23. Interestingly enough, La Luz cooperativists, realizing that an intensified  use  of  village  timber  would  be  required  when woodworking became a general co-op activity, had themselves set out to frame a sustainable-resource strategy. This original co-op conception, however, did not include a generalized notion of land-use zones and was limited to protecting pine forests from swidden burning and establishing a tree nursery.
24. It was precisely by assuming this social risk that cooperativists were able to alter the calculus of el  mando. The main path to el  mando is via village  governance participation. Although this route is ostensibly open to all comuneros , it had long been easier for those connected to the caciquista faction. Comuneros develop a history of service beginning as teenagers. This history is evaluated when comuneros are considered for leadership cargos , and it is at this point that politics enters in. Concerted, organized efforts to disrupt a cargo -holder's performance of duty or misrepresent the quality of his/her performance may undercut village perception of  an  individual's  ability  to  exercise  el  mando.  Since  the caciquista faction controlled many posts, they were able to systematically derail the efforts of independent comuneros to  demonstrate  management  capabilities.  Caciquista  faction members also tapped their connections to the PRI political  structure  (which  ruled  Mexico  until  the  July  2000 federal elections and still governs Oaxaca) to get transfers directed to the village and reap personal fundraising cachet.
25. Perhaps one of the most striking developments in 2000 was a plan to sell the village's old-growth pine forests to a pencil
- manufacturer. How, one may ask, may such a low-value use be supported? After the initial cut, the sections would be cut on a 'sustainable' twenty-year rotation. To place this effort in a more positive light, Santa Cruz villagers working in a community corporation will perform the logging and gain employment. The logging will not take all trees, nor will it occur within buffer zones around the numerous streams. Interestingly, the forest plan maintains that logging is necessary to save the forest, arguing that the pine population distribution indicates a failure to regenerate, and that forest succession is slowly  replacing  pines  with  other  vegetation  (ERA  2000). This contention is not conclusively supported by data, however. In any case, the driving factor behind the project, from the village standpoint, is the possibility of obtaining, at long last, a roadway. As one individual remarked, 'I've been working on the road for thirty years, and we still don't have one.' The problem, perhaps, is precisely this. The most negative impacts of logging will likely result from roadway stimulation of environmentally destructive activities such as cattle ranching.
26. 'PROCEDE workers came to trace out the village boundaries and divide up the village lands into private properties. At first many in the community were in favor of having their own land, but then the PROCEDE brigadistas presented the plot map, they saw that . . . some plots had better land. . . . It wouldn't be fair.

'PROCEDE said that unless we divided up our land, we wouldn't receive a presidential resolution upholding our [village land holdings]. . . . We said that as [communal land owners] we are entitled to a presidential resolution for our land. They agreed to give us the resolution  without  privatizing,  although  we  did  demarcate  .  .  .  the women's agricultural area [see Mutersbaugh 1998]. [The village next to ours] had already agreed to privatize, but when they heard that we were not, they called up PROCEDE and cancelled their privatization' (Communal Goods Commission President, Santa Cruz, July 2002).

For more on the role of PROCEDE in Mexican communities, see Stephen (1997).

27. A third of Santa Cruz villagers are now Protestant, and another third profess neither Catholic or Protestant faiths, believing simply in 'a single God' (field notes, October 1990).
28. This 1996 change in the configuration of co-op space represents a potentially significant reconstitution of village social space. Men have long enjoyed open access to public space in the early evening, passing their time in the central square in front  of  the  general  assembly  hall  talking  and  watching young  men  play  basketball.  Though  women  are  not  excluded from public space, they tend to spend time in private homes, often gathering with other women yet without an identifiable public space of their own. The co-op building, however, somewhat alters this dynamic. At present women (and children) have become the principal users of the co-op building  in  the  early  evening,  with  men  relegated  to  the edges,  watching  television  from  the  outside  through  an open window. Despite these changes, however, women generally call for greater access, particularly to projects such as carpentry. In one instance a co-op woman argued (with excellent time-geographic logic) that women's village-centered activity structure is much better suited to furniture-making than men's spatially dispersed work pattern.

## References

Bartlett,  W.  1992.  Labor-managed  cooperatives  and  private firms in north central Italy: An empirical comparison. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46:103-18.

- Bartra, R. 1982. Campesinado y poder pollítico en México (Peasantry and political power in Mexico). México: ERA.
- Bassett, T. 1999. Game depletion, hunter associations, and wildlife  conservation  in  northern  Côte  d'Ivoire.  Paper  presented at the Annual Meeting of the African Studies Association, Philadelphia, PA, 11-14 November.
- Bebbington, A. 2000. Re-encountering development. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 90 (3): 495-520.
- Bebbington, A., and G. Thiele, with P. Davies, M. Prager, and H.  Riveros.  1993. Nongovernmental  organizations  and  the state in Latin America. New York: Routledge.
- Bonin, J. P., D. C. Jones, and L. Putterman. 1993. Theoretical and empirical studies of producer cooperatives: Will ever the twain meet? The Journal of Economic Literature 31:1290-320.
- Bowles, S. 1985. The production process in a competitive economy:  Walrasian,  neo-Hobbesian,  and  Marxian  models. American Economic Review 75 (1): 16-36.
- Bryant, R., and S. Bailey. 1997. Third World political ecology. New York: Routledge.
- Burawoy, M. 1979. Manufacturing consent: Changes in the labor process  under  monopoly  capitalism. Chicago:  University  of Chicago Press.
- --. 2000. Global ethnography. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Carlstein, T. 1982. Time resources, society, and ecology. Vol. 1, Pre-industrial societies. London: George Allen and Unwin.
- Carney, J., and M. Watts. 1990. Manufacturing dissent: Work, gender, and the politics of meaning in a peasant society. Africa 60 (2): 208-41.
- Chari, S. 2000. The Agrarian origins of the knitwear industrial cluster in Tiruppur, India. World Development 28 (3): 57999.
- Cohen, J. H. 1998. Craft production and the challenge of the global market: An artisans' cooperative in Oaxaca, Mexico. Human Organization 57 (1): 74-82.
- Craig, B. 1992. The behavior of worker cooperatives: The plywood companies of the Pacific Northwest. The American Economic Review 82:1083-105.
- Del Casino, V. J., A. J. Grimes, S. P. Hanna, and J. P. Jones. 2000. Methodological frameworks for the geography of organizations Geoforum 31 (4): 523-38.
- Escobar, A. 1995. Encountering development: The making and unmaking of the Third World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Estudios Rurales y Asesoria Campesina (ERA) (Rural Studies and Consulting).  2000. Programa  de  Manejo  Forestal  Persistente para los bosques de Pinus Chiapensis de Santa Cruz. Oaxaca, Mexico: Estudios Rurales y Asesoría Campesina, A. C.
- Fantasia, R. 1988. Cultures of solidarity. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Ferguson, J. 1999. Expectations of modernity: Myths and meanings of urban life on the Zambian copperbelt. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Foucault,  M.  1997.  Theatrum  philosophicum.  In Language, counter-memory,  practice:  Selected  essays  and  interviews  by Michel  Foucault ,  ed.  D.  Bouchard,  165-96.  Ithaca,  NY: Cornell University Press.
- Fox, J. 1992. The politics of food in Mexico. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Gartrell, C. D., and B. E. Paille. 1997. Wage cuts and the fairness of pay in a worker-owned plywood cooperative. Social Psychology Quarterly 60 (2): 103-17.
- Gates, M. 1996. The debt crisis and economic restructuring. In Neoliberalism revisited: Economic restructuring and Mexico' s political future , ed. G. Otero, 43-62. Boulder, CO: Westview.
- Gibson-Graham, J. K. 1996. The end of capitalism (as we knew it): A feminist critique of political economy. New York: Blackwell.
- Gibson-Graham, J. K., S. A. Resnick, and R. D. Wolff. 2000. Class in a poststructuralist frame. In Class and its others , ed. J. K. Gibson-Graham, S. A. Resnick, and R. D. Wolff, 122. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Gould, S. J. 1995. Ladders and cones: Constraining evolution by canonical icons. In Hidden histories of science , ed. R. B. Silvers, 37-67. New York: New York Review of Books.
- Gramsci, A. 1971. Selections from the prison notebooks. New York: International Publishers.
- Gregory, D. 1985. Suspended animation: The stasis of diffusion theory. In Social relations and spatial structures , ed. D. Gregory and J. Urry, 296-336. London: Macmillan.
- Gui, B. 1984. Basque versus Illyrian labor management firms: The problem of property rights. Journal of Comparative Economics 8:168-81.
- Hägerstrand, T. 1974. On socio-technical ecology and the study of innovations. Ethnologia Europaea 7 (1): 17-34.
- Hart,  G.  1992.  Household  production  reconsidered:  Gender, labor  conflict,  and  technological  change  in  Malaysia's Muda region. World Development 20 (6): 809-23.
- Harvey,  N.  1996.  Rural  reforms  and  the  Zapatista  rebellion, 1988-1995. In Neoliberalism revisited: Economic restructuring  and  Mexico's  political  future ,  ed.  G.  Otero,  187-208. Boulder, CO: Westview.
- Hernández Navarro, L. 1991. Nadando con los Tiburones: la Coordinadora  Nacional  de  Organizaciones  Cafetaleras (Swimming with sharks: The national coordinator of coffee producer organizations). In Cafetaleros: la Construcción de la Autonomía (Coffee  producers:  Constructing  autonomy), ed.  Fernando  Celis,  Rosario  Cobo,  Arturo  García,  Pilar Lopez Sierra, Julio Moguel, Alberto J. Olvera, Luisa Paré, Lorena  Paz  Paredes,  Francisco  Pérez  Arce,  and  Gabriela Ejea y Luis Hernández, 17-48. Mexico: Coordinadora Nacional de Organizaciones Cafetaleras.
- Herod, A. 1998. Of blocs, flows and networks: The end of the Cold War, cyberspace, and the geo-economics of organized labor at the fin de millénaire. In An unruly world? Globalization, governance, and geography , ed. A. Herod, 162-95. New York: Routledge.
- Hirschman, A. O. 1993. Getting ahead collectively: Grassroots experiences in Latin America. New York: Pergamon Press.
- Jin, P. 1993. Work motivation and productivity in voluntarily formed work teams: A field study in China. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 54:133-55.
- Jones, D. C., and J. Svejnar. 1985. Participation, profit sharing, worker ownership and efficiency in Italian producer cooperatives. Economica 52:449-65.
- Klooster, D. 2000. Institutional choice, community, and struggle:  A  case  study  of  forest  co-management  in  Mexico. World Development 28 (1): 1-20.
- Latour, Bruno. 1999. Pandora's hope: Essays on the reality of science studies . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Lee, C. K. 1998. Gender and the South China miracle: Two worlds of factory women. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Lefebvre, H. 1991. The production of space. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
- Macdonald, L. 1997. Supporting civil society. New York: St. Martin's Press.

- Miguel, A. 1997. El Neoliberalismo  en  Oaxaca,  Mexico (Neoliberalism  in  Oaxaca,  Mexico).  Paper  delivered  at Latin American Studies Association Conference, Guadalajara Expo Hotel, Guadalajara, Mexico, 19 April.
- Miller, B. 1992. Collective action and rational choice: Place, community, and the limits to individual self-interest. Economic Geography 68 (1): 22-42.
- Mitchell, K. 1997. Different diasporas and the hype of hybridity. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 15:533-53.
- Mooney,  P.  H.,  J.  Roahrig,  and  T.  W.  Gray.  1996.  The  de/ repoliticization of cooperation and the discourse of conversion. Rural Sociology 61:559-76.
- Mountz, A., and R. A. Wright. 1996. Daily life in the transnational  migrant  community  of  San  Agustín,  Oaxaca,  and Poughkeepsie, New York. Diaspora 5 (3): 403-28.
- Murdock, J. 1997. Towards a geography of heterogeneous associations. Progress in Human Geography 21 (3): 321-37.
- Mutersbaugh,  T.  1998.  Women's  work,  men's  work:  Gender, labor organization, and technology acquisition in a Oaxacan village. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 16:439-58.
- --. 1999. Bread or chainsaws?: Paths to mobilizing household labor for cooperative rural development in a Oaxacan village (Mexico). Economic Geography 75 (1): 43-58.
- Neumann, R. P. 1998. Imposing wilderness: Struggles over livelihood and nature preservation in Africa. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Olson, J. M. 1999. Are artisanal cooperatives in Guatemala unraveling? Human Organization 58:54-66.
- Olson, M. 1971. The logic of collective action: Public goods and the theory of groups. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Peet, D., and M. Watts. 1996. Liberation ecologies: Environment, development, social movements. New York: Routledge.
- Pile, S. 1997. Opposition, political identities, and spaces of resistance. In Geographies of resistance , ed. S. Pile and M. Keith, 1-32. New York: Routledge.
- Pred, A. 1981. Social reproduction and the time-geography of everyday life. Geografiska Annaler 63B (1): 5-22.
- --. 1990. Lost words and lost worlds: Modernity and the language of  everyday  life  in  late  nineteenth-century  Stockholm. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- --. 1992. Commentary 2: T. Hägerstrand's Innovation Diffusion As A Spatial Process , classics in human geography revisited. Progress in Human Geography 16 (4): 542.
- Price, M. 1994. Ecopolitics and environmental nongovernmental  organizations  in  Latin  America. The Geographical Review 84:42-58.
- Pringle, R. 1989. Secretaries talk: Sexuality, power, and work. New York: Verso.
- Putterman, L. 1983. A modified collective agriculture in rural growth-with-equity: Reconsidering the private, unimodal solution. World Development 11 (2): 77-100.
- --. 1987. The incentive problem and the demise of team farming in China . Journal of Development Economics 26:103-27.
- Rangan, H. 1997. Indian environmentalism and the question of the state: Problems and prospects for sustainable development. Environment &amp; Planning A 29 (12): 2129-44.
- Robbins, P. 2000. The rotten institution: Corruption in natural resource management. Political Geography 19 (4): 423-43.
- Rose, G. 1993. Feminism and geography. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Roseberry, W. 1995. The cultural history of peasantries. In Articulating hidden histories: Exploring the influence of Eric Wolf , eds. J. Schneider and R. Rapp, 51-66. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Routledge, P. 1997. Space, mobility, and collective action: India's  Naxalite  movement. Environment  and  Planning  A 29:2165-89.
- Rus,  J.  1994.  The  'Comunidad  Revolucionaria  Institutional': The subversion of native government in highland Chiapas, 1936-1968,  In Everyday  forms  of  state  formation ,  ed.  G. Joseph  and  D.  Nugent,  265-300.  Durham,  NC:  Duke University Press.
- Sayer, A., and R. Walker. 1992. The new social economy: Reworking the division of labor. Oxford: Blackwell.
- Schroeder, R. 1999. Shady practices. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Stephen,  L.  1991.  Culture  as  a  resource:  Four  cases  of  selfmanaged  indigenous  craft  production  in  Latin  America. Economic Development and Cultural Change 39:101-30.
- --. 1997. Pro-Zapatista and pro-PRI: Resolving the contradictions of Zapatismo in rural Oaxaca. Latin American Research Review 32 (2): 41-70.
- Tendler, J, 1983. What to think about cooperatives: A guide from Bolivia. Arlington, VA: Inter-American Foundation.
- --. 1988. What to think about cooperatives: A guide from Bolivia. In Direct to the poor: Grassroots development in Latin America , ed. S. Annis and P. Hakim, 85-115. Boulder, CO: Rienner.
- Thompson, E. P. 1966. The making of the English working class. New York: Vintage.
- Tomkin, L. 2000. Women of steel: Constructing and contesting new gendered geographies of work in the Australian steel industry. Antipode 32 (2): 115-34.
- Ward, B. 1958. The firm in Illyria: Market syndicalism. American Economic Review 48:566-89.
- Watts, M. 1992. Living under contract: Work, production politics, and the manufacture of discontent in a peasant society. In Reworking modernity: Capitalisms and symbolic discontent , ed. A. Pred and M. Watts, 67-105. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Whyte, W. F. 1988. Making Mondragon: The growth and dynamics of the worker cooperative complex. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.
- --. 1999. The Mondragon cooperatives in 1976 and 1998. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 52:478-81.
- Williams, R. 1977. Marxism and literature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Willis,  P.  1997. Learning  to  labour:  How  working  class  kids  get working class jobs . Farnborough, U.K.: Saxon House.
- Wolf, D. 1992. Factory  daughters:  Gender,  household  dynamics, and  rural  industrialization  in  Java. Berkeley:  University  of California Press.
- Wolf, E. 1969. Peasant wars of the twentieth century. New York: Harper &amp; Row.