This article was downloaded by: [Ecole Hautes Etudes Commer-Montreal]

On: 11 August 2015, At: 03:41

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: 5 Howick Place,

London, SW1P 1WG

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

[Click for updates](http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1080/00045608.2015.1022127&domain=pdf&date_stamp=2015-05-13)

To cite this article: Hilda E. Kurtz (2015) Scaling Food Sovereignty: Biopolitics and the Struggle for Local Control of Farm Food in Rural Maine, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 105:4, 859-873, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2015.1022127

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2015.1022127

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## Scaling Food Sovereignty: Biopolitics and the Struggle for Local Control of Farm Food in Rural Maine

Hilda E. Kurtz a

a

Department of Geography, University of Georgia Published online: 13 May 2015.

## Scaling Food Sovereignty: Biopolitics and the Struggle for Local Control of Farm Food in Rural Maine

Hilda E. Kurtz

Department of Geography, University of Georgia

Recent scholarship highlights the play of biopower in and through policies and practices shaping food systems, but says little about the practices of resistance to such power. Alternative food movements mobilize critique of and resistance to an industrialized food system from many perspectives. This article examines food sovereignty activism in Maine as an illuminating instance of contemporary biopolitics. This article investigates a 'food sovereignty ordinance' passed in eleven towns in Maine since 2011 as an important moment in the biopolitical struggle over the nature of food systems. The ordinance exempts direct transactions of farm food from licensure and inspection in an effort to maintain the viability of small, diversified farms in a struggling rural economy. The ordinance effectively carves out a space of food sovereignty in each town that enacts it, thereby protecting conditions of life and livelihood within local food networks. The analysis focuses on the spatiality of the practices that comprise biopolitics, with attention to the scalar politics in play as well; that is, the ways in which modalities of power shape and are shaped by social, economic, and political scales of organization. This exploration of the scaling of biopolitics in relation to the concept of food sovereignty suggests insights into the contours of other moments of struggle over food regulations. Key Words: alternative food initiatives, biopolitics, food sovereignty, local ordinances, politics of scale.

晚 近 的 学 术 研 究 ， 强 调 生 命 政 治 在 政 策 及 实 践 中 、 同 时 透 过 政 策 及 实 践 ， 形 塑 粮 食 系 统 的 角 色 ， 但 却 鲜 少 提 及 抵抗 此 般 权 力 的 实 践 。 另 类粮 食 运 动 ， 则 从 多 方 观 点 ， 动 员 对 工 业 化 的 粮 食 系 统 之 批 判 ， 并 与之 对 抗 。 本 文 检 视 位 于 美 茵 （ Maine ） 的 粮 食 主 权 倡 议 ， 作 为 阐 明 当 代 生 命 政 治 的 实 例 。 本 文 探 讨 自 2011 年 以 来 ， 美 茵 的 十 一 座 城 镇 通 过 的 ' 粮 食 主 权条 例 ' ， 作 为 对 粮 食 系 统 的 本 质 进 行 生 命 政 治 斗 争 的 重 要 时 刻 。 该 条 例 准 许 农 场 食 物 的直 接 交 换 免 除 执 照 与 稽 核 ， 致 力 于 维 系 勉 强 生 存 的 农 村 经 济 中 ， 小 型 、 多 样 化 农 场 的 生 命 力 。 该 条 例 有 效 地在 每 一个 施 行 的 城 镇 中 ， 开 拓 出 粮 食 主 权 的 空 间 ， 从 而 保 护 在地 粮 食 网 络 中 的 生 活 与 生 计 条 件 。 本 研 究 分 析 ， 聚 焦 构 成 生 命 政 治 的 实 践 之 空 间 性 ， 并 同 时 关 注 运 作 中 的 尺 度 政 治 ； 亦 即 权 力 的 形式 如 何 形 塑 组织 的 社 会 、 经 济 与 政 治 尺 度 ， 并 反 之 被 这 些 尺 度 形 塑 的 方 式 。 此 般 探 讨 尺 度 化 生 命 政 治 之于 粮 食 主 权 的 概 念 ， 为 其 他 粮 食 规 范 斗 争 的 重 要 时 刻 之 概 况 ， 提 供 了 洞 见 。 关 键 词 ： 另 类粮 食 倡 议 ， 生 命 政 治 ， 粮 食 主 权 ， 地 方 条 例 ， 尺 度 政 治 。

En la m  as reciente erudici  on se destaca el juego que cumple la bioenerg  ıa dentro y a trav  es de las pol  ıticas y pr  acticas que configuran los sistemas alimentarios, aunque poco se dice acerca de las pr  acticas de resistencia a tal tipo de energ  ıa. Los movimientos alternativos en relaci  on con los alimentos movilizan la cr  ıtica y la resistencia a un sistema alimentario industrializado, desde muchas perspectivas. Este art  ıculo examina el activismo relacionado con soberan  ıa alimentaria en Maine como ejemplo ilustrativo de la biopol  ıtica contempor  anea. En el art  ıculo se investiga una 'ordenanza de soberan  ıa alimentaria' que se aprob  o en once pueblos de Maine desde 2011, como momento importante de la lucha biopol  ıtica sobre la naturaleza de los sistemas alimentarios. La ordenanza exime de licenciamiento e inspecci  on a las transacciones directas de alimentos procedentes de granjas en un esfuerzo por mantener la viabilidad de explotaciones agr  ıcolas peque ~ nas y diversificadas en una econom  ıa rural ya seriamente cargada de problemas. Ciertamente, esta ordenanza forja un espacio de soberan  ıa alimentaria en cada pueblo que la aplica, protegiendo as  ı las condiciones de vida y subsistencia dentro de las redes locales de alimentos. El an  alisis se enfoca en la espacialidad de las pr  acticas que comprende la biopol  ıtica, igualmente con atenci  on sobre la pol  ıtica de escala que est  a en juego; es decir, las maneras en las que las modalidades de poder configuran y son configuradas por las escalas sociales, econ  omicas y pol  ıticas de organizaci  on. Esta exploraci  on de la escala de la biopol  ıtica en relaci  on con el concepto de soberan  ıa alimentaria sugiere un mayor entendimiento dentro de los contornos de otros momentos de lucha sobre las regulaciones de los alimentos. Palabras clave: iniciativas alternativas sobre alimentos, biopol  ıtica, soberan  ıa alimentaria, ordenanzas locales, pol  ıticas de escala.

I n The Politics of Life Itself , N. Rose (2006) characterizes biopolitics-political struggle over the norms, conventions, and techniques of managing population health-as a central political problem of the twenty-first century. Biopolitics play out as resistance to biopower, those apparatuses of power that medicalize the population in pursuit of greater human productivity (Foucault 2003). 1 Biopower extends effects across populations, in arenas such as public sanitation, the linking of smoking proscriptions to health care costs, nutrition guidelines, food regulations such as mandatory pasteurization, and many others. Recent scholarship highlights the play of biopower in and through policies and practices shaping food systems (Brooks 2005; Herring 2007; Paxson 2008; Schlosser 2008; Nally 2011; Speake 2011; Holloway and Morris 2012). This body of work highlights that the practices that constitute biopower are enacted within recognizable arenas of knowledge, authority, and power (Rabinow and Rose 2006) but says little about resistance to biopower. Significantly, the globalized industrial food system has become an object of critique and concern in its own right, provoking biopolitical resistance to the norms, conventions, and techniques shaping industrialized food. To better understand the trajectory and implications of contemporary biopolitics it is important to investigate the practices shaping the struggle over the contours of food systems.

The food sovereignty movement-made up of myriad struggles for the rights of people to control their own food systems-is a compelling example of food-related biopolitics. Calls for food sovereignty raise difficult questions about the social and spatial parameters of democratic control of food system. Some observers suggest that as food sovereignty activism spreads to the Global North from the Global South, market-based localization will trump political efforts to foster food democratization as such (Claeys 2012; Fairbairn 2012); this would arguably limit the significance of such work as biopolitics. Ongoing political struggle over a local food sovereignty ordinance in Maine challenges that assessment by bringing different tiers of the state into debate over the possibility of local control of food systems.

Formally titled the Local Food and Community Self-Governance Ordinance (LFCSGO), the food sovereignty ordinance was introduced in 2011 in defense of traditional farm practices and local foodways after grassroots efforts to adapt state poultry slaughter regulations to small-scale production were defeated. The poultry rules enacted instead forbade existing practices of open-air, on-farm slaughter and imposed high facility costs on small-scale producers. Many farmers and farm patrons saw the rules as symptomatic of a regulatory regime in which their own views of life, health, and livelihood were fundamentally at odds with those held by the state's Department of Agriculture (DoA). In response, the LFCSGO was crafted by a small group of farmers and concerned citizens to assert and protect the right of farmers and farm patrons to engage in direct transactions of farm food (animal-based and otherwise) without the intervention of state food and agriculture regulators.

The so-called food sovereignty ordinance has been passed in eleven towns to date, spurring considerable legislative debate at the state level over a suite of related bills. Supporters of the ordinance argue that many agricultural regulations privilege industrial agriculture and systematically undermine the viability of small-scale farmers. In response, the ordinance creates spaces in which people can participate in local food networks and farmers can use traditional practices for producing food. Critics of the ordinance include state agencies, midsized farmers, and various interest organizations in the state who worry about the spread of pathogens in uninspected and unlicensed farm foods and about the implications of the ordinance for those farmers who do submit to licensure and inspection.

The stakes in the struggle over the food sovereignty ordinance are high, concerning intersections of life and livelihood, autonomy and its absence, and bases for knowing and for evaluating risk. That is to say, the stakes are biopolitical, a struggle over the management of individual and population health through the management of foods that are themselves biologically alive. Pasteurization kills the microbes that fresh-milk adherents consider most valuable but regulators consider its most deadly quality as food. The struggle over the LFCSGO and by extension over food sovereignty elsewhere concerns not only the regulation of food as something necessary to life itself (N. Rose 2006) but also the regulation of the lives and deaths of the animals and microbes that constitute that food.

The Maine food sovereignty ordinance offers an opportunity to explore the ways in which biopolitics play out in particular arenas of power with different instrumentalities for resistance. To develop this argument, the article first outlines food sovereignty as a problem of biopolitics. It then lays the groundwork for thinking about food sovereignty as a problem of scale and combines these perspectives to conceptualize the scaling of biopolitics. With this framework in place, the article traces the work of the ordinance activists as they engaged in scaling the biopolitics of food sovereignty.

## Conceptual Framework

## Food Sovereignty as Biopolitics

As an animating idea, food sovereignty calls into question the nature and extent of corporate control of food systems and the modalities of power that shape industrial food production at the expense of millions of smallholder and peasant farmers. First promulgated in 1996 at the Rome Food Summit, food sovereignty responds to peasant struggles in the face of globalized agribusiness and agro-export regimes and asserts communities' rights to produce for themselves rather than rely on international commodities markets (Alkon and Mares 2012). The food sovereignty movement calls for a radical transformation of farming and food systems by invoking a provocative if ambiguous blend of individual and collective sovereignty and rights with political and cultural overtones (Claeys 2012; Trauger 2013). Food sovereignty's 'radical insistence on community and the development of a 'defensible life space' against neoliberalism's enclosure of the commons' (Kopka 2008, 46) leads activists to confront multiple levels of food and agricultural governance that impinge on life spaces through the management of food systems.

Tensions within the movement over how to achieve food sovereignty have led in recent years away from global summitry (Ayres and Bosia 2012) to increasing emphasis on building food sovereignty from below, focusing on 'truly alternative, more feasible or reactive strategies, such as 'defending territories'' (Claeys 2012, 852). Concurrently, food sovereignty has been embraced by alternative food activists in the Global North as a way to amplify and energize critique of the crisis-ridden industrial food system (Fairbairn 2012). The proliferation of food sovereignty activism calls for examining the play of multiple food sovereignties in settings shaped by different political, economic, and social dynamics (Desmarais and Wittman 2013) and at multiple social and political scales (Ayres and Bosia 2012). Widely heralded by alternative food activists (Reinhardt 2011; Canfield 2012; Gumpert 2012) and fodder for legal analysis (Almy 2013; Hamilton 2013; Bidgood 2014), the Maine food sovereignty ordinance is an important attempt to build food sovereignty from below and warrants careful study as an effort to defend the life spaces of traditional foodways.

Conceptually, struggle over the ordinance concerns the conditions of lives being lived in rural Maine (human, animal, and microbial) and thus falls within the valence of biopolitics. Drawing on Foucault, biopolitics is understood here as struggle over the exercise of biopower, a form of power concerned centrally with population health as an object of political calculation and contestation. Foucault traced the emergence of biopower in the eighteenth century to the newfound ability to use vital statistics to document and manage human population health and, by extension, human productivity (Smart 2002; Brooks 2005; Foucault 2008; Speake 2011). Significantly, both state and nonstate actors exercise biopower, which can be traced in various institutions that 'coordinate medical care, centralize information, normalize knowledge . . . teach hygiene and . . . medicalize the population' (Foucault 2003, 241). Among such institutions are those that manage population health by managing food systems, through such devices as nutrition guidelines and food safety and agricultural regulation and the bureaucracies that implement them at different levels of government. Thus, the regulation of food is a rich vein for the exercise of biopower and biopolitical contestation over its effects. Diverse political and economic apparatuses serve as vehicles for biopower in relation to food; recent scholarship traces the play of biopower through, for example, mandatory dairy pasteurization regimes (Paxson 2008; Speake 2011; Kurtz, Trauger, and Passidomo 2013), agricultural biotechnology (Brooks 2005; Herring 2007; Schlosser 2008; Nally 2011), and livestock breeding (Holloway et al. 2009; Morris and Holloway 2009; Holloway and Morris 2012).

To extend this body of work, I draw on Rabinow and Rose's (2006) schema in which biopower is understood as the truth discourses, authorities, and modes and strategies of intervention and subjectification that are implicated in the management of population health. Biopolitics is understood as efforts to problematize the exertion of biopower by contesting the discourses, authorities, and strategies used to underpin it. Morris and Holloway (2009) used this framework in relation to food systems in their work on genetic knowledge practices in livestock breeding. They conceptualized biopolitics as a set of contestations over knowledge, power, and life that play out at three scales: in relations between humans and livestock, on farms and in rural spaces, and within national and international networks related to livestock breeding. 2 Truth discourses do not flow evenly across social landscapes but are shaped and privileged in relation to particular communities of practice, forms of authority, and apparatuses for intervention, which themselves reach unevenly across populations. Their finding that resistance to genetic indexes entails contestation over

particular knowledge practices underscores Foucault's recognition that power constitutes forms of resistance to itself (Holloway and Morris 2012). They further highlighted that biopolitics resonates differently in settings shaped by different modalities of power.

I expand on Holloway and Morris's (2012) work by examining a spatial political strategy of contestation over knowledge, life, and power at formally nested geographical scales. The ordinance and its unfolding legislative and judicial consequences underscore the importance of thinking biopolitics geographically, playing out in different and differently scaled arenas of power. Significantly, the ordinance activists' pursuit of radical change in the food system troubles the truth discourses, authorities, and interventions of agricultural regulation with an array of rights claims. In keeping with Foucault's recognition that power constitutes forms of resistance to itself, Cadman (2010, 541) noted the importance of 'an active and performative role for rights [that] is achieved through another understanding: 'the right to question governmental regimes of truth'' (citing Foucault 1997, 32). The LFCSGO is a rights-based ordinance that not only questions governmental regimes of truth but asserts a compelling and arguably innovative set of rights to be defended by the local state. In doing so it sets off a political struggle between different tiers of the state, invoking different modalities of decision-making power.

What should be clear from this discussion is that the state is not the undifferentiated locus of biopower. Not only does biopower thread through state and nonstate institutions and saturate the spaces of everyday life in relation to food, but biopower and biopolitics employ different modalities of legislative, regulatory, and judicial power at different scales of government. In the case at hand, the invocation of food sovereignty and the local ordinance strategy itself clearly introduce the politics of scale into the biopolitical struggle.

## Food Sovereignty as a Problem of Scale

The literature on the politics of scale offers insight into efforts to create spaces of food sovereignty, and to claim rights in layered jurisdictions. In this perspective, political and other geographic scales are not neutral containers for social action but are themselves created in the course of political struggle; that is to say, scales of social and economic organization are shaped by and in turn shape social relations, including relations of social struggle (Herod 1991). The politics of scale are a way of 'framing' reality

(Delaney and Leitner 1997, 96), through which social actors bring different concepts of space and modalities of power to bear on social struggle. As a central practice in politics of scale, scale frames (Kurtz 2002, 2003) are collection action frames that identify political problems and responses with central reference to particular geographic scales. The concept of scale frames draws attention to the range of options available to activists, to scale up or down their argument as the situation demands, and hints that truth claims in political struggle are shaped by the contexts in which they are made.

The concept of food sovereignty-democratic control of the food system, and the right of all people to define their own food systems (U.S. Social Forum 2010)-poses problems of scale in both economic and political terms. In economic terms, it implies a rescaling of food production and trade regimes, away from industrial scales to more localized and regional scales of production and distribution. In political terms, making food systems more democratic and transparent for consumers and small- To medium-scale producers calls into question the political and jurisdictional scales at which food sovereignty can be achieved. As Patel (2010) observed, 'To demand food sovereignty is to demand specific arrangements to govern territory and space' (191).

The Maine ordinance advocates framed a scalereferenced response to their lack of food sovereignty by drawing on a New England tradition of annual town meetings and Maine's political regime of strong home rule. Rather than just using municipal governance as a convenient scale of action, the activists crafted a rightsbased ordinance to argue substantively for local self-governance concerning the production and consumption of food. Their argument references scale by arguing for the right to community self-government in matters relating to food, the local spatial scale as a basis on which to organize a food system, and the need for scale-appropriate regulations for small-scale production for direct sale. 3

Figuring in these arguments and the ensuing debate over the ordinance are two key formal (jurisdictional) scalar relationships. First, Maine's political regime of strong home rule delegates legislative power to local governments over local matters 'except in areas of law and policy-making reserved for the state' (Parlow 2008, 383) and offered an opportunity to craft a political strategy formally grounded in understandings of local autonomy and self-governance. Second, however, all municipal governance is subject to the doctrine of preemption, under which federal and state laws constrain the legislative powers of local government, either directly or 'impliedly.' Because implied preemption can be so tricky

to ascertain, Diller (2007) argued that it 'has become the primary battleground for determining the parameters of local authority in modern home-rule regimes' (1127). As a rights-based ordinance, the LFCSGO challenges the doctrine of preemption.

## Scaling Biopolitics

Significantly, the practices that constitute the exercise of biopower are not aspatial and amorphous. Rather, as practices intended to manage population health, they are emplaced in particular professional settings, which are themselves shaped by situated regimes of knowledge and authority. As prescriptive practices, they create effects that reach out across populations to shape conduct in countless arenas of daily and professional life. Holloway and Morris (2012) demonstrated the importance and utility of thinking through the multiple scales at which practices of biopower can extend such effects. Their recognition that biopower exercised in relation to food production reshapes practices on farms, among farms, and within broader networks of knowledge and power has implications well beyond livestock breeding. This article extends from Holloway and Morris's work by bringing insights about the politics of scale to bear on the recognition that biopower percolates through practices organized at multiple geographic scales.

Attention to the politics of scale draws critical attention first, to the ways in which biopolitics (contestation over biopower) is shaped by scales of social organization, and second, to how such contestation challenges scales of social organization as part of social struggle. In the scaling of biopower and biopolitical practices, it is not just that certain kinds of practices and truth discourses are enacted at preexisting scales of activity but also that such practices, discourses, and enactments challenge scalar understandings as part of biopolitical struggle. The politics of scale perspective recognizes the fluidity and socially constructed quality of (nested) scales of interaction and focuses attention on how scales of social (political, economic) organization are constituted, challenged, and transgressed.

In the intersection of biopolitics and politics of scale, scale frames articulate truth claims about the management of population health and navigate the tensions and conceptual distance between the state simplification (Scott 1998) of the regulatory apparatus and the realms of self- and community care that authorize farm food transactions through a 'food sovereignty ordinance.'

Both the fluidity and the performative aspect of scale framing create opportunities to engage in strategic framing in relation to the truth discourses and modes of authority that undergird the exercise of biopower.

## Methodology

Findings are based on thirty-one interviews conducted in 2012, 2013, and 2014 in ten towns in the state of Maine and observations at two academic conferences, first- and secondhand observations of rallies, a documentary about the ordinance, a press conference, and Supreme Court oral arguments. In addition, I worked through an archival record including court documents in two lawsuits and an appeal, legislative testimony regarding six different state bills, and dozens of news reports (retrieved using Google, Lexis/Nexis, and word of mouth) in local, regional, and national news outlets, primarily the Bangor Daily News , the Portland Press Herald , and the New York Times.

I conducted semistructured interviews with key actors involved in drafting, defending, and being defended by the ordinance, which were audiorecorded and transcribed. I combed over and thematically coded interview transcripts and archival sources using both etic codes informed by the conceptual framework and emic codes emerging from the texts and the accompanying field notes. Emic codes in the interview transcripts highlighted, among other things, the emotional tenor of participants' involvement, a sense of real outrage at the effects of certain rules for the lives and livelihoods of small-scale hardscrabble farmers, and the social linkages between members of the communities, both those who support the ordinance and those who do not. Repeated visits to Western Hancock County and follow-up conversations with ordinance activists at subsequent events such as the Maine Law School's Forum on Food Policy and Yale's Critical Dialogue on Food Sovereignty offered insight into the relationships through which the ordinance strategy has been formed, contested, defended, and amplified.

## The Food Sovereignty Ordinance as Biopolitics

Catalyst: 1,000-Bird Exemption

In June 2009, in response to grassroots pressure, the Maine legislature passed a bill exempting poultry

producers slaughtering fewer than 1,000 birds from some of the requirements for large-scale poultry operations. The exemption would put Maine in line with other states that follow federal parameters that offer 20,000-bird and 1,000-bird exemptions and would clear a costly hurdle for small-scale diversified farmers. The administrative rule-making process, however, resulted in rules that did little to differentiate between facility requirements for the 20,000-bird and 1,000bird exemptions, requiring the smaller scale farmers to incur the same facility costs of $20,000 to $40,000 as did the far larger operations.

In Penobscot, Heather and Phil Retberg of Quill's End Farm were running a small, diversified livestock farm, where in addition to raising sheep and cattle for meat and milk, they processed several hundred meat chickens each year at a neighbor's slaughtering facility. Poultry had been slaughtered in farmyards by generations of farmers, and their practice was in keeping with this tradition (Interview July 2012). The new rules were crafted within a truth regime that viewed controlled indoor conditions for slaughter to be safer from contamination than the open-air conditions that farmers' experience indicated was adequately safe. Such a ruling underscores that the practices prescribed by biopower in pursuit of population health are expected to occur in certain places, under certain conditions. The implications of the new rules for Quill's End and countless other farms like it was that they would either have to build their own slaughter facility on site to expensive specifications or take their chickens to be slaughtered at one of just four facilities certified by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) in the entire state of Maine. The closest facility is more than 100 miles from Penobscot. Neither option was financially viable for the Retbergs.

Distressed at the implications of the new rule for their farm and countless others like it and the undemocratic way in which it came into force, the Retbergs turned to their friend Bob St. Peter, Executive Director of Food for Maine's Future (FMF), for help in generating a response to the new rules on the part of other small farmers. FMF is a small but vocal organization that invokes food sovereignty as it speaks out on behalf of small-scale farmers in Maine and elsewhere. Concern about the fate of the 1,000-bird exemption was well within FMF's ambit. FMF lent a hand by reaching out through e-mail lists and social networking sites to encourage people to write to the Department of Agriculture and to attend the public comment session scheduled in late December 2009.

Although letters on each side of the issue tended to acknowledge the importance of small-scale poultry production to the state's farm economy, they responded to the Quality Assurance and Regulations (QAR) rules that blurred the distinction between the 1,000-bird and 20,000-bird exemptions by focusing on different issues. Those expressing support for the more expensive requirements prioritized hygiene concerns as conventionally codified in federal and state regulations, endorsing the extant exercise of biopower in relation to poultry slaughter. Many of these writers expressed concern for unfair cost advantages to farmers using the exemption and argued that the answer to the problem of a costly slaughtering regime was more slaughter facilities, not less regulation. On the other side of the debate, letter writers protesting the new rules protested the lack of differentiation between small and midsized poultry farmers. This argument suggested that the QAR should hybridize its biopolitical management of risk by taking into account different logistical needs and safety concerns involved in smallscale agricultural production and developing scale-specific regulations for each. For example, Thom Young of Orizaba Farms, near Bangor, wrote to the QAR during the poultry exemption debate and posted on his Web site:

We urge the MDA to ensure that the language within farm regulations is scale-specific and acknowledges that small farmers who direct-market to consumers are faced with different logistical considerations and operating constraints than large agribusinesses and food processors. (Orizaba Farms 2009)

Many of the letters protesting the poultry ruling expressed urgency about the situation, as with one writer, who wrote that the new rules might 'very possibly mean an end to small poultry farms in Maine.' The earnestness in these letters signaled recognition that one-size-fits-all agricultural regulations-that is, social simplifications allied with state power-'enable much of the reality they [depict] to be remade' (Scott 1998, 3). The truth regime that failed to adequately distinguish between the logistical imperatives of large and small-scale farm production produced modes of intervention that systematically undermined the viability of the small-scale farms that did not fit the regulatory model.

After a period of public input and a slight relaxing of the facilities requirement, the chair of the legislative committee overseeing this process announced that the committee could not and would not approve

rules less restrictive than federal rules or the state would lose USDA funding for meat inspection. As one farmer explained in a later interview, the process did not engage the knowledge and understandings of farmers themselves:

The consensus was that we weren't really heard. That the decisions were made ahead of time. That the public hearings and all that were really just formalities. (Interview July 2012)

This outcome struck a painful nerve among farmers who had mobilized for months in pursuit of rules better aligned with the apparent intent of the legislation.

## Response: Local Community and Self-Governance Ordinance

Disappointed farmers and farm patrons viewed the distorted ruling on the poultry exemption as symptomatic of a regulatory regime in which their own views of life, health, and livelihood were fundamentally at odds with those held by state agencies like the DoA. Those who had worked hard on the poultry exemption had confidence in their individual and community bases for evaluating risk in farm practices and food preparation and found the imposition of seemingly federally mandated norms to be onerous and intrusive. They resented the regulators' dismissal of locally held knowledge of and authority on how to manage life and death on the farm and safely produce and distribute farm food. They further recognized that the poultry exemption debate was just the tip of an iceberg and were galvanized to defend their roles and practices as rural food producers. More broadly, these farmer-activists were taking a political stand for the traditional foodways that have been shaping social relations in rural Maine for hundreds of years, in the belief that these foodways can and should shape the future of small-scale agriculture in the state. As Heather Retberg explained in a documentary film about the case, the setback with the poultry exemption prompted us to look for alternative ways to democratically effect change, to just be able to preserve what we were doing and to preserve the kinds of relationships that come out of the way that we exchange food. (No Umbrella Media 2012)

Ordinance activists' emphasis on relationships fostered through food transactions highlights the embeddedness of foodways to these local communities (Interviews 2014). Food and traditional foodways saturate the spaces of everyday life and figure richly in social relationships among members of these small communities. As ordinance activists see it, a community's collective rights to foster social relationships around mutually agreeable economic transactions hung in the balance (Jones 2014).

Over the next year, a small group of activists read up on U.S. founding documents, attended a Democracy School sponsored by the Pennsylvania-based Community Environmental Legal Defense Fund (CELDF), consulted with members of their communities across the political spectrum, drafted the LFCSGO, and had it placed on the town meeting agenda of five towns in Maine. By that time, there was precedent for towns to pass ordinances keeping out unwanted land uses and other practices, including wind turbines, cell towers, corporate water extraction for bottling, and genetically modified seeds, each of which focused on corporate actions and imposed more restrictions on local activities than was exercised at the state or federal level (Interview July 2012). The new food-related ordinances did not target corporate actions directly but focused on agricultural regulations understood to benefit corporate agriculture to the detriment of small farmers. The ordinance would basically codify the practices small-scale farmers had been using for a long time and protect locally held truth regimes and authorities by eliminating the need for these practices to be licensed and inspected by state agricultural inspectors. In asserting both producers' and consumers' rights to engage in direct sale of farm food regardless of licensure and inspection, ordinance authors were also reconstituting the subject positions of both to be more autonomous, informed, and self-educated than was assumed in regulations designed for larger scale agriculture. Conceptually, they were intervening in the exercise of biopower, seeking to democratize the management of food-related risk. Materially, their goal was to protect and support the emergent community economy centered on farm- and foodstuffs, including but not limited to poultry (Interview July 2012).

Throughout 2010, FMF and the group now calling itself Local Food Rules kept the issue of scaleappropriate regulations in public view, through social media and the FMF annual conference. The issue of scale-appropriate regulations revolved around different understandings of small-scale farm operations, or truth discourses about how best to farm circulating within differently emplaced communities of practice-administrators' offices in Augusta on one hand and small diversified farms

across Maine on the other. As a farmer caught up in the debate explained,

We can't really have this question about scale-appropriate regulations until the folks who are in charge of making the rules understand how our farms work. They don't come to our farms. They only come to our farms if there's a problem. (Interview July 2012)

Heather Retberg contrasted these truth discourses in a keynote speech at FMF's 2010 conference (Retberg 2010). By that time, the Retbergs were concerned about their future ability to sell a range of farm foods, including both poultry and fresh, unpasteurized milk. The speech began:

Sustainable agriculture. A viable food production system. Family scale farm. Local food economy.

Milk distributors. Chicken processors. Food Safety inspection system. Supreme Court rulings. Private sales.

. . . The first set are words we use to describe ourselves and others on our peninsula, who are beginning to understand the necessity and the urgency of coming together to survive. The second set of words represent the steep learning curve [we] are now climbing as we try to decide how much regulation and licensure to accept, or indeed if we have a choice. Our state and federal laws, we have come to learn with a heavy clarity, right up to the highest court in the land, have been written against us. We've been happily working outside the system for our first twelve years of farming. This past fall, the system knocked on our door. We are not farmers, family or otherwise in their world-instead we are 'distributors' and 'processors'-the same language and definitions used to describe industrial food manufacturers. The language here is of primary importance. The definitions are written by the USDA.

The speech focused on a central tension between how the emerging activists-small farmers and farm patrons in the ordinance language-view their way of life and the broader economic and regulatory conditions that shape and constrain it. Retberg worked from a key insight recognized by constructivist scholars, which is that the language of regulations such as these not only describes social and material realities but also brings them into being. In the case of milk, for example, the view of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is that milk isn't milk until it has been pasteurized 4 (Almy 2013). The Maine Milk Rule (2007) defines a milk distributor as someone who sells milk in final form to an end consumer. A milk producer is defined as someone who sells milk but not in its final form; that is, the producer must sell to a distributor and not to an end consumer. So when the mixed livestock farmer with a couple of milking cows wants to sell her or his milk fresh or raw directly to a consumer, she or her gets caught between definitions and actions are constrained accordingly. The structuring and problematic assumption here is that there must be an intermediary milk distributor between the producer and the final consumer.

Agricultural regulations such as these regarding milk presuppose and help bring into being a food system configured around economies of scale and other practices that centralize and aggregate the industrial food system (see Scott 1998). As Retberg argued, much hinges on definitions. In the process of drafting and defending the LFCSGO, the Local Food Rules activists and allies amplified the message that the regulations as written do not recognize the particulars of their farm systems. They emphasized that small-scale rural food systems do not aggregate or centralize and are predicated on very different relations to food itself and different economic calculations than those used in intensely profit-driven industrial agricultural systems.

By the end of the spring 2011 town meeting season, the ordinances had been voted on in five towns in Western Hancock County and passed in four. The catalytic controversy around the nature of the new poultry rules, then, constrained farmers' actions as small-scale poultry producers but spurred action around a larger set of issues. The ordinance activists engaged in biopolitics by asserting the right to question governmental regimes of truth that require expensive facilities in which to slaughter poultry, in tandem with asserting their rights to purchase and consume foods of their choice. With the launch of the ordinance strategy, farm activists sought to reconfigure biopolitics and recalibrate the ways in which decisions over which foods are safe are made, by according more authority to farmers and the people who eat their food.

The ordinance is a fascinating document. The Preamble and Purpose are worth excerpting at length:

We the People of [Blue Hill] . . . have the right to produce, process, sell, purchase and consume local foods thus promoting self-reliance, the preservation of family farms, and local food traditions.

We recognize that family farms, sustainable agricultural practices, and food processing by individuals, families and non-corporate entities offers stability to our rural way of life by enhancing the economic, environmental and social wealth of our community.

As such, our right to a local food system requires us to assert our inherent right to self-government. We recognize the authority to protect that right as belonging to the Town of [Blue Hill].

We have faith in our citizens' ability to educate themselves and make informed decisions. We hold that federal and state regulations impede local food production and constitute a usurpation of our citizens' right to foods of their choice.

The rights asserted here are located not only at the interface of personal choice and government oversight but also at a nexus of these and the organization of food systems. The ordinance shows an understanding of local food practices as part of a social and economic system of family farms and local food traditions-cultural economies grounded in mutually understood traditions. The ordinance is an expression of outrage that regulators with strong links to corporate agriculture can intrude on the social relationships figured in rural communities around exchanges of food (Interview July 2012; No Umbrella Media 2012).

The statement that such localized food systems offer stability to rural ways of life invokes a recognition that the small farming at the margins of economic development is heavily threatened by structural forces shaping larger scale agriculture. Because Maine is positioned on the periphery of the national economy, with a lingering dependence on primary-sector activities and tourism, small farmers can link their argument to urgent concerns about the viability of Maine's rural economy, the larger positioning of Maine's economic future within a struggling national economy, and the specter of a pressing need for self-sufficiency and local food security.

The ordinance activists asserted their right to question governmental regimes of truth by expressing faith in town citizens' abilities to make informed decisions about their food choices, independent of biopower exercised as state and federal regulations that constrain those choices. The ineffective poultry exemption and the broader regulatory regime supporting it constituted an exercise of biopower, in which state and federal agencies based slaughter regulations on emplaced prescriptions for sanitation. Biopolitical resistance to these regulations introduced doubt and controversy about whether such stringent standards are necessary in small-scale operations.

In affirming the local state's authority to protect rights to traditional foodways, the ordinance highlights the scaling of biopolitics even more schematically. Significantly, the LFCSGO seeks to delimit governmental action and oversight within town boundaries. Under strong home rule, local ordinances have the power of law, yet in a strictly technical sense, lawyers and lawmakers might argue that delimiting governmental oversight in this way amounts to secession 5 or, at minimum, a significant test of the doctrine of preemption. Whereas ordinance supporters understood it to be a test of preemption that would prove to be legal and in line with the state constitution, the state Agriculture Commissioner (and many others in state government) saw the matter differently. The state had little recourse but to test the ordinance in court by suing someone over food sales. As discussed in the next section, the state's lawsuit against a Blue Hill farmer tapped into a broader public debate about the biopolitics of access to fresh milk and amplified the significance of the ordinance and the issues that brought it into being.

## Scaling Food Sovereignty

Within days of the first town meeting ordinance vote in Sedgwick, the LFCSGO had been touted across the alternative food blogosphere as a food sovereignty ordinance. Members of Local Food Rules and their allies embrace the food sovereignty frame to differing degrees, and this seems to fluctuate over time as well. Two related events, however, amplified the discourse of food sovereignty through which the ordinance strategy was understood locally and more broadly across alternative food networks. One formed part of the backdrop for the ordinance strategy: In February 2010, a small group of raw milk producers and consumers in several other states represented by the Farm to Consumer Legal Defense Fund sued the FDA for restricting their access to raw milk through its ban on interstate commerce in raw milk. The second, playing out in part as a test of the local food ordinance, was a lawsuit brought by the Maine Department of Agriculture in November 2011 against a Blue Hill farmer for selling raw milk without a license.

## 'There Is No Right to Consume Foods of One's Choice'

The raw milk controversy had been simmering since at least 2006 in several other states, where FDA agents had raided several raw milk producers and buying clubs. The Weston A. Price Foundation and its legal

arm, the Farm to Consumer Legal Defense Fund (FTCLDF), have raised the profile of the raw milk controversy across a wide political spectrum of organizations invested in traditional foodways (Fallon 2001; Weston A. Price Foundation 2011; see also Gumpert 2009). In February 2010, the FTCLDF filed a widely publicized lawsuit against the FDA (Cox 2010, FTCLDF v. Sebelius , United States District Court for the Northern District of Iowa Western Division Case No. 5:10-cv-4018), contesting the federal ban on interstate commerce in raw milk. The FDA spent the next two years trying to get the judge to dismiss the case. In a document filed in April 2010 as the ordinance activists began their work, the FDA asserted that 'there is no absolute right to consume or feed children any particular food' (S. Rose 2010, 25) in response to the plaintiff's argument that the interstate ban violated their rights to consume food of their own choosing. This stark phrase was repeated widely as a rallying cry across the alternative food blogosphere as evidence of the FDA's intent to seize ever more control of the food system with the passage of the Food Safety and Modernization Act of 2010. 6

Ordinance activists included the FDA's denial of the right to consume any particular food in an early pamphlet used to develop public support for the ordinance, and subsequent research interviews confirmed that the FDA's position provoked early support for the ordinance. Within a year of the FDA's assertion, five towns in Maine were on record countering the FDA's view, claiming a right to foods of one's choice that can be protected through local autonomy. The ordinance grounds such a right in particular place-based communities, nesting it in a set of scalar relationships and challenging the doctrine of preemption. The effort was understood by food activists as an important move in the struggle to give expression to food sovereignty in the Global North. It was also an intervention in the truth discourses that authorities used to manage the production and distribution of farm food, one that asserted the priority of mutually consenting and informed participants in transactions and relationships involving farm food.

## We Are All Farmer Brown

The LFCSGO is intended to insulate town residents engaged in direct sale of farm goods from the inspection and licensure requirements designed for aggregated and longer distance agricultural trade. Among those emboldened by the ordinance was Dan Brown of Blue Hill, a small-scale diversified farmer with one milking cow. Before the rule change in 2009, Brown was selling raw milk and milk products at two farmers' markets. At some point that year, he was told by an agricultural inspector that he could not do so unless he was licensed but that he could sell directly from his farm without a license. Brown then built a farm stand on his property at considerable expense, where the same inspector visited him and informed him that under the new interpretation of raw milk rules, he could not sell raw milk at all without a license. Brown disagreed with the inspector's interpretation of the rules and, with the passage of the Local Food Ordinance in Blue Hill, understood his actions to be protected. The DoA filed a lawsuit against him in November (Condra 2011; K. Miller 2011) in what many interpreted as a test case of the Local Food Ordinance.

FMF and other organizations publicized the lawsuit against Brown across alternative food networks and the blogosphere and launched a campaign called We Are All Farmer Brown, in which people were asked to write to the agricultural commissioner and the governor urging the DoA to drop its lawsuit against Brown. Against a backdrop that included the FDA's rejection of a right to consume the foods of one's choice, it was not hard to portray the DoA's actions as symptomatic of the state's vested interest in intervening in and regulating basic practices of life (food choices) and farmbased livelihood (selling raw milk and traditionally slaughtered poultry, etc.). Given how integral localized and community-based farm and food practices can be to personal and collective identity, such an apparent overreach by the FDA, and by association the Maine DoA, seemed particularly sinister to ordinance supporters.

As Brown's case made its way through the discovery phase, depositions, and various motions from both sides, FMF and Local Food Rules reached out across activist networks to speak out for the validity of the ordinances and their relevance to Brown's defense. The cause of Brown proved to be a useful mechanism for building up public awareness and dialogue about the LFCSGO and encouraging other towns to pass the ordinance.

Although the food sovereignty frame had been applied to the ordinance work intermittently for some time, the visibility of the Sebelius and Brown lawsuits involving rights to sell and purchase raw milk amplified the use of this frame. Concurrently,

FMF was deepening its own engagement with food sovereignty through executive membership in the National Family Farm Coalition, itself a member of Via Campesina. FMF had hosted several Via Campesina speakers and events since 2006 and used a biannual newsletter, a sizable e-mail list, and several events each year to link the interests and forge connections between small-scale farmers in Maine and allies from around the world. FMF played a key role in spreading the word about local ordinances and then in defense of Farmer Brown and in shaping understanding of the ordinance strategy as a battle for food sovereignty.

In April 2013, the Hancock County Superior Court granted summary judgment in favor of the state and issued an injunction against Farmer Brown that prevented him from selling raw milk without a license. Although the case was widely seen as a test of the local ordinance, the Court did not engage directly with its constitutionality and, in a move that outraged ordinance supporters, interpreted raw milk as a type of food that was likely not included in the scope of the ordinance. Brown's attorneys tartly replied in their next filing that the court's 'terse, tortured reading of the scope of the ordinance in which the court questions and apparently concludes that dairy products are not 'food,'' was an 'odd proposition [that] would come as a surprise to most people' (cited in Moretto 2013). Exchanges such as this highlight that as biopolitics play out in a particular arena, contestation over truth discourses, authorities, and interventions becomes subject to the norms and modalities of power in sway in those arenas. Ordinance supporters hoped to force recognition of the ordinances by the Superior Court judge, but she drew on a narrower legal argument and thereby avoided such recognition.

An insightful legal analysis of the case published in the Maine Law Review (Almy 2013) is worth excerpting at length. After acknowledging the reasoning the court used, Almy proffered an alternative judgment that could also be supported by the facts. Honing in on the issue of preemption that shapes the politics of scale in play in the ordinance debate, he argued that preemption analysis should not stop at the question of whether the food sovereignty ordinances 'circumvent regulations designed to conform all intrastate food production and supply to state sanitation and safety standards' (800). Rather, the analysis should take into account the state intent of agricultural regulations under Title 7

of the Maine Revised Statutes (7 M.R.S.A. x 1-A (2002 &amp; Supp. 2012), which indicates that

Agriculture . . . [contributes] substantially to the state's overall economy, [is] essential to the maintenance and strengthening of rural life and values and necessary to the preservation of the health, safety and welfare of all of the people of this State.

The survival of the family farm is of special concern to the people of the State, and the ability of the family farm to prosper, while producing an abundance of high quality food and fiber, deserves a place of high priority in the determination of public policy. (quoted in Almy 2013, 800-801)

Almy argued that the Hancock County Superior Court could have reasonably ruled in defense of the ordinances, finding that they do not frustrate the purpose of state agricultural regulations, because those regulations are intended not only to enforce sanitation standards designed for industrial-scale agriculture but also to preserve the family farm, strengthen rural ways of life, and ensure the provision of high-quality food. In this view, the ordinance 'represents a locality's attempt to reassert the established policy goals of agricultural regulation by exempting the family farm and direct farm-to-consumer sales from the industrial food model' (Almy 2013, 801).

The Court, of course, did none of these things, leaving the preemption question to the side for the time being. What is interesting in Almy's (2013) analysis, though, is the conceptual and legal space he made for a ruling that could upend understandings of preemption by finding a local rights-based ordinance to be reinforcing rather than circumventing state law. Although the Brown case was decided without engaging these questions, a future challenge to the ordinance could engage these questions more directly.

The FTCLDF appealed the case to the Maine Supreme Court, which heard oral arguments in May 2014. The juxtaposition of a press conference held by ordinance supporters before the court session with the direction of the oral arguments themselves highlights that arenas of power impose their own conventions and priorities on a given struggle. Press conference comments emphasized the collective importance of access to localized foodways, as in the campaign slogan 'We Are All Farmer Brown,' whereas the Supreme Court justices were less interested in the ordinance as such than they were in the legal concept of estoppel. In June 2014, the Court found against Farmer Brown but tortuously sidestepped the constitutional preemption issues raised by the ordinance. The decision

remains to be fully interpreted from different perspectives but, in the short term, it seems likely to stoke more public outrage at the precarity of small-scale farmers.

More broadly, the cause of Farmer Brown proved to be a useful mechanism for building up public awareness and dialogue about the ordinances and encouraging other towns to pass the ordinance. As of now, eleven towns have passed the ordinances, eight towns in Vermont have passed food sovereignty resolutions modeled on the ordinances, 7 and counties and municipalities in California, Arizona, Massachusetts, and Utah have passed similar measures (Kennedy 2013). The diffusion of the idea that food sovereignty can be expressed as local control over food systems can be seen to be changing the terms of debate over food sovereignty and local food systems.

## Short-Term Ramifications of the Ordinance

During the winter of 2012-2013, members of Local Food Rules learned from allies in the state legislature that several bills would be introduced into the legislature in the coming months that addressed various concerns on the part of small farmers. These included bills concerning small-scale poultry processing, sales of raw milk, direct sales of farm stuffs, labeling of food made with genetically modified ingredients, and an umbrella 'concept' bill, LD 475, An Act to Promote Food Sovereignty in Maine Communities. At the end of a frenzied legislative session, several more legislators had emerged as champions of localized food sovereignty in Maine, even while other legislators predictably dug in their heels in opposition. By the time the session ended, the food sovereignty bill had been killed, and the raw milk bill was passed in the legislature and then surprisingly vetoed by a governor who expressed support for efforts to promote and protect small-scale farming since being elected.

By 2014, five years after the catalytic poultry ruling, members and allies of Local Food Rules had made many trips to the state capital of Augusta, and their leaders had grown savvy and well-connected with multiple legislators, had met by invitation with the governor, and had grown adept at calling out supporters to weigh in on a series of bills focused on easing conditions for small farmers and farm-based rural economies. Farmer Brown took work on a lobster boat, the status of the ordinance remains in question, and activists are contemplating new legislative strategies for addressing the problems faced by small-scale diversified farmers in Maine.

## Conclusions: Food Sovereignty, Biopolitics, and Scale

This analysis highlights that the struggle over food sovereignty is deeply biopolitical, that biopolitics are inherently spatial, and that biopolitics can be fruitfully understood as politics of scale. This article lends insight into the dynamics of the case itself while speaking to broader concerns about contemporary biopolitics.

Regarding the case itself, as a political strategy, the LFCSGO originated in deep concerns about the disconnect between agricultural regulations that presupposed and privilege large-scale agriculture and the ways of knowing and doing that constitute small-scale diversified farming in rural Maine. Regulations intended to direct farmers' management of life and death in farm systems impose models and costs that starkly misalign with small-scale diversified farming, and ordinance activists and supporters embrace a set of knowledge practices for managing life and death in farm systems that are not quite legible to state regulators.

The ensuing contestation over truth discourses, authorities to speak one truth or another, and concomitant interventions in the production of farm food for direct sale was theorized in this article as a biopolitics of food sovereignty. Contestation played out at political scales and nested judicial arenas, each shaped by different modalities of power. Whereas the ordinance invoked the local states' authority to protect local food self-governance and socially embedded local food networks, such a scale frame was largely illegible to state regulators and state legislators. The Superior Court judge and the Supreme Court justices strove to avoid dealing with the constitutional issues raised by the scalar strategy of the LFCSGO.

More broadly, this analysis underscores that food regulations are an important arena of biopolitics. Food regulations are a clear manifestation of 'the ever increasing concern of power with the life biology of its subjects' (Campbell 2006, 2), which presuppose and enforce particular ways of managing life in relation to food and foreclose others. Unless and until alternative food activists seek political change, they (we) remain

subject to policies made without broad democratic participation and that are largely antithetical to smallscale diversified farming (and eating). A regulatory context shaped by the Food Safety Modernization Act and its privileging of industrial-scale food production might well provoke a more pronounced biopolitical turn to alternative food activism.

The attempt to carve out spaces of local autonomy in socially embedded food networks highlights the spatiality of biopolitics. The analysis draws on insights derived by Rabinow and Rose (2006) and Morris and Holloway (2012) that the biopower shaping food systems plays out in recognizable spaces and arenas to ask questions about the practices of biopolitical resistance. Broadly, the article traces truth discourses, the authority to speak them, and concomitant interventions and modes of subjectification as exercised within particular communities of knowledge and practice and in arenas shaped by disparate agendas. The analysis of the origins and implications of the LFCSGO suggests general contours of future struggle over food regulations. The bases for different forms of knowledge about food systems and food safety are shaped in different professional spaces and settings, themselves undergirded with different relations of power and authority. The intersections of power, authority, and knowledge that shape different political stances on the organization of food systems are derived in certain spaces of practice, calling for more attention to the norms and conventions shaping practices in these different settings and spaces.

This work underscores the importance of not only the spatiality of biopolitics but also the scalar politics in play as well; that is, ways in which modalities of power shape and are shaped by social, economic, and political scales of organization. The politics of scale lens on biopolitical struggle enlarges understanding of what is at stake as political spaces are made, remade, and struggled over and suggests further work to expand the conceptual reach of the politics of scale perspective. Personal, interpersonal, and local and municipal autonomy, different bases for evaluating risk, and judgments shaping life and livelihood are all implicated in (bio) politics of scale. There is much more to study in this regard. It is hoped that this analysis builds a foundation for future lines of inquiry into the biopolitics of food systems and networks.

## Acknowledgments

The work reported here was first presented at Yale Food Sovereignty: A Critical Dialogue conference in September 2013, with the collaboration of Heather

Retberg and Bonnie Preston. I am grateful to the many people who have taken time to participate in this research by sharing their perspectives and helping to refine my own. I also wish to thank the editor and three anonymous reviewers for their insightful and constructive comments on earlier versions of the article.

## Funding

The project was funded by a University of Georgia Faculty Research Grant awarded through the Willson Center for Humanities and the Arts and by the University of Georgia Provost's Summer Research Award.

## Notes

1. Foucault used the terms biopolitics and biopower somewhat interchangeably; I follow Rabinow and Rose (2006) in this formulation.
2. These could be seen as more than three scales.
3. As in other work with scale frames, the meaning of scale is polyvalent in this construction, referring to jurisdictional scales as well as to the scales of economic activity within a complex production system.
4. Almy (2013, 793, note 34) indicated that 21 C.F.R. x 131.110(a) (2012) defines milk as 'lacteal secretion . . . obtained by the complete milking of one or more healthy cows' that 'shall have been pasteurized or ultrapasteurized.'
5. Personal conversation, Theodore Kurtz, 20 June 2013.
6. The Food Safety Modernization Act of 2010 was signed into law by President Obama on 4 January 2011.
7. Vermont does not have home rule; it is a Dillon's rule state.

## References

- Alkon, A., and T. Mares. 2012. Food sovereignty in U.S. food movements: Radical visions and neoliberal constraints. Agriculture and Human Values 29:347-59.
- Almy, R. 2013. State v. Brown : A test for local food ordinances. Maine Law Review 65 (2): 790-805.
- Ayres, J., and M. Bosia. 2012. Beyond global summitry: Food sovereignty as localized resistance to globalization. Globalizations 8:47-63.
- Bidgood, J. 2014. Maine court fight pits farmers against state and one another. The New York Times 19 June:A14.
- Brooks, S. 2005. Biotechnology and the politics of truth: From the green revolution to the evergreen revolution. Sociologia Ruralis 45 (4): 360-79.
- Cadman, L. 2010. How not to be governed: Foucault, critique, and the political. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 28:539-56.
- Campbell, T. 2006. 'Bios,' immunity, life: The thought of Roberto Esposito. Diacritics 36 (2): 2-22.

- Canfield, C. 2012. Food sovereignty ordinances: Towns loosen reins on direct-to-consumer food producers. Huffington Post 22 June. http://www.huffingtonpost. com/2012/06/22/food-sovereignty-ordinances\_n\_1618270. html (last accessed 17 November 2014).
- Claeys, P. 2012. The creation of news rights by the food sovereignty movement: The challenge of institutionalizing subversion. Sociology 46:844-60.
- Condra, A. 2011. Maine's local food ordinances tested. Food Safety News 21 November. http://www.foodsafetynews. com/2011/11/maines-local-food-ordinances-tested/ (last accessed 17 November 2014).
- Cox, D. 2010. Plaintiffs' complaint For declaratory, preliminary and other injunctive relief: Farm-to-Consumer Legal Defense Fund et al. v. Kathyrn Sebelius et al . In the United States District Court for the Northern District of Iowa Western Division. Case No. 5:10-cv-4018.
- Delaney, D., and H. Leitner. 1997. The political construction of scale. Political Geography 16 (2): 179-82.
- Desmarais, A., and H. Wittman. 2013. Farmers, foodies &amp; first nations: Getting to food sovereignty in Canada. Paper presented at Food Sovereignty: A Critical Dialogue conference, Yale University, New Haven, CT. http://www.yale.edu/agrarianstudies/foodsovereignty/ pprs/3\_Desmarais\_Wittman\_2013.pdf (last accessed 3 October 2014).
- Diller, P. 2007. Intrastate preemption. Boston University Law Review 87:1113-76.
- Fairbairn, M. 2012. Framing transformation: The counterhegemonic potential of food sovereignty in the U.S. context. Agriculture and Human Values 29:217-30.
- Fallon, S. 2001. Nourishing traditions: The cookbook that challenges politically correct nutrition and the diet dictocrats . Washington, DC: New Trends.
- Foucault, M. 2003. Society must be defended: Lectures at the College de France, 1975-76 , ed. M. Bertani and A. Fontana, English series ed. A. Davidson, trans. D. Macey. New York: Picador.
- ---. 2008. The birth of biopolitics: Lectures at the College de France, 1978-79 , ed. M. Senellart, F. Ewald, and A. Fontana, English series ed. A. Davidson, trans. G. Burchell. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Gumpert, D. 2009. The raw milk revolution: Behind America's emerging battle over food rights . White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green.
- ---. 2012. Raw deal: Maine residents' fight for unregulated food draws crackdown. The Grist 29 June. http:// grist.org/food/raw-deal-maine-residents-fight-for-unreg ulated-food-draws-crackdown/ (last accessed 17 November 2014).
- Hamilton, N. 2013. Harvesting the law: Personal reflections on thirty years of change in agricultural legislation. Creighton Law Review 46:563-603.
- Herod, A. 1991. The production of scale in United States labour relations. Area 23 (1): 82-88.
- Herring, R. 2007. Stealth seeds: Bioproperty, biosafety, biopolitics. Journal of Development Studies 43:130-57.
- Holloway, L., and C. Morris. 2012. Contesting genetic knowledge-practices in livestock breeding: Biopower, biosocial collectivities, and heterogeneous resistances. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 30: 60-77.
- Holloway, L., C. Morris, B. Gilna, and D. Gibbs. 2009. Biopower, genetics and livestock breeding: (Re)constituting animal populations and heterogeneous biosocial collectivities. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 34 (3): 394-407.
- Jones, B. 2014. Remarks given at We Are All Farmer Brown press conference, Portland, ME, 14 May.
- Kennedy, P. 2013. Written testimony before Maine House Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee on LD 475, March 2013.
- Kopka, M. 2008. Defending food sovereignty. NACLA Report on the Americas January-February:45-47.
- Kurtz, H. 2002. The politics of environmental justice as a politics of scale. In Geographies of power: Placing scale , ed. A. Herod and M. Wright, 249-73. Oxford: Blackwell.
- Kurtz, H. 2003. Scale frames and counter scale frames: Constructing the social grievance of environmental injustice. Political Geography 22:887-916.
- Kurtz, H., A. Trauger, and P. Passidomo. 2013. The contested terrain of biological citizenship in the seizure of raw milk in Athens, Georgia. Geoforum 48:136-44.
- [Local Food and Community Self-Governance Ordinance. 2011. http://savingseeds.files.wordpress.com/2011/03/ localfoodlocalrules-ordinance-template.pdf (last accessed 13 August 2014).](http://savingseeds.files.wordpress.com/2011/03/localfoodlocalrules-ordinance-template.pdf)
- Maine Milk Rule. 2007. 7 M.R.S.A. x 2910 Chapter 329: Rule Governing Maine Milk and Milk Products.
- Miller, K. 2011. State sues Blue Hill farmer for selling unpasteurized milk at farmers' markets. Bangor Daily News 16 November. http://bangordailynews.com/2011/ 11/16/news/hancock/blue-hill-farmer-cited-for-violat ing-state-law/ (last accessed 19 July 2014).
- Moretto, M. 2013. With legal fight far from over, embattled Blue Hill raw milk producer will file for bankruptcy. Bangor Daily News 17 May. http:// bangordailynews.com/2013/05/17/news/hancock/withlegal-fight-far-from-over-embattled-blue-hill-raw-milkproducer-dan-brown-will-file-for-bankruptcy/?ref=search (last accessed 19 July 2014).
- Morris, C., and L. Holloway. 2009. Genetic technologies and the transformation of the geographies of UK livestock agriculture: A research agenda. Progress in Human Geography 33 (3): 313-33.
- Nally, D. 2011. The biopolitics of food provisioning. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 36: 37-53.
- No Umbrella Media. 2012. So you want to be a farmer . Film, No Umbrella Media, Portland, ME.
- Orizaba Farms. 2009. Blog post: Uphold the 1000-bird exemption for small poultry farms in Maine. http://oriza bafarm.wordpress.com/?s=poultry+exemption (last accessed 13 August 2014).
- Parlow, M. 2008. Progressive policy-making on the local level: Rethinking traditional notions of federalism. Temple Political and Civil Rights Law Review 17 (2): 371-85.
- Passidomo, C. 2014. Whose right to (farm) the city?: Race and food justice activism in post-Katrina New Orleans. Agriculture and Human Values 31:385-96.
- Patel, R. 2010. What does food sovereignty look like? In Food sovereignty: Reconnecting food, nature and

- community , ed. H. Wittman, A. Desmarais, and N. Wiebe, 186-96. Halifax, NS, Canada: Fernwood.
- Paxson, H. 2008. Post-Pasteurian culture: The microbiopolitics of raw-milk cheese in the United States. Cultural Anthropology 23 (1): 15-47.
- Rabinow, P., and N. Rose. 2006. Biopower today. BioSocieties 1:195-217.
- [Reinhardt, J. 2011. Maine town becomes first in U.S. to declare food sovereignty. Sustainable Cities Collective 17 March. http://sustainablecitiescollective.com/grownin thecity/22295/maine-town-passes-local-food-and-com munity-self-governance-ordinance-becomes-fi (last accessed 17 November 2014).](http://sustainablecitiescollective.com/growninthecity/22295/maine-town-passes-local-food-and-community-self-governance-ordinance-becomes-fi)
- Retberg, H. 2010. Farming is romantic . Keynote address presented at the 5th Annual Local &amp; Sustainable Food conference, Lewiston, ME. http://foodformainesfu ture.net/?s=retberg+keynote (last accessed 12 May 2014).
- Rose, N. 2006. The politics of life itself: Biomedicine, Power and Subjectivity in the 21st Century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Rose, S. 2010. Brief in support of United States' motion to dismiss Plaintiffs' amended complaint. In the United States District Court for the Northern District of Iowa Western Division. Case No. 5:10-cv-4018.
- Schlosser, K. 2008. Biopolitical geographies. Geography Compass 2:1621-34.
- Scott, J. 1998. Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Smart, B. 2002. Michel Foucault, revised edition. London and New York: Routledge.
- Speake, M. 2011. Infectious milk: Issues of pathogenic certainty within ideational regimes and their biopolitical implications. Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 42 (4): 530-41.
- Trauger, A. 2013. Towards a geographic theory of food sovereignty in the United States. Paper presented at Food Sovereignty: A Critical Dialogue, Yale University, New Haven, CT. http://www.yale.edu/agrarianstudies/ foodsovereignty/pprs/55\_Trauger\_2013.pdf (last accessed 3 October 2014).
- U.S. Social Forum. 2010. U.S. Social Forum food sovereignty declaration. http://www.seattleglobaljustice.org/ 2010/07/us-social-forum-food-sovereignty-declaration/ (last accessed 3 October 2014).
- Weston A. Price Foundation. 2011. Tour for beginners. Washington, DC: Weston A. Price Foundation. http:// westonaprice.org (last accessed 4 May 2014).

Correspondence : Department of Geography, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602-2502, e-mail: hkurtz@uga.edu.