This article was downloaded by: [University of Utah]

On: 12 November 2014, At: 10:23

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,

37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

Custom and Contradiction: Rural Water Governance and the Politics of Usos y Costumbres in Bolivia's Irrigators' Movement

Tom Perreault a

a Department of Geography , Syracuse University ,

Published online: 27 Sep 2008.

To cite this article: Tom Perreault (2008) Custom and Contradiction: Rural Water Governance and the Politics of Usos y Costumbres in Bolivia's Irrigators' Movement, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 98:4, 834-854, DOI: 10.1080/00045600802013502

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045600802013502

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## Custom and Contradiction: Rural Water Governance and the Politics of Usos y Costumbres in Bolivia's Irrigators' Movement

Tom Perreault

Department of Geography, Syracuse University

In recent years, water governance has emerged as a conflictive political issue in Bolivia, leading to major protests and the rise of influential social movements. Although conflicts over urban water services have received more attention, rural water issues have been an important if underexamined contributor to processes by which water governance is being reinstitutionalized in Bolivia. Rural water conflicts have given rise to a well-organized and influential peasant irrigators' movement, rooted in the department of Cochabamba but with national membership. The irrigators' movement has successfully promoted a vision of water governance based on traditional customary practices of water management, or usos y costumbres . In addition to being material practices associated with agricultural production, usos y costumbres are symbolic of livelihood strategies specific to Quechua- and Aymaraspeaking peoples in the Bolivian Andes. This article examines the material and symbolic importance of these usos y costumbres for the livelihoods and political claims of Bolivia's peasant irrigators. Irrigators have successfully mobilized a politicized and symbolic discourse of usos y costumbres, as well as dense associational networks that have together allowed them to renegotiate the institutionalization of rural water governance in Bolivia: who makes resource decisions, for the benefit of whom, at whose expense, at what sociospatial scales, and through what institutional arrangements. The reinstitutionalization of Bolivian water governance is reflective of historically rooted cultural systems that seek to reconfigure long-standing power asymmetries. Key Words: Bolivia, customary practice, irrigation, resource governance, water.

近年来，水的治理已在玻利维亚成为一个冲突政治的导火线，并引发了大型的抗议活动和有影响力的社 会运动。虽然城市供水服务的冲突受到更多的关注，农村水利问题也相当重要，但未受到充分的关注。 其过程是玻利维亚对水治理重新制度化的重要环节。农村水利冲突已经引起了一项组织良好和有影响力 的农民灌溉者运动。此运动根植于该署的科恰班巴，但也拥有全国会员代表。该灌溉者运动已成功促成 了一个基于传统习俗的水资源管理的治水理念。这个治水理念象征了在玻利维亚安第斯山的盖丘亚和艾 马拉人民的生计战略，同时也是与农业生产挂钩的物质实践。本文探讨该理念作为玻利维亚农民灌溉者 生计和政治主张的物质和象征意义。灌溉者已成功地组建了支持该理念的政治和象征性话语，以及密集 的社会网络，使得他们能够重新商讨玻利维亚农村水利治理的制度化。是谁决定资源的支配？是为了造 福谁？牺牲了谁？在什么社会空间规模？通过什么样的体制安排？玻利维亚水治的重新制度化，反映了 历史上根深蒂固的文化系统，也企图重新配置长期未决的权力不对称现象。关键词：玻利维亚，习惯做 法，灌溉，资源治理，水。

En a˜ nos recientes, la administraci´ on del agua ha emergido como un conflictivo tema pol´ ıtico en Bolivia, ocasionando protestas importantes y el surgimiento de movimientos sociales influyentes. Aunque los conflictos sobre los servicios urbanos de agua han recibido m´ as atenci´ on, los problemas rurales de agua influyen de manera importante, aunque subanalizada, los procesos mediante los cuales la administraci´ on de este recurso se est´ a reinstitucionalizando en Bolivia. Los conflictos rurales sobre el agua han dado origen a un movimiento influyente y bien organizado de irrigadores campesinos, con ra´ ıces en el departamento de Cochabamba pero con afiliaci´ on nacional. El movimiento de los irrigadores ha promovido exitosamente la visi´ on de una administraci´ on del agua basada en pr´ acticas usuales tradicionales, o usos y costumbres. Adem´ as de ser pr´ acticas materiales asociadas con la producci´ on agr´ ıcola, los usos y las costumbres son simb´ olicos de estrategias de sustento espec´ ıficas de los pueblos quechua y los hablantes de aymara de los Andes bolivianos. En este art´ ıculo se examina la importancia material y simb´ olica de estos usos y costumbres en las demandas pol´ ıticas y de sustento de los irrigadores campesinos de Bolivia. Los irrigadores han movilizado exitosamente un discurso simb´ olico y politizado de usos y costumbres, as´ ı como densas redes de asociaci´ on, que en conjunto, les han permitido renegociar la

institucionalizaci´ on de la administraci´ on del agua rural de Bolivia: qui´ en toma las decisiones respecto a este recurso, a beneficio de qui´ en, qui´ en corre con los gastos, a qu´ e escalas socioespaciales, y mediante qu´ e acuerdos institucionales. La reinstitucionalizaci´ on de la administraci´ on del agua boliviana refleja los sistemas culturales de ra´ ıces hist´ oricas que ambicionan reconfigurar las antiguas asimetr´ ıas del poder. Palabras claves: Bolivia, pr´ actica usual, irrigaci´ on, administraci´ on de recursos, agua.

'T he Water War, which was an important motivation for the mobilization of peasant irrigators from Cochabamba, was, without any doubt, based in the defense of Customary Practices [ usos y costumbres ] with regard to their water' (Peredo, Crespo, and Fern´ andez 2004, 11, translation by author). So begins a recent volume cowritten by activists and intellectuals involved with the departmental irrigators' federation in Cochabamba, Bolivia. There are many ways of interpreting the street protests of April 2000 that brought the Bolivian city of Cochabamba to a standstill, forcing the government to rescind the concession it had granted to Aguas del Tunari (a subsidiary of the U.S.based firm Bechtel), and causing reverberations well beyond the borders of this impoverished Andean nation. That leaders of Cochabamba's peasant irrigators' federation-which played a crucial, if little-reported role in the water war and its aftermath-retrospectively framed the conflict as centered on customary practices, or usos y costumbres , merits attention. Usos y costumbres, as applied to campesino irrigation, are the mutually agreed-on norms of water rights and management practices that govern communal irrigation systems. Their centrality to campesino production practices raises a number of questions regarding the nature of water politics in Bolivia: What is the relationship between peasant livelihood strategies and the forms by which water management is institutionalized? In what ways are material livelihood practices imbued with symbolic meanings as political rights and cultural autonomy? Through what discursive forms and social networks are claims to customary practice mobilized and projected onto a national stage?

Myconcernhereisnottodetailtheminutiaeofwater management practices involved in usos y costumbres. 1 Rather, this article sets out to analyze the complex role played by usos y costumbres, both as material practice and as claims to cultural rights, on the part of Bolivia's peasant irrigators. As the mutually agreed-on rules that govern water management in Quechua- and Aymaraspeaking peasant, or campesino , communities, usos y costumbres are inherently communal, place-based, and variable in time and space. Usos y costumbres that govern water rights and management are widespread among campesino irrigation systems in the Andean valleys and Altiplano of Bolivia. Because the peasantry in much of highland Bolivia (particularly in the departments of La Paz, Cochabamba, Oruro, Potos´ ı, and Chuquisaca; see Figure 1) is composed overwhelmingly of Aymara and Quechua peoples, usos y costumbres that confer water rights and serve to organize and regulate rural water management practices also define these smallholder irrigation systems as indigenous/campesino. 2 As both material practice and cultural signifier, they are of central importance to the ways that campesino irrigators articulate livelihood claims. Of particular importance for this study, moreover, is the fact that usos y costumbres have much to do with the governance of water: how decisions about water resources are made, by whom, at what geographical scales, and to whose benefit. As such, this article seeks to examine the ways that irrigator

Figure 1. Map of Bolivia, showing departments and department capitals.

<!-- image -->

mobilization has influenced structures and processes of rural water governance in Bolivia. In particular, the article focuses on the role of the irrigators' movement in promoting a model of water governance based on communal forms of water rights and management, rooted in the concept of usos y costumbres. Peasant irrigators, particularly Quechua-speaking campesinos from Cochabamba, have been at the forefront of efforts to secure communal rights to water, a direct response to attempts by the Bolivian government to implement water privatization and marketing policies. Although less visible and celebrated (both in national and international media) than urban social movements, Bolivian irrigators have formed dense organizational networks and have done far more than their urban counterparts to promote and institutionalize forms of water governance based on communal rights. It must be noted, however, that irrigators have deployed the concept of usos y costumbres in a highly essentialized manner, which has been both politically effective and socially exclusionary. These contradictions raise questions about social differentiation among the Bolivian peasantry and the class-based politics of the irrigators' movement, which are examined later.

This article has two central objectives. The first is an attempt to understand the ways that rural water management has been institutionalized in Bolivia, and how this institutionalization has been influenced by, on the one hand, neoliberal state restructuring, and on the other, an array of social movements opposed to neoliberalism. Second, the article seeks to disentangle the relationship between the material practice of water management and the symbolic importance of water rights. That is, it is concerned with understanding the cultural politics of claims to livelihood rights. These two themes-the institutionalization of water management and the cultural politics of livelihood claims-are examined through a discussion of Bolivia's peasant irrigators' movement, and the role it has played in shaping the country's water governance during the past decade. I argue that the concept of usos y costumbres serves as an idiom through which the irrigators' movement has articulated livelihood practices and broader claims to water rights and local cultural autonomy. This political deployment of customary practice, however, is not without problems, and attention must be paid to the ways in which the concept of usos y costumbres may be used to mask class differentiation and exclusionary practices among Bolivian irrigators. The article begins with a critical consideration of the concept of resource governance, and the ways it has been addressed in re- cent geographical literature. I argue that recent work in resource governance has been insufficiently attentive to rural contexts and resource users' organizations. I then present an analysis of the concept of usos y costumbres, which forms a central legitimating concept in irrigators' claims to water rights. The article then moves on to a detailed discussion of Bolivia's irrigators' movement, and the role it has played in challenging neoliberal models of water governance. Finally, the article presents a sympathetic critique of the irrigators' movement.

## Resource Governance and Peasant Irrigation

In recent years scholars from a variety of disciplinary and theoretical perspectives have adopted the term environmental (or resource) governance to signal the institutional diversification of environmental and resource management as a component of broader processes of political-economic restructuring under neoliberalism. Clearly, governance refers to the functions of government, but also, and importantly, to the relations among government, quasi-governmental, and nongovernmental actors. More properly, resource governance considers government not as a noun but as a verb; that is, the act of governing resources and environments, and the ensemble of organizations, institutional frameworks, norms, and practices, operating across multiple spatial scales, through which such governing occurs (Liverman 2004; McCarthy and Prudham 2004; Agrawal 2005; McCarthy 2006; Bakker and Bridge 2007). This institutional reconfiguration is characteristic of the shift from state-centric government to the multiscalar assemblage of state and nonstate actors involved in governance that MacLeod and Goodwin (1999) point to as a hallmark of neoliberal administrative practice (see also Painter 2000; Wood and Valler 2001). These authors emphasize the 'hollowing out' of the state, and the role of nonstate or quasi-state actors in carrying out functions that were previously the sole responsibility of the central state, including urban and regional environmental management (Gibbs and Jonas 2000; Jessop 2002; Jonas and Gibbs 2002).

Such a perspective hinges on the assumption that there is something new and different about neoliberalism and the neoliberalization of nature. 3 Neoliberalism is characterized by an institutional realignment away from state-centric (public-sphere) to marketbased (private-sphere) forms of governance. In a broad sense, then, neoliberalism is an economic and political project that seeks to liberalize trade

(particularly international trade), privatize statecontrolled industries and services, and introduce market-oriented management practices to the reduced public sector (Jessop 2002). Politically, neoliberalism seeks selectively to roll back certain state functions, particularly the provision of social services and regulatory restraints on corporate practices (Harvey 2005).

Increasingly influential in examinations of neoliberal resource governance is work in critical resource geography (sometimes referred to as First World political ecology [Bakker 2003a; Castree 2006]), which draws variously on regulation theory, urban regime theory, and institutional economics. Geographers working in this field seek to illuminate the ways that particular institutional configurations (e.g., resource rights, policies regarding resource extraction and conservation, or codified social norms and management practices) mediate the metabolic relationship between nature and society, and in so doing serve to stabilize environmental and social regulation within a given regime of accumulation (Bridge 2000; Bridge and Jonas 2002). Such institutional arrangements are seen as responses to, and codifications of, the social and ecological contradictions of capitalism (e.g., Benton 1996; O'Connor 1998). Critical resource geographers tend to focus their attention on single resources (or resource sectors) as direct appropriations of nature, and analyze the constellation of institutional arrangements and social norms that regulate its production and consumption. Such an approach has shed valuable light on the unique problems posed by the neoliberal governance of mining (e.g., Bridge 2000; Krueger 2002 ), wetlands (Robertson 2004 ), fishing stocks (Mansfield 2004a, 2004b), timber (Prudham 2005), agriculture (Hollender 2004), and water (Bakker 2002, 2003a, 2003b).

Of these various resources, water has received particular attention, in part because of the recent and widespread policy emphasis on market-based managementofurbanwatersystems, promoted by governments, private firms, and international development agencies. Research by geographers on these processes has been valuable in explicating the institutional processes and multiscalar politics involved in neoliberal water governance. For instance, in her examination of water service privatization in Spain, Bakker (2002) points out that the neoliberalization of water management occurs along one or both of two axes: privatization and commercialization (see also Haughton 2002; Bakker 2003a, 2003b; Swyngedouw 2004). Whereas privatization involves an organizational transference from public to private control, commercialization involves an institutional transformation, as efficiency measures, market mechanisms, and principles of competition gain primacy in resource management. The complexity and multiplicity of neoliberal institutional forms is similarly noted by Budds and McGranahan (2003), who argue that what is commonly referred to (and decried) as water privatization in fact involves a variety of institutional and organizational arrangements, lying on a continuum from complete state control and nonmarket, to wholly private and market-based (see also Bakker 2007). These authors highlight the continued necessity of an activist state under neoliberalism in establishing, regulating, and participating in water markets, a fact that belies the neoliberal conceit of self-regulating markets (see also Wilder and Romero Lankao 2006). The result, as Swyngedouw (2004, 45) notes, is a 'new 'gestalt' of governance, characterized by a multi-scaled articulation of institutions and actors with varying degrees of power and authority, and in which traditional channels of democratic accountability are cut, curtailed, or redefined.' In short, the neoliberalization of water governance has involved forms of institutional reconfiguration that have in many cases limited the ability of most people to participate in the management of the water they use on a daily basis. This is particularly true for the urban and rural poor, for whom water has in recent years become an increasingly scarce and expensive resource (Swyngedouw 2005).

Although geographical research on water governance has provided valuable insight into the complex institutional arrangements, administrative practices, and legitimating discourses that have contributed to water's neoliberalization, it has tended to privilege urban drinking water and sewerage systems to the comparative neglect of rural water systems (but see Budds 2004; Garande and Dagg 2005; Holder 2006). Although understandable, given the recent wave of water system privatizations in cities of both the global North and global South (Barlow and Clarke 2002 ), greater attention is needed to the governance of rural drinking water and irrigation systems, particularly in the global South, which have also been affected by marketbased reforms. Although such systems have only rarely been privatized in the same manner as urban water systems, 4 they have been influenced in myriad, often indirect, ways by neoliberal reform. In Bolivia, the governance of rural water systems involves a mixture of water users' associations, state agencies, national and international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and international development agencies. These institutional frameworks operate in networked form and

across spatial scales, simultaneously encompassing, for instance, transnational firms, multilateral lending institutions, bilateral aid agencies, central state agencies, NGOs, municipal governments, and local resource users' associations (Swyngedouw 2004). Within these arrangements, differing normative visions of water governance are often apparent: how water should be managed, who should have priority rights to water, how those rights should be allocated, and how much (and in what form) users should pay for water (Perreault 2005). The social struggles that arise from these competing visions help shape water governance, particularly in rural areas where the central state may have limited reach. Water governance, in short, should not be understood as a monolithic or homogeneous set of policies and practices, as competing institutional arrangements and values may coexist or compete.

If we are to understand the variegated nature of resource governance arrangements, however, greater attention must be paid to the role of civil society actors in responding to, contesting, and shaping particular institutional configurations. Geographical work on resource governance has tended to view state and capital as the privileged sites of governance, paying scant attention to the agency of social movements, resource users' groups, or other civil society organizations. This is perhaps a result of the influence of regulation theory, the primary emphasis of which is the dialectical relationship between state and capital in regulating production and consumption (Gertler 2000). It is true that recent waves of water service privatization (like other forms of resource neoliberalization) have been driven by the exigencies of capital accumulation, and the policies of states and international financial institutions, but social movements, NGOs, resource user organizations, and other civil society actors have often contested, and in many cases successfully reversed, such policies. As McCarthy (2005b, 734) notes in the case of environmental NGOs and social movements, such actors have played a key role in shaping the institutional configurations and spatial scales of environmental governance: 'Environmentalists have vigorously and successfully promulgated both positive and normative claims about the scales at which environmental problems should be conceptualized and environmental governance should occur.' The same may be said of resource users' organizations, the actions of which have done much in recent years to shape the structures, processes, and spatial scales of resource governance. Indeed, governance decisions made by national states, transnational corporations, or international environ- mental institutions are in most cases imperfectly enacted, and may meet with considerable-occasionally insurmountable-opposition (Perreault 2006). This recognition calls for greater attention by scholars to the material and discursive strategies employed by rural water users' associations, social movements, and other popular sectors to influence water governance. This in turn calls for a focus on the ways that local resource users make a living for themselves: the resources they require, the practical strategies they use to manage those resources, and the political practices and social forms they engage in to access and defend those resources. In short, attention to the localized effects of rural water governance draws our attention to questions of irrigator livelihoods.

## Irrigation and Peasant Livelihoods

If the agency of resource users has been neglected in the resource governance literature, it has long been a foundation of research on irrigation. In this vast body of work-far too large and varied to review thoroughly here-water management practices, norms of customary use, forms of social organization, and the power relations involved in water allocation have long been central themes (Wescoat 2003). Indeed, the classic works of Wittfogel (1957) and Geertz (1963) were centrally concerned with questions of power and social organization in relation to the management of water for irrigation. Such questions have remained at the heart of research on rural water resources, albeit with a variety of viewpoints and emphases.

Research on Andean irrigation is no exception. This bodyofworkhaslargely been concerned with individual canal systems encompassing one or a few communities, and has provided rich analyses of communal resource management (e.g., Guillet 1992; Mitchell and Guillet 1994), localized water conflicts (e.g., Paerregaard 1994; Gelles 2000), changing dynamics of livelihood strategies (e.g., Trawick 2001, 2003b), the gendered nature of water rights and management (e.g., Boelens and Zwarteveen 2002), and the legal complexities of competing norms in the constitution of water rights (e.g., Boelens and Hoogendam 2002). Comparatively less is known, however, about the role of irrigators' associations and supracommunity forms of organization in shaping the institutionalization of water rights and norms of management (but see Boelens and D´ avila 1998; Perreault, Bebbington, and Carroll 1998). This is a notable lacuna, given the important role that such organizations have played in securing and defending

smallholders' water rights in the Andes and elsewhere. Moreover, as discussed later, the Bolivian irrigators' movement forms an important part of broader popular mobilizations that have been involved in remaking the state since 2000 (Garc´ ıa Linera, Ch´ avez Le´ on, and Costas Monje 2005).

These facts point to the need for greater attention to the growing influence of water users' associations on national and international water policy. Insightful work has been done on the implications for peasant irrigators of water rights legislation in Peru (Guillet 1994; Trawick 2003a) and Chile (Bauer 1997; Budds 2004). Although providing valuable analyses of the ways that national legislation has constrained or enabled farmer livelihood opportunities, these studies say little about mobilization by peasant irrigators, and the agency of irrigators themselves in contesting, shaping, and at times reversing state initiatives. Notable exceptions to this are work by Boelens and Doornbos (2001) and Gelles (2000), who have examined irrigator mobilization in Ecuador and Peru, respectively, and the contestation of state water rights legislation and water development projects. In neither of these cases, however, did irrigators influence the institutionalization of water rights beyond their own communities or canal systems. As I discuss later, mobilization by Bolivian irrigators against state reform of the water sector has fundamentally altered the institutional basis of rural water management and water rights at the national, departmental, and community levels. Through processes of supracommunity organization and the formation of dense associational networks involving cross-class, cross-ethnic, and urban-rural linkages, irrigators have projected their interests onto a national stage, a process that has altered the institutions and processes of water governance in Bolivia. This mobilization has involved claims by irrigators to basic rights to livelihood, expressed through the idiom of customary practices, or usos y costumbres, to which I now turn.

## Usos y Costumbres in the Irrigators' Movement

As applied to small-scale irrigation in Andean Bolivia, usos y costumbres, or customary practices, can be defined as the mutually agreed-on norms of water rights and management practices that govern the functioning of irrigation systems. Usos y costumbres essentially rest on, and are defined by, three basic tenets: 5

1. They are practices that are repeated, habitual, and regular.
2. They are based on thorough, intimate knowledge of the social and environmental context in which irrigation takes place.
3. They are voluntary, mutually agreed-on, and accepted within a given social context (e.g., the members of the irrigation system), and not imposed by an external actor.

Usos y costumbres are, then, the mutually understood rules that govern rights to and management of water within a given irrigation system: when irrigation occurs, how much water each irrigator is entitled to, the order in which individual fields are to be irrigated, the labor or monetary contributions each irrigator is to make to the maintenance of the canal system, and the penalties for water theft or the shirking of responsibilities. Usos y costumbres for irrigation necessarily vary among canal systems, according to quantities and periodicity of water availability, topography, numbers of irrigators, watering needs of locally grown crops, and climatic conditions. Moreover, usos y costumbres may vary over time, as these conditions change, for instance as outmigration reduces the number of local irrigators, or if drought decreases the amount of water available in a given system. As such, and in common with similar rules of operation in commons property management systems the world over, usos y costumbres for irrigation are inherently local, spatially varied, and temporally mutable (cf. Ostrom 1990; Benda-Beckmann, BendaBeckmann, and Spiert 1998; Trawick 2001; Dolsak and Ostrom 2003). 6

Although the concept of usos y costumbres is itself quite old, having been adapted from Spanish colonial land and water law, it has emerged in recent years as a discursive trope linked to rights claims associated with pluri-cultural and multiethnic legal reforms in many parts of Latin America (cf. Eisenstadt 2007; see also Van Cott 2000; Hale 2002). In Bolivia, the concept of usos y costumbres was recognized under the 1994 Law of Popular Participation (LPP), an omnibus law that decentralized political administration and provided for greater popular involvement in local governance (Kohl and Farthing 2006). The LPP and associated laws, together with the 1994 constitutional reform, also granted recognition to certain (limited) forms of cultural and political autonomy on the part of indigenous peoples (Yashar 2005). Bolivian irrigators deploy the concept of usos y costumbres to signal culturally distinctive forms of water rights and customary practice recognized by

Bolivian law and sanctioned under the International Labor Organization's Convention 169 on the Rights of Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries (ILO 160, ratified in Bolivia by Law 1257 in 1991). As anthropologist Robert Albro (2006, 394) notes, legal recognition of usos y costumbres renders cultural identity a legal 'fact.' As such, the concept provides an idiom through which indigenous and campesino peoples in Bolivia link the material practices of everyday life with politicized discourses of identity formation and citizenship rights, both long denied by the hegemonic rule of Bolivia's white, urban minority. Usos y costumbres, then, are the prosaic material practices involved in irrigating crops. The concept is also deployed discursively, however, by irrigators and water activists as both a call for water rights for irrigators and, simultaneously, demands for cultural autonomy and political rights on the part of indigenous and campesino peoples (Laurie, Andolina, and Radcliffe 2002; Albro 2006).

For the purposes of this article I am less concerned with whether usos y costumbres-or irrigator claims to them-are 'authentically traditional,' than I am with the cultural and political work that the concept is made to do. By providing both a legal basis for water rights claims and a symbol of traditional, place-specific, and often culturally distinctive resource use practices, the notion of usos y costumbres is both materially vital and symbolically potent for the organizational politics and rights claims of peasant irrigators. In this sense, it is a foundational concept for irrigator leaders and water activists. As the leader of one Cochabamba irrigation association asserted, usos y costumbres enjoy ' derecho de hecho '; that is, they have 'right of fact or deed.' 7 In other words, usos y costumbres exist in and are reproduced, reinforced, and legitimated through everyday material practice. Insofar as they are based in consensus, collaboration, and mutual vigilance, usos y costumbres can only exist within a context of communal resource control and social organization. As explained by an irrigator and activist closely associated with the Cochabamba Departmental Federation of Irrigator Organizations (FEDECOR),

Usos y costumbres imply the communal form of life and communal work that campesinos exercise over their [irrigation] infrastructure and the water itself . . . also, usos y costumbres are intimately associated with what water means in the campesino communities, no? They say a lot about Wiracocha , Pachamama , 8 the water and earth. . . . It is a type of interdependence between water resources and humanbeings, no? It is a type of divinity, a sacred meaning that they give it . . . [usos y costumbres] are a product of the practices of the ancestors, sometimes from the period of the Incas, pre-colonial; others have been constructed as a result of the Colonial period, or the [formation of the] Republic, no? And what characterizes usos y costumbres is communal management of water, the distribution of water and the respect for its natural authorities.

Cultural beliefs-or the self-conscious representation of particular belief systems-are in this way deployed as an idiom through which water rights are claimed and contested. As is apparent in the preceding statement, irrigators frequently legitimate claims to usos y costumbres through discursive and essentialized appeal to ancient custom. This was emphasized by another FEDECOR leader:

Usos y costumbres are closely related to an historical process, they have much to do with Andean culture, and also reflect processes of struggle between [campesino] communities and hacienda owners, for example. And they reflect the [traditional] water authorities, they reflect the communal forms of decision making about water sources, and they also reflect communal norms of water distribution. . . . In this sense they are not static, they are dynamic.

In this sense, an essentialized discourse of usos y costumbres intimately connects past and present, providing a sense of cultural continuity and social stability. It is true that some irrigation systems in Cochabamba-or at least some individual canals-date to the Inca period, and many usos y costumbres stretch back generations. It must be recognized, however, that many, if not most, of Bolivia's campesino irrigation systems as they exist now date to 1953, when the agrarian reform dissolved the hacienda system and distributed the estates' lands and waters among the indigenous communities formerly bound to the haciendas in highly exploitative labor arrangements (Larson 1998). Many other irrigation systems were developed through internationally funded projects initiated in the 1980s or 1990s (Gerbrandy and Hoogendam 2002). Thus, the importance of usos y costumbres lies less in their historical authenticity than in their symbolic role as signifiers of indigenous or campesino cultural continuity and political autonomy. For example, the concept of usos y costumbres was repeatedly invoked during the process of irrigator mobilization beginning in the early 1990s that led to the establishment of a national irrigators' association and the passage in 2004 of a law recognizing irrigators' traditional water rights. It is to this process that the article now turns.

## The Bolivian Irrigators' Movement and Rural Water Governance 9

## Agrarian Transformation and Irrigator Mobilization

As is true in other Andean states, irrigation in Bolivia has a long and rich historical tradition, with some systems in the Altiplano and Andean valleys dating to pre-Columbian times (Mitchell and Guillet 1994; Zimmerer 2000b; Trawick 2003a, 2003b). Many such systems have undergone considerable transformation, as indigenous agricultural and water management practices were disrupted through processes of conquest, demographic collapse, enforced population concentrations ( reducciones ), and massive economic reorganization to serve Spanish colonial interests (Sherbondy 1994). Following independence from Spain, many irrigation systems-particularly those in favored locations such as Cochabamba's rich valley bottom landsremained under hacienda control (Larson 1998). 10 Meanwhile, Quechua and Aymara communities maintained small-scale irrigation systems where possible, managed collectively through communal labor arrangements. Indigenous irrigation systems-those managed by Quechua- or Aymara-speaking campesinosremained small and centered on single canals that served smallholders with favored lands in single com- munities (Zimmerer 2000b). Although some major irrigation projects were undertaken by the Bolivian government for the benefit of large haciendas during the Republican period, 11 no state attention was given to campesino irrigation systems. This situation began to change with the 1952 Social Revolution, and the ensuing agrarian reform, which largely dissolved the hacienda system (Klein 1992; Gotkowitz 2003). With agrarian reform, the lands and irrigation systems of the haciendas were distributed among the campesinos, who adapted the existing systems of water rights and management to the new forms of land use and tenancy. This was particularly the case in the Upper and Sacaba valleys, where water rights and management practices still retain characteristics of hacienda and even colonial systems (see Figure 2). In many cases, the usos y costumbres by which these systems are managed were established during the process of distributing the lands and water of the former haciendas (Peredo, Crespo, and Fern´ andez 2004). In the Central and Lower valleys, agrarian reform brought the reservoirs and associated irrigation systems built to benefit haciendas under the control of campesino communities (Gerbrandy and Hoogendam 2002).

In the years following the 1953 agrarian reform, investment in irrigation remained limited. This began to change in the 1970s with the activities of the German

Figure 2. Cochabamba valleys, showing principal towns.

<!-- image -->

bilateral aid agency, GTZ. By the mid-1980s, GTZ had begun working with young Bolivian engineers who, in comparison with their predecessors in Bolivia's Ministry of Agriculture, possessed a more nuanced understanding of campesino social organization and agricultural practices. Together, this group sought to foster irrigator associations that would group together multiple small-scale irrigation organizations. At this time, campesino irrigators were organized only at the level of the community or canal, 12 generally (although not exclusively) under the aegis of the community-based peasant unions ( sindicatos campesinos ). Irrigators' associations would, it was believed, be capable of playing the roles of advocate and mediator for community- and canal-level organizations.

Theprocess of organizing irrigator associations began in 1992, with the formation of the Association of Irrigation Systems of Tiquipaya-Colcapirhua, in the Central Valley of Cochabamba, and continued with the formation of similar irrigation associations in the Upper and Sacaba valleys (Peredo, Crespo, and Fern´ andez 2004, 57-58). In large part, irrigators were responding to a wave of neoliberal reforms passed by the government of newly elected President Gonzalo S´ anchez de Lozada. On the one hand, irrigators viewed the formation of locally based resource users' organizations as consonant with the new LPP, passed in 1994. 13 The LPP was a decentralization program that, through the associated law of municipalization, created more than 300 local administrative units called municipios and provided for their democratically elected governance (Kohl 2002; Perreault 2005; Kohl and Farthing 2006). 14 Municipios were provided 20 percent of the national budget on a per capita basis, and were given authority over certain administrative, infrastructure development, and resource management functions, including irrigation systems covering fewer than 100 ha (Kohl 1999). Thus, irrigator mobilizing efforts may be viewed in part as a response to political openings created by the LPP for civil society organizations and the potential for more locally based resource management. On the other hand, irrigator mobilization was also a response to S´ anchez de Lozada's efforts in 1996 to rewrite the water law of 1906-still the only comprehensive water law in effect in Bolivia-that had by that time become little more than a legal anachronism. Irrigator leaders were concerned that the proposed law would favor nonagricultural sectors, and would thereby undermine campesinos' already tenuous water rights. Worse yet, they feared that reform of the water law would open the door to the privatization of water services, which had become the preferred form of water governance among the interna- tional donors and development agencies on which the Bolivian government relied so heavily. 15

Just a few years after the formation of the first secondary-level irrigator associations, irrigators' capacity for mobilization would be tested in a series of conflicts in Cochabamba's Lower Valley. In 1992, Cochabamba's municipal water service, SEMAPA, sought to drill deep wells to serve the demand of the growing urban population. Irrigators in the communities of Vinto and Sipe Sipe, many of whom drew water from the innumerable shallow wells that dotted the valley floor, saw SEMAPA's moves as a threat to their livelihoods (Crespo and Orellana 1999). SEMAPA's efforts to drill intensified over the next few years, and led to confrontations with campesino irrigators in 1994 and 1995. Leading this struggle-what became known as the war of the wells ( guerra de pozos )-was the Association of Irrigation Systems Tiquipaya-Colcapirhua, whose president, ´ Omar Fern´ andez, would later play an instrumental role in the formation of a departmental irrigators' federation, and, following the Cochabamba Water War in 2000, lead the effort to form a nationallevel irrigators' association.

In the mid-1990s, with the assistance of an emerging network of allies, irrigators began to analyze the implications of the LPP for their water rights. Organizational efforts among irrigator associations had by this time been underway for a few years, and development agencies, NGOs, intellectuals, and government agencies were generally supportive of these efforts. The organizer of a 1996 workshop, a Dutch development practitioner working in Cochabamba at the time, provided irrigator leaders with a U.S.$1,000 grant from a fund established by the Dutch government and earmarked for fostering social organization. This money allowed irrigators, with the help of a lawyer from PEIRAV (a Dutch-funded research and teaching center focused on irrigation issues), to draw up statutes for the legal establishment of a department-level federation of irrigator associations. The Cochabamba Departmental Federation of Irrigator Organizations (FEDECOR) was formally inaugurated on 3 October 1997 (Peredo, Crespo, and Fern´ andez 2004, 60). Since its earliest days, one of FEDECOR's central objectives has been the promotion of a water law that would safeguard irrigators' usos y costumbres. By the end of the decade, however, FEDECOR had lost much of its initial energy, and although it was able to mediate water conflicts involving the irrigation associations of which it was composed, it was largely incapable of mounting a proactive campaign in favor of irrigator water rights. 16

## Cochabamba's Water War

FEDECOR's reactivation came with the 2000 Water War, in which irrigators and urban activists took to the streets of Cochabamba to force the (elected) government of former dictator Hugo Banzer to reverse the concession for the city's drinking water and sewerage services, granted to the firm Aguas del Tunari, a subsidiary of the U.S.-based firm Bechtel. 17 The Water War was led primarily by the Coordinadora para la Defensa del Agua y la Vida (Coordinator for the Defense of Water and Life, hereafter the Coordinadora), a coalition of social movements headed by union leader ´ OscarOlivera(Albro2005).Nevertheless, FEDECOR's ability to mobilize its dense organizational network of campesino communities made it a vital element of the Coordinadora, and complemented the urban unions responsive to Olivera's leadership. In this way, the Coordinadora brought together well-organized and militant urban and rural social movements concerned with the threat of water service privatization represented by the presence of Aguas del Tunari. The perception both by the urban poor and by campesino irrigators that their access to water was under threat, and that they had been abandoned by traditional political parties, allowed for the emergence of a potent rural-urban coalition. As Garc´ ıa Linera, Ch´ avez Le´ on, and Costas Monje (2005, 627, translation by author) put it,

The concession not only turned over the administration of water services and the distribution of drinking water in the city, it also established the possibility of fixing drinking water rates to the [U.S.] dollar according to criteria of profitability, a prohibition on drilling wells, the nonrecognition [' desconocimiento' ] of usos y costumbres in the access and use of water, etc. In parallel, and in a complementary manner, the government, in agreement with the [traditional] political parties, sent a Drinking Water Law [Law number 2029] to parliament, which, apart from providing a legal basis to the Aguas del Tunari concession, affected the customary practices of the irrigator associations in the [Cochabamba] valleys.

As noted by Garc´ ıa Linera, Ch´ avez Le´ on, and Costas Monje, there are two ways in which the concession and the associated Law 2029-hurriedly passed by Congress to legalize Aguas del Tunari's noncompetitive, singlebidder contract-represented a direct threat to irrigators' livelihoods. First, the concession prohibited the drilling of wells, and thus constituted a threat to irrigators' water sources. Shallow wells have long been the primary source of water for many irrigators in the Upper, Central, and Lower valleys. These include irri- gators in Punata, Tiquipaya, Colcapirhua, Vinto, and Sipe Sipe-precisely those irrigators who together initially formed FEDECOR to defend their water rights, and, in the cases of Vinto and Sipe Sipe, were involved in the guerra de pozos fi ve years earlier. Thus, irrigators were well organized and experienced with struggles of this type (Albro 2005).

Second, insofar as neither the concession nor Law 2029 recognized usos y costumbres, irrigators perceived them as a direct threat to their water rights. Usos y costumbres form the basis for irrigation management and water rights (Bustamante and Guti´ errez 1999; Peredo, Crespo, and Fern´ andez 2004). They were, nevertheless, vulnerable in that they were recognized legally in a general sense only, under a revised provision of the Ley del Agua Potable (drinking water law), but are not guaranteed in the Constitution (Laurie, Andolina, and Radcliffe 2002). 18 Any threat to usos y costumbres is thus seen by irrigators as a direct threat to their livelihoods, and became a central organizing principle for irrigators in the Water War (Peredo, Crespo, and Fern´ andez 2004; Albro 2005).

Mobilization for the Water War began in 1999, as social movements and activists analyzed Aguas de Tunari's contract, as well as the legal reforms put in place to enable it (Bustamante 2002). In a referendum held in late March and organized by the Coordinadora, voters overwhelmingly rejected the privatization of the city's water services, 19 and in early April campesino organizations led by FEDECOR began blocking roads throughout the Cochabamba valley, as a general strike brought the city to a standstill. Banzer's government cancelled Aguas del Tunari's contract and hurriedly issued a revised drinking water law. Irrigators viewed the Water War as a victory for their claims to traditional customary practices, which they considered under threat by the government's implementation of neoliberal policies of water governance. As ´ Omar Fernandez, leader of FEDECOR, put it in a 2004 interview:

The impact [of the Water War] is that the communities have conserved their rights over their sources of water, they have conserved their usos y costumbres . . . because the drinking water law that they passed . . . was tremendously affecting the usos y costumbres, making it so that the communities were going to have water rights for only five years. So what they have recovered are the rights of the communities that now nobody can affect. [But] the biggest threat at the moment is the [neoliberal] model . . . the government keeps trying to privatize water, to market ( mercantilizar ) water . . . to define the whole country as a zone for concession, make the rights of the communities

disappear. . . . Marketing ( mercantilizaci´ on ) is a permanent threat, privatization is a permanent threat for irrigators.

Here again we see the concept of usos y costumbres mobilized as a trope of campesino irrigator struggle. That the Water War grew so rapidly into so massive and violent a confrontation seemed to have caught Aguas del Tunari by surprise, and threw into sharp relief the severity of water rights as social issue in Bolivia. In the medium term at least, the Water War proved to be a pivotal moment for Bolivian social movements. The street protests were made possible by, and in turn strengthened, processes of social mobilization that signaled the emergence of new organizational forms in Bolivia, outside of (although not at odds with) the older labor union structure led by the Central Obrero Boliviano (COB; Garc´ ıa Linera, Ch´ avez Le´ on, and Costas Monje 2005). Social movement mobilization during the Water War led to pronounced reorganization and reinstitutionalization of water governance: SEMAPA was reinstated as the city's water provider, and new oversight boards were established to assure 'social control' of its operations based on the premise that water should be considered a social right, and not a commodity (Olivera 2004; Albro 2005). The irrigators, meanwhile, embarked on a series of workshops aimed at organizing irrigators throughout Bolivia.

## After the Water War: Network Expansion

In the wake of the Water War, new pressure was brought to bear on the Bolivian government to create more transparent and participatory processes for water governance. One source of pressure was the InterAmerican Development Bank (IDB), which, as the primary source of funding for drinking water, sewerage, and irrigation, enjoys unique leverage over Bolivia's water sector development. The IDB acknowledged, on the one hand, that Bolivia's outdated water law was badly in need of reform, and, on the other hand, that such reform (whether the neoliberal reform then favored by the Bolivian government, IDB, and World Bank, or the more socially oriented reforms favored by the social movements and NGOs) would be impossible without more participatory, inclusive, and transparent structures of governance. As such, the IDB made the creation of such a participatory body a condition of continued financing of irrigation and basic sanitation projects. Bowing to this pressure, in 2002 the Banzer government created CONIAG (the Inter-Institutional Water Council) a sort of 'stakeholder' forum that included representa- tives of NGOs, intellectuals, government, the private sector, and the major social movements, including the irrigators (who played an especially prominent role).

Meanwhile, Bolivian NGOs, social movements, and the Catholic Church increasingly focused their attention on water issues (ISEAT 2003). 20 One Churchaffiliated development NGO, the Center for Research and Promotion of the Peasantry (CIPCA), received funding from the IDB to organize a series of workshops involving irrigators in various departments across the country aimed at promoting awareness of water rights and governance issues, as well as irrigator mobilization. In organizing these workshops, CIPCA worked closely with FEDECOR, Centro AGUA (Andean Center for the Management and Use of Water, the Dutch-funded successor to PEIRAV), and the Bolivian NGO Commission for the Integrated Management of Water in Bolivia (CGIAB). These relationships illustrate the broadbased associational network that irrigators have been able to foster, both within and beyond Bolivia. They also highlight the reinstitutionalization of water management brought about following the Water War, and the variety of civil society, state, and multilateral actors involved in this process.

Irrigator workshops highlighted the politics of water management and began a process of nationwide mobilization in defense of campesino water rights. Irrigators felt their livelihoods threatened by the privatization of water and other resources, the increasing liberalization of agricultural markets, and the state's long history of urban bias in development policy (Zimmerer 1996, 2000a; Healy 2001). In these meetings, irrigators and their allies in civil society sought to form a nationallevel organization to counter these threats. At the heart of these discussions was the need to clarify the ways that water governance is institutionalized in Bolivia: the organizational forms and legal frameworks involved in governing access to and management of water, and the spatial scales at which these would operate. At the core of these discussions was the concept of usos y costumbres, as representing both the particularistic practices of water management, unique to each canal system, and the culturally distinctive rights to water that all indigenous and campesino irrigators held in common.

In the workshops, irrigators expressed a strong distrust of the government's proposed national-level regulatory agency ( superintendencia ) for water, and argued instead for an institutional structure that was more localized, decentralized, and sensitive to (local) usos y costumbres. In place of a Superintendent of Water, irrigators proposed the creation of a National Water

Service ( Servicio Nacional de Aguas ) that would include representatives of the state, irrigators' associations, and other civil society organizations, and that would have institutional standing similar to the regulatory agencies for mining and electricity. The National Water Service was to be attentive to usos y costumbres, which would form the basis of irrigator water rights. These efforts culminated in November 2003, when irrigators from across the country met for three days in Cochabamba to hold the First National Irrigators' Congress. In a large public ceremony, irrigators inaugurated their new organization, the National Association of Irrigators and Community Drinking Water Systems. The inclusion of community-based drinking water systems in the title signals a concern on the part of irrigators over changing government regulations for rural drinking water supplies. In particular, state regulation of drinking water, together with sectoral development programs funded by the IDB and GTZ, meant that these systems were to be managed separately from (and, irrigators feared, given priority over) irrigation systems. Irrigators, who in practice make little distinction between domestic and agricultural water supplies, argued for a more holistic form of management and regulation. Thus, although irrigation remains the central focus of the National Association, irrigators have broadened their concerns to include the integrated management of rural water systems more generally (Perreault 2005). Irrigators in this way promoted the reinstitutionalization of water governance, calling for new organizational forms, norms, and standards. They also promoted a dual management structure, which gave priority to local organizations and their usos y costumbres while coordinating management through participatory national- and departmental-level bodies.

## The National Irrigators' Association and the Irrigation Law of 2004

Following this inaugural congress, irrigators finalized their statutes and bylaws, with the help of consultants from Bolivian NGOs, to receive legal status. During this period, irrigators maintained a focus on drinking water and sewerage services in their continued organizing. By focusing on urban water services, irrigators were able to contribute not only their considerable organizational capacity, but also their technical and analytical abilities to the efforts to reverse market-oriented water policies in urban areas. Irrigators favored a model of drinking water and sewerage management that allowed for public participation and local oversight of water resources and services, and continued to emphasize that, in rural areas at least, irrigation and drinking water systems are intimately related.

These concerns took place against a backdrop of major political confrontation that exposed Bolivia's fragile political situation. In October 2003, protesters opposed to a government plan to export liquefied natural gas via Chile to the United States blockaded roads throughout the highlands, bringing the country to a standstill, and eventually forcing the resignation of president Gonzalo S´ anchez de Lozada (Hylton and Thomson 2004; Perreault 2006). In the following months, irrigator leaders continued to work with Bolivian intellectuals and NGOstoformulate proposals regarding irrigation water rights, and to gain the support of irrigators, other social movements, international development agencies, and state actors. This process culminated in October 2004 with the passage of a new irrigation law, Law number 2878, for 'Promotion and Assistance of the Irrigation Sector,' 21 which was passed unanimously by Congress and signed into law by President Carlos Mesa, the successor to S´ anchez de Lozada. The law stipulates the institutional formation of irrigation in Bolivia, most notably forming a National Irrigation Service (SENARI), and Departmental Irrigation Services (SEDERIs), with considerable participation of and oversight by irrigators themselves. The establishment of SENARI and the SEDERIs eliminates the possibility of a highly centralized regulatory agency for irrigation, as had been established for other natural resource sectors under the 1994 Law of Capitalization (Kohl 1999, 2002; Zeballos Hurtado and Quiroga Crespo 2003). In essence, then, the 2004 irrigation law codifies the proposals formulated by irrigators in the workshops held following the Water War, in conjunction with their allies from CIPCA, CGIAB, and Centro AGUA, and funded by the IDB. With the passage of this law, irrigators at last had achieved legal recognition and protection for their usos y costumbres regarding water rights and management practices. They had, moreover, succeeded in altering the governance of water in Bolivia, an outcome that would not have been possible without the dense associational network of NGOs, intellectuals, social movements, and sympathetic government representatives they had fostered.

## Protest and Political Transformation

Shortly after the passage of the irrigation law, protests intensified in the city of El Alto against the concession for drinking water and sewerage services held by

Aguas del Illimani, a subsidiary of the French transnational Suez-granted initially in 1998, and prior to that awarded to Aguas del Tunari. Street protests and road blockades intensified in El Alto and to a lesser extent in La Paz, as protestors called on Mesa to cancel Aguas del Illimani's contract, which he refused to do. 22 Meanwhile, Mesa's authority and legitimacy declined precipitously, and in June 2005 he resigned amid widespread protests and road blockades (Webber and Spronk 2005; Kohl and Farthing 2006).

Mesa's resignation opened the way for elections in December 2005. Although other candidates were on the ballot, the contest was, for all intents and purposes, between Evo Morales of the Movement to Socialism (MAS), and Jorge 'Tuto' Quiroga, a conservative young technocrat. That Morales garnered 54 percent of the vote in the first round of voting-twice as many votes as Quiroga and unheard of success for any candidate in Bolivia's fractious political system-is made all the more remarkable by the fact that he is of indigenous and campesino heritage, and continues to serve as leader of the country's coca-growers' union. Shortly after his election, Morales created a Ministry of Water and appointed social movement leader Abel Mamani as its head. Only months before, Mamani was in the streets of El Alto coordinating protests against Aguas del Illimani. Appointed to a vice-ministerial position under Mamani was one of the intellectuals who had worked closely with the irrigators in the process of establishing the national association and in formulating the proposal that became the 2004 Irrigation Law. Moreover, ´ Omar Fern´ andez, one of the central leaders of the irrigators' movement, was elected to the Senate in 2005 as a member of Morales's MAS party, as was another of the irrigators' key NGO supporters. It should be noted that, since its establishment, the Ministry of Water has experienced its share of divisions and controversy, common throughout contemporary Bolivia. The original vice-ministers of irrigation and drinking water systems both resigned, and both the irrigators' movement and the neighborhood organization in El Alto that Mamani onceled have since withdrawn support for him and have called for his resignation. Nevertheless, water activists and other allies of the irrigators' movement gained, and continue to hold, positions of influence in the Bolivian government.

Thus, through a decade of organizing and mobilization, Bolivian irrigators successfully altered the institutional arrangements by which water is governed in the country: the processes of participation, the scales of decision making, and the norms by which water rights are allocated and management practices effected. Irrigator representatives and their allies now hold positions in government, and have successfully influenced national water legislation and policies, something unthinkable a generation ago. Crucial to this process was the fostering by irrigators of dense associational networks involving NGOs, international aid organizations, urban intellectuals, social movement activists, and sympathetic government officials. Throughout this process, irrigators and their allies drew on the notion of usos y costumbres, as a potent discursive trope, to legitimize water rights claims according to traditional, culturally distinctive, and place-based practices. Although the concept of usos y costumbres is used to legitimate claims that may reasonably be seen as inclusive and counterhegemonic, it may also mask processes of social differentiation and exclusion within the Bolivian peasantry. It is to these questions that the article now turns.

## Peasant Irrigation and the Cultural Politics of Livelihood

I have argued here that the concept of usos y costumbres is vital to irrigator claims to water rights and livelihoods: the day-to-day practices employed by individuals, households, and communities to secure the material basis of life (de Haan 2000). Of particular importance for this study, moreover, is the fact that 'livelihood' encompasses not only the material aspects of life, but also the cultural and symbolic processes that invest life with meaning (Bebbington 2000; Moore 2005). It is this dual nature of livelihood-as both meaning and materiality-that allows us to consider the cultural politics of irrigator livelihood claims. Such a view highlights the ways that everyday struggles are often expressed in and through cultural referents, for example, through contestations over identity, religion, or other modes of social difference (Moore 2000; Escobar 2001; Doane 2005). That culture itself is a terrain of struggle was recognized long ago by Gramsci (1971), who emphasized the imbrication of ideological and material forces in political struggle. Such is particularly the case for many poor peoples' social and environmental movements, for whom '[c]ulture is political because meanings are constitutive of processes that, implicitly or explicitly, seek to redefine social power' (Alvarez, Dagnino, and Escobar 1998, 7; see also Guha and Martinez-Alier 1997). Through their political claims and discursive representations of both productive and cultural rights, Bolivian irrigators have sought to reconfigure the geometries of

power regarding water rights in Bolivia, linking livelihood claims to calls for more fully democratic forms of water governance (Swyngedouw 2004). Of particular interest here are the ways that claims to livelihood and governance become articulated, in the double sense of Stuart Hall (1990, 1996; see also Li 2000; Moore 2000; Perreault 2003). In Hall's neo-Gramscian analysis, articulation involves both the discursive enunciation of certain claims to identities, ideologies, or interests, and their simultaneous attachment to a specific set of ideological positions and political subjectivities. In making their claims, irrigation activists are performing Hall's dual task of articulation. The concept of usos y costumbres is frequently invoked in meetings, speeches, and documents released by irrigators and their NGO allies as legitimation of peasant irrigators' water rights claims. In contesting the normative basis of private concessions and water marketing, the mode of water governance favored, inter alia, by the World Bank, IDB, and GTZ, irrigators embed their claims within broader cultural systems and claims to political rights. In doing so, irrigators articulate their concerns with those of other social movements, negotiating the 'shifting middle ground' of political interests and class alliances (Conklin and Graham 1995).

The concept of usos y costumbres is deployed discursively to claim irrigator water rights and cultural autonomy, but it also masks processes of differentiation within the Bolivian peasantry. Although Bolivian irrigators can in no way be considered part of the country's elite, they represent a relatively privileged class fraction of the peasantry, a function of two fundamental realities. First, irrigation is an important factor in social differentiation among smallholder farmers. In the highaltitude and semi-arid Bolivian Andes, irrigation serves to supplement rainfall, extend the growing season, and protect crops from frost (Guillet and Mitchell 1994). As such, access to irrigation provides insurance against the effects of climate and altitude, allowing farmers to produce more reliably. Moreover, the majority of Bolivian campesinos (estimated to be roughly 75 percent) do not have access to irrigation, making their crops more vulnerable to drought, frost, and short growing seasons than those of irrigators. 23 Communities without irrigation frequently experience higher rates of outmigration andpoverty. The irrigator movement, led by FEDECOR and the national irrigators' association, thus represents a relatively privileged minority of Bolivia's campesino population (Crespo 2006).

Second, FEDECOR-the central force behind the national irrigators' association-primarily represents the interests of a relatively privileged subpopulation of irrigators: those with flat, fertile, valley-bottom land in the Cochabamba valleys, many of whom have electric wells, modern canal systems, and ready access to large urban markets in Cochabamba and Santa Cruz. During 2004 and 2005, much of FEDECOR's effort was directed toward securing lower electricity rates for irrigators. Although this is an important objective for those irrigators who can afford electric wells, this group represents a minority among a minority of the peasantry. There is no doubt that usos y costumbres are central to the management of these irrigation systems, and to the livelihoods of the irrigators who maintain them. It must be recognized, however, that the benefits of FEDECOR's achievements are distributed in an uneven manner among Bolivia's peasants (Laurie, Andolina, and Radcliffe 2002; Perreault 2006).

Irrigator claims to water, a commons resource, may be seen as a rejection of dominant market-based models of water governance. As McCarthy (2005a, 16) notes, 'Defenses of 'commons' or calls for new ones are, then, truly counterhegemonic projects, reminders that property relations are social, not natural, and that profoundly alternative social relations and values are entirely thinkable.' Irrigator mobilization, rooted in the concept of usos y costumbres, aims to create social, economic, and legal structures that represent an alternative to market-driven forms of water governance. Such structures should not, however, be viewed uncritically as inherently inclusive and egalitarian. The 2004 irrigation law, promoted by irrigators and their allies, protects existing water rights but does nothing to promote the extension of rights to nonirrigating campesinos. Moreover, the law places SENARI in charge of adjudicating petitions for new water rights. According to Article 9 of the law, irrigators hold seven of thirteen positions on SENARI's directorate, giving them a permanent majority. 24 As a result, nonirrigating campesinos must rely on the goodwill of the irrigators to gain water rights. In this sense, the new law establishes for irrigators a form of exclusive control over a commons resource, albeit of a corporate rather than individualized nature. Thus, the irrigation law, although unquestionably progressive in some respects, consolidates and codifies the privileged status of campesino irrigators. This is not to argue against the aims or efforts of the irrigators' movement, which are undeniably important to thousands of peasant irrigators, as well as to the urban poor on whose behalf they have struggled. Nor is it to deny the movement's achievements, which have

been many. Rather, my point is that, like myriad wellorganized social groups within and beyond Bolivia, the irrigators have used their influence to shape laws and institutional structures to reflect their own interests, exposing conservative tendencies beneath their communitarian discourse. This is hardly revealing. It does, however, caution us against uncritical appeals to rural peoples' popular movements, even as we acknowledge their considerable achievements (Watts and McCarthy 1997). The opponents of neoliberalism may in practice be no more egalitarian than its advocates, notwithstanding their rhetorical pronouncements to the contrary.

## Conclusion

Bolivian irrigators and their allies have influenced the institutionalization-and hence the governanceof water in a number of ways. Although less visible than the Coordinadora, irrigators have been more widely accepted as a legitimate partner in negotiations by representatives of the state, bilateral aid agencies such as GTZ, and the private sector. 25 This legitimacy is derived in part from the universally accepted fact that their livelihoods are directly dependent on access to water for irrigation. Additionally, the dense associational network that irrigators have fostered with intellectuals, activists, development practitioners, and other social movements has broadened their coalition of allies, and has given them access to technical expertise beyond the reach of many other rural peoples' movements. Similarly, irrigators promoted a proposal to safeguard water rights according to usos y costumbres, which became law in 2004. Again, the irrigators' dense network of allies played a crucial role in this achievement, as the workshops and the writing of the proposal were facilitated and financed by NGOs and international organizations aligned with the irrigators' interests. Moreover, insofar as they belong to a broader coalition of social movements, NGOs, and intellectuals working to influence water governance in Bolivia, irrigators are partly responsible for the establishment of the new Ministry of Water, the first time in the country's history that there has been a ministry devoted entirely to the management of water as a resource. Finally, the 2004 irrigation law provides for the establishment of national (SENARI) and departmental (SEDERIs) irrigation stakeholder boards that are to be-in theory at least-transparent, participatory, and, unlike the regulatory agencies they are intended to prevent, responsive and accountable to lo- cal concerns. Irrigators, working through a network of allies, have successfully negotiated the ways that water governance is institutionalized in Bolivia: who makes decisions about water rights and management, for the benefit of whom, at whose expense, at what sociospatial scales, and through what institutional arrangements (Liverman 2004)?

What does this case contribute to our understanding of resource governance? First, it shows we must take seriously the agency of civil society actors as they engage with resource policies, and the cultural and political forms that these engagements take. Irrigator efforts to shape the institutionalization of water governance in Bolivia are rooted in historically constituted social identities, systems of meaning, livelihoods, and class-based, ethnic, and regional alliances. Although rife with contradictions, irrigator mobilization may be seen as a direct response to, and rejection of, the atomizing logic of neoliberal water governance. Attempts by the state to implement (partial) privatization and market-based management of water services in La Paz/El Alto and Cochabamba were viewed by irrigators as antithetical to their historically communal forms of water management. Moreover, in a country with a long history of foreign-dominated resource exploitation, the specter of foreign-controlled water concessions is widely rejected on nationalist grounds. Second, if resource governance entails a reinstitutionalization of the institutions of state, market, and civil society, then we must be alert to the possibility that such reconfigurations may not be unidirectional. In contemporary Bolivia, social-movement-led reforms have resulted not in the 'hollowing out' of the state, but rather its reassertion, as the state is given new authority for oversight and management of water resources through the establishment of the Ministry of Water, SENARI, and the SEDERIs. New institutional and organizational forms of water governance in Bolivia involve strong roles for both state and civil society actors, but notably not the institutions of the market. Water governance in Bolivia has taken a resolutely antineoliberal turn. Bolivian irrigators are asserting the importance of local cultural autonomy while forming translocal networks with campesino and indigenous organizations, leftist political parties, and national and international NGOs, informing an agrarian politics that is based in, but not bounded by place, precisely the sort of 'rooted translocalism' called for by Katz (2001, 724). Honest analysis demands, however, that we guard against romanticizing the irrigators' movement, and acknowledge that its considerable achievements have been distributed

unevenly among the Bolivian peasantry. If, as Swyngedouw (2005) avers, neoliberalization of water governance leads to institutional forms that limit the ability of people to participate in managing their water, then Bolivia's irrigators' movement is an explicit attempthowever contradictory-to reconfigure these power geometries.

## Acknowledgments

Funding for this research was provided by a FulbrightHays Faculty Research Abroad fellowship, as well as grants from the Department of Geography and the Maxwell School at Syracuse University. Earlier versions of this article benefited from comments by Jessica Budds, Gabriela Valdivia, Margaret Wilder, and four anonymous reviewers, as well as discussions with patient audiences at the University of North Carolina, Colgate University, the University of Arizona, Cornell University, the University of Montr´ eal, and Texas A&amp;MUniversity. A debt of gratitude is owed to Chaly Crespo, Mar´ ıa Esther Udaeta, Rocio Bustamante, and my colleagues at Centro AGUA and Agua Sustentable in Cochabamba. My thanks to Joe Stoll for his help with the maps. All errors in fact or interpretation are, of course, my own.

## Notes

1. This is, however, an important topic that has received considerable attention elsewhere. See, for example, Sheridan (1988), Gerbrandy and Hoogendam (1998), Bustamante and Guti´ errez (1999), Gelles (2000), Trawick (2003), and Peredo, Crespo, and Fern´ andez (2004).
2. The identity politics involved in labeling highland Quechua and Aymara speakers is complex, and a full discussion of these issues is beyond the scope of this article. In most of highland Bolivia, Quechua and Aymara speakers do not self-identify as indigenous, adopting the term campesino (peasant) instead. This terminology has roots in the mobilizations that culminated in the National Revolution of 1952, and the subsequent agrarian reform of 1953, which dissolved the hacienda system and allotted land to the Quechua and Aymara communities that had been subject to racialized serfdom under its conditions. Campesino was constructed and widely adopted as a more modern and progressive social category, and a clear improvement over the term indio , commonly used in a disparaging manner prior to 1953. Campesino remains the most common, and preferred, term among many in highland Bolivia, although ind´ ıgena and in some instances originario are gaining in popularity, as ethnic movements increase their influence, and as Quechua and Aymara populations become increasingly urbanized (see Healy 2001; Alb´ o 2002; Grindle and Domingo 2003; Alb´ o and Quispe 2004). Each of these terms is highly politicized
3. and cannot be taken as straightforward, 'objective' reflections of social or ethnic reality.
3. This literature is examined in a pair of excellent review essays by Noel Castree (2008a, 2008b; see also Bridge and Jonas 2002; Castree 2006; Bakker and Bridge 2007; Himley 2008).
4. One exception to this is Chile, which has introduced thorough market-based reforms throughout its water sector (Bauer 1997; Budds 2004).
5. Author interview, Lu´ ıs Salazar, Programa Nacional de Riego (PRONAR), Cochabamba, 23 October 2003.
6. The concept of usos y costumbres is not unique to Bolivian irrigation. The term refers to common property arrangements of many sorts, including water, forests, and agricultural lands, and has been adopted in a variety of Latin American contexts to refer to indigenous customary law (Orellana 2004). Moreover, concepts equivalent to usos y costumbres-mutually recognized practices to govern the management of commons resources-exist in commons property systems throughout the world (Ostrom 1990).
7. Interview, leader of Asociaci´ on de Riego y Servicios de Tiraque (ARST), Tiraque, Cochabamba, 6 April 2004.
8. Wiracocha and Pachamama are references to Andean water and earth deities, respectively.
9. Unless otherwise indicated, information presented in this section is based on (1) open-ended interviews with irrigators, state officials, researchers, and representatives of development agencies in the Bolivian cities of Cochabamba, La Paz, and Oruro; (2) observation and analysis of three Quechua campesino irrigation systems in Cochabamba department; (3) participation in water policy-related meetings and conferences in La Paz, Cochabamba, and Oruro; and (4) analysis of project reports and summary data produced by state irrigation agencies, bilateral aid agencies, and NGOs. Fieldwork was conducted over fourteen months, between 2002 and 2007, including a ten-month period during 2003-2004.
10. The broad alluvial plain on which the city of Cochabamba and the numerous surrounding smaller towns and villages are located is divided into four zones, along distinct watersheds: the Upper Valley (with its principle towns of Tiraque, Punata, and Tarata); the Sacaba Valley (with its principal town of Sacaba); the Central Valley (with its principal towns of Tiquipaya, Colcapirhua, and Quillacollo); and the Lower Valley (with its principal towns of Vinto and Sipe Sipe). See Figure 2.
11. Author interview, Humberto Gandarillas, Programa Nacional de Riego (PRONAR), Cochabamba, 12 July 2005.
12. Canal systems frequently connect multiple communities within a watershed, but rarely serve every household in a given community (Zimmerer 2000b). Thus, the scale at which irrigation is practiced is not always congruent with the campesino community.
13. Author interview, Roc´ ıo Bustamante, Centro AGUA, Cochabamba, 9 February 2004.
14. Municipios are similar to counties in the United States, in that they are focused on an urban center, and include its frequently large rural hinterland. Administratively, they were created by reassigning preexisting territorial units known as provincial sections, which had no

- administrative authority, budget, or elected government of their own.
15. Author interview, Roc´ ıo Bustamante, Centro AGUA, Cochabamba, 9 February 2004.
16. Author interview, Roc´ ıo Bustamante, Centro AGUA, Cochabamba, 9 February 2004.
17. Cochabamba's Water War, which has become an iconic event for the global antineoliberalism movement, has been analyzed at length elsewhere, from a variety of ideological positions and disciplinary perspectives. See, for example, Barlow and Clarke 2002a, 2002b; Finnegan 2002; Laurie, Andolina, and Radcliffe 2002; Nickson and Vargas 2002; Garc´ ıa, Garc´ ıa, and Quit´ on 2003; Peredo et al. 2004; Albro 2005; Kohl and Farthing 2006; Perreault 2006.
18. In fact, the Constitution of 1994 explicitly states that all natural resources are the property of the state, and the state alone has the authority to make management and allocation decisions. Thus, a legal contradiction exists between the Constitution and the sectoral law regulating drinking water (author interviews with Carlos Crespo, Centro de Estudios Superiores Universitarios, Universidad Mayor de San Sim´ on, Cochabamba, 29 October 2003; and Ren´ e Orellana, Agua Sustentable, Cochabamba, 25 February 2004).
19. The referendum drew 48,276 people, who voted on the following questions: (1) Do you accept the water fee increase? (99 percent responded 'no'); (2) Should the contract with Aguas de Tunari be canceled? (96 percent responded 'yes'); and (3) Do you agree that water is private property, as stated in Law no. 2029? (97 percent responded 'no'; Bustamante 2002).
20. Author interview, Marcelo Ortega, CEPAS-Caritas, La Paz, 13 January 2004.
21. The text of this law can be found at http://www. aguabolivia.org/index.php?option = com wrapper&amp;Itemid = 50.
22. As of this writing (December 2007), Aguas de Illimani's contract still has not been canceled, and its future remains an open question.
23. Although no definitive data exist, and the numbers of irrigators change as new irrigation systems are developed, it has been estimated that roughly 25 percent of Bolivia's campesino population has access to water for irrigation, meaning that some 75 percent of campesinos have no irrigation (Alfredo Ter´ an, Director, Centro AGUA, personal communication, Cochabamba, 15 August 2007).
24. The other positions are held by the minister and three vice-ministers of the Ministry of Water, a representative of the national peasant union CSUTCB, and a representative of the national agribusiness council, CONFEAGRO.
25. Author interview, Eberhard Gol, GTZ, La Paz, 14 June 2004.

## Appendix: List of Acronyms Used in Text

- CentroAGUA: CentroAndinoparalaGesti´ on y Uso del Agua (Andean Center for the Management and Use of Water)
- CGIAB: Comisi´ on para la Gesti´ on Integral del Agua en Bolivia (Commission for the Integrated Management of Water in Bolivia)
- CIPCA: Centro de Investigaci´ on y Promoci´ on del Campesinado (Center for Research and Promotion of the Peasantry)
- COB: Central Obrera Boliviana (Bolivian Workers' Central)
- Agro-
- CONFEAGRO: Confederaci´ on Nacional de pecuarios (National Agricultural Confederation)
- CONIAG: Consejo Inter-institucional del Agua (Interinstitutional Water Council)
- CSUTCB: Confederaci´ on Sindical ´ Unica de Trabajadores Campesinos de Bolivia
- (Sole Confederation of Peasant Workers of Bolivia)
- FEDECOR: Federaci´ on Departamental Cochabambina de Regantes (Cochabamba Departmental Federation of Irrigators)
- GTZ: Deutsche Gesselschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit (German bilateral aid agency)
- IDB: Inter-American Development Bank
- ILO: International Labor Organization
- LPP: Ley de Participaci´ on Popular (Law of Popular Participation)
- MAS: Movimiento al Socialismo (Movement to Socialism)
- NGO: Nongovernmental organization
- PRONAR: Programa Nacional de Riego (National Irrigation Program)
- SEDERI: Servicio Departamental de Riego (Departmental Irrigation Service)
- SEMAPA: Servicio Municipal de Agua Potable y Alcantarillado (Municipal Drinking Water and Sewerage Service, Cochabamba)
- SENARI: Servicio Nacional de Riego (National Irrigation Service)

## References

- Agrawal, A. 2005. Environmentality: Technologies of government and the making of subjects . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Alb´ o, X. 2002. Pueblos Indios en la pol´ ıtica [Indian peoples in politics]. La Paz, Bolivia: Plural Editores/CIPCA.
- Alb´ o, X., and V. Quispe 2004. ¿Quienes son ind´ ıgenas en los gobiernos municipales? [Who are the indigenous peoples in municipal governments?] La Paz, Bolivia: Plural Editores/CIPCA.
- Albro, R. 2005. 'The water is ours, carajo!' Deep citizenship in Bolivia's water war. In Social movements: An anthropological reader , ed. J. Nash, 249-71. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.

- ---. 2006. The culture of democracy and Bolivia's indigenous movements. Critique of Anthropology 26 (4): 387-410.
- Alvarez, S. E., E. Dagnino, and A. Escobar. 1998. Introduction: The cultural and the political in Latin American social movements. In Cultures of politics, politics of cultures: Re-visioning Latin American social movements , ed. S. E. Alvarez, E. Dagnino, and A. Escobar, 1-29. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Bakker, K. 2002. From state to market? Water mercantilizaci´ on in Spain. Environment and Planning A 34:767-90.
- ---. 2003a. A political ecology of water privatization. Studies in Political Economy 70:35-58.
- ---.2003b. An uncooperative commodity: Privatizing water in England and Wales . Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
- ---. 2007. The 'commons' versus the 'commodity': Alter-globalization, anti-privatization and the human right to water in the global South. Antipode 39 (3): 43055.
- Bakker, K., and G. Bridge. 2007. Resource regulation. In Handbook of political geography , ed. K. Cox, M. Low, and J. Robinson, 269-88. London: Sage.
- Barlow, M., and T. Clarke. 2002a. Blue gold: The fight to stop the corporate theft of the world's water . New York: The New Press.
- ---. 2002b. Who owns the water? The Nation, 2 September. http://thenation.com/doc.mhtml?i = 20020902&amp;s = Barlow (last accessed 5 July 2006).
- Bauer, C. J. 1997. Bringing water markets down to earth: The political economy of water rights in Chile, 197695. World Development 25 (5): 639-56.
- Bebbington, A. 2000. Reencountering development: Livelihood transitions and place transformations in the Andes. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 90 (3): 495-520.
- Benda-Beckmann, F. von, K. von Benda-Beckmann, and J. Spiert. 1998. Equity and legal pluralism: Taking customary law into account in natural resource policies. In Searching for equity: Conceptions of justice and equity in peasant irrigation , ed. R. Boelens and G. D´ avila, 57-69. Assen, The Netherlands: Van Gorcum.
- Benton, T. 1996. The greening of Marxism . New York: Guilford.
- Boelens, R., and G. D´ avila. 1998. Water users' organisations, support approaches and the defence of equity. In Searching for equity: Conceptions of justice and equity in peasant irrigation , ed. R. Boelens and G. D´ avila, 419-40. Assen, The Netherlands: Van Gorcum.
- Boelens, R., and B. Doornbos. 2001. The battlefield of water rights: Rule making amidst conflicting normative frameworks in the Ecuadorian highlands. Human Organization 60 (4): 343-55.
- Boelens, R., and P. Hoogendam, eds. 2002. Water rights and empowerment . Assen, The Netherlands: Van Gorcum.
- Boelens, R., and M. Zwarteveen. 2002. Gender dimensions of water control in Andean irrigation. In Water rights and empowerment , ed. R. Boelens and P. Hoogendam, 75-109. Assen, The Netherlands: Van Gorcum.
- Bridge, G. 2000. The social regulation of resource access and environmental impact: Production, nature and contra-
- diction in the U.S. copper industry. Geoforum 31:23756.
- Bridge, G., and A. E. G. Jonas. 2002. Governing nature: Thereregulation of resource access, production, and consumption. Environment and Planning A 34:759-66.
- Budds, J. 2004. Power, nature, and neoliberalism: The political ecology of water in Chile. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 25 (3): 322-42.
- Budds, J., and G. McGranahan. 2003. Are the debates on water privatization missing the point? Experiences from Africa, Asia and Latin America. Environment and Urbanization 15 (2): 87-113.
- Bustamante, R. 2002. Legislaci´ on del agua en Bolivia [Water legislation in Bolivia]. In Indigenous water rights, local water management, and national legislation , ed. R Boelens, 182-263. Report prepared for Water Law and Indigenous Rights (WALIR). Wageningen, The Netherlands: Wageningen University/IWE and United Nations/CEPAL.
- Bustamante, R., and Z. Guti´ errez. 1999. Usos y costumbres en la gesti´ on de riego: Caos u orden en la gesti´ on de agua para riego [Customary uses in the management of irrigation: Chaos or order in the management of water for irrigation]. In Aguas y municipios: Retos para la gesti´ on municipal de agua [Waters and municipalities: Challenges for the municipal management of water], ed. P. Hoogendam, 163-89. La Paz, Bolivia: Plural Editores.
- Castree, N. 2006. From neoliberalism to neoliberalisation: Consolations, confusions, and necessary illusions. Environment and Planning A 38: 1-6.
- ---.2008a. Neoliberalizing nature: The logics of de- and re-regulation. Environment and Planning A 40:131-52.
- ---.2008b. Neoliberalizing nature: Processes, effects and evaluations. Environment and Planning A 40:153-73
- Conklin, B. A., and L. Graham. 1995. The shifting middle ground: Amazonian Indians and eco-politics. American Anthropologist 97 (4): 695-710.
- Crespo, C. 2006. La ley de riego y sus reglamentos: Riesgos y desaf´ ıos [The law of irrigation and its regulations: Risks and challenges]. Todo Sobre el Agua , Comisi´ on para la Gesti´ on Integral de Agua en Bolivia (Commission for the Integrated Management of Water in Bolivia) Bulletin 78 (December): 3-6.
- Crespo, C., and R. Orellana. 1999. Conflictos ambientales (dos casos: Agua y territorio) [Environmental conflicts (Twocases: Water and territory)]. Cochabamba, Bolivia: CERES.
- de Haan, L. J. 2000. Globalization, localization and sustainable livelihood. Sociologia Ruralis 40 (3): 339-65.
- Doane, M. 2005. The resilience of nationalism in a global era: Megapojects in Mexico's south. In Social movements: An anthropological reader , ed. J. Nash, 187-202. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.
- Dolsak, N., and E. Ostrom, eds. 2003. Commons in the new millennium: Challenges and adaptation . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Eisenstadt, T. A. 2007. Usos y costumbres and postelectoral conflicts in Oaxaca, Mexico, 1995-2004: An empirical and normative assessment. Latin American Research Review 42 (1): 52-77.
- Escobar, A. 2001. Culture sits in places: Reflections on globalism and subaltern strategies of localization. Political Geography 20:139-74.

- Finnegan, W. 2002. Leasing the rain. The New Yorker, 8 April, 43-53.
- Garande, T., and S. Dagg. 2005. Public participation and effective water governance at the local level: A case study from a small under-developed area in Chile. Environment, Development and Sustainability 7:417-31.
- Garc´ ıa, A, F. Garc´ ıa, and L. Quit´ on. 2003. La 'Guerra del Agua' abril de 2000: La crisis de la pol´ ıtica en Bolivia [The 'Water War' April 2000: The crisis of politics in Bolivia). La Paz, Bolivia: PIEB.
- Garc´ ıa Linera, A., M. Ch´ avez Le´ on, and P. Costas Monje. 2005. Sociolog´ ıa de los movimientos sociales en Bolivia: Estructuras de movilizaci´ on, repertorios culturales y acci´ on pol´ ıtica [Sociology of the social movements in Bolivia: Structures of mobilization, cultural repertories, and political action]. La Paz, Bolivia: Diakon´ ıa/Oxfam.
- Geertz, C. 1963. Agricultural involution: The processes of ecological change in Indonesia . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Gelles, P. 2000. Water and power in highland Peru: The cultural politics of irrigation development . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Gerbrandy, G., and P. Hoogendam. 1998. Aguas y acequias: Los derechos al agua y la gesti´ on campesina de riego en los Andes Bolivianos [Waters and irrigation canals: The water rights and peasant management of irrigation in the Bolivian Andes]. La Paz, Bolivia: Plural Editores.
- ---.2002.Materialising rights: Hydraulic property in the extension and rehabilitation of two irrigation systems in Bolivia. In Water rights and empowerment , ed. R. Boelens and P. Hoogendam, 36-51. Assen, The Netherlands: Van Gorcum.
- Gertler, M. 2000. Regulation school. In The dictionary of human geography , ed. R. J. Johnston, D. Gregory, and D. M. Smith, 518-19. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.
- Gibbs, D., and A. E. G. Jonas 2000. Governance and regulation in local environmental policy: The utility of a regime approach. Geoforum 31:299-313.
- Gotkowitz, L. 2003. Revisiting the rural roots of the revolution. In Proclaiming revolution: Bolivia in comparative perspective , ed. M. S. Grindle and P. Domingo, 164-82. Cambridge, MA, and London: Harvard University Press and University of London Institute of Latin American Studies.
- Gramsci, A. 1971. Selections from the prison notebooks . Trans. and ed. Q. Hoare and G. N. Smith. New York: International.
- Grindle, M. S., and P. Domingo, eds. 2003. Proclaiming revolution: Bolivia in comparative perspective . Cambridge, MA, and London: Harvard University Press and University of London Institute of Latin American Studies.
- Guha, R., and J. Martinez-Alier. 1997. Varieties of environmentalism: Essays north and south . London: Earthscan.
- Guillet, D. W. 1992. Covering ground: Communal water management and the state in the Peruvian highlands . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
- ---. 1994. Canal irrigation and the state: The 1969 water law and irrigation systems of the Colca Valley of southwestern Peru. In Irrigation at high altitudes: The social organization of water control systems in the Andes , ed. W.P. Mitchell and D. Guillet, 167-87. Society for Latin
- American Anthropology Publication Series 12. Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association.
- Guillet, D. W., and W. P. Mitchell. 1994. Introduction: High altitude irrigation. In Irrigation at high altitudes: The social organization of water control systems in the Andes , ed. W. P. Mitchell and D. Guillet, 1-20. Society for Latin American Anthropology Publication Series 12. Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association.
- Hale, C. R. 2002. Does multiculturalism menace? Governance, cultural rights and the politics of identity in Guatemala. Journal of Latin American Studies 34 (3): 485524.
- Hall, S. 1990. Cultural identity and diaspora. In Identity: Community, culture, difference , ed. J. Rutherford, 22237. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
- ---. 1996. On postmodernism and articulation: An interview with Stuart Hall. In Stuart Hall: Critical dialogues in cultural studies, ed. D. Morley and K. H. Chen, 131-50. London: Routledge.
- Harvey, D. 2005. A brief introduction to neoliberalism . Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
- Haughton, G. 2002. Market making: Internationalisation and global water markets. Environment and Planning A 34:791-807.
- Healy, K. 2001. Llamas, weavings, and organic chocolate: Multicultural grassroots development in the Andes and Amazon of Bolivia . South Bend, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
- Himley,M.2008.Geographiesofenvironmentalgovernance: The nexus of nature and neoliberalism. Geography Compass 2:1-19.
- Holder, C. D. 2006. Contested visions: Technology transfer, water resources, and social capital in Chilasc´ o, Guatemala. Comparative Technology Transfer and Society 4 (3): 269-86.
- Hollender, G. 2004. Agricultural trade liberalization, multifunctionality and sugar in the south Florida landscape. Geoforum 35 (3): 299-312.
- Hylton, F., and S. Thomson. 2004. The roots of rebellion: Insurgent Bolivia. NACLA Report on the Americas 38 (3): 15-19.
- ISEAT. 2003. La defensa del gas y el agua: Miradas desde la fe [The defense of gas and water: A view from faith]. La Paz, Bolivia: Plural.
- Jessop, B. 2002. Liberalism, neoliberalism, and urban governance: A state-theoretical perspective. Antipode 34:45272.
- Jonas, A., and D. Gibbs. 2002. A tale of two areas: Governance and regulation in local environmental policy making in the East of England. Social Science Quarterly 84 (4): 1018-37.
- Katz, C. 2001. Vagabond capitalism and the necessity of social reproduction. Antipode 33 (4): 70928.
- Klein, H. S. 1992. Bolivia: The evolution of a multi-ethnic society. 2nd ed. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
- Kohl, B. 1999. Economic and political restructuring in Bolivia: Tools for a neoliberal agenda? PhD dissertation, Cornell University.
- ---. 2002. Stabilizing neoliberalism in Bolivia: Popular participation and privatization. Political Geography 21:449-72.

- Kohl, B., and L. Farthing. 2006. Impasse in Bolivia: Neoliberal hegemony and popular resistance . London: Zed Books.
- Krueger, R. 2002. Relocating regulation in Montana's gold mining industry. Environment and Planning A 79 (3): 867-82.
- Larson, B. 1998. Cochabamba, 1550-1900: Colonialism and agrarian transformation in Bolivia . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Laurie, N., R. Andolina, and S. Radcliffe. 2002. The excluded 'indigenous'? The implications of multi-ethnic policies for water reform in Bolivia. In Multiculturalism in Latin America: Indigenous rights, diversity and democracy , ed. R. Sieder, 252-76. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Li, T. M. 2000. Articulating indigenous identity in Indonesia: Resource politics and the tribal slot. Comparative Studies in Society and History 42 (1): 149-79.
- Liverman, D. 2004. Who governs, at what scale, and at what price? Geography, environmental governance, and the commodification of nature. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 (4): 734-38.
- MacLeod, G., and M. Goodwin. 1999. Space, scale and state strategy: Rethinking urban and regional governance. Progress in Human Geography 23 (4): 503-27.
- Mansfield, B. 2004a. Neoliberalism in the oceans: 'Rationalization,' property rights, and the commons question. Geoforum 35:313-26.
- ---.2004b. Rules of privatization: Contradictions in neoliberal regulation of North Pacific fisheries. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 (3): 56584.
- McCarthy, J. 2005a. Commons as counterhegemonic projects. Capitalism, Nature, Socialism 16 (1): 9-24.
- ---. 2005b. Scale, sovereignty, and strategy in environmental governance. Antipode 37 (4): 731-53.
- ---.2006. Neoliberalism and the politics of alternatives: Community forestry in British Columbia and the United States. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 96 (1): 84-104.
- McCarthy, J., and S. Prudham. 2004. Neoliberal nature and the nature of neoliberalism. Geoforum 35:27583.
- Mitchell, W. P., and D. Guillet, eds. 1994. Irrigation at high altitudes: The social organization of water control systems in the Andes . Society for Latin American Anthropology Publication Series 12. Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association.
- Moore, D. 2000. The crucible of cultural politics: Reworking 'development' in Zimbabwe's eastern highlands. American Ethnologist 26 (3): 654-89.
- ---. 2005. Suffering for territory: Race, place and power in Zimbabwe . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Nickson, A., and C. Vargas. 2002. The limitations of water regulation: The failure of the Cochabamba concession in Bolivia. Bulletin of Latin American Research 21 (1): 99-120.
- O'Connor, J. 1998. Natural causes: Essays in ecological Marxism . New York: Guilford.
- Olivera, O. 2004. ¡Cochabamba! Water war in Bolivia . Boston: South End Press.
- Orellana, R. 2004. Interlegalidad y campos jur´ ıdicos: Discurso y derecho en la configuraci´ on de ´ ordenes semiaut´ onomos en co-
- munidades Quechuas de Bolivia [Interlegality and juridical fields: Discourse and law in the configuration of semiautonomous ordering in Quechua communities of Bolivia]. Amsterdam: University of Amsterdam.
- Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for collective action. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- Paerregaard, K. 1994. Why fight over water? Power, conflict and irrigation in an Andean village. In Irrigation at high altitudes: The social organization of water control systems in the Andes , ed. W. P. Mitchell and D. Guillet, 189-202. Society for Latin American Anthropology Publication Series 12. Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association.
- Painter, J. 2000. State and governance. In A companion to economic geography , ed. E. Sheppard and T. J. Barnes, 359-76. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.
- Peredo, C., C. Crespo, and O. Fern´ andez. 2004. Los regantes de Cochabamba en la Guerra del Agua [The Cochabamba irrigators in the Water War]. Cochabamba, Bolivia: CESU/UMSS.
- Perreault, T. 2003. Changing places: Transnational networks, ethnic politics, and community development in the Ecuadorian Amazon. Political Geography 22 (1): 6188.
- ---. 2005. State restructuring and the scale politics of rural water governance in Bolivia. Environment and Planning A 37 (2): 263-84.
- ---. 2006. From the Guerra del Agua to the Guerra del Gas : Resource governance, popular protest and social justice in Bolivia. Antipode 38 (1): 150-72.
- Perreault, T., A. Bebbington, and T. Carroll. 1998. Indigenous irrigation organizations and the formation of social capital in northern highland Ecuador. Yearbook, Conference of Latin Americanist Geographers 24:1-15.
- Prudham, S. 2005. Knock on wood: Nature as commodity in Douglas-fir country. New York: Routledge.
- Robertson, M. 2004. The neoliberalization of ecosystem services. Geoforum 35 (3): 361-74.
- Sherbondy, J. 1994. Water and power: The role of irrigation districts in the transition from Inca to Spanish Cuzco. In Irrigation at high altitudes: The social organization of water control systems in the Andes , ed. W. P. Mitchell and D. Guillet, 69-98. Society for Latin American Anthropology Publication Series 12. Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association.
- Sheridan, T. E. 1988. Where the dove calls: The political ecology of a peasant corporate community in northwestern Mexico . Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
- Swyngedouw, E. 2004. Social power and the urbanization of water: Flows of power. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
- ---. 2005. Dispossessing H2O: The contested terrain of water privatization. Capitalism, Nature, Socialism 16 (1): 81-98.
- Trawick, P. B. 2001. Successfully governing the commons: Principles of social organization in an Andean irrigation system. Human Ecology 29 (1): 1-25.
- ---. 2003a. Against the privatization of water: An indigenous model for improving existing laws and successfully governing the commons. World Development 31 (6): 977-96.

- ---. 2003b. The struggle for water in Peru: Comedy and tragedy in the Andean commons . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Van Cott, D. L. 2000. The friendly liquidation of the past: The politics of diversity in Latin America . Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
- Watts, M., and J. McCarthy. 1997. Nature as artifice, nature as artifact: Development, environment and modernity in the late twentieth century. In Geographies of economies , ed. R. Lee and J. Wills, 71-86. London: Arnold.
- Webber, J. R., and S. Spronk. 2005. Bolivian president resigns amidst blockades of the new Left and a belligerent old Right. Z-Net Online, 7 March. http://www.zmag.org/content/showarticle.cfm?ItemID = 7388 (last accessed 5 July 2007).
- Wescoat, J. L., Jr. 2003. Water resources. In Geography in America at the dawn of the 21st century , ed. G. L. Gaile and C. J. Willmott, 283-301. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
- Wilder, M., and P. Romero Lankao. 2006. Paradoxes of decentralization: Water reform and social implications in Mexico. World Development 34 (11): 1977-95.
- Wittfogel, K. 1957. Oriental despotism: A comparative study of total power . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Wood, A., and D. Valler. 2001. Turn again? Rethinking institutions and the governance of local and regional economies. Environment and Planning A 33:113944.
- Yashar, D. 2005. Contesting citizenship in Latin America: The rise of indigenous movements and the postliberal challenge . Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- Zeballos Hurtado, H., and E. Quiroga Crespo. 2003. Pol´ ıtica y econom´ ıa de los recursos naturales renovables en Bolivia [Politics and economics of the renewable natural resources in Bolivia]. La Paz, Bolivia: Plural Editores/COSUDE/SINERARE.
- Zimmerer, K. 1996. Discourses on soil loss in Bolivia: Sustainability and the search for socioenvironmental 'middle ground.' In Liberation ecologies: Environment, development, social movements , ed. R. Peet and M. Watts, 110-24. New York: Routledge.
- ---. 2000a. Commentary: Social science intellectuals, sustainable development and the political economies of Bolivia. Journal of Latin American Anthropology 5 (2): 179-89.
- ---. 2000b. Rescaling irrigation in Latin America: The cultural images and political ecology of water resources. Ecumene 7 (2): 150-75.

Correspondence: Department of Geography, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244-1020, e-mail: taperrea@maxwell.syr.edu.