## THE MULTIFUNCTIONALITY OF COUNTRY STORES: INSIGHTS ON RESILIENCE FROM RURAL VERMONT*

## CHERYL MORSE

ABSTRACT. A multifunctionality analysis of built environments within rural landscapes can deepen understanding of how contemporary rural places function. There is an urgent need for this knowledge as small towns in the United States lose socio-economic infrastructure resulting from restructuring, demographic change, and the centralization of services. This qualitative and exploratory study of country stores in rural Vermont finds that stores operate as key socio-spatial nodes within broader geographic networks. Analysis of the goods, functions, and services stores furnish reveals the reflexive relationships stores have with the physical and cultural geographies of their regions. In moments of community crisis and under certain conditions, stores exhibit hyperfunctionality. Built environments and their socio-spatial roles in multifunctional landscapes should be included in analyses of rural community resilience. Keywords: multifunctionality, retail geography, rural, resilience, small towns.

## INTRODUCTION

R ural country stores, with their creaking wood floors and single gasoline pumps, are often romanticized as relic institutions of days gone by. However, a closer look at country stores' operation within their broader socio-environmental landscapes reveals that they serve multiple and thoroughly modern functions for rural residents. Frequently described as the 'heart' of rural communities, some stores are so highly valued that community organizations have made significant efforts to save them from closure. As small towns lose socioeconomic infrastructure as a result of restructuring, demographic change, and the centralization of services, understanding the material dimensions of how rural communities function is increasingly important. Banks, restaurants, and even landfills are sites for provision of services, as well as places for residents to encounter one another to share information, socialize, and conduct business. Identification of the functions that particular rural institutions contribute to the resilience of a rural region furnishes critical knowledge for residents, policy makers, and scholars planning for rural futures. This article draws on a qualitative study of country stores in Vermont to argue that the concept of multifunctionality can be usefully extended to analyses of built places in order to deepen understanding of how contemporary rural places operate. Close attention to specific store functions yields insight into the relationships

*I am grateful to Richard Watts for making me aware of the role of small stores in Vermont's political discourse several years ago. Newton Rose provided essential and sage research assistance throughout this project. Prudence Doherty kept me supplied with historical sources. Thank you to both Newt and Prue for their collegiality. Finally, I thank the storekeepers and other research participants who kindly shared their time and insights.

k DR. MORSE is an assistant professor of geography at the University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont 05405 ; [cheryl.morse@uvm.edu].

between the store and the land uses, economies, and cultures of its region. Interviews with storeowners and managers, a review of store merchandise, and a survey of rural residents seeking to save a store in their small town provided the data for this analysis. Findings indicated that in times of crisis or when other rural institutions close, the country store may exhibit hyperfunctionality.

## MULTIFUNCTIONALITY IN RURAL AREAS

## THE MULTIFUNCTIONALITY CONCEPT

Multifunctionality has become a powerful concept in rural geography, landscape studies, and planning (Van Huylenbroeck and others 2007 ; Wilson 2010 ; Domon 2011 ). Originally a term that identified the multiple functions that agricultural landscapes serve, it has expanded to recognize the wide range of ecological, economic, and cultural outputs of rural places more broadly (Brandt and Vejre 2004 ; Hollander 2004 ; McCarthy 2005 ; Holmes 2006 ). It has been applied to forest policy (Mu ~ noz-Rojas and others 2015 ), water infrastructure (Rosenberg 2015 ), and hunting governance (Fischer and others 2013 ). Given the wide application of multifunctionality in geography and rural studies, it is surprising that the concept has not been used to analyze the built environments within landscapes.

## EVALUATING LANDSCAPE MULTIFUNCTIONALITY

Multifunctionality assessments incorporate values, functions, services, and outputs, capturing the nuances of what makes rural areas distinct from one another (Wilson 2010 ). In recent years, there have been advancements in methods to measure and weigh the relative value of multiple functions and services at the farm level (Wilson 2008 ; Lovell and others 2010 ; Andersen and others 2013 ), at the regional level (Palang and others 2004 ), and to identify multiscalar influences that manifest at the local level (Pinto-Correia and Kristensen 2013 ). As much of this work has shown, an evaluation of multifunctionality requires more than a mere listing of services; a robust analysis considers the relationships between a landscape's central components and processes.

Kirsten Parris identified three key elements of multifunctional agricultural landscapes: structure, which includes interactions between environmental features and also 'man-made objects (e.g. hedges, farm buildings)'; function, meaning the kinds of affordances made possible by farmed landscapes like work and environmental services; and value, referring to the meaning ascribed to agricultural lands ( 2004 , 194 ). Several years later, Paul Selman ( 2009 ) argued that analyses of multifunctionality had evolved to focus on interactivity, synergistic effects, and integrative systems. Taken together, these two perspectives on evaluating multifunctionality suggest that a first step is to identify the functions performed and the second is to consider how such processes interact in relation to others. I adopt this approach in the following analysis of the functions that country stores fulfill within rural communities.

## PUBLIC PLACES IN RURAL STUDIES

While built places are typically listed as key components of multifunctional rural places (Parris 2004 ), they have not been treated as objects of study. Of course, there have been many place-based studies that contribute to scholarship on human-environment interactions in rural communities. Such spaces include olive groves (Galani-Moutafi 2013 ), apple orchards (Cloke and Jones 2001 ), and abandoned homes (Robertson 2015 ). These studies have tended to center on private and outdoor spaces; the socio-spatial operations of public built places have received less attention. However, a few examples from the existing research on built places demonstrate their relevance to multifunctionality studies.

Village pubs have been analyzed as public sites for performance of class (Heley 2008 , 2010 ) and gender identities (Campbell 2000 ). These studies demonstrated how the material presence of the pub makes possible certain social interactions, and expressions of identity and culture. Coming at pubs from another angle, Damian Maye and colleagues considered the pub as a node in relation to other businesses within a network, relating it to the cultural and economic functioning of a broader community ( 2005 ). This work suggests that the pub could be analyzed as a multifunctional site both on its own, and as a site operating in relation to a broader multifunctional landscape. A similar conclusion can be drawn from Carrie Breitbach's food-system analysis of a region in South Dakota ( 2007 ). She related changes in beef production systems to the closure of specific sites such as the slaughterhouse and the butcher shop, and traced the impacts of such closures on the social reproduction of local communities. Other works have shown the effects of the absence of public space for specific social groups, such as teenagers growing up in economically challenged rural areas (Kraack and Kenway 2002 ; Dunkley 2004 ).

These studies raise questions about the role that other institutions play within the socio-material geographies of small towns. What is made possible by a restaurant, church, or park pavilion? What possibilities are foreclosed when the only school in town closes? This paper focuses on the operation of county stores within small towns to demonstrate how built places and the socio-material networks they make possible contribute to the functioning of rural places.

## COUNTRY STORES IN RURAL AMERICA

Country stores were once found throughout rural America. They provided the goods that farmers could not produce themselves and served as a crucial social space for residents who lived on remote farms (Stoffle 1972 ; Beck 1980 ; Bathory-Kitsz 2013 ). Over time, as transportation systems changed, rural areas became less reliant on agriculture. When subsequent retail restructuring took place, many country stores went out of business, grew larger, or shifted their products and services (Stoffle 1972 ; Vias 2004 ). Little has been written about country stores in contemporary rural America. However, in 2012 , Brooks

Blevins reported on a tour he conducted of country stores in the Ozarks. At the conclusion of his research he declared that the country stores of the rural South, the kind where the shopkeeper lives in the back, post office boxes line a section of the store, and people gather around a woodstove, have mostly vanished. These have been replaced by chain or convenience stores. This finding sits in contrast with the state of country stores in rural Vermont.

## RESEARCH CONTEXT: VERMONT

What came to be the state of Vermont was settled by Euro-Americans in the early 1760 s. Those responsible for planning new towns drew on their experience living in southern New England (Wessels 1997 ). Town centers served the civic, social, and economic needs of the community; the larger town centers typically included a green space, town hall, church, school, post office, houses, and a store. In smaller towns, the store may have housed the post office and offices of the town clerk, state legislative representative, and tax collector (Beck 1980 ). In towns with multiple villages, each village may have had a store, or even two. The storekeeper played the role of banker, barber, and medicine advisor (Beck 1980 ). In the nineteenth century, Vermont experienced far less industrial development than other New England states and suffered from extended periods of outmigration (Harrison 2006 ; Searls 2006 ). Resulting from of this lack of growth, many of Vermont's villages retained their original settlement patterns as well as some of their original buildings, including the town store, into the twenty-first century.

In the 1960 s the geographies of small stores shifted as the development of the interstate system facilitated growth outside of village centers. New convenience stores started to cluster at interstate exits distant from town centers. According to Dennis Bathory-Kitsz's history of, and guide to Vermont's country stores published in 2013 , Vermont now has about 450 small stores; 150 are informally categorized as country stores and the remainder are convenience stores (see DEFINITIONS below).

Vermont is the second-most rural state in the country, as measured by the percentage of its population who live in towns with 2 , 500 or fewer residents (U.S. Census Bureau 2017 a). Vermonters are primarily employed in the services, retail trade, and manufacturing sectors. Tourism contributes about $ 2 billion to the state's economy (Economic Research Service 2016 ; Vermont Agency of Commerce and Community Development 2017 ). Within the extractive sector, dairy farming and maple sugaring are dominant activities, yet small, diversified agricultural enterprises are growing (Census of Agriculture 2012 ). Vermont's tourism industry has long been based on selling pastoral village views and outdoor recreational experiences (Harrison 2006 ). Country stores have been key sites in Vermont's rural tourism landscape (Bathory-Kitsz 2013 ).

Vermont's per capita income of $ 29 , 167 is slightly higher than the U.S. average of $ 28 , 555 ; these averages, of course, hide geographical diversity. In the

towns included in this study, for example, per capita incomes ranged from $ 24 , 072 to $ 46 , 060 (U.S. Census 2017 b). Some of the communities include many second homes and tourism facilities. Others are home to residents whose employment is scattered around a rural region. Two of the towns in this study are located on the periphery of Chittenden County, the state's urban center. Residents in these rural communities typically commute to the small cities of the county for their employment. Vermont's outmigration problem illustrates a growing urban/rural divide in the state: Chittenden County houses one in four Vermonters, yet many small towns, including towns included in this study, have lost population in recent years (U.S. Census Bureau 2017 b). How country stores function within these diverse rural communities is the subject of this research.

## METHODS

The evidence for this paper derives from a qualitative study conducted in 2015 and 2016 . The research was exploratory by design, seeking to investigate how a small group of stores functioned within their towns in order to advance discussion of built spaces within multifunctional analyses. The study did not aim to yield a dataset that would be representative of all country stores in Vermont. Data sources included site visits to country stores; interviews with store managers, storeowners, and other key stakeholders; and a survey of community members who were seeking to transform a privately owned store into a cooperative store.

Seventeen stores were analyzed for this study. Fourteen stores were located within a thirty-mile radius of Ludlow, in central Vermont, where a research assistant was based. One store outside of this region was included because it was managed by the director of the Vermont Alliance of Country Stores, whom we interviewed for the study. The two remaining stores were located in northern Vermont and were included because one was in the process of becoming cooperatively owned and the other was the longest continually operating store in the Vermont.

The stores were located in fifteen towns (two communities had two country stores). The most populated town had 5 , 009 residents and the least populated had 298 ; seven communities had populations of fewer than 1 , 000 people. As noted above, the communities were diverse in terms of income, proximity to urban areas, and local economies. A data-collection form was used to gather information about each store's physical layout, geographic location, and merchandise and services. Semistructured interviews were conducted with either the storeowner or a manager (henceforth: storekeeper) at fourteen of these stores. One storekeeper served on the statewide association of country stores, so he represented the association as well as his own experience operating a store. An additional interview was conducted with the director of a historic preservation organization that has actively worked with country stores. A few

of the research participants requested anonymity, therefore their names are pseudonyms. The two people representing organizations are named.

At the time of the research, two of the country stores in this study were community-run cooperatives; one of them transitioned from a privately owned store to a co-op while the research was being conducted. An on-line survey on perceptions of the role of the country store in town was distributed to those who had listed their interest in becoming members of the proposed co-op -eighty-three people in all. It was an optional, two-question, open-text response survey. A total of forty-four people responded to the first question and thirtyeight people responded to the second. The responses were coded to identify common themes and new insights on the role of the store.

## DEFINITIONS

This paper uses several terms interchangeably. This is intentional and reflects the ways in which Vermonters refer to their everyday places. For the purposes of this paper, country stores refer to establishments, often located in rural town or village centers, which sell a wide variety of merchandise, are independently owned, whose owner owns just one or two stores, and which tend to occupy a space that has housed a store for decades, if not longer. The Vermont Alliance of Independent Country Stores is a nonprofit alliance of such businesses. Its list of members includes stores with the words 'country,' 'general,' and 'village' in their name, indicating the fluidity of such terms in referring to such establishments (Vermont Alliance of Country Stores 2017 ).

The distinctions between country/general stores and convenience stores are arbitrary, but important for this study. For this paper, 'convenience stores' are stores that tend to be part of a national, regional, or local franchise or chain. They often, but not always, are located at road intersections in newer buildings than those of country stores. Chain convenience stores' interior layouts are nearly identical to other stores within the same franchise. Convenience stores always sell gasoline, may have products that are branded for the chain, and may also sell locally produced items that can be found in a country store. Convenience stores do not figure into the Vermont tourism discourse as country stores do. Stores that fit within these definitions were excluded from the research; however, it is clear that such stores may fulfill several functions that country stores fulfill.

'Community' is a widely contested term (Wilson 2010 ). In everyday speech, Vermonters interchangeably use 'community' and 'people in town' to refer to local residents, and 'town' refers to the geographic unit and the people who live there, therefore this paper follows these conventions. Political decision making in Vermont rests at the town and state scales. The tradition of town meeting is still widely practiced in Vermont, and it is through voting at town meeting that zoning, civic governance, and tax rates are determined (Bryan 2004 ). Although a single town may include multiple villages, they are officially

part of one political unit. In Vermont, the town is a dominant political structure, which in many ways maps onto community.

Retail and entertainment establishments like stores and movie theatres are typically privately owned, yet open to the public. This paper refers to country stores as public spaces, but recognizes that private ownership may distinguish stores in some ways from other truly publicly owned spaces such as a town office.

## THE MULTIFUNCTIONAL COUNTRY STORE

## 'EVERYBODY'S LITTLE PANTRY'

Country stores fulfill multiple and varied functions in Vermont's small towns. In communities that do not have a large grocery store nearby, the most obvious function the country store fulfills is the provision of a range of household items and ingredients, as storekeeper Cyrus explained:

We're pretty much everybody's little pantry. That's the way I look at it. They're in the middle of a recipe and they run out of confectionary sugar or vanilla or something like that -boom -so [they] run down here and grab it.

Cyrus' store is located in a commuter town in northern Vermont. Jack's store provides for the needs and desires of the 1 , 700 permanent residents and many tourists in his amenity-rich community. Yet similar to Cyrus, Jack stated that:

The nature of a country store is that you provide what your community needs and you fill up every available space with something. So the nature of country stores is that . . . you find very eclectic and a huge variety of different things because if one person asks for it you want to have it on your shelves . . .

Jack's store is the only one in the village; the closest midsized grocery store is nine miles away. Of the seventeen stores studied, fifteen were located at least five miles from a midsized grocery store that offers more than a few aisles of goods; almost half were more than nine miles from a larger store. The majority were the only store in town. Country stores tend to be located in small buildings, often with a single sales room or a few small rooms linked together (see figures 1 and 2 ). Space is limited. Since that missing ingredient is never predictable, country stores tend to carry a large number of products in small quantities or sizes. Hence, the diversity of products for sale illustrates the first function of a country store: to provide a wide range of goods. Yet stores serve many other purposes than this.

Table 1 categorizes country stores' functions and services. Rather than serving as an accounting of functions, the table is intended to illustrate the wide range of and less visible roles stores play in their communities. The range of goods listed in row 1 of Table 1 demonstrates the expected wide range of items for sale in most stores. Rows 2 and 3 show the formal and informal services

FIG. 1 -The Jericho Center Country Store, Jericho, Vermont.

<!-- image -->

stores offer, and rows 4 through 6 list the ways stores interact with other elements of their rural areas. The following sections draw out the key themes that emerged from the analysis of Table 1 .

## THE CENTERPIECE OF THE COMMUNITY

Table 1 categorizes services as 'formal,' as in those functions that are visible through the material presence of ATM and lottery ticket machine, and as 'informal,' which are less visible to the visitor. The visitor cannot see that the store keeps credit lines for regular customers, for example, or hosts a local group's regular meeting. 1 Hosting seemingly unrelated services are a way to attract additional sales. A few of the stores in this study contain a post office, complete with old-fashioned glass mailboxes. These stores function as a 'contracted postal unit.' As one storeowner explained, hosting a post office doesn't turn a profit 'but it brings customers and that's why I like it. That's a service.'

Stores with many customers serve as a place for sharing information and encountering others. Storeowners described the main function of the store using several related terms: 'a gathering place,' and a 'social,' 'community,' and 'information hub.' Results of the survey conducted with residents seeking to purchase a privately owned country store to run as a cooperative supported these understandings of the store. The survey asked: 'Why are you interested in supporting the country store? In other words, why do you want to keep it open?' Twenty-three respondents -more than half -said the store is their

FIG. 2 -Store Shelves, Jericho Center Country Store, Jericho, Vermont.

<!-- image -->

connection to the community, is the center of the community, or is a meeting place for neighbors. The following two responses capture the sentiments of many respondents:

TABLE 1 -CATEGORIZATION OF COUNTRY STORE PRODUCTS, SERVICES, AND ENGAGEMENTS

| 1 .   | Products for Sale                     | packaged food, dairy products, bottled water and beverages, hot coffee, beer and wine, prepared food, deli items, pizza, produce, gasoline, soft and hard ice cream, tobacco products, baked goods, candy, locally-made foods, stationary, toys, local maple syrup and honey, postcards, local artwork, guidebooks, newspapers and magazines, local music CDs, hunting and fishing supplies, clothing, over-the-counter medicines, housewares, cleaning supplies, toiletries, pet supplies, animal supplies, hardware   |
|-------|---------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2 .   | Formal Services                       | post office, automatic teller machine (ATM), catering, lottery tickets, hunting and fishing licenses, wireless internet access, forest fire warden                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| 3 .   | Informal Services                     | bulletin board for local news and businesses, giving directions and community information to visitors, customer credit accounts, historical information sharing, free book shelf, school bus drop-off point, hold house keys for residents, air pump for bike tires, meeting space                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| 4 .   | Community Services                    | donation boxes for local charities, ticket sales for local events, food at cost for local fundraisers, food and other donations to fundraisers, gift certificates for high school students with high grades, jobs for local residents, jobs and job training for area youth                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| 5 .   | Livelihood and Landscape Interactions | purchase of goods from local artists and food producers, networking with local businesses, advertisement for local businesses, sale of Vermont made products, involvement in sale of non-local products, engagement in town planning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 6 .   | Emergency Services                    | package drop-off when dirt roads are impassable, information center in natural disaster, site for community meetings, electricity for charging phones and batteries, internet access, food storage and provision                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

I love having a friendly community store within a short walk from my house. I/we shop there most every day. I enjoy meeting my neighbors at the store, knowing the storekeepers personally, and seeing the [the store] as an integral part of the community. Small-village commerce such as the [store] is part of what holds communities together, keeps people local, and encourages interaction among neighbors, not to mention offering convenience.

## It's the centerpiece of our town !

The second survey question asked respondents to describe what would be lost if the store were to close. Of the thirty-nine responses to this question, eighteen said a meeting or central place in town would cease to exist. The notion that the store offers a location to informally 'run into' or meet people came up more than once, as in this response: '[The store is a] place to meet members of the community without a set meeting time.'

Residents in the towns involved in this research on average spent between twenty and thirty-four minutes, one way, commuting to work (U.S. Census 2016 ). They spent a large portion of their day outside their town of residence. As services increasingly centralize at the regional level, the country store may be the only place left to encounter a neighbor and hear the local news in their town of residence. For example, in the comment below about town residents' conversations at his gasoline pump, Cyrus explained how the loss of the dump was also a loss of a political and social space:

They'll be here for a half an hour or more once they bump into somebody. Cause they lost a lot of that when they lost the landfill. When the dump closed. That was the spot where people met, you know, of all places. All the politicians were there when they needed their signatures to get on the ballot, that's where they would go. They'd go to the dump to get their signatures.

Cyrus is a lifetime resident of the town. He and his wife live in the apartment above the store. He laughed as he explained the kinds of questions people ask when they enter his store.

. . . a lot of people come and ask for different things too. Even if it's just directions. I mean I have people come in 'cause I've lived here so long and ask me about things that happened years ago . . . 'Do you know where the cemetery is, and where this one is buried?' Yeah, I know where a lot of the old bodies are buried in this town, you know? !

The store as a center of the community has a more than figurative meaning -it is socio-spatial. The material space of the store allows for social and material interactions to take place. Cyrus' knowledge is not available to the tourist without his physical presence within the store. There are consequences to a local landfill closing: fewer places to meet people like Cyrus, fewer sites for political and many other kinds of interactions.

The store is where noncommercial community engagement happens too: the store sells tickets to the school play, or collects donations for the family who lost their home in a fire. It's where the school bus drops off students when the town's dirt roads are impassable. Stores employ people, frequently young people who work at the store as their first job. Several storeowners said that training young people in basic job skills is one of the most important community services they offer.

## LOCAL TO GLOBAL NETWORKS

Country stores are key actors in networks that support livelihoods, economic systems, and land uses across scales. The ubiquitous community bulletin board festooned with flyers and business cards is evidence of how stores link customers to businesses and businesses to one another. Less obvious are the cooperative relationships amongst business owners who share resources, like the

storeowner who said that he provides ice cream cones to the ice cream stand down the road when they run out. He also noted that others assist the store. For example when the hired snowplow doesn't arrived first thing in the morning, someone else removes the snow free of charge.

The items sold in stores can be traced to networks operating at multiple scales. These networks impact landscape uses. A few examples illustrate these networks. Locally produced maple syrup was sold at every store visited for this research. Syrup sales contribute to the businesses of sugar makers who maintain sugar maple forests. Maintenance of these forests reduces the growth of invasive species such as hawthorn. The composition of the surrounding forests is partially shaped by the sales of syrup at the store.

Local artwork was sold in most stores visited. Profits returned to the artists contribute to on-going production of local livelihoods. As the artwork frequently draws on environmental features of the local area such as ski slopes and covered bridges, representations of the immediate area as a distinctive rural place are reinforced. Similarly, Vermont foods and beverages distributed statewide, such as meat, cheese, and artisanal beer, keep agricultural landscapes in operation.

Many of the area's dairy farms are members of a cooperative whose milk and cream are exclusively used to make Ben &amp; Jerry's, a premium ice cream. The ice cream is made in Vermont, but the company is owned by a multinational corporation, and is distributed internationally. Ben &amp; Jerry's ice cream is available in nearly every country store in Vermont, therefore its purchase at the store engages the customer in a buying practice that simultaneously keeps neighboring farms in business, employs Vermonters in production and administrative positions, and contributes to a global food system.

Others have documented these reflexive and sometimes generative relationships between rural livelihoods and landscapes at multiple scales; indeed, this is an explicit goal in food systems, rural development, and multifunctional analyses (see Marsden and others 2002 ; Holloway and others 2006 ; Mundler and Laughrea 2016 ). However, much of this work skips over the role of local stores in these networks. These four categories of products -a locally made forest product, environmental artwork, artisan food products, and global ice cream -illustrate the roles small stores play at multiple scales.

## THE REFLEXIVE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN STORE AND LANDSCAPE

The goods on store shelves show the distinctiveness of particular rural communities. Each store holds a unique dialogue with its customers, and the topography, seasonality, and environmental conditions of the immediate area. Jack Garvin, the president of the Vermont Alliance of Independent Stores shared this perspective:

There is a standard about how it [the country store] fulfills the community, but there are different dynamics for each country store depending on where

they are. There are some way up in the Northeast Kingdom where their busy season is wintertime because they are smack-dab on the VAST trails, the snowmobile trails, and then they don't see anybody all summer.

Two stores located in the foothills of Vermont's highest mountain illustrate stores' attunement to their surroundings. The Jericho Center Country Store (JCCS) and Underhill Country Store (UCS) are located six miles apart, on opposite sides of a ridge that houses a military alpine training base. The JCCS is located closest to the base's main entrance. In winter, it is typical to see Humvees parked in front of the JCCS as soldiers exit the squeaky front door with sandwiches wrapped in paper and steaming cups of soup. The UCS is located close to the head of a hiking trail that climbs Mount Mansfield. The former owner of the store explained that winter is their slow season.

. . . this is the unique part of this store, or the unique demographic is the mountain. Hikers, campers in the summer time. They're on their way to the mountain picking up food or on their way back getting refreshments and rehydrating. That's really what makes it a busy place in the summer.

The stores offer similar prepared foods and local beers, but the seasonality of their businesses and the groups of people they gather into their space differ due to differences at the microlocal scale.

Such intimate relationships between events, location, and community were expressed by other storekeepers as well.

Our biggest month of sales is July. On the day of the 100 -mile [cycling] race, we make enough money to buy all our wood for winter and three months of electricity. (Carmen)

[Our customers are ] a lot of building crews for second homes, property maintenance [workers] . . . people . . . , people from the horse farm and [people] swimming in the pond nearby. In the winter there are a lot of snowmobilers . . . . In fact our whole menu changes in the winter. (Lucy)

Weddings at the nearby inn are very important for business almost every weekend. (Jeffrey)

Jeffrey's store is located in a town where 62 percent of the residences are second or recreational homes. His store offers sixty-three types of beer and forty-three types of wine. In contrast, another storeowner whose customers are mainly local residents said his largest sales are of gasoline, pizza, cigarettes, and beer. Some stores sell hunting licenses, while others sell water toys. Small stores are reflective of their diverse communities and can provide insight into the culture, economies, and physical geographies of their multifunctional regions.

## THE STORE AS CRISIS CENTER

Residents of rural communities in Vermont are connected to other places through transportation, energy, and telecommunications networks. Rural places are global places (Woods 2007 ). However, the geographic realities of living in relatively remote towns emerge when connecting networks are disrupted. In such moments, the socio-material geographies of rural towns come into stark relief.

In August 2011 , Hurricane Irene made landfall on the eastern coast of the United States. By the time it moved over the state of Vermont, it had downgraded to a tropical storm, but stalled over the southern half of the state, where rapidly rising rivers destroyed roads and bridges. The rivers swept away houses, cars, and mature trees. Power lines were destroyed. Buildings were flooded. Thirteen communities, including a few of the towns in this study, were completely cut off as all routes out of the town were impassable (Rose and Ash 2013 ). Residents in affected communities immediately began their own rescue efforts before the state and federal agencies could reach them. They used heavy equipment to dig out and re-connect. Public places that escaped the flooding -town halls, schools, restaurants, and even town greens -became homemade emergency response centers. In some towns, the country store played a critically important role, as Kent described.

When [Tropical Storm] Irene came through, this was the place to find out what happened, what's happening in the town. The power was out for almost a week, so we put up a board saying this is who's got power and this is where the power isn't and this is what's the weather's going to be because most people couldn't get any information without internet or power and so we had a generator we kept things going and this was the place everybody came to figure out what to do.

Keith, a storekeeper in one of the stranded communities said that his store had one of the only generators in town and some residents were eating every day at the store. The remoteness of towns like his became readily apparent when residents requiring dialysis were trapped, and others' supplies of medicines like insulin ran out (Shinn 2013 ).

Another storekeeper recalled a different local emergency. 'Last year there was a four-day power outage and because we have a generator the people of Shrewsbury were coming here every morning to brush their teeth or coming to use the wi-fi.' Organizational systems, material resources, and local knowledge are required to address crises, and so too are central and accessible physical sites where people can gather.

## PRESERVING THE COUNTRY STORE

Vermont's historic preservation community has recognized the importance of country stores to the functioning and cultural reproduction of rural

communities. The Preservation Trust of Vermont, an organization dedicated to helping communities save and use historic places, has supported country stores in several ways, including purchasing a store (Preservation Trust of Vermont). The organization has undertaken this work because they believe:

[Stores] are what make a small community a great place. Without a really important community gathering place, the sense of community is lost-it just becomes a suburb if you will. We find them to be really important as a cultural center and a community center. (Paul Bruhn, director, Preservation Trust of Vermont)

Rather than focusing only on preserving physical structures, the organization pays attention to a building's uses:

. . . you can preserve a building, but if you don't have a good use for it, it's going to be preserved but then ten years fifteen years, twenty years down the road because it hasn't had any use, it's falling into disrepair again. So we generally try to support local community organizations and communities that are taking on preservation projects. (Paul Bruhn)

Bruhn underscores the relationship between built space and the functions that take place within them. As scholars and planners consider how rural areas adjust to change and plan for uncertain futures, it makes sense to take stock of the socio-spatial functions that take place within built elements of the landscape. The following discussion forwards the idea that rural socio-spatial institutions such as the country store may exhibit hyperfunctionality under certain conditions. On an everyday basis, their spatial presence and array of services help connect elements of their broader rural community and landscape.

## DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

## THE HYPERFUNCTIONALITY OF THE RURAL STORE

The country stores analyzed in this research clearly perform a large and diverse set of functions. Working from Parris' characterization of multifunctionality ( 2004 ), the findings provide evidence for the interaction of the country store in relation to other spatial components of the landscape, the affordances made possible by the store's presence, and the multiple values placed on the store as a community center. In a rural place such as Vermont where the land uses include dairy production, other agricultural and forestry work, tourist activities, and residences for telecommuting or traditionally commuting residents, the country stores can be understood as flexible, responsive, and nimble elements within a varied landscape. The storekeeper must anticipate what 'everybody's little pantry' might need and what passers-through might want.

Stretching beyond its primary task of selling goods, the rural store fills in gaps that elsewhere may be served by banks, coffee shops, entertainment venues, and crisis centers. The country store is a hyperfunctional socio-spatial

site within a multifunctional landscape. This research implies that as the number of rural socio-spatial sites declines, their relative importance to the functioning of rural communities may increase. It suggests the need for additional research into other rural public institutions that form the backbone of small towns and villages elsewhere.

Selman contended that multifunctionality assessments reveal the interactions and synergies embedded in landscape studies ( 2009 ). The research conducted here brought to light the reflexive relationships that small stores have with their surrounding landscapes. The sale of locally made products has direct impacts on livelihoods and the physical environment of the surrounding area. Yet country stores are also a conduit between goods and services produced in other places into particular rural communities. They are pathways within global networks and circuits for local networks.

More than simply offering things for sale, the space of the store affords the exchange of information, and the 'bumping into' that may lead to synergistic outcomes. One resident meets another at the store and a babysitter is found, and a source of firewood is located, and a book club is established. Absent the store, where would these things take place? This is not to say that country stores are idyllic locations in idyllic rural communities. There is evidence of exclusionary behaviors in stores. A former resident of a small town shared that she felt uncomfortable walking through the cluster of men who gathered in the morning at the store entrance, for example. Some storekeepers are unwelcoming to children and outsiders. In several communities it appeared that the patrons of different stores were split along class-based and political lines. There is ample room for more detailed research into how the country stores operates for different groups of people, however the point here is that as the only public place in town that is in theory open to everyone, it makes possible all kinds of chance meetings, interactions and synergies.

## RURAL RESILIENCE

Wilson asserted that 'resilient rural communities are characterised by welldeveloped economic, social and environmental capital' ( 2010 , 366 ). As there have been few studies that consider the role of built spaces in rural communities, it is difficult to locate accounts where the display of resilience can be located for observation. This study of rural stores attempted to fill in a small volume of that gap. All of the country stores' functions -formal and informal, year-round and seasonal, leisure-oriented and potentially life-saving -rely on the material presence of the store to take place. If resilience relies on such interactions, public spaces as key socio-spatial sites within rural communities deserve greater attention.

Selman argued that a multifunctionality approach ought to be applied to planning for all kinds of landscapes, from rural to urban ( 2009 ). While this paper is focused on the rural, the findings suggest that a multifunctionality

analysis of socio-spatial institutions located in any isolated community may be an effective way to trace the relationships between values, functions, and built space. There is great value in identifying key strengths and weaknesses in a community by first considering where relationships are made and interactions take place. This research on country stores suggests that as public infrastructure closes, the number of places where the important work of society -local political activity, economic exchanges, information sharing -diminishes as well. Multifunctionality assessments should include the functions afforded by infrastructure, built places, and social centers. It is hard to imagine how rural communities will thrive in the future without the institutions that provide space for everyday life.

## NOTE

- 1 Extending store credit is considered an informal service because it does not involve a financial institution or interest payments. Typically, storekeepers keep a tab running for regular customers who pay their once per month or quarterly.

## REFERENCES

- Andersen, P. S., H. Vejre, T. Dalgaard, and J. Brandt. 2013 . An Indicator-based Method for Quantifying Farm Multifunctionality. Ecological Indicators 25 : 166 -179 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1016 / j.ecolind. 2012 . 09 . 025 .
- Bathory-Kitsz, D. 2013 . Country Stores of Vermont: A History &amp; Guide . Charleston, S.C.: The History Press.
- Beck, J. 1980 . The General Store in Vermont: An Oral History . Middlebury, Vt: Vermont Folklife Center.
- Blevins, B. 2012 . The Country Store in Search of Mercantiles and Memories in the Ozarks. Southern Cultures 18 ( 4 ): 43 -6 -0 .
- Brandt, J., and H. Vejre. 2004 . Introduction. Edited by J. Brandt and H. Vejre, Multifunctional Landscapes Volume I- Theory, Values and History . Boston, Mass.: WIT Press.
- Breitbach, C. 2007 . The Geographies of a More Just Food System: Building Landscapes for Social Reproduction. Landscape Research 32 ( 5 ): 533 -557 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1080 / 01426390701552696 .
- Bryan, F. 2004 . Real Democracy: The New England Town Meeting and How It Works . Chicago, Ill.: The University of Chicago Press.
- Campbell, H. 2000 . The Glass Phallus: Pub(lic) Masculinity and Drinking in Rural New Zealand. Rural Sociology 65 ( 4 ): 562 -581 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1111 /j. 1549 -0831 . 2000 .tb 00044 .x.
- Census of Agriculture, U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2012 . Volume 1 / Chapter 1 : State Level Data, Vermont. Available at: https://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/ 2012 /Full\_Report/ Volume\_ 1 ,\_Chapter\_ 1 \_State\_Level/Vermont/.
- Cloke, P., and O. Jones. 2001 . Dwelling, Place, and Landscape: An Orchard in Somerset. Environment and Planning A 33 ( 4 ): 649 -666 .
- Domon, G. 2011 . Landscape as Resource: Consequences, Challenges and Opportunities for Rural Development. Landscape and Urban Planning 100 ( 4 ): 338 -340 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1016 /j.land urbplan. 2011 . 02 . 014 .
- Dunkley, C. 2004 . Risky Geographies: Teens, Gender, and Rural Landscape in North America. Gender, Place and Culture 11 ( 4 ): 559 -79 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1080 / 0966369042000307004 .
- Economic Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture. 2016 . State Fact Sheets: Vermont. Available at: http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/state-fact-sheets/state-data.a spx.
- Fischer, A., C. Sandstr € om, M. Delibes-Mateos, B. Arroyo, D. Tadie, D. Randall, F. Hailu, A. Lowassa, M. Msuha, V. Kere  zi, S. Relji  c, J. Linnell, and A. Maji  c. 2013 . On the Multifunctionality of Hunting -An Institutional Analysis of Eight Cases from Europe and

- Africa. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management 56 ( 4 ): 531 -552 . https://doi. org/ 10 . 1080 / 09640568 . 2012 . 689615 .
- Galani-Moutafi, V. 2013 . Rural Space (Re)produced -Practices, Performances and Visions: A Case Study from an Aegean Island. Journal of Rural Studies 32 : 103 -113 . https://doi. org/ 10 . 1016 /j.jrurstud. 2013 . 04 . 007 .
- Harrison, B. 2006 . The View from Vermont: Tourism and the Making of an American Rural Landscape . Burlington: University of Vermont Press.
- Heley, J. 2008 . Rounds, Range Rovers and Rurality: The Drinking Geographies of a New Squirearchy. Drugs-Education Prevention and Policy 15 ( 3 ): 315 -321 . https://doi. org/ 10 . 1080 / 09687630801921029 .
- -. 2010 . The New Squirearchy and Emergent Cultures of the New Middle Classes in Rural Areas. Journal of Rural Studies 26 : 321 -331 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1016 /j.jrurstud. 2010 . 03 . 002 .
- Hollander, G. M. 2004 . Agricultural Trade Liberalization, Multifunctionality, and Sugar in the South Florida Landscape. Geoforum 35 ( 3 ): 299 -312 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1016 /j.geof orum. 2003 . 11 . 004 .
- Holloway, L., R. Cox, L. Venn, M. Kneafsey, E. Dowler, and H. Tuomainen. 2006 . Managing Sustainable Farmed Landscape Through 'Alternative' Food Networks: A Case Study from Italy. Geographical Journal 172 : 219 -229 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1111 /j. 1475 -4959 . 2006 . 00205 .x.
- Holmes, J. 2006 . Impulses Towards a Multifunctional Transition in Rural Australia: Gaps in the Research Agenda. Journal of Rural Studies 22 ( 2 ): 142 -160 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1016 /j. jrurstud. 2005 . 08 . 006 .
- Kraack, A., and J. Kenway. 2002 . Place, Time and Stigmatised Youthful Identities: Bad Boys in Paradise. Journal of Rural Studies 18 : 145 -155 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1016 /S 0743 -0167 ( 01 ) 00033 -X.
- Lovell, S. T., S. DeSantis, C. A. Nathan, M. B. Olson, V. E. Mendez, H. C. Kominami, D. L. Erickson, K. S. Morris, and W. B. Morris. 2010 . Integrating Agroecology and Landscape Multifunctionality in Vermont: An Evolving Framework to Evaluate the Design of Agroecosystems. Agricultural Systems 103 ( 5 ): 327 -341 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1016 /j.agsy. 2010 . 03 . 003 .
- Maye, D., B. Ilbery, and M. Kneafsey. 2005 . Changing Places: Investigating the Cultural Terrain of Village Pubs in South Northamptonshire. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 6 ( 6 ): 831 -847 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1080 / 14649360500353079 .
- McCarthy, J. 2005 . Rural Geography: Multifunctional Rural Geographies -Reactionary or Radical? Progress in Human Geography 29 ( 6 ): 773 -782 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1191 / 03091325 05 ph 584 pr.
- Marsden, T., J. Banks, and G. Bristow. 2002 . The Social Management of Rural Nature: Understanding Agrarian-Based Rural Development. Environment and Planning A 34 : 809 -825 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1068 /a 3427 .
- Mundler, P., and S. Laughrea. 2016 . The Contributions of Short Food Supply Chains to Territorial Development: A Study of Three Quebec Territories. Journal of Rural Studies 45 : 218 -229 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1016 /j.jrurstud. 2016 . 04 . 001 .
- Mu ~ noz-Rojas, J., M. Nijnik, M. Gonz  alez-Puente, and F. Cortines-Garc  245a. 2015 . Synergies and Conflicts in the Use of Policy and Planning Instruments for Implementing Forest and Woodland Corridors and Networks: A Case Study in NE Scotland. Forest Policy and Economics 57 : 47 -64 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1016 /j.forpol. 2015 . 05 . 002 .
- Palang, H., H. Alumae, A. Printsmann, and K. Sepp. 2004 . Landscape Values and Context in Planning: An Estonian Model. In Multifunctional Landscapes Volume I -Theory, Values and History , edited by J. Brandt and H. Vejre, 218 -233 . Boston, Mass.: WIT Press.
- Parris, K. 2004 . Measuring Changes in Agricultural Landscapes as a Tool for Policy Makers. In Multifunctional Landscapes Volume I -Theory, Values and History , edited by J. Brandt and H. Vejre, 193 -218 . Boston, Mass.: WIT Press.
- Pinto-Correia, T., and L. Kristensen. 2013 . Linking Research to Practice: The Landscape as the Basis for Integrating Social and Ecological Perspectives of the Rural. Landscape and Urban Planning 120 : 248 -256 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1016 /j.landurbplan. 2013 . 07 . 005 .
- Preservation Trust of Vermont. 2016 . Available at: http://www.ptvermont.org/.
- Robertson, I. J. M. 2015 . Hardscrabble Heritage: The Ruined Blackhouse and Crofting Landscape as Heritage from Below. Landscape Research 40 ( 8 ): 993 -1009 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1080 / 01426397 . 2015 . 1074986 .

- Rosenberg, E. 2015 . Water Infrastructure and Community Building: The Case of Marvin Gaye Park. Journal of Urban Design 20 ( 2 ): 193 -211 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1080 / 13574809 . 2015 . 1009011 .
- Searls, P. 2006 . Two Vermonts: Geography and Identity . Durham: University of New Hampshire Press.
- Selman, P. 2009 . Planning for Landscape Multifunctionality. Sustainability: Science, Practice, &amp; Policy 5 ( 2 ): 45 -52 .
- Shinn, P. 2013 . Deluge: Tropical Storm Irene, Vermont's Flash Floods, and How One Small State Saved Itself . Hanover, N.H.: University Press of New England.
- Stoffle, R. W. 1972 . Whither the Country Store? Ethnohistory 19 ( 1 ): 63 -72 . https://doi. org/ 10 . 2307 / 481345 .
- Van Huylenbroeck, G., V. Vandermeulen, E. Mettepenningen, and A. Verspect. 2007 . Multifunctionality of Agriculture: Definitions, Evidence and Instruments. Living Reviews in Landscape Research 1 ( 3 ): 5 -43 .
- Vermont Agency of Commerce and Community Development. 2017 . Available at: http://accd.ve rmont.gov/tourism.
- Vermont Alliance of Independent Country Stores. 2017 . Available at: http://vaics.org/.
- Vias, A. C. 2004 . Bigger Stores, More Stores, or No Stores: Paths of Retail Restructuring in Rural America. Journal of Rural Studies 20 ( 3 ): 303 -318 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1016 /j.jrurstud. 2003 . 10 . 003 .
- Wessels, T. 1997 . Reading the Forested Landscape: A Natural History of New England . Woodstock, Vt: Countryman Press.
- Wilson, G. A. 2008 . From 'Weak' to 'Strong' Multifunctionality: Conceptualising Farm-level Multifunctional Transitional Pathways. Journal of Rural Studies 24 ( 3 ): 367 -383 . https://doi. org/ 10 . 1016 /j.jrurstud. 2007 . 12 . 010 .
- -. 2010 . Multifunctional 'Quality' and Rural Community Resilience. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 35 ( 3 ): 364 -381 . https://doi.org/ 10 . 1111 /j. 1475 -5661 . 2010 . 00391 .x.
- Woods, M. 2007 . Engaging the Global Countryside: Globalization, Hybridity and the Reconstitution of Rural Place. Progress in Human Geography 31 ( 4 ): 485 -507 . https://doi. org/ 10 . 1177 / 0309132507079503 .
- U.S. Census Bureau. 2016 . American Community Survey 5 -Year Estimates 2010 -2014 . Selected Economic Characteristics: Commuting to Work. Available at: http:// http://factfinder.ce nsus.gov/.
- U.S. Census Bureau. 2017 a. 2010 Census Urban and Rural Classification and Urban Criteria. http://www.census.gov/geo/reference/ua/urban-rural2010 .html.
- U.S. Census Bureau. 2017 b. 2011 -2015 American Community Survey 5 -Year Estimates. American Factfinder. http://factfinder.census.gov/.