<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Inverted Two-Step Floating Catchment Area Method for Measuring Facility Crowdedness

## Fahui Wang

To cite this article: Fahui Wang (2017): Inverted Two-Step Floating Catchment Area Method for Measuring Facility Crowdedness, The Professional Geographer, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2017.1365308

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2017.1365308

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 09 Oct 2017.

Submit your article to this journal C

Article views: 29

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Inverted Two-Step Floating Catchment Area Method for Measuring Facility Crowdedness

Fahui Wang Louisiana State University

The popular two-step fl oating catchment area (2SFCA) method has been widely used in the literature to measure spatial accessibility of residents for a service. The 2SFCA method accounts for the ratio between the supply capacity and demand amount of the service as well as the complex spatial interaction between them. This article introduces an inverted two-step fl oating catchment area (i2SFCA) method that is derived from an extension of the classic Huff model and used to capture the ' crowdedness ' (scarcity of resource or intensity of competition) for facilities. The method is illustrated and validated by a case study of evaluating hospital inpatient services in Florida. Several possible uses of the measure are also discussed. Key Words: distance decay, Huff model, inverted two-step fl oating catchment area (i2SFCA) method, two-step fl oating catchment area (2SFCA) method.

盛 行 的 两 阶 段 流 动 搜 寻 法 (2SFCA), 在 文 献 中 已 广 泛 地 用 来 测 量 某 项 服 务 对 居 民 的 空 间 可及 性 。 2SFCA 模 型 , 说 明 了 服 务 的 供 给 能 力 与 需 求 量 之 间 的 比 率 , 以 及 两 者 之 间 的 复 杂 空 间 互 动 。 本 文 引 介 反 向 的 两 阶 段 流 动 搜 寻 法 (i2SFCA), 该 方 法 来 自 于 古 典 霍 夫 模 型 的 延 伸 , 并 用 来 捕捉 设 施 的 ' 拥 挤 度 ' ( 资 源 的 稀 缺 性 或 竞 争 的 强 度 ) 。 本 文 运 用 一个 评 估佛 罗 里 达 州 医 院 住 院 服 务 的 案 例 研 究 , 描 绘 并 証 实 该 方 法 。 本 文 同 时 探 讨 运 用 该 测 量 方 法 的 若 干 可 能 性 。 关 键 词 : 随 距 衰 减 , 霍 夫 模 型 , 反 向 两 阶 段 流 动 搜 寻 法 (i2SFCA), 两 阶 段 流 动 搜 寻 法 (2SFCA) 。

El popular m  etodo de  area de captaci  on fl otante en dos pasos (2SFCA) ha sido utilizado profusamente en la literatura para medir la accesibilidad espacial de los residentes a un servicio. El m  etodo 2SFCA da cuenta de la proporci  on o ratio entre la capacidad de suministro y la cantidad de demanda del servicio, lo mismo que de la compleja interacci  on espacial entre ellas. Este artículo presenta un m  etodo inverso de  area de captaci  on fl otante en dos pasos (i2SFCA), derivado de una extensi  on del cl  asico modelo de Huff, que es usado para captar la ' congesti  on ' por servicios (escasez del recurso o intensidad de la competencia). El m  etodo es ilustrado y validado por medio de un estudio de caso de evaluaci  on de servicios para pacientes hospitalarios en Florida. Tambi  en se discuten varios usos posibles de la medida. Palabras clave: declinaci  on de distancia, modelo de Huff, m  etodo inverso de  area de captaci  on fl otante en dos pasos (i2SFCA), m  etodo de  area de captaci  on fl otante en dos pasos (2SFCA).

S ince its inception (Luo and Wang 2003), the twostep floating catchment area (2SFCA) method has become a popular measure of spatial accessibility, particularly in its application to health care access (McGrail 2012). Spatial access emphasizes the importance of spatial separation between supply (i.e., facilities) and demand (i.e., population) and how they are connected in space (Joseph and Phillips 1984). The 2SFCA method captures two important aspects of spatial accessibility valued by people: proximity to service providers and availability of service while its scarcity matters. Many subsequent improvements to the original 2SFCA method have focused on different ways of conceptualizing the distance decay behavior and can be integrated into a generalized 2SFCA framework, where the distance decay function takes a continuous form, a discrete variable or a hybrid between them (Wang 2012). In essence, the method yields an accessibility score that is the ratio of supply and demand, each of which interacts with the other in distance decay. It measures the convenience of residents at a location reaching and obtaining a service that might be provided by multiple facilities.

From the preceding review, the 2SFCA is resident (or demand) oriented and assesses residents ' relative ease of getting a service from a residential location. By turning the regular 2SFCA upside down, this article proposes a method for examining an equally important property on the supply side. In other words, by switching the supply and demand terms in the formulation of 2SFCA, we have an inverted 2SFCA (i2SFCA) to measure, for lack of a better term, the ' crowdedness ' (or busyness, saturation, or stress level) for a service provided at a facility. To my knowledge, there has been no work reported in the literature on such an approach.

Related questions for the i2SFCA method include the following:

1. Is there any theoretical foundation for this approach?
2. What is the connection between the regular and inverted 2SFCA methods?
3. Can we validate the method in an empirical setting?
4. How can the method help us enhance our research and practice in real applications (e.g., health care)?

The remainder of the article attempts to answer these questions. The fi rst section review the regular 2SFCA and derive the i2SFCA method from a Huffbased model to solidify its theoretical foundation. The next section illustrates the implementation of i2SFCA in a case study of measuring crowdedness of hospitals in Florida. Based on the case study, the next section compares the results from 2SFCA and i2SFCA and examines the connection between them. After that, I provide some validation of the i2SFCA results and discuss possible follow-up applications. The article concludes with a brief summary.

## Review of Regular 2SFCA and Derivation of Inverted 2SFCA

Review of Regular 2SFCA

The review begins with the formulation of classic 2SFCA (Luo and Wang 2003). The 2SFCA repeats the process of ' fl oating catchment area ' twice (once on supply locations and once on demand locations):

1. For each supply location j , search all demand locations ( k ) that are within a threshold distance ( d0 ) from location j (i.e., catchment area j ), and compute the supply to demand ratio Rj within the catchment area:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where dkj is the distance between k and j , Dk is the demand at location k that falls within the catchment (i.e., dkj  d0 ), and Sj is the capacity of supply at location j . The process repeats ( fl oats) across all supply locations to obtain the ratios Rj ( j D 1, 2, . . . , n ).

2. For each demand location i , search all supply locations ( j ) that are within the threshold distance ( d 0) from location i (i.e., catchment area i ), and sum up the supply to demand ratios Rj at those locations to obtain the accessibility Ai at demand location i :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where dij is the distance between i and j, and Rj is the supply-to-demand ratio at supply location j that falls within the catchment centered at i (i.e., dij  d 0 ). Again, the process repeats ( fl oats) across all demand locations to obtain the accessibility scores Ai ( i D 1, 2, . . . , m ).

The fi rst step assigns an initial ratio to each service area centered at a supply location as a preliminary measure of supply availability. The second step sums up the initial ratios in the overlapped service areas to measure accessibility for a demand location, where residents have access to multiple supply locations. Equation 1 is basically the ratio of supply to demand with only selected supplies and demands entering the numerator and the denominator, and the selections are based on a threshold distance within which supplies and demands interact. A larger value of Ai indicates a better accessibility at a location.

One major limitation of the 2SFCA presented here is its dichotomous approach that de fi nes a supply facility being accessible or inaccessible by a cutoff (threshold) distance. The generalized 2SFCA incorporates a distance decay effect as a function f ( d ) in the supply -demand interaction (Wang 2012). It applies to both the numerator and denominator in Equation 1, written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The distance decay function f ( d ) can be (1) a continuous function such as a power function (e.g., Joseph and Bantock 1982), an exponential function (e.g., Weisbrod, Parcells, and Kern 1984), a Gaussian function (e.g., Shi et al. 2012), or a log-logistic function (e.g., Delamater et al. 2013); (2) a discrete variable such as binary in the aforementioned classic 2SFCA or multiple weights in E2SFCA (Luo and Qi 2009); or (3) a hybrid of the two such as a kernel function with a cutoff distance range (Dai and Wang 2011) or a threezone hybrid approach (McGrail and Humpherys 2009). Choosing which function and using what parameter values to use should be based on analyzing the actual travel behavior in a study area (Jia, Wang, and Xierali 2017b). Many researchers do not have access to such a data set, however, and often conduct sensitivity analysis by experimenting with different functions and employing a set of parameter values (e.g., Bauer and Groneberg 2016).

Hereafter, the preceding formulation of generalized 2SFCA is simply referred to as 2SFCA, as the classic 2SFCA is just a special case (when the distance decay function takes a binary variable with a cutoff distance). In contrast to the inverted 2SFCA to be introduced later, it is termed regular 2SFCA for differentiation.

## Deriving Inverted 2SFCA (i2SFCA)

The conceptualization of the Huff (1963) model might be linked to the multichoice logistic model. The probability that consumers at location i choose a particular

facility j among a set of alternatives l ( D 1, 2, . . . , n ) is proportional to the perceived utility ( U ) of each alternative. That is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the classic Huff model, the utility of a facility is measured as a gravity kernel, which is positively related to a facility ' s attraction (e.g., its size S ) and inversely related to its distance ( d ) from consumers in a power function. That is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where b &gt; 0 is the distance friction coef fi cient. As discussed previously, the distance decay behavior can be generalized as a function f ( d ). By doing so, the general Huff model (Jia, Wang, and Xierali 2017b) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Given the demand (population size) Di at i with probability of selecting a facility j as Probij , the amount of consumer fl ow from residential location i to facility j , denoted by Fij , is projected as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, the total number of consumers attracted by facility j , denoted by Vj , is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, the ratio of population served versus the supply capacity at facility j is projected as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the term Sj is eliminated in both the numerator and denominator for simpli fi cation, and the ratio Cj can be interpreted as ' projected or potential crowdedness ' (e.g., patients per bed in a hospital, students per teacher in a school, clients per clerk, etc.). A higher Cj value indicates a service facility being more crowded (saturated, stressed, or busy).

## Comparing 2SFCA and i2SFCA

Symmetry is evident when comparing Equation 2 for the regular 2SFCA and Equation 3 for the newly derived measure by switching supply S and demand D in the formulations. Therefore, Equation 3 is termed inverted 2SFCA and, similarly, it can be implemented in two steps.

One important property of 2SFCA is that the weighted mean of accessibility (using the demand amount as weight) is equal to the ratio of total supply ( S ) to total demand ( D ) in a study area (Shen 1998). Similarly, we can prove that the weighted mean of crowdedness measured by the i2SFCA (using the supply capacity as weight) is equal to the ratio of total demand to total supply in a study area, such as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Table 1 is compiled to summarize the differences between the regular and inverted 2SFCA. In essence, Step 1 of 2SFCA captures preliminary availability of service at each supply location, and its Step 2 sums up accessible supplies around each demand location to yield accessibility there. In contrast, Step 1 of i2SFCA measures preliminary competition intensity for service at each demand location, and its Step 2 sums up reachable demands around each supply location to obtain crowdedness there. In implementing the i2SFCA method, when using the ArcGIS toolkit developed by Zhu and Wang (2015), one could simply switch the demand layer and associated items with those for the supply layer.

The derivation process shown in the previous section demonstrates that the i2SFCA method for projecting potential crowdedness for facilities has its theoretical footing in the Huff model. To some extent, this further justi fi es the rationale for the regular 2SFCA to measure accessibility for residents. This is worth noting as the regular 2SFCA was proposed without similar reasoning. Furthermore, barring circumstances that merit special consideration, it is unnecessary to alter the formulation of 2SFCA or i2SFCA with additional complications such as ' 3SFCA ' (e.g., Wan, Zou, and Sternberg 2012; Chu et al. 2016).

## Case Study: Measuring Hospital Crowdedness in Florida

A case study is selected to illustrate the i2SFCA method and discuss related issues such as its connection to the regular 2SFCA and the validation. Only aggregated data based on a previous study are used for this article. Readers can refer to Jia, Wang, and Xierali

Table 1 Comparing two-step floating catchment area and inverted two-step floating catchment area methods

## 2SFCA

Measuring potential accessibility of service at a residential location ( i )

For each supply location j, sum up demands, discounted by distance decay function f . dkj / , across all demand locations k ( D 1, 2, . . . , m ), and compute the supply to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For each demand location i, sum up ratios Rj , discounted by distance decay function f . dij / , across all supply locations j ( D 1, 2, . . . , n ), to obtain the accessibility Ai at

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## i2SFCA

Measuring potential crowdedness at a facility location ( j )

For each demand location i, sum up supplies, discounted by distance decay function f . dil / , across all supply locations l ( D 1, 2, . . . , n ), and compute the demand to sup-

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For each supply location j, sum up ratios r i , discounted by distance decay function f . dij / , across all demand locations i ( D 1, 2, . . . , m ), to obtain the crowdedness Cj at

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Objective

Step 1

Step 2

Property

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Weighted mean of accessibility (using the demand amount as weight) is equal to the ratio of total supply to total demand in the study area

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Weighted mean of crowdedness (using the supply capacity as weight) is equal to the ratio of total demand to total supply in the study area

Weighted means of accessibility and crowdedness in the study area are reciprocal of each other

Note : 2SFCA D Two-step floating catchment area; i2SFCA D inverted two-step floating catchment area.

(2017a, 2017b) for detail. Brie fl y, this research used the following data extracted from the 2011 State Inpatient Databases (SID) of Florida (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 2011) and other publicly accessible sources:

1. 268 hospitals with capacity de fi ned as staffed bed size ( Sj ).
2. 983 ZIP code areas with demand de fi ned as number of patients generated there ( Di ).
3. Travel time between the fi rst two sets of data points through the road network ( dij ).
4. Volume of patient fl ow between ZIP code area and hospital.

As shown in Figure 1, major hospitals are concentrated in large metropolitan areas such as Jacksonville, Orlando, Tampa, Miami, and so on. With the supply ( Sj ), demand ( Di ), and travel time ( dij ) de fi ned earlier, the remaining task is to choose catchment area size ( d0 ) or parameter(s) in the distance decay function f ( d ). Based on the data for patient fl ows, Figure 2 shows how the cumulative percentage increased with travel time range. Note that the travel time was estimated by ArcGIS network analysis module, which tends to underestimate about fi ve minutes below what travelers usually experience (e.g., by Google Maps; Wang and Xu 2011). For instance, Figure 2 indicates that 80 percent of patients traveled within twenty- fi ve estimated minutes (about thirty minutes in the real world), which was a good baseline for catchment area size when a cutoff travel range ( d 0) was used. Figure 3A shows the variability of resident-based accessibility across ZIP code areas when the cutoff travel time of twenty- fi ve minutes was used in the classic 2SFCA method. Other threshold travel times such as twenty minutes and thirty minutes were also used, and results were largely consistent with each other (e.g., the correlation coef fi cient between accessibility scores by twenty-minute threshold vs. by twenty- fi ve-minute threshold was 0.89 and by thirtyminute threshold vs. by twenty- fi ve-minute threshold was 0.75).

As reported in Jia, Wang, and Xierali (2017b), the log-logistic and exponential functions outperformed the others signi fi cantly in fi tting the existing patient fl ow pattern. Although the log-logistic function had a slight edge over the exponential function in fi tting power, the difference was negligible. The exponential function, with the distance decay parameter b D 0.14, was chosen here for its simplicity, as it contains one parameter instead of two parameters in the log-logistic. Figure 3B shows the variability of accessibility when the exponential function was used in the 2SFCA method. When different b values were used (e.g., 0.12, 0.16), the correlation coef fi cients of their accessibility scores were even higher (  0.92).

The spatial patterns revealed in Figure 3 were also consistent (the correlation coef fi cient is 0.66). The changes in Figure 3A were more abrupt, with some rural areas having a 0 accessibility score as they were beyond the twenty- fi ve-minute range from their nearest hospitals; the variations of accessibility in Figure 3B were smoother. The weighted average accessibility in the study area was 23.72 beds per 1,000 patients according to Figure 3B (the value was slightly off in the classic 2SFCA according to Figure 3B as the threshold excluded certain demand -supply pairs dij in Equation 2).

As discussed previously, the implementation of i2SFCA was similar by using the same parameters

Figure 1 Hospitals and ZIP code areas in Florida.

<!-- image -->

but switching the roles of supply and demand layers and their associated items. Given the consistency of the method between using a fi xed travel time threshold and a continuous function as well as across different parameters, here only the result of i2SFCA based on the exponential function with b D 0.14 is presented. Figure 4 shows the i2SFCA result superimposed on that of 2SFCA for comparison (both used the exponential function with b D 0.14). The weighted average crowded in the study area was 42.15 patients per bed, which is exactly the reciprocal of the aforementioned weighted average accessibility (i.e., 1,000/23.72). A quick overview of Figure 4 indicates some correspondence between hospitals with higher values of crowdedness and their surrounding areas with relatively lower accessibility (e.g., rural areas) as well as many lower crowdedness hospitals in higher accessibility areas (e.g., major metropolitan areas). The next section provides more in-depth discussion on this.

## Connection between 2SFCA and i2SFCA

How are the measures from 2SFCA and i2SFCA related to each other? One obstacle for examining the relationship between the results of 2SFCA and i2SFCA is the discrepancy in the scales: 2SFCA yields the resident-based accessibility in ZIP code areas, and i2SFCA outputs the facility-oriented crowdedness in hospitals. One way to unify the scales is to use the fl oating catchment area (FCA) approach to calibrate the average (and thus smoothed) value of one measure around each of the data points in another unit (Wang, Antipova,

Figure 2 Cumulative percentage of patients by estimated travel time range.

<!-- image -->

and Porta 2011). Considering a much larger sample of ZIP code areas (983) than hospitals (268), it is more reliable to compute average accessibility around each hospital and examine its relationship with the crowdedness values there.

Note that rural ZIP code areas are much larger in area size than urban ZIP code areas. If a fi xed distance range is used in implementing the FCA, the number of ZIP code areas participating in the calibration of average accessibility around each hospital would vary a great deal and raise the issue of comparability and reliability. Here the concept of ' spatially adaptive fi lter '

(Tiwari and Rushton 2005) was used to mitigate the problem. Speci fi cally, a fi xed number of nearest ZIP code areas around each hospital was used to de fi ne an adjustable window, and averaged accessibility values within the window were then paired with the crowdedness values across hospitals for comparison.

Figure 5 shows that the average accessibility score in ZIP code areas around each hospital declines with increasing hospital crowdedness, and the trend is nonlinear ( R 2 D 0.33 when fi tted by an exponential function and a similar R 2 D 0.31 when fi tted by a power function as shown in the graph).

Figure 3 Accessibility to hospitals by residents in ZIP code areas (A) using a cutoff estimated travel time of twenty-five minutes and (B) using an exponential distance decay function with b D 0.14. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 4 Hospital potential crowdedness versus ZIP code area accessibility (based on an exponential distance decay function with b D 0.14). (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 5 Hospital potential crowdedness versus averaged ZIP code area accessibility around hospital.

<!-- image -->

Both 2SFCA and i2SFCA methods used the exponential distance decay function with b D 0.14, and fi ve nearest ZIP code areas were used to obtain the average accessibility around each hospital in the results reported in Figure 5. When using other distance decay functions (e.g., power function, fi xed threshold travel time ranges) or selecting different numbers of nearest ZIP code areas around each hospital (e.g., three and eight), the resulting patterns were largely consistent.

That is, in areas where residents enjoyed better accessibility for hospital care, those hospitals in the same areas tended to expect less crowdedness. It is understandable that less crowded hospitals were generally considered an amenity and contributed to better accessibility for residents. Due to the complex

<!-- image -->

metro metro

Figure 6 (A) Average accessibility by urbanicity. (B) Average crowdedness by urbanicity.

interaction between residents and hospitals, however, such a trend was not strong enough to ascertain that a higher accessibility value in residents fi rmly corresponded to a lower crowdedness index in hospitals there. Such a complexity is further examined in the following paragraph as a possible urban -rural disparity as speculated by glancing at Figure 4.

Here the Urban -Rural Classi fi cation Scheme for counties by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS 2006) was adopted to examine the variability across urbanization levels. The six-level NCHS categories include large central metro, large fringe metro, medium metro, small metro, micropolitan, and noncore, ranging from most urban to most rural. Figure 6 shows the average accessibility scores and average crowdedness values across the six categories, respectively. For residents ' accessibility (Figure 6A), the urban advantage and rural disadvantage seemed to be limited in the most urbanized large central metro areas and the true rural noncore at the two ends of the urbanicity spectrum, and the trend was unclear for those categories in the middle with small metro enjoying better average accessibility than medium metro and then large fringe and micropolitan. For hospital crowdedness (Figure 6B), the rural disadvantage was more evident as the average potential crowdedness was the highest in noncore and then micropolitan and the other four types of metros with similar crowdedness. The results from 2SFCA and i2SFCA were consistent in revealing the rural -urban disparities in hospital resource allocation between the most urbanized large central metro and the least urbanized noncore but differed to some extent in areas in the middle range of urbanization levels. The rural disadvantage in health care is a constant observation in numerous studies (Stanford eCampus Rural Health 2010) and is likely to worsen in the United States as an increasing number of rural hospitals are closed (Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research 2017).

In summary, resident-based accessibility and facility crowdedness are two aspects in gauging the geographic variability of resource allocation. The two measures might capture similar traits in surplus or scarcity of a resource in some areas but have their

Figure 7 Hospital total crowdedness versus actual patients discharged.

<!-- image -->

distinctive emphases for different purposes with different scales. Even when the scales for demand and supply locations are the same, one cannot compute the values for one measure and simply use its reciprocal to measure the other. Mathematically, Equation 2 for accessibility is not the reciprocal of Equation 3 for crowdedness. As stated previously, however, the weighted mean of accessibility by 2SFCA in a study area ( S/D ) is indeed the reciprocal of the weighted mean of crowdedness measured by the i2SFCA ( D/S ) in the whole study area.

## Validation and Discussion

From the derivation of i2SFCA earlier, the crowdedness for a facility is simply the ratio of projected population served versus the supply capacity at the facility. In our case study, it is potential patients per bed. Based on Equation 3, estimated total patients in a hospital j , Vj , is written as Vj D Cj S j , which is the product of crowdedness and hospital capacity in bed size, termed total crowdedness.

How good is this estimate? Figure 7 shows that the total crowdedness values correlated with actual numbers of patients discharged by hospitals with R 2 D 0.65. This validates the i2SFCA method as a good measure of potential saturation or stress level of service supply at individual facilities.

The i2SFCA method yields a direct measure for the saturation or stress level for facilities and offers some guidance on public policy that targets facilities. Take the hospital care as an example. One might examine its possible linkage to stress level of staff and waiting time of patients in hospitals and whether these indicators lead to certain satisfaction levels rated by patients. The relative value of potential crowdedness indicates possible understaffing or surplus in staff and suggests adjustment to mitigate the problem. For instance, one might formulate a planning problem with an objective of minimizing the variability of crowdedness across hospitals in allocating available new resources in health care planning.

## Conclusion

This article introduces the i2SFCA method in contrast to the popular 2SFCA method. Whereas the 2SFCA is resident oriented and assesses accessibility of a service, the i2SFCA method measures potential crowdedness for facilities providing the service (or scarcity of resource or intensity of competition). The formulation and implementation of i2SFCA is to simply switch the demands and associated items with those for the supplies. The derivation of i2SFCA from an extension of the classic Huff model further solidi fi es its rationale and, in essence, it is the ratio of estimated demand served versus the supply capacity at a facility. The derivation further justi fi es the rationale for the regular 2SFCA to measure accessibility for residents.

The i2SFCA method is illustrated and validated by a case study of evaluating hospital inpatient services in Florida. One important property is that the weighted means of 2SFCA-derived accessibility and i2SFCAderived crowdedness in the study area are the reciprocal of each other. The study indicates that areas with better accessibility by resident tend to have hospitals of less crowdedness nearby. The relationship is hardly monotonic, however, and the two methods have distinctive emphases for different purposes, usually in different scales. Some might use the i2SFCA method alone to assess the disparity of resource allocation from the perspective of service providers, and others might use it concurrently with the 2SFCA method to have the dual perspectives of service providers and receivers. The i2SFCA method provides a direct measure of potential crowdedness for facilities and might guide public policy that targets facilities (e.g., adjusting their capacities) to achieve a fair allocation of public resources. &amp;

## Literature Cited

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 2011. Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP) State Inpatient Databases (SID) -Florida . Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Accessed August 31, 2017. http://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/sidoverview.jsp.

Bauer, J., and D. A. Groneberg. 2016. Measuring spatial accessibility of health care providers -Introduction of a variable distance decay function within the fl oating catchment area (FCA) method. PLoS One 11 (7):e0159148.

- Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research. 2017. 80 rural hospital closures: January 2010 -present. Accessed August 31, 2017. http://www.shepscenter.unc.edu/pro grams-projects/rural-health/rural-hospital-closures/.
- Chu, H.-J., B.-C. Lin, M.-R. Yu, and T.-C. Chan. 2016. Minimizing spatial variability of healthcare spatial accessibility -The case of a dengue fever outbreak. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 13 (12):1235.
- Dai, D., and F. Wang. 2011. Geographic disparities in accessibility to food stores in southwest Mississippi. Environment and Planning B: Planning &amp; Design 38:659 -77.
- Delamater, P. L., J. P. Messina, S. C. Grady, A. WinklerPrins, and A. M. Shortridge. 2013. Do more hospital beds lead to higher hospitalization rates? A spatial examination of Roemer ' s law. PLoS One 8:e54900.
- Huff, D. L. 1963. A probabilistic analysis of shopping center trade areas. Land Economics 39:81 -90.
- Jia, P., F. Wang, and I. Xierali. 2017a. Delineating hierarchical hospital service areas in Florida. Geographical Review . Advance online publication. doi: 10.1111/j.19310846.2016.12207.x
- ---. 2017b. Using a Huff-based model to delineate hospital service areas. The Professional Geographer 69:522 -30.
- Joseph, A. E., and P. R. Bantock. 1982. Measuring potential physical accessibility to general practitioners in rural areas: A method and case study. Social Science and Medicine 16:85 -90.

- Joseph, A. E., and D. R. Phillips. 1984. Accessibility and utilization: Geographical perspectives on health care delivery . New York: Harper &amp; Row.
- Luo, W., and Y. Qi. 2009. An enhanced two-step fl oating catchment area (E2SFCA) method for measuring spatial accessibility to primary care physicians. Health and Place 15:1100 -07.
- Luo, W., and F. Wang. 2003. Measures of spatial accessibility to health care in a GIS environment: Synthesis and a case study in Chicago region. Environment and Planning B: Planning &amp; Design 30:865 -884.
- McGrail, M. R. 2012. Spatial accessibility of primary health care utilising the two step fl oating catchment area method: An assessment of recent improvements. International Journal of Health Geographics 11:50.
- McGrail, M. R., and J. S. Humphreys. 2009. A new index of access to primary care services in rural areas. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health 33:418 -23.
- National Center for Health Statistics. 2006. NCHS Urban -Rural Classi fi cation scheme for counties. Accessed August 31, 2017. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data\_access/urban\_ru ral.htm.
- Shen, Q. 1998. Location characteristics of inner-city neighborhoods and employment accessibility of lowincome workers. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 25:345 -65.
- Shi, X., J. Alford-Teaster, T. Onega, and D. Wang. 2012. Spatial access and local demand for major cancer care facilities in the United States. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102:1125 -34.
- Stanford eCampus Rural Health. 2010. Healthcare disparities &amp; barriers to healthcare. Accessed August
- [31, 2017. http://ruralhealth.stanford.edu/health-pros/fact sheets/downloads/rural\_fact\_sheet\_5.pdf.](http://ruralhealth.stanford.edu/health-pros/factsheets/downloads/rural_fact_sheet_5.pdf)
- Tiwari, C., and G. Rushton. 2005. Using spatially adaptive fi lters to map late stage colorectal cancer incidence. In Developments in spatial data handling , ed. P. Fisher, 665 -76. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
- Wan, N., B. Zou, and T. Sternberg. 2012. A three-step fl oating catchment area method for analyzing spatial access to health services. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 26:1073 -89.
- Wang, F. 2012. Measurement, optimization and impact of health care accessibility: A methodological review. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102:1104 -12.
- Wang, F., A. Antipova, and S. Porta. 2011. Street centrality and land use intensity in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Journal of Transport Geography 19:285 -93.
- Wang, F., and Y. Xu. 2011. Estimating O-D travel time matrix by Google Maps API: Implementation, advantages and implications. Annals of GIS 17:199 -209.
- Weisbrod, G. E., R. J. Parcells, and C. Kern. 1984. A disaggregate model for predicting shopping area market attraction. Journal of Marketing 60:65 -83.
- Zhu, H., and F. Wang. 2015. Appendix 5B: A toolkit for automated spatial accessibility measures. In Quantitative methods and socioeconomic applications in GIS . 2nd ed., ed. F. Wang, 112 -13. Boca Raton, FL: CRC.

FAHUI WANG is James J. Parsons Professor in the Department of Geography and Anthropology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803. E-mail: fwang@lsu.edu. His research interests include spatially integrated social sciences, public policy, and planning.