## ARTICLES

## America's Changing Farmscape: A Study of Agricultural Tourism in Michigan*

## Gregory Veeck

Western Michigan University

Deborah Che

Kansas State University

Ann Veeck

Western Michigan University

Agricultural tourism incorporates visits to farms for the purposes of on-site retail purchases, enjoyment, and education. Long popular in the European Union (EU), agritourism is gaining popularity throughout the United States. Interest has grown as a result of stagnant grain prices, rising farm costs, and growing international competition. For rural areas seeking new economic options, the potential of these operations to generate new sources of income through sales and horizontal linkages to other tourism-based activities has sparked interest beyond the farm gate. This article, based on a survey and a statistical analysis of 300 agritourism operations in Michigan, summarizesfactorsassociated withsuccessful operations. KeyWords: agritourism,Michigan,ruraldevelopment.

Our farm is 140 acres and we used to be heavy into commercial agriculture . . . cherries, peaches, and apples, and eighteen years ago, my mom and dad started the retail portion with one hay wagon and make-your-own caramel apples in our barn where we threw sheets over all the equipment and the tools and we turned it into a retail (operation) for September and October. Now, it's grown into four hay wagons and a haunted house, animal farm, cornfield maze, Upick apples, caterpillar crawl, and we have a small bakery . . . and we're doing many other entertainment things and, in five years, we will probably be totally out of commercial agriculture, and (be) strictly a retail operation. It's getting harder and harder commercially to make a living with the way the prices are for the fruit that we're raising. So, not only am I transitioning from generations, but basically trying to revolutionize the business so I'm able to stay and hopefully have something there for my kids.

-Sixth-generation Michigan farmer

T he global restructuring of agriculture requiring scale economies, coupled with consumer concerns about the safety of ''industrial'' food production, has resulted in the transformation of ''working'' countrysides based on agro-industrial production to new forms shaped by entrepreneurial uses of local resources (Marsden et al. 1993). One of these new forms, agritourism, has considerable potential to increase net revenues for relatively small, higher-cost producers in advanced industrialized countries beyond those possible from wholesale operations of similar scale ( Johnson 2003). Defining agricultural tourism is something akin to the blind men and the elephant, but there is general agreement that agritourism incorporates visits to farms for the purposes of on-site retail purchases, enjoyment, and education (cooking classes, flower classes, and farm history among others; Small Farm Center

*Wededicate this article to Sandra Hill, who was an early and persuasive supporter of agritourism in Michigan. Sandy wore many ''hats'' well: farmer, state legislator (1/1993-12/1996), MDA employee, and agritourism activist. Many will miss her.

ThisprojectwasconductedjointlybyresearchersintheGeographyDepartmentofWesternMichiganUniversityandbytheMichiganDepartmentof Agriculture. Funding for the project was made possible through a grant from the United States Department of Agriculture. We are very grateful for this support. We also wish to thank the editor and the four anonymous reviewers whose comments significantly improved this article.

The Professional Geographer, 58(3) 2006, pages 235-248 r Copyright 2006 by Association of American Geographers. Initial submission, May 2004; revised submissions, March 2005 and September 2005; final acceptance, November 2005. Published by Blackwell Publishing, 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, and 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, U.K.

2004). Participating farmers hope for significant and steady retail sales, but the components of entertainment and education that are also provided make agritourism more than simply a relocation of retail sales to a family farm. Long important in the European Union (EU), agritourism is gaining popularity throughout the United States. Interest has grown as a result of stagnant staple prices, rising farm costs, and growing international competition. This shift to agritourism is taking place in the state of Michigan, where more than 90 percent of the state's 53,273 farms are family operations, and 62 percent of farms reported sales of less than $10,000 for the 2002 Agricultural Census (USDA 2003).

Push factors evolving in traditional wholesale agriculture have made conversions to agritourism more attractive to many of Michigan's smaller family farm operations. Low priced imports and agglomeration in the fruit and dairy industries have put pressure on small wholesale fruit, vegetable, maple syrup, and honey operations. Many feed-based farms (corn and soybeans) also face new pressures from domestic producers and slumping exports.

In addition to push factors, the potential for increased revenues and profits (pull factors) also favors the development of agritourism in Michigan. Michigan's diverse climate and products, the relatively high population density throughout the southern third of the state, and the proximate large urban areas in adjacent states give agritourism great potential for the creative farmers of Michigan. Operations as diverse as roadside produce stands, vineyards with wineries, retail/wholesale greenhouses selling cut flowers and bedding plants, apple orchards, berry U-picks, Christmas tree farms offering cocoa and sleigh rides, and spring and fall onfarm farmers' markets can potentially raise farm incomes while offering consumers farm-fresh produce, educational and recreational opportunities, and social interaction with growers.

This article summarizes the current status of agritourism in Michigan based on a detailed survey of family farms operating as agritourism businesses. We report on the range of activities that comprise Michigan's agritourism industry, and provide data derived from our survey to illustrate the importance of these firms to the rural economy, including the number of visitors to the different types of operations, and the characteristics of these businesses, including promotional costs, wages, taxes, and revenues. These data are evaluated through regression analysis to identify the relationships among the variables and the net income reported by these agritourism businesses. Regression analysis allowsustoestimatethecontributions thata set of variables including visitors, advertising, and the numberofemployeesmaketonetincome.Prior to reporting the results of our survey and our regression analysis, we discuss globalization and the ongoing restructuring of the rural economy as the context for agritourism development in Europe, the United States, and specifically Michigan. We then present our findings on the economic conditions and relationships associated with these farms using data from a 2003 mail survey of 302 on-farm agritourism operators. We offer our conclusions and recommendations on how to further this strategy for rural economic development and diversification.

## The Challenge of the Global Marketplace

Agriculture has always been an uncertain business. Global trade patterns have changed dramatically in recent decades for all agricultural commodities, including corn, barley, sorghum, rice, wheat, soybeans, cotton, tobacco, fruits, vegetables, essential oils, and other specialty crops such as honey. Most experts include the following factors as root causes of the current reorganization of the global food, drug, and fiber system: (1) the inclusion of agricultural products in the 1994 World Trade Organization (WTO)agreementshas brought new producers such as Canada, Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, and even China into the global marketplace (Knox, Agnew, and McCarthy 2003); (2) livestock and avian diseases within the United States, and more importantly abroad, have slowed both meat/poultry exports and domestic meat consumption, reducing domestic and international grain demand; and (3) trade/consumer disagreements regarding the safety and environmental impacts of genetically modified (GM) grains, oil crops, tobacco, and cotton have lowered demand for some GM varieties of these products, while dampening overall demand for U.S. imports due to fear of ''genetic pollution'' or cross-pollination of GM varieties with local

varieties (Wright and Nebel 2002; Hsin 2003; Cunningham, Cunningham, and Saigo 2005). Consequently, U.S. wheat, corn, and rice exports have stagnated or declined since the ''good old days'' of the early 1980s. This slowing of exports is the opposite of expectations when the United States demanded in 1994 that agriculture be included in the Uruguay Round of talks that initiated the WTO (Weidman 1996). As exports have slowed, domestic prices throughout much of the Midwest have declined. At the same time, prices are also more volatile. Most experts now feel that U.S. grain producers will continue to face flat price projections and shrinking markets in the short to medium term (USDA 2004). As a consequence, the average amount of U.S. farmland devoted to export crops has declined from 103.6 million acres in 1980 to 77 million acres in 2003, a decline of 25.6 percent (USDA 2003). Better enforcement of tariff agreements, a gradual reduction in international grain stocks, and the promise of amiable solutions to GM export bans currently in place for Japan, South Korea, and the EU may reverse the outlook for exports in the future, but at least for now many small farmers are suffering. At present, it is clear that the market expansion anticipated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture for American agriculture in the post-WTO era has not occurred as expected.

As exports have slowed, a greater amount of low-cost grain has remained within the U.S. market, depressing prices and lowering net returns for many types of farms. Equally important, smaller farms are having a harder time competingwiththeagribusinesses that are often their neighbors.

Farm scale has long played a role in the efficiency of any farming operation in the United States, including the family farm. The average U.S. farm in 2002 incorporated 441 acres. The average Michigan farm was 189 acres, or 42.8 percent of the national average (USDA 2003). Michigan grain farmers have been squeezed more than most-they have less acreage but higher costs. For many smaller farms, the production of traditional crops is no longer providing an acceptable income from the land. Farmland is more expensive in Michigan due to intervening opportunities (nonfarm uses) and state tax regulations. Taxes are adjusted and increased if land is sold and taken out of agriculture even once; the tax structure is not re- adjusted even if the land is later restored to crop production. Also, scale economies cannot easily be reached for grain and/or hay for dairy operations on farms of fewer than 500 acres.

Although corn, soybeans, and hay have traditionally been Michigan's most important crops in terms of sown acreage, they have never been the most profitable crops in a state blessed with fine soils and diverse climates. Family farm operations for fruits and dairy are much smaller in terms of farm size, but their value per acre is much greater. In fact, by dollar value, milk is Michigan's most valuable farm product ($793,800,000 in 2003; NASS 2004). From the late 1980s until the mid-1990s fruits and vegetables became increasingly popular crops in Michigan as farms accrued higher returns per acre compared to returns for grains, dry beans, or sugar beets.

Unfortunately, the smaller wholesale fruit and vegetable operations that produce some of the highest quality apples, blueberries, cherries, and asparagus in the nation have had a difficult time competing in the current global marketplace. Part of this trend is the result of greater international competition. Congressional approval of Permanent Normal Trade Relations ( PNTR) with China in October 2000 was initially viewed by the Michigan Department of Agriculture (MDA) as key to sustaining the economic viability of Michigan's food and agriculture producers since it would open the Chinese market (Michigan Department of Agriculture 2002). However, with its similar growing seasons and crops, China has proved to be a major competitor for many U.S. agricultural products, including some important Michigan crops such as apples, honey, and garden/house plants (NASS 2004).

Although direct competition is certainly significant in some cases, Michigan farmers do not always go head-to-head with farmers from Chinaorotherdeveloping nations. Just as Michigan was developing a competitive asparagus market with a well-organized co-op, skilled growers, and excellent brand recognition, lower-priced asparagus from Mexico, Chile, and Ecuador flooded the market and Michigan growers were once again looking for alternatives. More often than direct competition, agricultural imports from developing nations to west and southeast coast markets cause a ''ripple effect'' that changes the economics of production in Michigan.

For example, as China exports apple juice concentrate to U.S. wholesalers, apple farmers in Washington and California face increasing pressure to move lower grade fruit into other markets. Because China now controls 43 percent of the global apple juice concentrate trade (NASS 2004), growers in western states have started to ship more apples into the Midwest rather than converting the apples to concentrate that is more expensive than Chinese imports. This means greater competition in Michigan's regional markets for fresh apples, leading to lower Midwest prices. The case for apples and apple juice is far from unique. Many Michigan farm products face similar competition, including honey/wax from China, grapes from Chile, vegetables from Mexico, and peaches and Christmas trees from the U.S. Southeast.

Another important cause of declining competitiveness results from the domestic aggregation of farms and dairies in Michigan and throughout the United States. This aggregation can result in larger, more stable farms, but it often leaves many farm families without opportunity. Supersized dairy and hog farms are turning a large profit for a very limited number of Michigan farmers, but smaller operations find it difficult to remain in business without changing strategies because larger firms push wholesale prices below the break-even prices of smaller enterprises. Dairy operations with more that 3,000 head, termed Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations (CAFOs), now account for one-fourth of Michigan's $3.5 billion farm sector. Estimates by the MDA suggest there are only 200 to 300 of these supersized dairy farms in the state, a fraction of the 5,600 hog and dairy operations that exist in Michigan. In the coming decade, if CAFOs are not limited, other dairy farms in Michigan will find it increasingly difficult to survive (Christoff 2003a, 2003b). Michigan's agricultural sector is simultaneously headed in two different directions: (1) large factory farms that ''mass-produce cheap produce for the supermarkets'' and (2) limited acreage entrepreneurial farms that sell fresh and organic produce on site or in farmers' markets and/or participate in the growing agritourism industry (Brooks and Lynch 2004, 1A). Because small-scale farming operations face problems competing in wholesale markets, there is considerable enthusiasm for the rela- tively high returns that are possible with a wellrun agricultural tourism operation.

## Agritourism as a Response to Agricultural Restructuring

Declining exports and changes in rural land use are related to the growth potential for Michigan agritourism. Although agritourism has taken place in areas such as alpine Austria for nearly one-hundred years (Pevetz 1991), it has recently become a key strategy in the EU's 1992 and 1996 Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) to diversify agricultural economies impacted by cost-price squeezes and the technological treadmill (Busby and Rendle 2000; Nilsson 2002). Agritourism, which is supported by structural adjustment funding in the EU, fits into the multifunctional European model of agriculture. Agriculture is viewed as key to maintaining food production/security, rural landscapes, and environmental protection (Hollander 2003). In agrarian-touristic peripheries not suited for intensive agriculture, but where the primary, secondary, and tertiary sectors are coordinated and local specialties are produced for local consumption and export, tourism and related land uses can result in interregional transfer of external resources and endogenous development (Conrad 1990). Agritourism, which attracts urbanites nostalgic for the rural experience of their childhood, offers the possibilities of selling high-value local/regional foods to guests, renting rooms, creating jobs, and maintaining the regional service base (Pevetz 1991; Busby and Rendle 2000; Nilsson 2002; Clemens 2004). Agritourism involving farm stays and branded regions for wine, cheese, and fruit have helped small European farms deal with falling prices for commodities for years (Slee, Farr, and Snowdon 1997; Grykien 1999; Ilbery et al. 1998).

To date, agricultural tourism in the United States is not as extensively developed as in the EU. Agritourism is often overlooked in overall appraisals of the U.S. farm sector due to the relatively small size of many operations, the lack of national political action committees, and a shortage of reliable data with respect to the number of operations and their revenues, employment, and economic impact. However, rural areas in the United States, seeking new

economic strategies, are increasingly interested in farm-based agritourism operations to generate new sources of income through sales, services, and related horizontal linkages with other tourism-based local activities (Small Farm Center 2004). Agritourism already represents a significant and enduring source of farm income, rural employment, and state and local tax revenues in the rapidly changing agricultural economy (Nickerson, Black, and McCool 2001). Given the rising operating costs and stagnant or declining wholesale prices for many field crops, as well as those for milk, poultry, and livestock, conversion of traditional commodity-based farms to agritourism operations has enabled many part-time farm families to retain control of their farms (Nickerson, Black, and McCool 2001; Johnson 2003; Lange 2003). The farm businesses in turn provide visitors with a chance to visit rural America and spend time outdoors with family and friends (Farmstop.com 2004; SMRDCB 2004). Moreover, for consumers increasingly distrustful of the nation's food supply, agritourism operations offer farm-to-table links with new, possibly more healthy alternatives to domestic or international superfarms and their ''industrial'' produce. Although organic produce may be the fastest growing trend in this regard, many families simply wish to purchase locally grown produce that is ''fresher'' than the fruits and vegetables sold in chain supermarkets.

Given the declining profitability for America's smaller farms, many small-farm families have turned to agritourism. In every state there is a complex spatiotemporal geography to these conversions. Small, rural farms accessible to urban areas capitalize first by ''harvesting'' nearby consumers looking for cheaper produce, organic produce, specialty crops, and/or a relaxing day in the country. Those states with high population density coupled with small mean farm size, including Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maryland, recognized the potential of agricultural tourism earlier than states with fewer large cities and lower population density. As a consequence, the U.S. Northeast and Atlantic states developed state networks promoting agricultural tourism earlier than did states in the West and the Midwest. Departments of agriculture in the Northeast and the mid-Atlantic states also provided the most sophisticated support (Hilchey 1993; Kuehn et al. 2000). In the late 1970s, these regions held the earliest statewide conferences promoting agritourism. States in the Midwest, South, and West generally followed suit in the late 1980s (Mahoney 1987; Gartner, Limback, and Adiarte 1996).

Beyond the farm gate, agricultural tourism offers important opportunities for links between agricultural producers and the tourism industry, resulting in increased regional economic benefits and reduced leakage (Berno 2004; T elfer and Wall 1996; T orres 2002). A Canadian example is offered by the Taste of Niagara, an alliance of food producers, processors, distributors, hotels, wineries, restaurants, and chefs in Ontario's Niagara Region that promotes the use of local products in the tourism industry (T elfer 2000). Increased interconnections between the farm and the restaurant table can increase sales of local produce as well as promote local cuisine. Local cuisine may develop into a peak part of the tourist experience, rather than being a supplemental experience merely extending the ontological comfort of home food consumption (Quan and Wang 2004).

Agritourism businesses can also increase revenues at other proximate tourism-related firms and amenities such as restaurants, hotels, gift stores, and gas stations. A $15.00 trip to pick apples on the farm may entail a visit to a corn maze or haunted house along the way, stopping for a nice meal to celebrate after ''the harvest,'' a quick stop at a nearby craft shop or bakery to get a few gifts, or even a boat trip or wagon ride at dusk to top off a wonderful day in the country. Estimated savings of 50 percent or more can accrue from picking your own produce (LeDuc Farms 2003), but saving a few dollars on apples, blueberries, or strawberry jam three or four times a year does not fully explain the growing popularity of on-farm sales and visits, or why the estimates of attendance for agritourism in many states are growing at a record-setting pace (SMRCDB 2004). U.S. agritourism operations also sell prepared food (donuts, pies, and cider) and farm products ( fruits, vegetables, plants, and trees), but just as important they offer a ''farm experience,'' a chance for fresh air and a day outside:

Tourism is the fastest growing business in the world. And since September 11, customers are seeking safer ways to have an enjoyable experi-

ence. Agricultural tourism can bridge the gap between farm and city dwellers, to the benefit of both. At one time most city people had relatives in the countryside, they no longer have them available since so few people live on farms. Many city people want farm vacations, to get away, but they don't have relatives or friends who are farmers. . . . Agricultural tourism provides enjoyment and education for the public, promotes products for the farm, and increases income for the farm. . . . Most of all, they want to see how a real farm works and to be a part of that cycle of life for a time.

-(Cross 2004)

Agritourism is coming of age in the United States. As recommended by the USDA Advisory Committee on Agricultural Statistics, the 2007 U.S.Agricultural Census will have a new section devoted to agritourism (Advisory Committee 2002). Until this nationwide survey is complete, comprehensive statistics related to agritourism do not exist. However, with the goal of establishing benchmark data on the contributions of these businesses to the state and local economy and culture, a team from Western Michigan University (WMU) and the MDA instituted a survey intended to identify the economic and cultural benefits of Michigan's agritourism sector. This article reports some of the results of the survey and analyzes these data through regression analysis to identify factors associated with predicting net income.

## Data: The Michigan Agricultural Tourism Survey

Until recently, little systematic research had been done to evaluate the economic impact (income, wages, taxes) of the increasingly important agritourism businesses in Michigan. This is because, first, state government leaders are still not sure who should collect the data and promote agritourism. The traditional state tourism department, Travel Michigan, is just now considering how to promote these farm businesses, once considered as out of their area. The MDA has an Agricultural Development Division with five full-time employees, but no one is assigned solely to promoting agritourism, though some in the office feel more attention must be paid to agritourism development if and when the state budget crisis eases (Craig 2005). Second, given the great diversity in the types of operations, it is difficult to collect comparable data in a large enough sample to make statistically sound generalizations. Only with a significant sample size can any reliable generalizations be made regarding the economic importance of these operations.

After discussions with the heads of some growers groups who helped with recruiting, in 2003 members of the project team convened three Michigan agritourism focus groups in three parts of the state: in Kalamazoo (southwest Michigan), Ellsworth (northwest lower peninsula), and Flint (approximately 50 miles north of Detroit) with the eventual goal of implementing a systematic agritourism survey. The Flint focus group met via a video network. Each of the three focus groups included people from six to nine family farm agritourism operations. The sessions elicited ideas and opinions of agritourism operators to help design a comprehensive survey to assess the impact of agritourism on Michigan's economy. The survey contained questions about location, products and services, visitation, income, employees, wages, revenues, and advertising. Additionally, several sets of questions were designed to identify opinions related to the benefits of these businesses, as well as problems that operators currently face. Responses to these questions were evaluated using five-point Likert scales to gaugetheseverity and significance of each problem. The survey also incorporated a number of open-ended questions related to current and future concerns and problems. The project format, including the development of surveys for both firms and consumers, followed that of Slee, Farr, and Snowdon's (1997) comprehensive study of rural tourism in Scotland. Only the portion of this survey related to the economic impact of agritourism with respect to visitors, employment, advertising, and income is analyzed in this study.

After evaluating the survey, the MDA mailed the forms to approximately 1,500 agritourism operations-a number determined by budgetary constraints facing the MDA, which paid for this portion of the project. All mailed surveys went to family-based firms, and, throughout the article, we intend the terms family farm and fi rm to be interchangeable. Additional surveys were distributed at various industry meetings and conventions during late 2002 and early 2003. Approximately 20 percent, or 311 surveys (301

usable), were returned to the MDA by June 2003 and were included in this analysis.

Prior to presenting findings, it is important to discuss the limitations of this study. Currently there is no way of knowing the relationship between our sample of 301 usable surveys and the entire population of such firms in Michigan. No determination can be made of exactly how many family farms engage in agritourism activities, although Hill estimated that more than 4,000 family farms in Michigan 1 are involved. Assuming her estimate is correct, this would meanthatapproximately 7.5 percent of all farms in Michigan derive at least some of their income from agritourism activities. Every effort was taken to distribute surveys whenever possible but we do not believe the survey to be entirely random. Farmers who are more active in commodity groups and with stronger MDA ties are probably overrepresented. Nevertheless, the survey represents the first systematic study of this increasingly important type of tourism for many rural places in Michigan.

## Results and Discussion

The following subsections summarize the main types of agritourism operations identified from the survey. Farm characteristics are based on 301 usable surveys, and include descriptions of the types of operations that participated in the survey, as well as summaries of the length of operation, net sales and net income, the numbers of visitors to the farms, promotional efforts, total wages paid, and characteristics of the employment offered. The summaries of the various types of agritourism operations are followed by the presentation of an ordinary least squares (OLS) linear regression model designed to estimate the effects of the variables mentioned earlier on the net incomes reported by a subsample of these businesses. Only some businesses participating in the study reported their net incomes, so the sample used for the regression analysis included sixty-four households. We conclude with an interpretation of results and some thoughts on methodological problems and issues for further study.

## Characteristics of Agritourism Operations

After the surveys were returned to the MDA, the data were coded and each business was classified for analysis based on the dominant self-reported source of revenue. After an initial classification based on fourteen types of operations, all farms were reclassified as one of ten types of operations. Of course, agritourism in Michigan takes many forms, including U-pick fruits, on-farm farmers' markets, 2 and various seasonal attractions such as Fall/Halloween operations or those centered on Christmas. T able 1 summarizes these categories and the associated products and services offered. Many of the farms obviously offer products from more than one category but were assigned to a group based on the owner's opinion of the most important (lucrative) activities that were offered to farm visitors. Because of Michigan's diverse climate and the relatively high population density throughout the southern half of the state, Michigan has the widest possible range of agritourism activities. Some activities are those that would be expected: U-picks for berries, apples, pears, peaches, and apricots, or pumpkin patches with corn mazes and haunted houses for Halloween. Others, such as deer parks for petting and feeding deer, vineyards with wine-making classes, or dairy farms where visitors milk a cow, pasteurize the milk, and make ice cream, are less common.Still, all of the operations summarized in Table 1 offer on-farm retail sales of some group of core products, along with variable amounts of rural relaxation and education.

The products and activities offered by each business partially determine the periods of operation, and the income generated by agritourism. Based on survey results, 81 percent of the agritourism firms in our sample were open seasonally, and 19 percent were open year round (Table 2). The average number of full days of operation was 174.5 days, but the standard deviation was 115 days. Thus, there is a considerable range in how important agritourism activities are to annual incomes. Many of our focus group informants indicated that product and service diversification-that is, developing activities and products that allowed the farms to extend the time they could remain open-was oneofthemostcriticalstrategies for a successful operation. Apple orchards must add a pumpkin patch and corn/sorghum mazes to operate later into the fall. Similarly, fall markets can open earlier in spring or summer by adding a fishpond, a petting zoo, or a strawberry U-pick.

The number of operating days is not necessarily correlated to the number of visitors

Table1 Ten major types of agritourism operations in Michigan

| Category and number of operations       | Description of products and services                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|-----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1. Berries (36)                         | U-pick berry fruits: strawberries, raspberries, blueberries, and cranberries. Often provide picking buckets, water, hand washing stations, and rides to fields. Additional retail food products such as jams, syrup, and baked goods are also offered.                                                                              |
| 2. Orchard (55)                         | U-pick or ready-to-sell tree fruits: apples, cherries, peaches, pears, and plums. Many provide other productssuchassnacks,jams,andjellies.Coffee,pie, cider,anddonutsareoftensoldinthefallseason.                                                                                                                                   |
| 3. Farm market (54)                     | Typically an in-town location with assorted fruits and vegetables. Mayalso include crafts, baked goods, jams, and jellies. The most diverse product lines are offered by these operations.                                                                                                                                          |
| 4. Fall harvest (34)                    | Thesearediverse,usuallyseasonal,operationscombiningretailsaleswithfarmexperiences.Fallfoods, including pies, cider, candies, and donuts are offered in conjunction with U-pick apples, hay rides, pumpkin patches, and corn mazes. Some locations may also have a haunted house or haunted/regular sorghum or corn maze.            |
| 5. Christmas (33)                       | Evergreen tree farm with U-cut Christmas trees. Some have a holiday shop selling candy, coffee, hot cocoa, wreaths andboughs,stands, ornaments,andprecut trees. Somealsosell ''flocked'' trees,anda number offer wagon/sleigh rides in December.                                                                                    |
| 6. Animal products and attractions (19) | Variety of offerings: animal observation in natural settings; organized hunting ranches; sheep, alpaca, and llama farms with natural fiber sales; stocked fishponds; and petting zoos. Horseback riding is also included here, but in the context of on-farm sales of related products as well.                                     |
| 7. Farm experience (10)                 | Dairy farms, but also include operations that offer a variety of produce and fruits in conjunction with activities such as wagon rides, petting zoos, equipment/activity demonstrations, and farm tours. There is a strong element of visitor participation, as well as a frequent focus on historical and contemporary activities. |
| 8. Honey/maple (10)                     | Variety of products centered on either honey/wax or maple sugar, syrups, and sauces. In most cases many other food-related products are also sold, such as herb teas and spices.                                                                                                                                                    |
| 9. Nursery (36)                         | Widerangeof bedding plants, annuals, perennials, ornamental shrubs, trees, and landscaping services.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| 10. Vineyard (14)                       | Wine tasting, wine, grapes, fruit cordials, and vineyard tours.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

Source: Generated by the farm surveys.

( Pearson's r ¼ .224, p ¼ .001). In fact, the various types of ''Fall Harvest'' operations (Halloween-based operations, apples, cider, fall markets) have a relatively short (seventh lowest) average season of 137.29 days, but reported the greatest average number of visitors per operation ( n ¼ 37,628; T able 3). The arrival of this many customers in almost any rural area of Michigan obviously presents some challenges (traffic, noise) but is also a considerable opportunity for nearby businesses, state parks, and tourist destinations. Thus, in addition to employment and taxes, farm operations spin off benefits to local economies. Well-promoted agritourism operations can bring an influx of people (and dollars) to many small towns akin to having the July 4th parade every day.

Thebusiest seasons, based on customer visits, were fall (40 percent of visitors) and summer (35 percent), with the remainder of visitors almost equally divided between spring and winter. Obviously, these figures are also somewhat contin-

Table2 Comparative statistics for full days of operation for the ten categories of agritourism firms

| Type of Operation   |   N |   Mean no. of days |   Std. deviation |   Std. error |   Minimum no. of days |   Maximum no. of days |
|---------------------|-----|--------------------|------------------|--------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| Animal products     |  18 |             274.61 |          101.968 |       24.034 |                    90 |                   365 |
| Berries             |  35 |              99.23 |           58.399 |        9.871 |                    27 |                   214 |
| Christmas           |  31 |              50.39 |           57.777 |       10.377 |                    23 |                   267 |
| Fall harvest        |  34 |             137.29 |           88.893 |       15.245 |                    21 |                   365 |
| Farm market         |  53 |             176.94 |           85.286 |       11.715 |                    16 |                   365 |
| Farm experience     |   9 |             232.56 |          129.937 |       43.312 |                    55 |                   365 |
| Honey/maple syrup   |   9 |             339.44 |           54.512 |       18.171 |                   210 |                   365 |
| Nurseries           |  35 |             224.94 |           92.568 |       15.647 |                    45 |                   365 |
| Orchards            |  52 |             161.15 |          106.834 |       14.815 |                    30 |                   365 |
| Vineyards           |  14 |             356.43 |           32.071 |        8.571 |                   245 |                   365 |
| Total               | 290 |             173.84 |          114.937 |        6.749 |                    16 |                   365 |

Source: Summarized from the farm surveys.

Note: The total number 290 reflects the fact that responses were not provided on some of the 301 useable surveys.

Table3 Mean values for selected variables by type of agritourism operation

| Category of business        |   Customers |   Full-time employees |   Part-time employees |   Advertising expenses |   Gross sales |   Net income |
|-----------------------------|-------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|---------------|--------------|
| (1) Animal farms/Activities |      7597   |                 1.75  |                 3.89  |                 14,875 |        51,227 |        8,975 |
| (2) Berry farms             |      3953   |                 1.64  |                 8.14  |                  2,655 |        44,601 |        9,766 |
| (3) Christmas               |      3841   |                 0.72  |                 5.92  |                  1,448 |        20,914 |       11,597 |
| (4) Fall harvest            |     37628   |                 3.8   |                20.83  |                  4,441 |       214,479 |       16,480 |
| (5) Farm markets            |     14035   |                 2.55  |                 3.83  |                  6,171 |       164,479 |        9,518 |
| (6) Farm experience         |      7311   |                 2     |                 2.83  |                  4,211 |       114,559 |       10,250 |
| (7) Honey/maple             |       782   |                 0.57  |                 3.71  |                    500 |        23,333 |       18,250 |
| (8) Nurseries               |      3940   |                 3.26  |                 4.81  |                  7,505 |       152,907 |       25,790 |
| (9) Orchards                |     10650   |                 2.56  |                13.31  |                  4,912 |       201,671 |        9,419 |
| (10) Vineyards              |     24857   |                 4.42  |                 7.45  |                 14,881 |       425,250 |       52,701 |
| Grand means                 |     11459.4 |                 2.327 |                 7.472 |                  6,160 |       141,342 |       17,275 |

Source: Survey data.

gent on the types of operations. Most fruit and vegetable U-pick operations draw the majority of their visitors in summer and fall. Halloweenand Thanksgiving-related operations that we aggregated as our ''fall harvest'' group had a very short season, yet their number of visitors greatly exceeded those of many of the other groups.

For the businesses in our sample, the most important products as defined by gross sales value for each type of firm were (1) apples, (2) Christmas trees, (3) pumpkins, (4) animal products (natural wools, fishing ponds, horseback riding), (5) strawberries, (6) sweet corn, (7) blueberries, (8) bedding plants, (9) other trees/shrubs, and (10) wine/grape products (Figure 1). The products that the public initially seeks when visiting the farms vary. Increasingly, successful operators recognize the importance of valueadded secondary products produced on the farm or sold in on-farm retail shops, or both. An $8.00 peck of apples brings in the customer, but the fresh-baked pie ($6.50), the jar of apple butter ($2.99), the gallon of cider ($2.99), or the surprisingly ubiquitous ''country'' potpourri ($4.89) raises gross revenues and profits.

Aslightly different picture results when gross sales and net income by type of firm are studied in conjunction with visitors, employees, and advertising and promotional costs. T able 3 provides mean values for these diagnostic variables for each of the ten types of operation, and really gets to the heart of the matter. Mean estimates for net incomes by firm type vary widely from $52,701 for wineries to slightly more than $9,000 for animal products and animal attractions. The numbers are surprisingly consistent, with most types of operations generating a net income of $10,000 to $15,000. It is clear that the majority of these operations serve as supplemental sources of income. Only the vineyards consistently provide full-time work and incomes.

The average annual gross sales for the wineries participating in the survey were $425,250, with a standard deviation of almost a half a million dollars. The second highest grossing group was ''fall harvest,'' followed by nursery operations that are often joint wholesale/retail operations. The enormous range in revenues reflects the difficulties inherent in sample averages, but also underscores the wide range of activities and types of operations included within agritourism.

The survey results also indicate the importance of these firms to the local employment base. A typical agritourism firm employs an average of just over 9.8 nonfamily workers, including an average 2.3 full-time workers and 7.5 part-time workers (T able 3). If family members are included, the average number of full-time workers increases to 3.14 persons. Part-time workers worked an average of 19.4 hours/week during the operating season. Average wages for shift managers in 2002 were $9.42 per hour; for full-time employees, the average rate was $7.58 per hour. Even for part-time workers, the mean hourly rate of $6.84 was above the current minimumwageof $5.15 Assuming there is one shift manager, 2.1 full-time workers, and 10.12 parttime workers (19.42 hours/week), the average firm participating in the survey paid out approximately $2,029.90 in local wages for every 40 hours of operation. The largest operations employ dozens of people, the smallest have only

Figure1 Most common products ranked as highest in gross sales in 2003.

<!-- image -->

one or two, but all of this enters the local economy while providing part-time work for high school and college students throughout Michigan.

## Explaining Variations in Net Income for Agritourism Operations in Michigan

Regression analysis is used to explain variations in net income based on the following variables introduced in the previous section: (1) customers (estimated number of visitors per year, NUMVIS); (2) promotional investments in advertising (annual $ spent on all forms of advertising and signage, PROMINV); (3) bus groups (number of buses/year, BUSGRP); and (4) total estimated annual wages ($/year, WAGETOT).

The number of customers was included since the greater the number of visitors, the higher sales should be. Second, although no one would dispute that advertising in America works, inclusion of promotional expenses in the model allows us to establish the quantitative relationship between advertising and income. Third, bus groups were included as the use of buses by public school classes for field trips really underscores the educational aspects of the agritourism industry. Certainly more than 95 percent of visitors arriving on buses are elementary and middle school students. This variable registered a weak correlation ( r ¼ .287, p ¼ .001) with the total number of visitors, so both variables were included in the final function. School groups are only common when the farms are near large cities such as Lansing or

Grand Rapids, but they also serve as a surrogate for scale and the sophistication of operations. Firms drawing bus groups are mostly near major metropolitan areas, but they also expend more advertising and effort to access the school groups and retirement communities offering bus trips. The results from the regression analysis are presented in T able 4.

The exploratory model uses sixty-four farms because many firms are simply unwilling to provide income data ( Y ). The model yields an adjusted R 2 of .587 ( F ¼ 23.743, p ¼ .0001). Based on the standardized beta coefficients (Table 4), the most important factor of those selected for the model is the money spent on promoting the business. Every dollar spent on promotion results in $2.51 in net revenues (not sales!).

The next significant predictor, total wages paid out, has an inverse effect on Y : the higher the payroll, the lower the net returns. This finding raises some interesting issues related to the optimum size of these agritourism operations, above which they cease to attract those seeking a rural experience. It may be that when operations are too large, the farm experience, or contact with the farmer and the farm experience, is lost. As mentioned earlier, saving money is not really the major force behind the success of agritourism operations. On the other hand, those operations more dependent on family labor conserve cash by shifting the burden of longer hours to family members. In some cases, these smaller operations may be more efficient,

Table4 Ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analysis predicting income from agritourism operations: Coefficients and model statistics for predicting annual net income by firm

|              | Unstandardized coefficients   | Unstandardized coefficients   | Standardized coefficients   | Standardized coefficients   |      |
|--------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|------|
| Model        | Beta                          | Std. Error                    | Beta                        | t                           | Sig. |
| 1 (Constant) | 2562.717                      | 2283.236                      |                             | 1.122                       | .266 |
| promomon     | 2.510                         | .432                          | .777                        | 5.808                       | .000 |
| numvisit     | .412                          | .143                          | .272                        | 2.881                       | .005 |
| busgrps      | 679.595                       | 252.419                       | .248                        | 2.692                       | .009 |
| wagetot      |   .219                         | .063                          |   .451                       |   3.452                      | .001 |

Source: Generated by survey data.

Notes: Dependent variable: net income per operation.

R 2 ¼ .587, F ¼ 23.743, significant at .0001.

n ¼ 64 farm operations (cases).

but this economic efficiency comes at some cost. If children are asked to work excessively long hours, they may leave the very farm the family is fighting to save to pass to the next generation.

Not surprisingly, the number of visitors and bus groups are both positively associated with net income. In other words, the more people, the more sales. School groups are usually charged a fixed rate per child. Again, the importance of these businesses is greater than the economic activity identified at each business. Visitors to a U-pick or farm market will spend additional monies along the way. The Michigan findings support the differences according to the scale of operations identified in earlier literature based on empirical studies in the EU.

## Promoting Agritourism Has Benefits Beyond the Economy

Agricultural tourism is an increasingly important option for small farm families in the state of Michigan. For a variety of economic reasons, many farm families have moved away from conventional wholesale operations to agritourism, and the public has embraced these new recreational options. There can be little doubt that, taken collectively, these activities potentially represent a growing source of income and employment for much of rural Michigan. Agritourism has many facets-from simply picking fresher fruit, to learning to bake or make wine, to the relaxation of a day spent horseback riding, to a wintry outing to cut the family Christmas tree. It seems certain that the activities provided by the state's farmers as agritourism activities will continue to diversify as new ideas are developed, tested, and implemented.

The economic benefits with respect to employment and wages are clear. Of course, there are benefits to the tax base as well. Questions related to taxes were included in the survey but only a limited number of respondents provided answers and, in many cases, the responses included property taxes and income taxes, as well as the sales and payroll taxes that were the intended target of the question. Successful firms must ''think off-farm''; they must invest in promotion, produce new products, develop new activities, and come to grips with the complications associated with managing group tours, dealing with county health departments, and acquiring permission to expand road signage.

Benefits from agritourism go beyond operators and customers to the surrounding communities. Through on-site sales, value-added production, and services (such as school tours, corn mazes, and Halloween activities), agritourism yields the additional income that enables operators not only to maintain a ''way of life'' but often to retain the family farm. Admittedly, the strategy is not without social and psychological costs. Families and communities must to some extent open their doors to travelers from afar. Customers are not always well behaved or tidy, and small-town life sometimes changes with strangers around. Still, there are many benefits beyond economics. For the customers, agritourism provides a place to obtain fresh produce and experience nature with their families. For rural communities and the state of Michigan, agritourism generates employment and tourism and tax revenues, while helping to maintain open space and the viability of Michigan agriculture. By expanding product offerings, agritourism's sales potential can be further

increased while simultaneously providing visitors with greater choice.

## Conclusions and Recommendations

Given agritourism's benefits, the state of Michigan should provide further support for this sector that integrates Michigan's second and third largest industries, tourism and agriculture. At present, no employee of the MDA is charged as a primary task with promoting agricultural tourism or helping farm families' transition to agritourism (Craig 2005). This would seem shortsighted. An important move toward a comprehensive study of the role of agritourism throughout the United States will be the inclusion in the 2007 Agricultural Census of an entire section devoted to agricultural tourism. The census will provide critical information with respect to the numbers of farms involved and the economic contributions of these activities.

Nevertheless, more must be done to actively promote these activities. Agritourism operators need assistance in dealing with other governmental agencies on regulatory issues such as zoning/local ordinances, the loss of property tax homestead exemptions when a commercial operation is developed on the farm, signage placement and fees, and a spate of multiagency/local regulations including the health department regulations related to foods that are prepared and sold on-site. Families considering a switch to agritourism need the help and support that the MDA can provide, at least as a source of advice. Equally important, the state of Michigan should provide financial support to strengthen the links between tourism, agriculture, and nature, especially since Michigan's agricultural products can help draw more visitors. The New York Times recently devoted extensive print and Web coverage to Michigan as a ''flavorable vacationland,'' offering cherries and other tree fruits, game, and wines and spirits (Apple 2003). By making food a peak part of the tourism experience, Michigan can maximize its potential of drawing tourists from the state's traditional tourism-generating areas as well as from outside the region. According to Hjalager (1996), the eating culture is a distinctive feature of destinations, yet it is underestimated in rural tourism.

Marketing and promotional support are critical. Danish and U.K. studies have found that small to medium-sized, locally owned agritourism and rural tourism enterprises have limited entrepreneurship capabilities related to innovations in management, product development, and planning for future growth. Their owners may be constrained entrepreneurs who lack tourism business skills and capital (Shaw and Williams 1998; Ioannides and Petersen 2003). Although the level of entrepreneurship was not a primary focus of our research, we surmise that small, Michigan agritourism operators, who were forced by globalization to shift from production to consumption-oriented activities, share these problems. There is a very wide range of expertise and ambition among the farm families in our sample. Strengthening existing operations, as well as encouraging additional agricultural businesses, especially as the market is not saturated, can help to bolster an area's reputation for agritourism (Che, Veeck, and Veeck 2005). Initially, government funding and training should be targeted at two types of farmers: (1) small farmers facing financial hardships (including high debt loads and poor returns on traditional field crops of fruit wholesalers) who would benefit from training programs on how to begin such an operation; and (2) efforts should be made to identify innovative operators so that they can be encouraged to share their expertise and ideas with their neighbors.

Michigan agritourism offers many benefits to the rural areas where these farms are located and should be supported. Beyond wages and taxes, these farm activities help many families stay on the farm, and provide a new draw of customers to area businesses. Further, keeping farm families on the farm slows urban sprawl, while maintaining an important aspect of state history and heritage. Finally, and perhaps more important than all the money is that fact that these businesses give all of us wonderful opportunities to ''go back to the farm.'' '

## Notes

1 In 2002, Sandra Hill of the MDA developed a mailing list of more than 2,000 agritourism operations. Althoughmanyofthesedidnotrespondtothesurvey or were returned due to change of address, they were operating and at one time responded to MDA inquiries or advertised in the Yellow Pages. Hill believed she was able to identify only half of the

operating firms and that the actual number might be around 4,000 businesses. This was only an estimate on her part.

2 The term ''farm market'' is somewhat problematic. In this study, the term is used to denote family farm operations that sell many more products than are actually produced on the farm. A family may produce ten to fifteen varieties of vegetables but sell thirtybuying the rest wholesale or from other farmers. Our ''farm market'' category must be distinguished from Farmers Markets held several times a week in most cities and towns in the United States during summer and fall.

## Literature Cited

- Advisory Committee (Advisory Committee on Agricultural Statistics). 2002. Executive Summary February 19-20th Annual Meeting . Washington, DC: USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service.
- Apple, R. W., Jr. 2003. Up North: Michigan's flavorful vacationland. New York Times http://www.nytimes. com/2003/07/30/dining/30MICH.htm (last accessed 2 March 2005).
- Berno, T. 2004. New approaches to sustainable tourism: Optimizing the linkages between agriculture and tourism in the Fiji Islands. Paper presented at the Centennial Meeting of the Association of American Geographers, Philadelphia, PA, March 2004.
- Brooks, J., and J. Lynch. 2004. Small farms thrive despite Metro sprawl; Defying national trend, small-scale farmers meet increased demand for fresh, organic produce. The Detroit News 22 June: 1A, 6A.
- Busby, G., and S. Rendle. 2000. The transition from tourism on farms to farm tourism. Tourism Management 21:635-42.
- Che, D., A. Veeck, and G. Veeck. 2005. Sustaining production and strengthening the agritourism product: Linkages among Michigan agritourism destinations. Agriculture and Human Values 22 (2): 225-34.
- Christoff, C. 2003a. Big farms cause big stink. Detroit Free Press http://www.freep.com/news/mich/ cafo22\_20030721.html (last accessed 1 March 2004; hard copy can be obtained from authors).
- ---. 2003b. Dairy industry in Michigan: Waste runoff a worry with mega-farms. Detroit Free Press http://www.freep.com/news/mich/cafo22\_ 20030722.html (last accessed 1 March 2004; hard copy can be obtained from authors).
- Clemens, R. 2004. Keeping farmers on the land: Agritourism in the European Union. Iowa Ag Review 10 (3): 8-9.
- Conrad, J. 1990. Development paths for rural areas in the European Community. Land Degradation and Rehabilitation 2:57-68.
- Craig, Robert. 2005. Michigan Department of Agriculture, telephone interview 24 August 2005.
- Cross, C. 2004. Agricultural T ourism-ISAI (International Sports Adventure Institute; http:// www.satglobal.com/agricultural\_tourism.htm (last accessed 2 March 2005).
- Cunningham, W. P., M. A. Cunningham, and B. Saigo. 2005. Environmental science: A global concern . New York: McGraw-Hill.
- Farmstop.com. 2004. T ourists flocking to farms now have help with new website: Farmstop.com. http:// www.farmstop.com/articles/farmstoprelease.asp (last accessed 2 March 2005).
- Gartner, W., L. Limback, and A. Adiarte. Economic impact of tourism in Minnesota. Minnesota Agricultural Economist 684 1: 5-7.
- Grykien, S. 1999. Tourist farms in Lower Silesia, Poland. GeoJournal 46:279-81.
- Hilchey, D. 1993. Agritourism in New York State: Opportunities and challenges in farm-based recreation and hospitality , 2nd ed. Ithaca, NY: Farming Alternatives Program, Department of Rural Sociology, Cornell University (reprint).
- Hjalager, A.-M. 1996. Agricultural diversification into tourism: Evidence of a European Community development programme. Tourism Management 17 (2): 103-11.
- Hollander, G. 2003. Agricultural trade liberalization, multifunctionality, and the political ecology of sugar in Florida. Paper presented at the Political Ecology at Home conference, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, March 2003.
- Hsin, H. 2003. Bittersweet harvest: The debate over genetically modified crops . Annual editions: Global issues 2003/2004. Guilford, CT: McGraw-Hill/ Dushkin.
- Ilbery, B, I. Bowler, G. Clark, A Crockett, and A. Shaw. 1998. Farm-based tourism as an alternative farm enterprise: A case study from the Northern Pennines, England. Regional Studies 32 (4): 355-64.
- Ioannides, D., and T. Petersen. 2003. T ourism ''nonentrepreneurship'' in peripheral destinations: A case study of small and medium tourism enterprises on Bornholm, Denmark. Tourism Geographies 5 (4): 408-35.
- Johnson, L. A. 2003. Agritourism industry brings the public, money to state's farms. Associated Press Business News . Dateline: Colt's Neck, NJ, 19 October.
- Knox, P., J. Agnew, and L. McCarthy. 2003. The geography of the world economy , 4th ed. London: Arnold.
- Kuehn,D.,D.Hilchey,D.Ververs, K.L. Dunn, andP. Lehman. 2000. Considerations for agritourism development . Oswego, NY: New York Sea Grant, SUNY College at Oswego (reprint).
- Lange, L. 2003. Bountiful new crop; Rural America reaps lucrative harvests via agritourism. Knoxville News-Sentinel (Tennessee) 5 October: F-1.

- LeDuc Farms. 2003. Interview with employees at LeDuc Blueberries and Strawberries, Highway 43, Paw Paw, MI, August 2003.
- Mahoney, E. 1987. Michigan's AG-T ourism program. In Agriculture and tourism in Wisconsin : Report on the first Ag-Tourism Conference, 6-8. Madison: The Recreation Resources Center, College of Agriculture, University of Wisconsin.
- Marsden, T., J. Murdoch, P . Lowe, R. Munton, and A. Flynn. 1993. Constructing the countryside . London: UCLPress.
- Michigan Department of Agriculture. 2002. New markets. http://www.michigan.gov0,1687,7-12514963-,00.html (last accessed 14 February 2003; hard copy can be obtained from authors).
- NASS(NationalAgriculturalStatisticsService).2004. ''Michigan 2003-2004 Highlights.'' Available online at http://www.nass.usda.gov/mi/T emplates/ STHILGTS.pdf
- Nickerson, N. P., R. J. Black, and S. F. McCool. 2001. Agritourism: Motivations behind farm/ranch business diversification. Journal of Travel Research 40:19-26.
- Nilsson, P. A. 2002. Staying on farms: An ideological background. Annals of Tourism Research 29 (1): 7-24.
- Pevetz, W. 1991. Agriculture and tourism in Austria. Tourism Recreation Research 16 (1): 57-60.
- Quan, S., and N. Wang. 2004. T owards a structural model of the tourist experience: An illustration from food experiences in tourism. Tourism Management 25:297-305.
- Shaw, G., and A. M. Williams. 1998. Entrepreneurship, small business culture, and tourism development.In Theeconomic geography of the tourist industry: A supply-side analysis , ed. D. Ioannides and K. G. Debbage, 235-55. London: Routledge.
- Slee, B., H. Farr, and P. Snowdon. 1997. The economic impact of alternative types of rural tourism. Journal of Agricultural Economics 48 (2): 179-92.
- Small Farm Center. 2004. Agricultural Tourism . http://sfc.ucdavis.edu/agritourism/definition.html (last accessed 2 March 2005).
- Southern Maryland Resource Conservation and Development Board, Inc. (SMRCDB). 2004. Taking the First Step: Farm and Ranch Alternative Enterprise and Agritourism Resource Evaluation Guide with technical and financial assistance from the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
- Conservation Service (NRCS), Resource Economics and Social Sciences Division.
- Telfer, D. J. 2000. Tastes of Niagara: Building strategic alliances between tourism and agriculture. International Journal of Hospitality &amp; Tourism Administration 1 (1): 71-88.
- Telfer, D. J., and G. Wall. 1996. Linkages between tourism and food production. Annals of T ourism Research 23 (3): 635-53.
- Torres, R. 2002. T oward a better understanding of tourism and agriculture linkages in the Yucatan: Tourist food consumption and preferences. Tourism Geographies 4 (3): 282-306.
- USDA. 2003. 2002 Census of Agriculture - Preliminary data . USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service. http://www.nass.udsa.gov/census/census02 (last accessed 2 March 2005).
- ---.2004. USDA agricultural baseline projections to 2013 . Staff Report WAOB-2004-1. Washington, DC: USDA Office of the Chief Economist.
- Weidman, J. M. 1996. The US food and agriculture system and the GATT/WTO Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture. http://www.csupomona.edu/  jis/1996/Weidman.pdf (last accessed 2 March 2005).
- Wright, R. T., and B. J. Nebel. 2002. Environmental science: Toward a sustainable future . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.

GREGORY VEECK is a Professor of Geography at WesternMichiganUniversity, Kalamazoo, MI 49008. E-mail: gregory.veeck@wmich.edu. His research interests include agriculture and rural development in China, the United States, and East Asia.

DEBORAH CHE is an Assistant Professor of Geography at Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506. E-mail: dche@k-state.edu. Her research interests include nature-based tourism, destination branding, and race/ethnicity issues in tourism and recreation.

ANN M. VEECK is an Associate Professor of Marketing at Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI 49008. E-mail: Ann.Veeck@wmich.edu. Her research interests include family consumption patterns and food consumption patterns in China and the United States.