## Who Is 'Forest-Dependent'? Capturing Local Variation in Forest-Product Sale, Eastern Honduras*

## Kendra McSweeney

The Ohio State University

How researchers describe groups living within or near the world's tropical rain forests has important implications for how and why these groups are targeted for assistance by conservation and development organizations. This article explores how data about market behavior can be used to assess one aspect of forest peoples' livelihoods: their 'dependence' on forest resources as a source of market income. With the intent of revealing the importance of methodology to how we describe forest peoples' livelihoods, I draw from a multiyear survey of market activity among the T awahka Sumu of Honduras and distinguish nested measures of the T awahkas' engagement in forest-product sale. Results indicate that whether or not the T awahka-or any forest group-can be considered financially 'dependent' on forest resources depends on the spatial and temporal scales at which data are aggregated. As a group, the T awahka earned 18 percent of total market income from forest-product sale, but their group profile masked a high degree of heterogeneity at the village and household level. Similarly, multiyear data indicated that while group-level generalizations adhere from year to year, they belie considerable change in households' market behavior across years. I discuss three ways in which the findings are relevant to the theory and practice of conservation and development in the humid tropics. I emphasize the importance of spatial scale in interventions, how market-oriented conservation schemes can benefit from a broader conceptualization of the economic context in which forest-product sale occurs, and how longitudinal analysis can reveal the dynamism of forest peoples' livelihoods. Key Words: conservation and development, forest dependence, Honduras, rural nonfarm income, Tawahka.

## Introduction

ow peoples living within or near tropical rainforests  are  characterized  can  have important  implications  for  the  way  in  which national and international conservation and development organizations perceive-and seek to influence-forest  peoples  and  their  environments. 1  Depending on whether economic, cultural,  geographic,  or  other  criteria  are  used, any given forest-dwelling population can usually  be  described  in  a  host  of  different  ways, varying from forest peasant, indigenous, or rural to forest-dependent, smallholder, colonistor  simply  poor  (e.g.,  Atran  et  al.  1998).  The criterion  chosen  is  important  because  it  can evoke a different degree of local receptivity to particular  conservation  and/or  development interventions. For example, conservation projects based  around  the  expectation  that  'indigenous'  equates  with  particular  conservationist behaviors have been known to founder when target groups do not act as they 'should' (RedH

ford and Stearman 1993; Schwartzman, Moreira, and Nepstad 2000). Similarly, Zimmerer (2000) describes how spatial characterizations of rural livelihoods influence the way in which conservation landscapes are subsequently zoned for  particular  uses.  Where  the  term  'forest peasant' emphasizes the degree to which forest-based livelihoods combine subsistence with market production (e.g., Coomes 1996), locals may be perceived as particularly amenable to market-oriented conservation programs.

In this article, I explore how economic criteria  can be used to assess the degree to which forest people be considered financially 'dependent' on forest resources. I demonstrate that such a categorization is very much conditioned by the way in which economic data are categorized  and  the  spatial  and  temporal  scales  at which information is aggregated. My primary goal is to render explicit the effect of the researcher's analytical gaze in how forest groups are depicted-in this case, through the use of economic data. T o do so, I focus on a single

* I am grateful to IDRC (Ottawa), McGill University, and FCAR Quebec ( Fonds pour la formation de chercheurs et l'aide à la recherche ) for funding the research on which this work is based. I thank Ricardo Godoy, the Harvard Institute for International Development, and researchers with the Harvard Forests Project for access to data collected in 1995. I am particularly grateful to the T awahka Sumu of Honduras, without whose assistance and good humor the research could not have been done. I thank five anonymous reviewers and Oliver Coomes for their helpful comments on an earlier draft.

group, the T awahka Sumu of eastern Honduras, drawing on information about their market activities  over  four  years  (1994-1998).  Although the study's empirical results are particular to this context, I employ a typology that can be applied to other forms of forest dependence elsewhere.

The study responds to the recent call by Byron and Arnold (1999) for a clearer conceptualization  of  the  nature  of  forest  dependence. They outline how the term 'forest-dependent people' has been applied uniformly to populations that in fact appear to vary markedly in the degree to which forest resources provide essential  livelihood  inputs,  and  they  argue  that clearer  definitions  are  essential  in  order  for policymakers  and  conservation  and  development practitioners to more readily distinguish between target groups whose condition would likely  worsen  without  access  to  forests,  and those whose future well-being would be little affected by forest loss. I focus here on one particular type of forest dependence: fi nancial dependence, or the degree to which forest peoples would be left with few ways to purchase market goods  without  the  earnings  they  derive  from the sale of forest products.

I focus on financial dependence for two reasons. First, that forest peoples can derive financial  gain  from  forest-product  sale  has  been  a keystone  in  productive  conservation  or  integrated conservation and development approaches to tropical forest management. Proponents argue  that  forest-product  sale  raises  incomes while simultaneously enhancing local peoples' economic stake in sustainable forest management (Bawa and Gadgil 1997; Kant 1997; Hall 2000).  Others  point  out  that  such  initiatives would benefit from a better understanding of the  ongoing  role  that  forest  products  play  in tropical  livelihood  systems  (Barraclough  and Ghimire  1995;  Jepma  1995;  Hedge  et  al. 1996; Southgate 1998; Barham, Coomes, and Takasaki 1999). However, despite considerable research in this field, and although study populations  are  routinely  described  as  'reliant,' 'specialized,' or 'dependent' on forest-product  earnings,  few  studies  define  these  terms, and those that do, do so in ways that are not comparable across studies. 2  A portable measure of forest dependence is therefore needed, in order both to identify a target population's receptivity to market-based interventions (Hedge et al. 1996; Kant 2000; Gram 2001), and to distinguish within-group differences in ongoing forest-product marketing activities  (Byron and  Arnold  1999;  Coomes  and  Burt  2000). Second, quantifiable changes in forest dependence  are  relevant  to  theoretical  models  of forest  households' response to increased engagement with external markets (e.g., Godoy, Brokaw, and Wilkie 1995; Sierra, Rodriguez, and  Losos  1999;  Godoy  2001).  Yet  when  no common standard exists for judging variance in  dependence,  predicting  behavior  across those  same  levels  of  dependence  becomes highly problematic.

The  Tawahka  Asangni  Biosphere  Reserve (TABR) was ratified in 1999 (but delineated a decade earlier) with the intention of preserving biological and cultural diversity while limiting industrial  development  and  frontier  agricultural expansion (Republic of Honduras 1999). The  reserve  therefore  encapsulates  the  cultural, economic, and ecological conditions for which  conservation  and  development  initiatives  are  intended.  Indeed,  the  T awahka  and their environment have received financial support through at least twelve different international and national nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in the past decade, for projects ranging  from  health  initiatives  to  forestproduct  marketing  schemes.  However,  while there is no question that T awahka livelihoods are rooted in local resources, a recent study by Godoy and colleagues (2000) suggests that the direct use-value of the forest to local users may be  lower  than  the  forest's  global  value.  The current study uses a different approach towards offering a complementary assessment of the financial contribution of the forest to the Tawahka. It is anticipated that these data will be useful to a management plan being developed for the TABR in 2002-2003.

I elaborate below on the economic and social context of the study site. In subsequent sections I  detail  the  collection  and  categorization  of market income data. This is followed by data analysis  over  two  time  scales,  at  three  spatial scales, and using four indices of engagement in forest-product sale. Finally, I review three key insights from the study that are relevant to the theory and practice of conservation and development in the humid tropics. My emphasis lies in  critically  assessing  how  the  T awahka  case study  reveals  the  sensitivity  of  analytical  ap-

proach to the way in which we perceive forest peoples' livelihoods, rather than in seeking to explain  the  patterns  of  resource  use  found among the Tawahka per se.

## Study Region

The Honduran Tawahka, who numbered about 1,000 at the time of the study, are a subgroup of Mayangna, or Sumu, of whom the majority live in Nicaragua. In Honduras, the  Tawahka homeland is centered along the midchannel of the  Patuca  River.  The  area  straddles  three Honduran departamentos (political regions) and lies at the southwestern edge of what is known as the Mosquitia region (Figure 1). Here, the pine-covered coastal plain ( &lt; 75 m) of the Mosquitia  meets  the  Colón  and  Patuca  ranges, which  support  broadleaf  rain  forests  that  include Honduras' most endangered biota (Cruz and Benitez 1994; Harcourt and Sayer 1996).

Most Tawahka live in one of five permanent communities (subsequently referred to in this article as Villages A-E) located along a 40-km stretch of river. Most communities have consolidated around a Catholic church and school, and most Tawahka children receive three years of basic education. Communities differ in size (in 1998, Village A had a population of 624; Village  E,  64)  and  in  the  area  of  adjacent floodplain.  Only  Village  A  had  a  government-funded health clinic during the 1990s.

Figure 1 The location of Tawahka villages within the Tawahka Asangni Biosphere Reserve, eastern Honduras,  1998.  Sources:  Honduras  base-map:  International Travel  Maps,  1997 ,  Herlihy  (1997),  and author's field notes.

<!-- image -->

Most Tawahka households (67 percent) comprise  a  single  nuclear  family,  but  almost  20 percent  included  the  more  traditional  arrangement of extended family, comprising an elder couple and their married children (McSweeney 2000).

Tawahka  livelihoods  are  based  on  permanent,  intensive  polycultural  cultivation  along riverbanks  and  shifting  cultivation  of  poorer uplands (House 1997). Compared to most rural Hondurans, the T awahka live under conditions of  land  abundance. In 1998, households controlled an average of 6.45 ha of land on river terraces ( ± 8.03 ha), in addition to more extensive  upland  fields  and  fallows  (McSweeney 2000). During the study period, land was held in usufruct, and there was no formal land market.  The  T awahka  supplemented  agricultural production with fishing and hunting, and other forest resources provide essential construction materials,  canoes,  medicines,  and  fuelwood. Access  to  village-proximate  forest  resources depended  on  village  residence,  although  all Tawahka had equal access to resources far from settlements. With no tradition of effective village councils or local political leadership, the Tawahka have used social sanctions to convey communal  disapproval of excessive forestproduct harvest from what is a de facto forest commons. 3   The  T awahkas'  collective  knowledge of forest resources and extraction methods are nationally renowned (Cruz and Benitez 1994; House 1997).

Over the past two decades, T awahka extraction  patterns  have  been  increasingly  circumscribed by an ever-expanding colonization front of  nonindigenous,  Spanish-speaking  farmers, who are moving into the Tawahka homeland from the south and west. Aggressive land grabs by  these  colonists  in  the  mid-1980s  led  the Tawahka to consolidate disparate homesteads into five communities within a defensible core area (Herlihy 1997), which in turn led to the 1999 ratification of the 2,300-square-km TABR.  Nevertheless,  conflicts  over  land  and timber  resources  continue,  as  colonists  clear forests  deeper  into  the  reserve  and  have charged Tawahka fees for the use of forest resources there. Although it is the responsibility of Honduras'  state forestry administration (AFE)  to  enforce  the  reserve  boundaries  and expel  new  migrants  (Republic  of  Honduras 1999), effective enforcement is lacking. In con- trast, AFE employees at downriver offices have been  relatively  quick  to  tax  the  T awahka  for small volumes of wood products (e.g., dugout canoes)  exported  from  the  reserve,  which  in some cases has raised the cost of forest-based market production.

The  T awahka  also  face  land  and  forest  resource shortages as their population grows rapidly: the median age is 12, and households are large,  averaging  7.8  members  (McSweeney forthcoming). Land was rendered more scarce when  flooding  from  1998's  Hurricane  Mitch wiped out the majority of the T awahkas' most productive riparian fields. Hardest hit were the cacao  orchards  that  had  become  increasingly important  in  T awahka  market  strategies.  Because the fieldwork on which this study is based was completed six months before Mitch, results depict economic conditions prior to subsequent agricultural  reorganization.  Nevertheless,  results attest to the flexibility of T awahka market strategies,  a  trait  on  which  the  group  leaned heavily during post-Mitch reconstruction.

The  Tawahka  have  traded  forest  products and  other  goods  with  a  neighboring  ethnic group, the Miskito, and with outsiders since at least  the  late  1700s  (Roberts  1827;  Young 1842). In common with many remote tropical forest regions, economic integration with national and international  markets  has  been highly cyclical. External demand for successive products-which in the T awahka case have included  bananas,  rubber,  and chicle (latex  used for chewing gum)-has driven so-called booms (Cruz and Benitez 1994). At the time of the study, however, the T awahka characterized the local economic climate as one of lala  apu ('no money'), or relative economic stagnation. Under  such  conditions,  participation  in  no single  market  activity  is  overdetermined,  and income portfolios among forest peoples typically broaden to accommodate market needs in  more  diverse  ways  (Pinedo-Vasquez  et  al. 2001). As a result, the T awahka earned income during  the  study  period  from  varied  sources. They  exported  forest  products,  agricultural goods, and labor to downriver Miskito communities and to farmers and river traders from upriver.  The  T awahka  rarely  migrate  seasonally for  work,  in  marked  contrast  to  the  Miskito. Some goods exported from the TABR eventually reached national markets, including beans, cacao, and gold dust. Other goods were con-

sumed within the Mosquitia, particularly lumber, dugout canoes, and perishable agricultural produce. Coastal Miskito communities, where such  products  are  scarce,  provide  a  constant market for such T awahka commodities.

The Tawahka sell a variety of goods to each other,  including  agricultural  surpluses,  forest products  (particularly  meat),  firewood,  dairy products,  and,  most  importantly,  labor.  Salaried  Tawahka-those  working  as  teachers, nurses, or NGO employees-provide a steady cash input to the local economy, as they hire neighbors to tend their fields and cover domestic work. Other T awahka use market earnings to  meet basic needs such as tools, medicines, food and other perishables (particularly cooking oil, coffee, sugar, flour, salt, soap, and kerosene), clothing, and educational expenses.

As with much of rural Honduras and forests pantropically, government involvement in the economy is minimal. There is no formal credit provisioning,  no  insurance  markets,  and  few government technical assistance services. Local shopkeepers are typically the main source of informal credit. Cash is often scarce in T awahka communities, and barter is common. As a result, this study uses the term 'market income' to refer to T awahkas' earnings from the sale of goods and services, rather than the more exclusive term 'cash income.' With few formal ways of holding wealth, the T awahka invest surplus earnings in livestock,  in  trade  (by  purchasing outboard  motors),  in  agriculture  (by  buying improved  seeds  or  herbicide  applicators),  in forest extraction (by buying chainsaws), and in their children's secondary education (by paying  school  fees,  and  room  and  board  outside the TABR).

## Data and Methods

To establish  a  picture  of  the  role  of  forestproduct sales within T awahka market production, I analyzed information about the sale of goods and services compiled from three household-level surveys: one conducted in 1995 by a research team from the Harvard Institute for International  Development  (HIID),  and  two that I conducted in 1996 and 1998. 4  I organized these data into two sets, one comprising a single year  of  market  production  (1997-1998)  for about 100 Tawahka households and the other covering three years (1994, 1995, 1997) for a subset of 49 households from one T awahka village. Below, I describe how the data were collected and organized.

## One Year of Earnings

In early 1998, over a roughly eight-week period  that  spanned  Easter  Holy  Week,  I  surveyed  116  T awahka  households  in  all  five Tawahka communities, or about 88 percent of Tawahka households  estimated  to  live  within the TABR. I asked male and female household heads to estimate the value of all goods and services sold or exchanged by household members since Holy Week of 1997. I asked about a set of common market activities, including the sale of crop  surpluses  and  forms  of  wage  work,  but also used open-ended questions to solicit information about other activities. I made every effort to ensure that both male and female householders' activities were recorded, which in the case of 35 households required at least one return visit. I recorded all earnings in Lempiras (Lps), as typically reported by respondents. In 1997-1998, the exchange rate averaged 13.21 Lps to U.S.$1. 5

Respondents occasionally had difficulty remembering transactions, as might be expected in a region where records are rarely kept and market transactions are highly informal (Barham, Coomes, and Takasaki 1999; Gram 2001). In particular, respondents tended to overlook 'everyday'  sales  of  small  items  such  as  eggs, but  remember  large,  one-time  transactions such as employment contracts or cattle sales. As a result, reported earnings are likely to be conservative. During interviews, I attempted to distinguish barter transactions-that is, those with  an  explicitly  commercial  intent-from forms  of  reciprocity,  which  I  discounted  as nonmarket, subsistence income, following Ellis (1998). In addition, because some adult household members were absent from the community and so could not be consulted about distant  earnings,  I  was  able  to  obtain  complete data for only 100 of the 116 households surveyed (87 percent of the study sample, or 76 percent of the TABR's T awahka households).

I reviewed householder responses to isolate market earnings from other financial transactions.  For  example,  I  discounted  intrahousehold  exchanges  and  excluded  remittances, because it proved impossible post hoc to distinguish  transfers within households  from  those

between households.  Finally, I excluded  all 'earnings' from loans and mortgages (pawn).

I divided the T awahkas' earnings into seven market sectors. There is no template for doing so in rainforest settings, and researchers have used different methods to categorize earnings (cf. Gunatilake, Senaratne, and Abeygunawardena 1993; Coomes 1996; Hedge et al. 1996; Kant  1997;  Reddy  and  Chakravarty  1999). However, the way in which earnings are categorized  is  important,  because  the  number  of categories  influences  measures  of  specialization; in addition, Ellis (1998) notes that when peasants alter their activity mix, they are more likely  to  shift  within  sectors  (from  bean-  to rice-farming, for example) than between them (farm  to  nonfarm).  Sectoral  divisions  must therefore reflect what local people see as comparable or distinct activities. Here, I combined geographical (e.g., farm/forest) and functional (e.g.,  employment/business) criteria, adapting the categorization suggested for classic agrarian groups to the realities of rainforest economies.  For  example,  agriculture  and  livestock are  traditionally  paired  in  standard  peasant contexts (Upton 1996) but are separated here because T awahka cattle did not receive agricultural  inputs  and  livestock  ranged  freely  on common land.

Most importantly, I separated own-account production-for example, sales of homegrown  agricultural  surplus  or  self-harvested forest products-from related employment activities, such as wage work in agriculture or employment as a woodcutter. I therefore explicitly disaggregated components of the generic 'farm' and 'forest' sectors. I did so in order to focus analytical attention on that part of forest-based production that reflects a household's decision to invest directly in agriculture or forest-product marketing, rather than a decision to join the labor  market.  This  decision  is  ultimately  of greatest interest to policymakers and resource managers because it illuminates the degree to which households are likely to respond individually  to  programs  designed  to  encourage  the sustainable  use  of  land  and  forest  resources through market mechanisms.

## Market sectors

1. Within forest-product  sale I  included  the gross  value  of  all  wild-harvested  goods

from  forests,  active  fields,  fallows,  and rivers. Items include canoes, sawn lumber,  bark  and  fiber  handicrafts,  firewood, thatch palm leaf, bamboo, poles, and  posts  used  in  house  construction. Of  these,  women  were  most  likely  to sell  handicrafts,  thatch,  and  firewood. This  sector  does not include  meat  or honey  sales  because  of  respondents'  uneven recall of such piecemeal transactions. Annual firewood and handicraft sales were extrapolated from earnings over the most recent  four  months  ( January-April), because  respondents  found  it  difficult to  remember  a  year's  worth  of  such transactions.

2. Within crop sale I  included the gross income from the sale of rice, beans, and cacao. Annual earnings from cacao were extrapolated  from  reported  sales  over  a four-month period. 6
3. Livestock included all gross income from the sale of chickens, hogs, and cattle.
4. Business ,  or self-employment ,  included  the net annual income from shops, the rental of homes, net income from forest-related enterprises such as resale of lumber, and income from the  sale  of  prepared  food, drink,  and  medicinal  plant  treatments. Annual earnings from food and medicinal services  were  extrapolated  from  a  fourmonth sample, and were earned primarily by women. I calculated net shop income as the 20 percent ganancía ,  or  profit,  on what shop owners estimated to be their average gross monthly earnings.
5. Mining included  independent  gold  panners' earnings from the sale of placer gold to traders.
6. Agricultural wage labor included any form of  farm  employment,  and  was  a  particularly common  source of earning for women. I distinguished agricultural work from other forms of employment in order to improve parity with the significant 'offfarm' sector in most rural economies, and to facilitate recombination with crop sale into a combined 'agricultural' sector. All annual wage earnings for 1997-1998 are estimates based on reported earnings over four months (January-April 1998), due to respondents' generally poor recall of intermittent wage work over longer periods.

7. Respondents  also  reported  significant employment outside of agriculture. These  activities  were  included  in other wage , and comprised forest-related activities such as distant employment in woodcutting, local domestic work, and salaried employment with NGOs or as a government teacher.

## Three Years of Earnings

To compare income data over time, I reconciled data collected by HIID with those that I collected  separately  in  1996  and  1998.  The data sets were not a perfect match. I was able to isolate  comparable  data  for  only  1994,  1995, and 1997, and found that only some market activities were measured comparably across surveys.  These  included  earnings  from  gold panning,  the  sale  of  canoes,  cattle  and  hog marketing, rice, bean, and cacao sales, and store income.  Employment  data  were not reconcilable. I assigned each to one of six sectors (mining, forest-product sale, livestock, business, commercial  agroforestry,  or  annual  cash-cropping). Because I did not adjust earnings to account for the effects of inflation over the study period, my analysis compares relative, rather than absolute, income measures across years.

Furthermore, I was able to create complete multiyear income profiles for only sixty-seven households, or about 66 percent of those originally  surveyed  in  1995.  Of  these,  I  focus  my analysis on forty-nine households in Village A, in order to control for the influence of communitylevel variables on variations in market earnings over the four-year survey period.

## Defining Terms

In this study, 'financial dependency' on forest resources at any analytical scale is defined as the sustained and near-exclusive use  of  forest  resources as a source of market income. As discussed earlier,  this  narrow  definition  of  forest dependency focuses only on the contribution of forest products to a group's ability to meet its market needs, and in no way addresses the myriad other ways in which peoples living in or near tropical rainforest derive benefits from their local environment. The following describes how I distinguish  dependence  from  the  three  other nested measures of which it is composed.

First, for any scale of analysis, I define participants as  those  who  sold  forest  products  in  a given time period. I distinguish levels of participation  through draw ,  or  the  total  income earned from the sector (measured here in Lps). As used here, 'draw' refers only to income flow and says nothing about the actual flow of resources  from  the  forest,  although  elsewhere, forest-derived income has been used to proxy for  the  'market  consumption'  of  forest  resources (see Godoy and Bawa 1993). Reliance , then, refers to the share of total market earnings  derived  from  forest-product  sale  (measured as a percentage). I distinguish reliance as high, low, or moderate by stratifying the sample rather than by using an absolute measure (following Coomes and Burt 2000). However, because reliance measures say little about the relative  weight  of  forest-product  sale  in  market production profiles, I calculate a ' specialization coefficient' 7  to account for the relative contribution of each sector within the span of sectoral participation. A coefficient of one (1) represents complete specialization (in which 100 percent of earnings come from a single sector), and zero (0) represents complete diversification (in  which  all  sectors  contribute  equally).  Finally,  because  forest  dependence  as  defined must  be  sustained  over  some  period  of  time greater  than  a  year,  its  definition  requires  a temporal component, which in this study comprises a four-year period.

In sum, then, financial dependence on forest resources arises when a given user group earns a  top-level  share  of  its  income  from  forestproduct sale, engages in few other sectors besides, and does so through time.

## Assessing Earnings over One Year (1997-1998)

Below I explore one year of market earnings using  four  indices  of  engagement  in  forestproduct sale across three nested scales: the regional scale (data are aggregated to the level of the TABR), the local, or community scale (patterns are compared across the five T awahka villages),  and  the  household  scale  (comparing across  all  100  sample  households).  T able  1 summarizes the results.

## Regional Patterns

When  household  earnings  are  aggregated  at the regional scale, the T awahkas' earnings totaled U.S.$142,552 in 1997-1998, or an annual

Table 1 Total Market Earnings by Sector, Tawahka Asangni Biosphere Reserve, Honduras, 1997-1998

|                           | Households   | Earnings (Lps)   | Earnings (Lps)   | Household Participation   | Household Participation   |
|---------------------------|--------------|------------------|------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
| Sector                    | Responding a | Mean             | S.D.             | No.                       | %                         |
| Forest-product sale       | 110          | 2401             | 4027             | 68                        | 61.8                      |
| Agricultural product sale | 111          | 4673             | 5912             | 82                        | 73.9                      |
| Livestock sales           | 111          | 634              | 1700             | 65                        | 58.6                      |
| Mining                    | 112          | 397              | 1302             | 21                        | 18.8                      |
| Business                  | 109          | 1026             | 4713             | 35                        | 32.1                      |
| Agricultural wage work    | 106          | 571              | 1376             | 56                        | 53.0                      |
| Other wage work           | 107          | 4833             | 10,392           | 74                        | 69.2                      |
| Total earnings            | 100          | 14,266           | 16,020           | 100                       | 100                       |

Source: Household survey, 1998.

- a Not all respondents answered all questions.

per capita market income of about U.S.$138. Forest products contributed 18 percent to the group's  aggregate  total  earnings.  Relative  to other sectors, forest-product sales lagged general wage employment (which contributed almost 29 percent of total earnings) and the sale of crops (25 percent), but exceeded the share contributed by employment in agriculture (12 percent), and by mining (6 percent), livestock sales (5 percent), and business (5 percent).

It is important to note that had I originally merged forest-product sale with earnings from forest-based  employment  (e.g.,  guiding  services or wage work as a woodcutter), the combined  'forestry  sector'  would  be  shown  to have contributed 27 percent of total earnings (U.S.$62,842, or U.S.$61 per capita), and thus would have ranked second after earnings from a combined agricultural sector (37 percent). In other words, rather than appearing to earn primarily through nonagricultural wage work, with crop sales and forest-product sales taking  second  and  third  place  respectively,  the Tawahka would have appeared as professional farmers  first,  foresters  second,  and  wageearners third. Clearly, these results exemplify the  sensitivity  of  economic  characterizations to choices regarding data groupings made early in analysis.

## Village-Level Patterns

Every  T awahka  community  included  households that sold forest products; thus, every village may be considered uniformly 'participant' in the sector. In terms of total earnings from forest-product sale, however, the villages varied  markedly.  For  example,  Village  A  clearly dominated  as  the  regional  center  of  forestproduct marketing, accounting for 74 percent of all earnings from the sector. But the picture changes again when earnings are assessed on a per  household  basis,  by  which  the  smallest community, Village E, emerges as the village in which households earned an average of 4,833 Lps from forest-product sales, or over one and a half times that of any other village; the difference is statistically significant (see T able 2). Village E also appeared to be the community most reliant on forest-product sale. There, the sector accounted for 47 percent of total earnings, or more than twice that of the moderately reliant villages (Villages A, B, and C, where reliance ranged between 10 and 20 percent), and fifteen times that of neighboring Village D, a community  where  forest-product  sale  contributed  a mere 3 percent to village income in 1997-1998!

Although villages clearly differed in their reliance  on  forest-product  sale,  they  appeared comparatively similar with regard to the total number of sectors in which villagers engaged and in their degree of specialization (T able 2). In other words, although forest-product earnings appeared more important in some villages than others, the variety of sources from which households  earned  was  comparable  across  all five communities.

## Household-Level Patterns

Participation All  households  in  the  sample participated in the market economy in 19971998. However, not all sold forest productsin fact, only 62 percent of T awahka households did  so.  Furthermore,  those  that  did  chose  to market very different products. For example, of the 68 forest-product 'marketers,' only 21 percent  sold  dugout  canoes,  32  percent  sawn wood, 15.5 percent handicrafts, and 7 percent poles and bamboo. The fact that fewer than 33

Table 2 Market Earnings and Distribution by Tawahka Village, Honduras, 1997-1998

|                                   | Village   | Village   | Village   | Village   | Village   |         |            |
|-----------------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|---------|------------|
|                                   | A         | B         | C         | D         | E         | Test a  | P          |
| Sample size                       | 68        | 12        | 12        | 8         | 6         |         |            |
| %of all households sampled        | 87        | 92.3      | 80        | 67        | 55        |         |            |
| Total earnings/household          |           |           |           |           |           |         |            |
| Mean (Lps)                        | 16,283    | 21,289    | 3,758     | 3,477     | 7,100     | kwallis | ***        |
| Upper tercile mean                | 32,181    | 44,631    | 8,765     | 5,390     | 12,795    |         |            |
| Middle tercile mean               | 13,114    | 13,175    | 2,122     | 3,303     | 7,470     |         |            |
| Lower tercile mean                | 4,132     | 6,062     | 1,230     | 2,318     | 1,035     |         |            |
| Specialization indices            |           |           |           |           |           |         |            |
| Mean number of sectors (of 7)     | 3.95      | 3.75      | 3.5       | 2.57      | 3.66      | anova   | (not sig.) |
| Specialization coefficient        | 0.51      | 0.55      | 0.48      | 0.61      | 0.61      | anova   | (not sig.) |
| Earnings from forest-product sale |           |           |           |           |           |         |            |
| Mean (Lps)                        | 2,982     | 1,586     | 429       | 69        | 4,833     | kwallis | **         |
| %households participating         | 72        | 70        | 42        | 13        | 67        |         |            |
| Share of all earnings (%)         | 20        | 10        | 15        | 3         | 47        | kwallis | (not sig.) |

Source: Household survey, 1998.

a One-way ANOVA (anova) or Kruskal-Wallis (kwallis) tests for difference of means and medians, respectively; *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; ***P ≤ 0.005.

percent of households sold any single type of forest  good  points  to  product  specialization among those households.

In  contrast  to  this  apparent  product-level specialization,  data  indicate  that  households that sold forest products tended to be more diversified in their income-generating strategies than were other households: that is, they earned income from a total of 4.5 sectors (range: 2-7; no household relied exclusively on forest-product sale), whereas households that did not sell forest products engaged in only 2.5 sectors. A t -test showed that the differences were statistically significant ( t = -8.29; P ≤ 0.001). A comparison of specialization coefficients also supports the conclusion that forest-product sellers were  more  financially  diversified  than  nonsellers  ( t -test: t = 5.78; P ≤ 0.001).  In  fact, households appeared to engage in forest-product sale while they were earning in at least two other sectors.  T o  identify  which  sectors  were most commonly paired, I cross-tabulated household  participation  by  sector.  The  results  revealed that the most common sectoral overlap occurred between forest-product sale and the sale of crops, with 90 percent of the households that sold crops also selling forest goods, and 74 percent  of  forest-product  sellers  also  selling crops.  Overall,  cross-tabulation  revealed  that forest-product sale ranked third as the activity in which participants in any other sector were most  likely  to  have  engaged,  following  crop sale and nonagricultural employment. In short,

68  percent  of  households  earning  from any other activity in 1997-1998 were also selling forest products.

While households that sold forest products appeared more diversified, they did not appear to  earn  any  more  or  less  overall  than  households that did not (a t -test found no significant difference in means). Among sellers, however, total earnings rose significantly with an increase in  the  number  of  sources  from  which  those earnings  came  (Kruskal-Wallis  difference-ofmedians test; P ≤ 0.01).

Income Draw and Distribution For  the  62 percent of households that sold forest products in 1997-1998, the average draw from the sector was 3,884 Lps, or about U.S.$295. However,  the  range  in  earnings  was  particularly high:  from  40  Lps/year  to  29,000  Lps/year. When these households were stratified by terciles  of  forest-product  earnings,  as  shown  in Table 3, it appears that the lowest tercile earned on average one-fifth that of the midlevel tercile, which in turn earned only about a third of the highest tercile. The results were significant.

Reliance Obviously, the 38 percent of Tawahka  households  that  did  not  sell  forest products in 1997-1998 were in no way financially reliant on the sector in that year. For the 62  percent  of  households  that did sell  forest products, the sector's average contribution to total earnings was 29 percent, but ranged from

Table 3 Tawahka Households by Terciles of Reliance a on Forest-Product Sale, Honduras, 1997-1998

|                                                     |      Low |   Middle |    Upper | P b      |
|-----------------------------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|
| Number of households                                |    23    |    22    |    23    |          |
| Share of market income from forest-product sale (%) |     7    |    23    |    57    | ***      |
| Mean earnings from forest-product sale (Lps)        |   511.5  |  2815    |  8278    | ***      |
| Mean total earnings (Lps)                           | 21667    | 13400    | 11933    | not sig. |
| Specialization indices                              |          |          |          |          |
| Mean number of sectors (of 7)                       |     4.36 |     4.81 |     4.19 | not sig. |
| Specialization coefficient                          |     0.51 |     0.35 |     0.48 | ***      |

- a 'Reliance' refers to the share of total earnings from forest-product sale.
- b Using Kruskal-Wallis test for difference of medians; *P ≤ 0.05;**P ≤ 0.005; ***P ≤ 0.0005.

negligible  (1  percent)  to  very  high  (93  percent). Patterns of reliance appear more clearly when households were stratified by tercile: the most reliant  tercile  derived  an  average  of  57 percent of their market income from the forest, the midreliant 23 percent, and the least reliant 7 percent. The differences are significant (see T able 3).

Households that were most reliant on forestproduct sale as a source of earnings were also those that derived the highest returns. Analysis shows that reliance is strongly correlated with draw (with a Pearson's correlation coefficient of  0.75),  and  regression  results  indicate  that with  every  extra  132  Lps  (U.S.$10)  earned from forest-product sale, reliance on the sector increases by 1 percent ( n = 100; aR 2 = 0.56; P = 0). In other words, the more successful the household at selling forest products, the larger the  share  that  the  sector  comprises  in  their earnings portfolio.

However,  while  greater  reliance  on  forestproduct sale seems to arise from greater success in the sector, a difference-of-means test found no difference in total earnings across terciles of forest sale reliance (T able 3). In fact, the highest reliance levels appeared among households that fell in the middle range of total earnings. The highest-earning tercile of households, in turn, appeared to be the least reliant on forestproduct sale. In fact, the highest-earning households  appeared  to  be  those  that  sold  forest products to complement, or as a supplement to, earnings from a variety of other activities, but did not derive too large a share of their earnings (i.e., no greater than about 25 percent) from forest-product marketing alone.

Specialization If  some T awahka households appear to have been significantly more reliant on  forest-product  sale  than  others  in  1997-

1998, is it also possible to isolate households that specialized in the sector? T o be specialized in the context of this study, households would not  only  have  derived  a  large  share  of  their earnings  from  the  forest,  but  sold  few  other products or services besides.

In fact, forest-product specialists appeared to be rare and difficult to identify. Rather than uncovering clear links between reliance and sectoral specialization, T able 3 shows significantly higher specialization indices among those households least reliant  on  forest-product sale. Likewise, when I plotted all households by terciles of reliance on forest-product sale against  terciles  of  specialization  coefficients (not  shown),  I  found  that  most  were  either among the highly specialized overall but among the least reliant on forest-product sale (18  percent)  or  among  the  highly  reliant  but among the lowest-ranking in terms of overall specialization  (19  percent).  In  fact,  only  five households-5  percent  of  the  sample-were identified as specialized in forest-product sale due  to  their  position  in  the  upper  terciles  of both reliance and specialization. In sum, then, I found that the majority of households tended to  be  either  specialists  (in  other  sectors) or among the most reliant on forest earnings, but not both. Furthermore, for the five households that were specialized in forest-product sale, the strategy did not seem particularly lucrative: a difference-of-medians  test  found  that  these specialists earned no more or less from forestproduct sale than any other forest-product sellers did.

## Assessing Earnings Over a Four-Y ear Span (1994, 1995, 1997)

This  section  considers  data  collected  from  a sample of forty-nine households in Village A

that were surveyed three times over a four-year period  (1994,  1996,  and  1997).  As  described above, the forest-product component of earnings over this period is represented by sales of dugout canoes, a forest product which contributed  the  largest  share  to  TABR-level  forestproduct earnings in 1997-1998.

When earnings  data  are  aggregated  at  the village  level  and  compared  across  the  three years,  dugout  canoes  appear  to  have  contributed a fairly  constant  share,  at  about  14  percent. This constancy contrasts with other sectors'  changing  market  share  over  time:  both mining and business lost net market share over the study period (by 22 percent and 4 percent respectively),  while  earnings  from  cacao  sales more than doubled, from 15 percent in 1994 to 38 percent in 1997. The fact that the contribution of forest products to local market earnings remained relatively  constant  while  other  sectors were in flux suggests that factors of production, as well as demand for canoes, changed relatively little over the four-year research period. In contrast, earnings from gold declined precipitously as the cost of its extraction rose, and cacao's ascendance resulted from a growing interest  in  a  cash  crop  long  promoted  by  regional NGOs and made more attractive by a high buying price.

The  distribution  of  total  earnings  for  the group remained relatively fixed across years, as evidenced  by  Gini  values  that  held  steady  at about 0.47. 8 That is, in each year, about half of the population earned only 10 percent of the total  market  earnings,  while  the  'richest'  10 percent of households captured about 45 percent of total earnings.

To what degree can this village-level steadiness  in  the  distribution  of  total  earnings,  and the  constant  contribution  of  forest-product sales,  be  ascribed  to  the  activities  of  a  steady group of households selling canoes consistently across years? Apparently, not at all. In fact, the steadiness  of  the  canoes'  market  share  belied net  attrition  of  households  from  the  sector: from  24.5  percent  of  households  ( n = 12)  in 1994 to 16.3 percent ( n = 8) in 1997. Decomposed into net annual movements, I found that every year the group selling forest products exhibited  remarkable  turnover.  For  example,  in 1994, twelve households sold at least one canoe; by  1995,  fifteen  new  households  had  entered the canoe market as seven left; by 1997, three had entered and fifteen left (T able 4). Broken down in this way, then, we find that over the four-year  study  period,  a  total  of  twenty-nine households-or a full 59 percent of the Village A sample-had sold canoes in one or two years; only one household sold in all three years. In other  words,  many  more  households  sold  canoes over the four-year period than is reflected by any year alone; at the same time, few households displayed any interannual commitment to this  market  activity.  Furthermore,  households appeared to move into and out of other sectors equally frequently, as T able 4 indicates.

## Discussion

This case study has explored different ways of analyzing information about the market behavior  of  one  group  of  rainforest  dwellers,  the Tawahka Sumu of eastern Honduras. The results offer insights into how we measure, and in effect conceive of, one particular aspect of 'forest  dependence'-in this  case,  the  degree  to which an ethnic group, community, or household depends on forest-product sale as a source of  market  income.  Below  I  outline  three  insights in particular, and review their relevance

Table 4 Changes in Household Participation by Sector, Village A, TABR, 1994-1997

|                     | Total Number of Households Moving In/Out of Sector ( n = 49)   | Total Number of Households Moving In/Out of Sector ( n = 49)   | Total Number of Households Moving In/Out of Sector ( n = 49)   | Total Number of Households Moving In/Out of Sector ( n = 49)   | Total Number of Households Moving In/Out of Sector ( n = 49)   | Total Number of Households Moving In/Out of Sector ( n = 49)   |
|---------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
|                     | 1994-1995 (1 year)                                             | 1994-1995 (1 year)                                             | 1994-1995 (1 year)                                             | 1995-1997 (2 years)                                            | 1995-1997 (2 years)                                            | 1995-1997 (2 years)                                            |
| Sector              | In                                                             | Out                                                            | Net                                                            | In                                                             | Out                                                            | Net                                                            |
| Forest-product sale | 15                                                             | 7                                                              | 8                                                              | 3                                                              | 15                                                             | - 12                                                           |
| Annual agriculture  | 13                                                             | 6                                                              | 7                                                              | 8                                                              | 5                                                              | 3                                                              |
| Agroforestry        | 7                                                              | 2                                                              | 5                                                              | 4                                                              | 4                                                              | 0                                                              |
| Mining              | 0                                                              | 5                                                              | - 5                                                            | 0                                                              | 9                                                              | - 9                                                            |
| Livestock           | 4                                                              | 2                                                              | 2                                                              | 7                                                              | 5                                                              | 2                                                              |
| Business            | 6                                                              | 0                                                              | 6                                                              | 0                                                              | 8                                                              | - 8                                                            |

Source: Household survey, 1998; HIID survey, 1995.

to the theory and practice of conservation and development in the humid tropics. While it is beyond the scope of the discussion to attempt to explain the particular financial patterns revealed in the T awahka case, I review, where relevant,  some  of  the  local  factors  that  contributed to the particular financial configurations of the TABR during the study period.

## The Importance of Analytical Scale

Results  of  this  study  emphasize  how  a  researcher's  analytical  lens  greatly  determines what is seen. Similarly, for any given scale of analysis,  seemingly  minor  differences  in  the way in which data are manipulated can magnify into very different perceptions about how a society works. Both of these observations are, of course, truisms. I reiterate them here because, to date, very few studies of forest peoples have made  explicit  the  scale-dependence  or  measurement sensitivity of their results, and more careful attention to the analytical scale at which forest livelihoods are assessed has been widely recommended (Vosti  and  Witcover  1995;  Agrawal and  Wilson  1999;  Barham,  Coomes,  and Takasaki 1999; Coomes and Burt 2000).

Using  information  about  the  source  and magnitude of T awahka earnings over one year, this  study  found  that  as  a  group,  the  1,000strong T awahka are probably best classified, in comparison  to  other  small-scale  forest  societies, as neither dependent nor specialized, but moderately financially  reliant  on  the  forest. 9 That is, the 18-percent share that forest-product sale contributed to the T awahkas' earnings profile in 1997-1998-and which multiyear data suggest was representative of the sector's contribution throughout the 1990s-appears low when  compared  with  the  47  percent  and  60 percent of market income that forest-product sale  contributed  in  two  Indian  communities (Hedge et al. 1997), or the 35 percent reported for a sample of West Bengali extractors (Reddy and Chakravarty 1999), or the 27 percent that forest-product  extraction  and  fishing  income comprised in Peruvian ribereño cash income profiles (Coomes 1996). In fact, the T awahka appear about as reliant on forest-product sale for their  market  income  as  are  low-income  rural Hondurans on all nonfarm income sources (21 percent) (Ruben and van den Berg 2001).

Any tentative conclusions drawn from global comparisons,  however,  are  potentially  under- mined by the fact that the village -level assessment reveals a very different picture of the role of forest products in T awahka market activity. Not one of the five T awahka villages mimicked the group's aggregated profile: T awahka settlements  varied  from  strongly  to  weakly  financially reliant on forest-product sale. Household -level analysis, in turn, shows that village-level aggregations poorly predict household behavior. Indeed, neighbors demonstrate remarkable heterogeneity  in  the  degree  of  their  involvement  in  forest-product  sale,  despite  a  shared cost-price environment, comparable access to resources,  and  relatively  even  market  access. For example, in not one T awahka community did all households  participate  in  extraction during 1997-1998; a full 25 percent of Tawahka households received absolutely no direct  financial  benefit  from  the  forest  around them. Meanwhile, at least five households were so specialized in the sale of forest products in 1997-1998 that they might be considered ill positioned to have earned income without recourse to forest resources.

Given, then, that study results clearly point to the potential for aggregate profiles to poorly represent  their  constituent  communities  and households, just how unusual are the T awahka? Do other forest groups evidence greater continuity across spatial scales? Few studies have actually compared across different scales, but existing  evidence  from  other  microeconomic studies  of  forest  groups  suggests  that  household-level heterogeneity is a common characteristic of forest groups (e.g., Godoy, Brokaw, and  Wilkie  1995;  Wickramasinghe,  Pérez, and  Blockus  1996;  Barham,  Coomes,  and Takasaki 1999).

If,  then,  T awahka  neighbors  do  not  appear unusual  in  the  heterogeneity  of  their  market behaviors, how might outsiders seeking to influence economic and environmental outcomes in rainforest environments proceed? That is, at what scale  should  credit  programs  be  implemented, agricultural assistance extended, forest-product markets supported, and so on? Clearly,  attempts  to  promote  forest-product sale  that  focus  uncritically  at  the  community scale may benefit only some households at a time; similarly, sanctions on harvesting-a common part of management plans for protected areas, be it in the form of zoning, fines, or other types of restrictions-may differentially affect most

reliant households and undermine the broadbased community trust needed for such projects to work in the long term. T o better tailor conservation/development initiatives, then, practitioners might more concertedly identify locallevel  particularities,  rather  than  applying  a blanket  approach  to  a  given  region  (Coomes 1996).  Byron  and  Arnold  (1999)  note,  however, that few organizations have the time or capability to conduct the lengthy, fine-grained investigation  required.  Given  these  limitations, an effective approach might involve multifaceted  assistance  packages  that  facilitate flexible  project  combinations  in  response  to particular target-group interests and are suited to local schedules.

That neighbors can vary so markedly in their production  choice  and  related  resource  reliance underscores the fact that it is ultimately at the  household  (or  individual)  level  that  price and  other  market  signals  are  interpreted  and become  manifest in resource-use patterns. Recognition of this fact makes the case for continued  research  attention  to  the  householdlevel  determinants  of  activity  choice.  Such microlevel analysis can complement more macrolevel  social  and  political  foci  (e.g.,  Leach, Mearnes, and Scoones 1999) towards more nuanced policy prescriptions for rainforest conservation  and  development  (Vosti  and  Witcover 1995).

## Forest-Product Sale in Economic Context

A second insight from this study concerns how multisectoral  analysis  of  rainforest  peoples' economic  strategies-in  contrast  to  the  tendency of researchers to focus on a single sector alone  (e.g.,  Jepma  1995;  Broekhoven  1996; Reddy and Chakravarty 1999)-can illuminate the  complex  decisionmaking  rubric  by  which households  turn  to  one  market  activity  or another.

In this study, intersectoral analysis revealed that what might appear to be straightforward relationships among  measures of forestproduct sale, and between forest-product sale and total earnings, were rarely clear nor direct. That is, reliance on extraction did not preclude diversification; specialization did not necessarily  beget  dependence; and the distribution of forest-product  earnings  predicted  little  about the distribution of total market income. Such discontinuity  was  unexpected,  because  theory predicts-and other studies have indicatedthat forest-dependent peoples are hallmarked by their low incomes overall, and by few market options besides forest-product sale (Hedge et al. 1996; Reddy and Chakravarty 1999). In contrast,  higher  incomes  are  typically  associated with a decrease in forest reliance (see, e.g., Gunatilake, Senaratne, and Abeygunawardena 1993; Godoy, Brokaw, and Wilkie 1995; Byron and  Arnold  1999;  Kant  2000).  Instead,  this study  found  that:  (a)  participation  in  forestproduct sale  was  predicated  on  a  household's participation in at least two other forms of income generation, typically agricultural income and  wage  labor-thus,  to  be  a  specialist  in forest-product  marketing  already  required  an above-average market portfolio breadth; (b) although  draw  and  reliance  were  significantly and  positively  correlated,  there  appeared  no significant difference in total income between terciles  of  forest  reliance;  and  (c)  households that derived the largest share of their earnings from forest-product sale were also those that balanced  earnings  relatively  evenly  amongst several  sectors.  In  sum,  I  found  that  those households that drew the largest share of their earnings from the forest-and therefore might appear to be the most financially 'needy' of forest  products-were in fact those whose wide and balanced income profiles tagged them as the forest-product sellers who were actually the least dependent on earnings from this source.

The  explanation  for  this  apparent  paradox appears to lie in recognizing the importance of intersectoral transfers to the business of forestproduct sale. Among the T awahka, the marketing  of  forest  resources  can  be  relatively  risky (distant  travel  to  uncertain  resources),  relatively  capital-intensive  (labor,  tools,  and  food are required for extractive trips), or both. This suggests that involvement in the forest-product sector  is  predicated  on  recent  or  imminent earnings in other sectors (usually agriculture), in order to either insure or self-finance before entering the  forest.  Households  that  have earned little market income or have low expectation of income are unlikely to be in such a position.  Thus,  success  in-and  attendant  reliance  on-the  forest-product  sector  is  more likely to be predicted by the size and balance of a  household's  income  portfolio  than  by  the household's overall success at earning income.

These results echo empirical evidence from

eastern Peru that the most forest-reliant households include those rich enough to be so (Barham, Coomes, and T akasaki 1999; Coomes and  Burt  2000).  Combined  with  the  current study,  these  findings  suggest  that  where  an abundance  of  agricultural  land  ensures  basic livelihood security for all, and where abundant forest  resources  encourage  the  marketing  of only high-value, processed forest goods (e.g., canoes and lumber) or mass production of lowvalue goods (e.g., charcoal), a focus on such activities is unlikely to be the purview of the poor. Rather,  the  income-rich  may  be  relatively forest-reliant.  In  contrast,  studies  that  have found an inverse relationships between income and forest dependence tend to derive from environments where forest extraction is characterized  by  sales  of  low-risk,  low-value  forest products, such as firewood or palm fruits, that are harvested from oligarchic palm forests or from  the  edges  of  national  parks  (see,  e.g., Anderson and Ioris 1992; Hedge et al. 1996). In such settings, it is the landless poor who have few options but to depend on these relatively 'free' resources for income.

These findings suggest two directions for research  and  intervention  in  land  and  resource abundant  environments  such  as  the  TABR. First, the promotion of market activity in several rural sectors-both within agricultural production  and  in  nonfarm  production-may  offer the best way to indirectly support and encourage  levels  of  forest-product  harvest  that  are profitable enough to engender interest among local peoples in long-term forest management. Second, the positive relationship between income  diversification  and  reliance  on  forestproduct sale may quell concerns that the promotion  of  a  single  market  sector  can  initiate risky specialization and so compromise livelihood security (Hammond, Dolman, and Watkinson 1995).

## Insights from a Longitudinal Perspective

A third insight from the study relates to the potential for multiyear analysis to reveal patterns that are not evident from 'snapshots' of forest livelihoods  alone.  Even  the  modest  four-year span of this study was sufficient to nuance the interpretation  of  annual  data  and  to  derive original observations about forest peoples' economic dynamism.

The study revealed that households' partici- pation  in  forest-product  sale-let  alone  specialization in, or reliance on, the sector-can be sporadic across years. That is, despite the fact that  canoe  sales  contributed  steadily  to  the Tawahkas' communal earnings profile, individual households moved frequently into and out of the sector; only one household in forty-nine sold a canoe for three consecutive years! This finding  underlines  the  relative  importance  of contingent and opportunistic moments-a sudden  need  for  cash,  an  unexpected  market opportunity-to drive households to sell forest products  in  economic  environments  where viable production alternatives exist.

Low rates of interannual participation in forest-product  sale  also  raise  a  warning  flag  to studies that infer interannual constancy in production orientation from a single year of data (Gram  2001),  and  emphasize  the  potential futility of seeking to identify 'career' forestproduct  sellers:  among  the  Tawahka,  such households did not appear to exist during the study  period.  Household  market  production strategies were simply too temporally diversified  to  exhibit  true  dependence  on  forestproduct sale.

Evidence of longitudinal income diversification at the household level was surprising, because such economic behavior requires that individual households cross sectoral boundaries frequently. Such mobility is unusual in classic peasant  contexts  (Ellis  1998)  and  reportedly rare  among  poor  Honduran  peasants  (Ruben and van den Berg 2001); indeed, Coomes and Burt  (2000)  found  evidence  of  householders' entrenchment in particular sectors over time. In the  case  of  the  TABR,  several  aspects  of  the economic  environment  may  help  to  explain households'  flexible  approach  to  market  income generation in general and forest-product sale  in  particular.  First,  T awahka  households shift sectors often because they can. Costs associated with entry/exit from different forms of market engagement sectors are apparently relatively low, although, in the case of canoe production, they may be contingent on earnings in other  sectors.  Second,  T awahka  households may shift market activities often because they have to. Under current conditions of relative recession,  households  seek  to  take  maximum advantage of the small interannual fluctuations in  returns  across  sectors  that  typically  arise from the incompleteness of markets and high

environmental risks characteristic of forest environments (Upton 1996). Thus, the sale of a forest product one year may represent an opportunistic response to sudden demand.

Clearly,  a  better  understanding  of  the  motives behind forest peasants' interannual shuffling of income profiles is warranted; indeed, it is necessary if conservation-development initiatives seek to identify long-term trends in resource use and influence them through market mechanisms.  Particular  attention  should  be paid  to  identifying  the  circumstantial  household-level  factors  that  push/pull  households into/out  of  commercial  extraction  between years, in addition to the more fixed householdattributes factors that have been found to drive extraction  in  other  areas  (such  as  extractive skills, wealth endowments, and so on; see, e.g., Barham, Coomes, and Takasaki 1999).

## Conclusions

This study has illustrated the degree to which measures of forest 'dependence' are sensitive to the methods used and the spatial and temporal scales over which they are assessed. The intention here is not to claim that the T awahka are more or less financially dependent on the forest than are other groups, or that the T awahka would be any less disadvantaged by forest loss. Certainly, true dependence on forest resources involves  much  more  than  this  study's  narrow focus on market income can elucidate. Rather, I have demonstrated a typology for categorization of market income that can be applied to other  forms  of  resource  use.  Results  are  intended to encourage more critical and explicit data collection and interpretation by researchers  working  among  rainforest  peoples, towards  better  informing  efforts  to  influence such groups' livelihoods through conservation and development interventions. /H17039

## Notes

- 1 In the conservation-and-development arena, where donors have demonstrated attention to-and often fund-research into resource use and other aspects of rural livelihoods, research results can be quick to influence practice and policy. For example, the 1989 valuation study by Peters, Gentry, and Mendelsohn gave vital scientific backing to then-incipient efforts to  promote  what  became  known  as  'productive conservation' (Hall 2000).
- 2 For example, FAO (1995), Bawa and Gadgil (1997), Reddy and Chakravarty (1999), and Kant (2000) describe  householders'  'dependence'  on  the  forest, but  do  not  explain  what  dependence  constitutes. Barham and colleagues (1999) establish households that derived more than 30 percent of total income from  commercial  extraction  as  forest  'reliant'; Godoy  and  Bawa  (1993),  Godoy,  Brokaw,  and Wilkie (1995), and Coomes and Burt (2000) refer to, but do not define, forest-based production 'specialization';  Wickramasinghe,  Pérez,  and  Blockus (1996) use householders' own opinions to categorize use levels.
- 3 For example, I witnessed how two young men who had killed what was considered an excessive number of peccary were temporarily excluded from subsequent group hunts.
- 4 Nested within a larger National Science Foundation-sponsored project on forest reliance (principal investigators included Ricardo Godoy, David Wilkie, and Nicholas Brokaw), a team of Harvard students conducted  a  one-time  socioeconomic  survey  of nearly all (88 percent) of T awahka households ( n = 100). Some of the results of this study are found in Godoy, Wilkie, and Franks (1997). I collected data in 1996 as part of an independent effort while employed by HIID. Access to both data sets was sanctioned  by  the  PIs  with  few  restrictions  (see  McSweeney 2000).
- 5 I  considered  local  peoples'  assessment  of  product values reliable for two reasons: (a) price information appeared well shared within T awahka communities; and (b) only the respondent knew the temporal context of the sale-an important factor given seasonal price variations.
- 6 Because all cacao production was sold, this calculation presumes that cacao production between January and April 1998 is typical of production throughout  the  year.  In  fact,  the  majority  of  respondents with  producing  cacao  trees  ( n = 44)  opined  that yields over this period were lower than during the rest  of  the  year  (54  percent);  11  percent  thought they were higher than the rest of the year, and 36 percent found them normal. Thus extrapolated data probably slightly underestimate cacao's annual contribution to market income.
- 7 Adopted  from  Coomes  (1992,  360),  who  adapted the Herfindahl-Hirschmann Index of Market Share Concentration to estimate a coefficient of specialization (SC) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- where Xi is the percentage of total household market income contributed by product (or in this case, sector) i , and n is the number of products sold (here, the number of sectors in which the household is engaged).
- 8 Gini values measure the deviation from a perfectly equitable  income  distribution,  with  0  being  the most equitable and 1 the least; high Gini values suggest that a small portion of the population is earning a disproportionately large share of total income.

- 9 At U.S.$138/per capita, how do the T awahkas' average  per-capita  earnings  in  1997-1998  compare  to those of other forest-dwelling groups?  Godoy, Franks,  and  Claudio  (1995)  report  U.S.$88  and U.S.$110 as the average per-capita off-farm income for the Mojeño and Yuracaré of Bolivia, respectively, while Amazonian river-dwellers reportedly earn average  incomes  of  U.S.$326/household  (Coomes 1996), or about U.S.$54 per capita. Hedge and colleagues (1997) report U.S.$90.80 and U.S.$82.46 as per-capita market income totals for two Indian communities. At U.S.$138 per capita, then, the T awahkas' market income in 1997-1998 fell midway between  these  estimates.  Comparison  with  other groups is hindered by lacking or incomparable data.

## Literature Cited

- Anderson, A. B., and E. M. Ioris. 1992. The logic of extraction:  Resource  management  and  income generation by extractive producers in the Amazon estuary. In Conservation of neotropical forests: Working from traditional resource use , ed. K. H. Redford and  C.  Padoch,  175-202.  New  York:  Columbia University Press.
- Agrawal, A., and C. C. Gibson. 1999. Enchantment and  disenchantment:  The  role  of  community  in natural resource conservation. World Development 27 (4): 629-49.
- Atran, S., D. Medin, N. Ross, E. Lynch, J. Coley, E. Ucan Ek, and V. Vapnarsky. 1998. Folk ecology and commons management in the Maya lowlands. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 96:7598-603.
- Barham, B. L., O. T. Coomes, and Y. T akasaki. 1999. Rain forest livelihoods: Income generation, household wealth, and forest use. Unasylva 50:3442.
- Barraclough,  Solon  L.,  and  Krishna  B.  Ghimire. 1995. Forests and livelihoods: The social dynamics of deforestation in developing countries. New York: St. Martin's Press.
- Bawa, Kamaljit S., and Madhav Gadgil. 1997. Ecosystem services in subsistence economies and conservation of biodiversity. In Nature's services: Societal dependence on natural ecosystems , ed. Gretchen C. Daily, 295-310. Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Broekhoven,  G.  1996. Non-timber  forest  products. Utrecht: IUCN; The World Conservation Union.
- Byron,  Neil,  and  Michael  Arnold.  1999.  What  futures for peoples of the tropical forests? World Development 27 (5): 789-805.
- Coomes, Oliver T. 1992. Making a living in the Amazon rain forest: Peasants, land, and economy in the  T ahuayo  River  basin  of  northeastern  Peru. Ph.D.  diss.,  Department  of  Geography,  University of Wisconsin-Madison.
- ---. 1996. Income formation among Amazonian peasant households in northeastern Peru: Empir-
- ical  observations  and  implications  for  marketoriented conservation. Yearbook , Conference of Latin Americanist Geographers 22:51-64.
- Coomes, Oliver T., and Graeme J. Burt. 2000. Peasant charcoal production in the Peruvian Amazon: Rainforest use and economic reliance. Forest Ecology and Management 5033:1-12.
- Cruz, Gustavo, and Edgardo Benitez. 1994. Diagnóstico  etnológico  y  ecológico  de  la  Biósfera  T awahka Asangni (An ethnographical and ecological assessment of the T awahka Asangni Biosphere). 3 vols. Tegucigalpa: FITH.
- Ellis,  Frank.  1998.  Household  strategies  and  rural livelihood diversification. The Journal of Development Studies 35 (1): 1-38.
- Food  and  Agricultural  Organization  (FAO).  1995. Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry. FAO T echnical Papers no. 7. Rome: Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations.
- Godoy, Ricardo A. 2001. Indians, markets, and rainforests. New York: Columbia University Press.
- Godoy,  Ricardo,  and  K.  S.  Bawa.  1993.  The  economic value and sustainable harvest of plants and animals from the tropical forest: Assumptions, hypotheses,  and  methods. Economic  Botany 47  (3): 215-19.
- Godoy, Ricardo, Nicholas Brokaw, and David Wilkie. 1995. The effect of income on the extraction of non-timber tropical forest products: Model, hypotheses, and preliminary findings from the Sumu Indians of Nicaragua. Human Ecology 23 (1): 29-52.
- Godoy, Ricardo, Jeffrey R. Franks, and Mario Alvarado Claudio. 1995. Adoption of modern technologies by lowland Amerindians in Bolivia: The role of households, villages, ethnicity, and markets. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Institute for International Development.
- Godoy, Ricardo, David Wilkie, and Jeffrey Franks. 1997. The effects of markets on neotropical deforestation: A comparative study of four Amerindian societies. Current Anthropology 38 (5): 875-78.
- Godoy, R.,  D.  Wilkie,  H.  Overman,  A.  Cubas,  G. Cubas, J.  Demmer,  K.  McSweeney,  and  N. Brokaw. 2000. Valuation of consumption and sale of forest goods from a Central American rain forest. Nature 406:62-63.
- Gram, Søren. 2001. Economic valuation of special forest products: An assessment of methodological shortcomings. Ecological Economics 36:109-17.
- Gunatilake,  D.  M.,  A.  H.  Senaratne,  and  P .  Abeygunawardena.  1993.  Role  of  non-timber  forest products in the economy of peripheral communities of Knuckles National Wilderness Area of Sri Lanka: A farming systems approach. Economic Botany 47 (3): 275-81.
- Hall, Anthony. 2000. Environment and development in  Brazilian  Amazonia:  From  protectionism  to productive conservation. In Amazonia at the cross-

roads ,  ed.  A.  Hall,  99-114.  London:  Institute  of Latin American Studies.

- Hammond, D. S., P. M. Dolman, and A. R. Watkinson.  1995.  Modern  Ticuna  swidden-fallow  management in the Colombian Amazon: Ecologically integrating market strategies and subsistencedriven economies? Human Ecology 23 (3): 335-56.
- Harcourt, C. S., and J. A. Sayer. 1996. The conservation atlas of tropical forests: The Americas. New York: Simon and Schuster.
- Hedge,  R.,  S.  Suryaprakash,  L.  Achoth,  and  K.  S. Bawa. 1996. Extraction of non-timber forest products in the forests of Biligiri Rangan Hills, India. Part  1:  Contribution  to  rural  income. Economic Botany 50 (3): 242-51.
- Herlihy, Peter H. 1997. Indigenous peoples and biosphere reserve conservation in the Mosquitia rain forest corridor, Honduras. In Conservation through cultural survival , ed. S. Stevens, 99-129. Washington, DC: Island Press.
- House, Paul. 1997. Farmers of the forest. London: The Natural History Museum.
- Jepma, C. J. 1995. Tropical deforestation: A socio-economic approach. London: Earthscan.
- Kant, Shashi. 1997. Integration of biodiversity conservation in tropical forest and economic development of local communities. Journal of Sustainable Forestry 4 (1/2): 33-61.
- ---. 2000. A dynamic approach to forest regimes in developing economies. Ecological Economics 32: 287-300.
- Leach,  Melissa,  Robin  Mearns,  and  Ian  Scoones. 1999. Environmental entitlements: Dynamics and institutions in community-based natural resource management. World Development 27 (2): 225-47.
- McSweeney, K. 2000. 'In the forest is our money': The changing role of commercial extraction in T awahka livelihoods, eastern Honduras. Ph.D. diss., Department of Geography, McGill University, Montreal.
- ---. Forthcoming. A demographic profile of the Tawahka Sumu of Honduras. Geographical Review.
- Pendelton, L. H. 1992. T rouble in paradise: Practical obstacles to nontimber forestry in Latin America. In Sustainable harvest and marketing of rain forest products , ed. M. Plotkin and L. Famolare, 252-62. Covelo, CA: Conservation International, Island Press.
- Peters,  C.,  A.  H.  Gentry,  and  R.  O.  Mendelsohn. 1989. Valuation of an Amazonian rain forest. Nature 339:655-56.
- Pinedo-Vasquez,  Miguel,  Daniel  J.  Zarin,  Kevin Coffey, Christine Padoch, and Fernando Rabelo. 2001.  Post-boom  logging  in  Amazonia. Human Ecology 29 (2): 219-39.
- Reardon, Thomas. 1997. Using evidence of household income diversification to inform study of the rural nonfarm labor market in Africa. World Development 25 (5): 735-74.
- Reddy, S. R. C., and S. P . Chakravarty. 1999. Forest dependence and income distribution in a subsis-
- tence economy: Evidence from India. World Development 27 (7): 1141-49.
- Redford, K. H., and A. M. Stearman. 1993. Forestdwelling native Amazonians and the conservation of biodiversity: Interests in common or collision? Conservation Biology 7 (2): 248-55.
- Republic of Honduras. 1999. Decreto (Decree) no. 157-99. La Gaceta (T egucigalpa) 21 December:2.
- Roberts, O. 1827. Narrative of voyages and excursions on the east coast and in the interior of Central America. Edinburgh:  Constable  and  Co.;  London:  Hurst, Chance, and Co.
- Ruben, Ruerd, and Marrit van den Berg. 2001. Nonfarm employment and poverty alleviation of rural farm households in Honduras. World Development 29 (3): 549-60.
- Schelhas, J. 1996. Land-use choice and change: Intensification  and  diversification  in  the  lowland tropics of Costa Rica. Human Organization 55 (3): 298-306.
- Schwartzman, S., A. Moreira, and D. Nepstad. 2000. Rethinking tropical forest conservation: Perils in parks. Conservation Biology 14 (5): 1351-64.
- Sierra, R., R. Rodriguez, and E. Losos. 1999. Forest resource use change during early market integration in tropical rain forests: The Huaorani of upper Amazonia. Ecological Economics 30:107-19.
- Southgate, Douglas. 1998. Tropical forest conservation: An  economic  assessment  of  the  alternatives  in  Latin America. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Stiles, Daniel. 1994. T ribals and trade: A strategy for cultural and ecological survival. Ambio 23 (2): 10611.
- Upton, M. 1996. The economics of tropical farming systems. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- Vosti,  Stephen A., and Julie Witcover. 1995. Nontimber  tree  product  (NTTP)  market  research workshop-an overview. Unpublished manuscript. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
- Wickramasinghe, Anoja, Manuel Ruiz Pérez, and Jill M.  Blockus.  1996.  Nontimber  forest  product gathering in Ritigala Forest (Sri Lanka): Household  strategies  and  community  differentiation. Human Ecology 24 (4): 493-519.
- Young, Thomas. 1842. Narrative of a residence on the Mosquito  Shore,  during  the  years  1838,  1840,  &amp; 1841. London: Smith, Elder &amp; Co.
- Zimmerer, Karl S. 2000. The reworking of conservation geographies: Nonequilibrium landscapes and nature-society hybrids. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 90 (2): 356-69.

KENDRA McSWEENEY is an Assistant Professor in  the  Department  of  Geography,  The  Ohio  State University, Columbus OH 43210-1341. E-mail: mcsweeney.14@osu.edu. Her current research interests include the relationship between forest peasant livelihoods and resource use and the impact of rapid environmental change on resource-reliant peoples.